Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of Statistical Lives" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 207, 2004). 
The University of Chicago Law School John M. Olin Law & Economics Working Paper Series 
Working Paper No. 207 AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies 
Working Paper No. 04-05 Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of Statistical Lives Cass R. Sunstein 
February 2004 
This paper can be downloaded without charge from the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection at: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=506142 Preliminary draft 2/17/04 All rights reserved 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
Each government agency uses a uniform figure to measure the value of a statistical life. This is a serious mistake. The very theory that underlies current practice calls for far more individuation of the relevant values. According to that theory, the value of statistical lives should vary across risks. More controversially, the value of a statistical life should vary across individuals—even or especially if the result would be to produce a lower number for some people than for others. One practical implication is that a higher value should be given to programs that reduce cancer risks. Should government use a higher VSL for programs that disproportionately benefit the wealthy—and a lower VSL for programs that disproportionately benefit the poor? A serious complication here is that sometimes the beneficiaries of regulation pay only a fraction or even none of its cost; when this is so, the appropriate VSL for poor people might be higher, on distributional grounds, than market evidence suggests. An understanding of this point has implications for foundational issues about government regulation, including valuation of persons in poor and wealthy nations. 
I. 
For over two decades, executive orders have required regulatory agencies to engage in cost-benefit analysis of major regulations,1 and Congress has imposed the same requirement in several statutes.2 To conduct cost-benefit analysis, agencies must assign monetary values to human lives. What numbers do they choose? Do some deaths count for more than others? * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to participants in a work-in-progress lunch at the University of Chicago Law School and to Matthew Adler, David Strauss, Robert Hahn, Eric Posner, Richard A. Posner, Adrian Vermeule, and W. Kip Viscusi for valuable comments on a previous draft. Sarah Sulkowski provided outstanding research assistance. 1 See Stephen Breyer et al., Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 120-35 (5th ed. 2002). 2 See, e.g., 15 USC 2601 et seq. (Toxic Substances Control Act); 7 USC 136 et seq. (Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act); 42 USC 300g-1 (Safe Drinking Water Act). 
The Environmental Protection Agency uses a uniform value for a statistical life (VSL): $6.1million.3 Other agencies use either lower and higher numbers, with a range, in recent years, between $1.5 million (the Federal Aviation Administration in 19904) to the FDA’s current figure of $6.5 million.5 While substantial differences can be found across agencies,6 uniformity is the intended practice within agencies.7 No agency treats cancer risks, or mortality risks that produce unusual fear or involve special suffering, as worthy of more concern than other risks. No agency treats young people as worth more than poor people.8 No agency values the lives of poor people less than the lives of rich 3 See 66 Fed. Reg. at 7012. In its July 2003 regulation governing food labeling of trans fatty acids, the Food and Drug Administration used a VSL of $6.5 million, see 68 Fed. Reg. 41434, 41488 (July 11, 2003); in its March 13, 2003 proposed rule on dietary ingredients and dietary supplements, the same agency suggested a VSL of $5 million, see 68 Fed. Reg. 12158, 12229 (using this value to calculate the “value of a statistical life day”). 4 The Department of Transportation now uses a higher figure, but one that is still low in comparison to what most agencies do. See 67 Fed. Reg. 17556, 17559 (April 10, 2002) ($2.7 million). 5 See Table 1 below; Matthew Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted, 29 J Legal Stud 146 (2000). 6 These differences appear to be inexplicable. 7 See Adler and Posner, supra note. There are some differences within agencies across contexts and across time, but those differences do not appear to be deliberate. See, e.g., the FDA sources cited in note 1 supra. The most explicit discussions of varying VSL have come from the EPA. In its 2003 discussion of hazardous air pollutants, see 68 Fed. Reg. 1660, 1693 (Jan. 13, 2003), the EPA noted that there “is general agreement that the value to an individual of a reduction is mortality risk can vary based on several factors, including the age of the individual, the type of risk, the level of control the individual has over the risk, the individual’s attitude toward risk, and the health status of the individual.” Nonetheless, the agency announced, without offering reasons, that it “prefers not to draw distinctions in the monetary value assigned to the lives saved even if they differ in age, health status, socioeconomic status, gender or other characteristic of the adult population.” Id. 
An extended discussion of related issues can be found in the EPA’s arsenic proposal, see 65 Fed. Reg. 38888, 38945 (June 22, 2000). There the EPA noted that the “factors which may influence the estimate of economic benefits associated with avoided cancer fatalities include (1) a possible ‘cancer premium’ (i.e., the additional value or sum that people may be willing to pay to avoid the experiences of dread, pain and suffering, and diminished quality of life associated with cancer-related illness and ultimate fatality); (2) the willingness of people to pay more over time to avoid mortality risk as their income rises; (3) a possible premium for accepting involuntary risks as opposed to voluntary [sic] assumed risks; (4) the greater risk aversion of the general population as opposed to workers in the wage-risk valuation studies; (5) ‘altruism’ or the willingness of people to pay more to reduce risk in other sectors of the population and (6) a consideration of health status and life years remaining at the time of premature mortality.” The EPA acknowledged that these factors “may significantly increase the present value estimate,” but said that “there is currently neither a clear consensus among economists about how to simultaneously analyze each of these adjustments nor is there adequate empirical data to support quantitative estimates for all potentially significant adjustment factors.” Id. Hence the EPA solicited comments on these issues and said that it would ask its Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) to conduct a review. Id. As noted below, the comments produced a sensitivity analysis that contains several 7% upward adjustments from the $6.1 million figure, see below, but the SAB’s review suggested that at the present time, upward adjustments were not justified by existing evidence, see below. 8 With the interest in focusing on “life-years,” however, this might change. See Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay, Colum L Rev (forthcoming 2004). people. No agency distinguishes between whites and African-Americans or between men and women. For statistical lives, the governing idea is that each life is worth exactly the same. With respect to cost-benefit analysis, much is disputed.9 But on the idea of a uniform value per life saved, there is a solid consensus, at least in terms of regulatory practice.10 
I intend to question that consensus here, and to do so in a way that raises foundational issues about the economic valuation of human lives. I suggest that a uniform value is obtuse. Under the very approach that agencies use to produce the current numbers, the value of a statistical life should vary along two dimensions. First, it should vary across risks. For example, there is reason to think that VSL is higher for cancer deaths than for sudden, unanticipated deaths11; deaths that produce unusual fear,12 or that are accompanied by high levels of pain and suffering, should be expected to produce a higher VSL. Human beings face countless mortality risks, and it would be truly bizarre to maintain that for each of these risks, VSL is identical. Second, VSL should vary across individuals.13 People who are risk averse will show a higher VSL than people who are risk-seeking.14 People who are thirty will show a higher VSL than people who are sixty.15 9 For various perspectives, see Adler and Posner, supra note; W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1994); Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless (2004). 10 An arguable exception, noted below, involves the debate over whether agencies should focus on lives or instead life-years; the latter approach might well value older people less than younger ones. For discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay, Colum L Rev (forthcoming 2004). An implicit challenge to the consensus can be found in W. Kip Viscusi, Risk Equity, J Legal Stud. W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph E. Aldy, The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates Throughout the World, 27 J Risk and Uncertainty 5, 7 (2003), notes the existence of heterogeneity by income, union status, and age, and explains that the “existence of such heterogeneity provides a cautionary note for policy.” 11 See James K. Hammitt and Jin-Tau Liu, Effects of Disease Type and Latency on the Value of Mortality Risk, 28 J Risk and Uncertainty 73 (2004) (finding that willingness to pay to reduce a cancer death is about one-third larger WTP to reduce risk of a similar chronic, degenerative disease). 12 For evidence of a higher VSL for airline risks than for automotive risks, see Fredrik Carlsson et al., Is Transport Safety More Valuable in the Air?, 28 J Risk and Uncertainty 147 (2004). 13 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 18 (“transferring the estimates of a value of a statistical life to nonlabor market contexts, as is the case in benefit-cost analyses of environmental health policies for example, should recognize that different populations have different preferences over risks and different values on life-saving”). 14 See Carlsson et al., supra note, at 158 (finding that those who are scared of flying are willing to pay especially high amounts to reduce the risks of flying). 15 As found in Joseph P. Aldy and W. Kip Viscusi, Age Variations in Workers’ Value of a Statistical Life (2003), forthcoming. Those who are rich will show a higher VSL than those who are poor. It follows that different demographic groups will show diversity in their VSL as well.16 
If we put together these two forms of variability—across risks and across persons—we will find that the unitary $6.1 million figure is far too crude. In theory, each person in society should have a particular VSL for each and every risk, resulting in a fully individuated VSL.17 Such a fully individuated VSL would mean, for example, that the VSL of some racial groups would likely be lower than that for others.18 But these differences 
would not be the result of a governmental decision to take racial characteristics into account; in fact it would not be a product of any kind of group-level discrimination on government’s part, at least not when government is calculating VSL.19 The differences would be the result of aggregating fully individual VSLs, just as ordinary markets do in producing prices for the reduction of the statistical risks associated with smoke alarms, unusually safe cars, and much more.20 16 Such differences are found in W. Kip Viscusi, Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of a Statistical Life, 27 J. Risk & Uncertainty 239, 252 tbl.5 (2003) [hereinafter Viscusi, Racial Differences]. To get a bit ahead of the story: I am not arguing that government should assign a higher VSL to white lives than to African-American lives. I am speaking here of demographic differences that would emerge from a fully individuated approach to VSL, in which each person’s WTP were calculated on an individual basis; once these values are aggregated, the white VSL would likely be higher than the African-American VSL, simply because of disparities in wealth and income. Richer people pay more for safe cars and smoke alarms than poor people do. See below for further discussion. 17 I am putting to one side the complication that sometimes values are constructed, rather than elicited, by social situations – an especially serious complication for contingent valuation studies. See John Payne et al., Measuring Constructed Preferences: Toward a Building Code, 19 J. Risk and Uncertainty 243 (1999); Cass R. Sunstein and Richard Thaler, Libertarian Paternalism Is Not An Oxymoron, 70 U Chi L Rev 1159, 1177-1178 (2003). 18 As found in W. Kip Viscusi, Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of a Statistical Life, 27 J Risk and Uncertainty 239 (2003); John D. Leeth and John Ruser, Compensating Wage Differentials for Fatal and Nonfatal Injury Risk by Gender and Race, 27 J Risk and Uncertainty 257 (2003). Viscusi finds that the overall white VSL is $15 million, while the overall African-American VSL is $7.2 million. For white females, the overall VSL is $9.4 million, compared to $18.8 million for white males; for African-American females, the overall VSL is $6.9 million, compared to $5.9 million for African-American males. 19 Discrimination might well lay in the background, of course; it almost certainly accounts for the unequal opportunities that produce lower VSL for African-Americans than for whites. See Viscusi, supra note, at 255, for the suggestion that the racial differentials reflect “differences in market opportunities.” Viscusi goes on to suggest that “it is inappropriate to attribute the observed differences to a greater willingness by black workers to bear risk.” Id. In a sense Viscusi is correct; there is no reason to think that AfricanAmerican workers have an intrinsically greater predisposition to take risks. But in the market, one’s willingness to bear risks is a product of “market opportunities,” and hence those with fewer opportunities will show a greater willingness to bear risk. 20 See W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1994). 
In practice, of course, a fully individuated VSL is not feasible, for two different reasons. First, government lacks the information that would permit the calculation. Regulators do not know how much each person would be willing to pay to reduce each statistical risk; categories are therefore inevitable. Second, many regulatory programs involve collective goods and therefore must protect many people at once. A clean air program, for example, cannot easily ensure that some people in a geographical region are exposed to no more than 10 parts per billion (ppb) of some pollutant, while others in the same region are subjected to 50 ppb. Because collective goods are typically involved in regulation, the problem is pervasive. 
Notwithstanding issues of feasibility, an understanding of the reasons for individuating VSL is important for two reasons. The first involves conceptual clarity. The theory behind the use of VSL and willingness to pay (WTP) remains poorly understood. An appreciation of the case for individuation will clarify the theory—both its rationale and its limitations, empirical and ethical. The second reason involves the possibility of moving some way in the direction of greater individuation. With respect to cancer risks, for example, there is reason to believe that VSL is significantly higher than the amounts produced by examining studies of workplace accidents. For this reason, the government’s current numbers for cancer risks might well be too low, resulting in widespread underprotection of the public. Similarly, there is reason to think that VSL should be higher for mortality risks from airplanes than for statistically identical risks on the highways.21 More generally, different agencies, dealing with qualitatively different risks, might well use different VSLs, simply because market evidence is likely to show just those differences. Full individuation is not feasible, but greater individuation would be quite easy. 
A far more troublesome point, to which I will devote considerable attention, involves disparities along demographic lines. For now, notice a simple factual point: When risks are faced disproportionately by wealthy people, VSL, based on actual WTP, should be higher than $6.1 million—just as it should be lower when it is faced 21 See Carlsson, supra note (finding that people’s WTP for airline deaths is more than double their WTP for taxi deaths). disproportionately by poor people.22 WTP is dependent on ability to pay, and those with little income and wealth will show little WTP. It follows that people in poor nations will have a lower VSL than people in rich nations, a point with implications for valuation of the harms from global warming23—and that people in poor areas will have a lower VSL than those in wealthy areas, a point with implications for valuation of multiple risks in the domestic setting. If variations across risks and persons are significant, the question of individuation should be a central part of the second generation of cost-benefit analysis—a step beyond the first generation debate about whether to do such analysis at all, and a step toward doing such analysis in a way that is more refined and more closely attuned to the consequences of regulations in terms of both welfare and distributional equity. 
Of course it is offensive and wrong to suggest that in principle, poor people are “worth less” than rich people. If poor people are subject to a risk of 1/10,000, they do not have less of a claim to public attention than if wealthy people are subject to the same risk; in fact they have a greater claim, if only because they lack the resources to reduce that risk on their own. But the topic here is regulation rather than subsidy, and the two ought not to be confused. In principle, government should not force people to buy protection against statistical risks at a price that seems to them excessive.24 Someone should not be required to pay $70 to reduce a risk of 1/100,000 if she is willing to pay no more than $50. The point bears on international issues as well as domestic ones. If a uniform VSL would benefit the poor, there is an argument for a uniform VSL. But regulation based on a uniform VSL may or may not produce a better distribution of income; in fact any redistribution may be perverse, and a single VSL might not promote equality at all. If wealthy people are the principal beneficiaries of a particular regulation chosen on the basis of a uniform VSL, and if the public as a whole pays for it, then any redistribution will benefit the wealthy, not the poor. And if poor people are forced to pay an amount for risk reduction that exceeds their WTP, desirable redistribution will hardly result; forced exchanges, on terms that people reject, are not a good way of redistributing wealth to the disadvantaged. On the other hand, it is possible that some regulatory programs, based on 22 With this qualification: If poor people would be disproportionately benefited by assigning them a higher VSL, then there is a good argument for assigning them a higher VSL. I explore this issue below. 23 See below. 24 I offer a number of qualifications below. See TAN infra. a uniform VSL, will help those in need, if their beneficiaries receive risk reduction for which they pay little or nothing—an issue to which I will devote considerable attention. 
A larger lesson follows. For purposes of law and politics, there is no sensible answer to the abstract question about the correct monetary value of human life. Any judgment about the appropriate VSL, and about individuation, must be heavily pragmatic; it must rest on the consequences of one or another choice. Whether government should use a higher or lower VSL across demographic lines cannot be answered simply. An important implication involves the assessment of VSL across nations. A poor nation would do well to adopt a lower VSL than a wealthy nation; for China or India, it would be disastrous to use a VSL equivalent to that of the United States or Canada. But this point should not be taken to support the ludicrous proposition that for donor institutions, both public and private, risk reduction in a wealthy nation deserves more attention than equivalent risk reduction in a poor nation. 
This Article is organized as follows. Part II clarifies the theory behind the valuation of statistical lives. The major point here is that regulators do not really use a VSL; instead they use a mean WTP to eliminate a statistical risk. For example, agencies might say that they are using a VSL of $6 million, but if so, they are relying on evidence more or less establishing that the average person pays, or is paid, $60 to eliminate a risk of 1/10,000. Part III, in some ways the heart of the essay, explores the need for individuation across both risks and persons. Part IV offers a more ambitious discussion of the uses and limits of willingness to pay in regulatory policy. It distinguishes between easy and hard cases for using WTP. The central claim here is that the argument for using WTP is strongest when the beneficiaries of regulation must pay all of its cost—though even in that event, the argument is subject to important qualifications, above involving bounded rationality. The argument for using WTP is weaker when the beneficiaries of regulation pay only a fraction of that cost. In the latter circumstances, some people will benefit from regulation even if it is inefficient in economic terms. I discuss the implications of this point for a uniform or fully individuated VSL. 
It has now become standard for regulatory agencies to assign monetary values to human lives. Consider the following table, which captures agency practices from 1996 through 2003: 
Value of Statistical Life Findings of Significant Contribution and Rulemaking on Section 125 Petitions for Purposes of Reducing Interstate Ozone 
Transport January 18, 2000 65 FR 2674-01 Final Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for 
Hazardous Waste Combustors 
September 30, 1999 
64 FR 52828-01 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: 
Disinfectants and Disinfection Byproducts 
December 16, 1998 
63 FR 69390-01 Financial Responsibility Requirements for 
Licensed Launch Activities 
August 26, 1998 63 FR 45592-01 Quality Mammography Standards 
October 28, 1997 62 FR 55852-01 
Regulations Restricting the Sale and 
Distribution of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to Protect Children and Adolescents 
August 28, 1996 61 FR 44396-01 Pathogen Reduction; Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) Systems 
July 25, 1996 61 FR 38806-01 Aircraft Flight Simulator Use in Pilot Training, Testing and Checking and at Training Centers 
July 2, 1996 61 FR 34508-01 Requirements for Labeling of Retail Containers of Charcoal 
May 3, 1996 61 FR 19818-01 Large Multiple-Tube Fireworks Devices 
March 26, 1996 61 FR 13084-01 
These number show substantial variations, though less so than even ten years ago.25 The variations appear not to have any rationale behind them; agencies with higher or lower numbers have not explained their choices. The prior question is how agencies 25 See Adler and Posner, supra note, for a slightly dated report that shows larger disparities. generate monetary amounts of this kind. The answer comes from two kinds of evidence. The first and most important involves real-world markets, producing evidence of compensation levels for actual risks.26 In the workplace and for consumer goods, additional safety has a price; market evidence is investigated to identify that price.27 The second kind of evidence comes from contingent valuation studies, asking people how much they are willing to pay to reduce statistical risks.28 The EPA’s $6.1 million is a product of studies of actual workplace risks, attempting to determine how much workers are paid to assume mortality hazards.29 The relevant risks usually are in the general range of 1/10,000 to 1/100,000.30 The calculation of VSL is a product of simple arithmetic. Suppose that workers must be paid $600, on average, to eliminate a risk of 1/10,000. If so, the value of a statistical life would be said to be $6 million. 
For some of the two dozen studies on which agencies currently rely,31 consider the following table:32 26 See W. Kip Viscusi, supra note. 27 A valuable and comprehensive overview can be found in Viscusi and Aldy, supra note. 28 See, e.g., James Hammitt and Jin-Tau Liu, Effects of Disease Type and Latency on the Value of Mortality Risk, 28 J Risk and Uncertainty 73 (2004). 29 See Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs, supra note, for discussion. 30 See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29, 33 (2004) (showing fatality risks ranging from about 1/100,000 to 45/100,000). 31 For an accessible outline, see Richard W. Parker, Grading the Government, 70 U Chi L Rev 1345, 148586 (2003). 32 See EPA, Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses 89 (2000). 
A large advantage of labor market studies of this kind is that they avoid the lively disputes over the use of “willingness to pay” or “willingness to accept” in regulatory policy.33 In many contexts, people demand more to give up a good than they are willing to pay to obtain it in the first instance—a disparity that much complicates efforts to assign monetary values to regulatory benefits, including mortality and morbidity.34 If people are willing to pay $25 to eliminate an existing risk of 1/100,000, but demand $100 to incur a new risk of 1/100,000, then it is difficult to know how to proceed for purposes of monetary valuation of risks. Fortunately, this problem dissipates in the context of labor market studies. If workers who face a risk of 1/10,000 are paid $600 more for doing so, and if workers who refuse to face such a risk are being paid $600 less, then it is irrelevant whether we speak in terms of WTP or WTA. 
Nonetheless, some questions might be raised about the use of these studies by EPA and other agencies.35 Most obviously, the studies show significant variety in the crucial numbers, ranging from $0.7 million, in 1997 dollars, to $16.3 million. The EPA has adopted the $6.1 million figure on the ground that it represents the median in the relevant studies. But there is a risk of arbitrariness in fastening on that median figure, certainly if we lack reason to believe that the relevant study is the most accurate. In fact a more general look at the VSL data produces further puzzles and wider ranges. Some studies find no compensating differentials at all, indicating a VSL of zero36—implausibly low, to say the least, for purposes of policy. Others find that non-unionized workers receive negative compensating differentials for risk, that is, they appear to be paid less because they face mortality risks.37 Another study finds that African-Americans receive no significant compensating wage differential and hence that their particular VSL is zero.38 On the other hand, it is possible to find studies finding a VSL not below the range 33 See Russell Korobkin, The Endowment Effect and Legal Analysis, 97 Nw. U.L. Rev. 1227 (2003). 34 See id.; Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law, 22 J. Legal Stud. 217, 246-47 (1993). 35 See Parker, supra note, and Robert Frank & Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position, 68 U. CHI. L. REV. 323 (2001), for several such questions. 36See Peter Dorman and P. Hagstrom, Wage Compensation for Dangerous Work Revisited, 52 Industrial and Labor Relations Review 116 (1998). 37 Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 44. 38 Leeth and Ruser, supra note. in Table 1 but above it; consider the finding that for people who choose jobs with low level risks, the VSL is as much as $22 million.39 
The most recent meta-study, far more comprehensive than EPA’s own analysis, finds that most studies produce a range of between $3.8 million and $9 million.40 The range is fairly compressed, in a way that disciplines agency decisions; for many regulations, the “bottom line” of the cost-benefit assessment will not be affected by a choice of $3.8 million or $9 million for VSL. But that range still leaves significant room for discretion, in a way that would have significant implications for policy and law. Consider the fact that the monetized value of a program that saves 200 lives would range from $760 million to $1.8 billion; consider also the fact that the EPA’s highly publicized arsenic regulation would easily fail cost-benefit analysis with a $3.8 million VSL but easily pass with a $9 million VSL.41 The simple point is that the variety of the outcomes raises questions about the reliability of any particular figure. 
In addition, most of these studies on which EPA relies are based on data from the 1970s. Since that time, there has been significant growth in national income, in a way that suggests that any VSL derived from 1970s data is too low. Of course people with more money are expected to be willing to pay more, other things being equal, to reduce statistical risks. One study finds that at the beginning of the twentieth century, VSL was about $150,000 in current dollars—less than one-twentieth of the corresponding amount a century later.42 On reasonable assumptions, the EPA’s use of 1970s data has produced a significant undervaluation of the monetary value of the lives at stake, for the $6.1 million figure reflects no adjustment to account for changes in national real income growth.43 In principle, the failure to undertake an adjustment is a serious mistake. The actual amount might be substantially higher.44 40 See id. at 18. 39 Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 23. 41 See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. The regulation was projected to cost about $200 million, and its monetized benefits, with a $6.1 million VSL, were around $190 million. See id. It should be easy to see that a $3.8 million VSL would make the regulation impossible to defend – and a $9 million VSL would make it impossible to challenge. 42 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 22. 43 EPA has updated the relevant numbers for inflation, but it has not otherwise made adjustments. 44See Dora L. Costa & Matthew E. Kahn, The Rising Price of Nonmarket Goods, 93 Am. Econ. Rev. (Papers & Proc.) 227, 229 tbl.1 (2003) (suggesting likely current value of $12 million). For recent evidence that the current numbers are indeed too low, see W. Kip Viscusi, Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of a Statistical Life, 27 J. Risk & Uncertainty 239, 252 tbl.5 (2003) [hereinafter Viscusi, Racial 
Let us suppose that these problems can be solved and that we can identify a number, call it $6 million, that really represents people’s valuations. It should be clear that even if this were so, it is grossly misleading to offer the following suggestion: The value of a statistical life is $6 million. It would be much more accurate to say that for risks of 1/10,000, the median WTP, in the relevant population, is $600—or that for risks of 1/100,000, the median WTP is $60. If true, these statements would, on assumptions to be explored, be extremely helpful for purposes of policy. But even at first glance, we can see that these numbers need not be taken to support a VSL that is independent of probability.45 Suppose that people would be willing to pay $60 to reduce a risk of 1/100,000. From this it does not follow that people would be willing to pay $6 to eliminate a risk of 1/1 million, or $6000 to reduce a risk of /1000, or $60,000 to reduce a risk of 1/100. It is plausible to think that people’s WTP to reduce statistical risks is nonlinear.46 As the probability approaches 100%, people become willing to pay an amount for risk reduction that arises nonlinearly to 100% of their income; as the risk approaches 0%, WTP nonlinearly approaches nothing. For a risk of 1 in 1million, for example, many reasonable people would be willing to pay zero, treating that risk as inconsequential. 
Hence the claim that VSL is $6.1 million is merely a shorthand way of saying that people are willing to pay from $600 to $60 to eliminate risks of 1/10,000 to 1/100,000. Since this is the range for risks with which most agencies deal, the relevant data is highly informative. For current purposes, this point is the crucial one. 
My basic claim is that VSL will inevitably vary across both risks and persons. If people’s WTP is higher to avoid cancer risks than risks of unanticipated, sudden deaths, then the use of a VSL, drawn from studies of the latter risks, will ensure insufficient Differences], finding values as high as $15.1 million in the case of white males. In the context of arsenic regulation, the EPA also noted in its sensitivity analysis that the appropriate adjustment would increase the VSL from $6.1 million to $6.7 million. 66 Fed. Reg. at 7012. For recent evidence, suggesting that the current VSL is $4.7 for a full sample, $7 million for blue-collar males, and $8.5 for blue-collar females. See W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29 (2004). 45 See Richard Posner, forthcoming book. 46 See id. protection of the exposed population. If people in different occupations are paid different amounts to incur a risk, then use of an uniform VSL will not track actual behavior, which is what it is supposed to do.47 If wealthy people show a higher WTP than poor people, then a uniform WTP, based on a population-wide median, will ensure insufficient protection of wealthy people and excessive protection of poor people—in a way that might well prove harmful to both groups.48 
To test these issues in a highly preliminary way, I conducted a small contingent valuation study. Eighty-four University of Chicago law students were asked about their WTP to eliminate each of five risks of 1/100,000. The simplest of these risks involved dying from an automobile accident as a result of a defective brake. The four other risks might be expected to occasion greater concern; they involved deaths from lung cancer, AIDS, Alzheimer’s disease, and dying in an airplane crash as a result of a terrorist attack. The 1/100,000 risk of dying in an automobile accident produced a mean WTP of $156, whereas the four other accidents produced significantly higher amounts (ranging from $184 for the AIDS risk to $193 for Alzheimer’s disease). In addition, there was substantial heterogeneity across individuals. For each of the questions, about ten respondents were willing to pay nothing to eliminate the 1/100,000 risk, producing a VSL of 0. And for each of them, about fifteen people were willing to pay at least $500 to eliminate the 1/100,000 risk, producing a VSL of $50 million. Let us now turn to the possibility of substantial diversity across both risks and persons. 
I have emphasized that the data that underlies the $6.1 million figure comes from risks of accidents in the workplace—and that even if this data can be generalized, it would not justify a probability-independent VSL. But there is a point of greater practical importance. A 1/100,000 risk of dying in a workplace accident might well produce a different WTP from a 1/100,000 risk of dying of cancer from air pollution, which might in turn be different from a 1/100,000 risk of dying in an airplane as a result of a terrorist 47 W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29, 33, 39-41 (2004) 48 On the “might well,” see below. attack, and that number might in turn by different from a 1/100,000 risk of dying as a result of a defective snowmobile. The very theory that lies behind the government’s current use of VSL justifies a simple conclusion: VSL should be risk-specific; it should not be the same across statistically equivalent risks. The use of a single number almost certainly produces significant blunders. 
relevant differences. The American economy contains a wide range of occupations and industries, and a uniform VSL should not be expected to emerge from each of them. Indeed, a recent study finds significant differences across both occupations and industries,49 with blue collar workers showing a higher VSL than others.50 It is inevitable that a wide range of values would emerge from studies that looked separately at machine operators, executive positions, sales, dental technicians, equipment cleaners, security guards, and secretaries51—and undoubtedly diverse values could be found within each category. 
In addition, many risks controlled by the EPA are qualitatively different from the workplace risks that EPA has used to generate its VSL. Two differences are particularly important. First, the workplace studies do not involve cancer, and cancer risks are often involved in environmental decisions. There is considerable evidence that the risks associated with cancer produce a higher WTP than other kinds of risk.52 For example, Hammit and Liu find that in Taiwan, willingness to pay to eliminate a cancer risk is about one-third larger than WTP to avoid a risk of a similar, chronic degenerative disease.53 Some contingent valuation studies suggest that people are willing to pay twice as much to prevent a cancer death as an instantaneous death.54 People seem to have a special fear of cancer, and they seem to be willing to pay more to prevent a cancer death than a sudden unanticipated death, or a death from heart disease.55 The “cancer premium” might be 49 W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29, 39-41 (2004) 50 Id. 51 See id. at 33. Viscusi does not produce separate numbers for the different occupation groups, but his data clearly indicate that separate numbers would emerge. 52 See Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Cost-Benefit Analysis, and the Discounting of Human Lives, 99 Colum. L. Rev. 941, 962–74 (1999). 53 See Hammitt and Liu, supra note. 54 See Id. 55 See GEORGE TOLLEY ET AL., STATE OF THE ART HEALTH VALUES 339-40 (1993). produced by the “dread” nature of cancer; it seems well-established that dreaded risks produce special social concern, holding the statistical risk constant.56 
To be sure, existing evidence on this count is not unambiguous. One study of occupational exposures does not find a significantly higher VSL for cancer risks.57 But that study assumes that occupational cancers account for 10-20 percent of all cancer deaths—an amount that is almost certainly too high. If occupational exposures account for 5% of all cancers—a far more realistic number—then the VSL for cancer risks may be as high as $12 million, about double the amount that EPA now uses. The current findings conflict58; but in principle, the VSL figures should be risk-specific, and we know enough to suspect that cancer risks produce an unusually high VSL. 
The second difference between workplace risks and the risks that concern EPA is that the latter risks seem peculiarly involuntary and uncontrollable.59 Unlike the risks of workplace accidents, pollution risks are not assumed voluntarily in return for compensation.60 
A 
great deal of literature suggests that involuntary, dread, uncontrollable, and potentially catastrophic risks produce unusually high levels of public concern.61 If so, the numbers that derive from workplace accidents will substantially understate willingness to pay for regulatory benefits provided by the EPA and many other agencies as well.62 
The implications go well beyond the distinction between workplace accidents and environmental risks. For example, people appear to be willing to pay far more to produce safety in the air than to produce safety on the highways63; it follows that VSL should be higher for the Federal Aviation Administration than for the National Highway Traffic 56 See Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk (2000). 57 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 22. In the same vein, see W. Magat et al., A Reference Lottery Metric for Valuing Health, 42 Management Science 1118 (1996) (finding no difference between valuations of cancer death and auto accident death). 58 Id. at 57. 59 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value of Nothing (2003). 60 Of course it is possible to question the idea that workplace risks are assumed voluntarily and in return for compensation. For example, many workers probably do not know the risks that they face. The distinction I am drawing here is one of kind rather than degree. See Cass R. Sunstein, Bad Deaths, 14 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 259 (1997). 61 See SLOVIC, The Perception of Risk, supra note. 62 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value of Nothing (2003). 63 See Carlsson et al., supra note. Safety Administration. Oddly, the former agency has an unusually low rather than an unusually high VSL.64 Some diseases would produce a higher VSL than others. A 1/100,000 risk of death from Alzheimer's disease, for example, would almost certainly produce a higher VSL than 1/100,000 risk of death from a heart attack; 1/50,000 risk of an AIDS death would not produce the same VSL as a 1/50,000 risk of death from a defective brake system on an automobile; most people would pay more to reduce a risk of dying from slow-acting strokes than from strokes that kill outright. There should be a distinctive population-wide median VSL for mortality risks of airplane accidents, of cancer from air pollution, of motor vehicle accidents, of defective toys, of cancer from water pollution. 
In fact studies have been done for seatbelt use, automobile safety, home fire detectors, and more, and they find a wide variety of numbers, with a VSL ranging from $770,000 (smoke detectors, based on data in the 1970s) to $9.9 million (fatality risks associated with safety belts and motorcycle helmets).65 And within each of these categories, further distinctions would undoubtedly emerge. All cancer fatalities are not the same; informed people would surely make distinctions between those that involve long periods of suffering and those that do not. If we are really interested in basing VSL on WTP, a uniform number, treating all statistically identical mortality risks as the same, is fatally obtuse. 
the context of arsenic regulation, the EPA was alert to some of them.66 Hence its own sensitivity analysis for arsenic suggested the need for an upward revision of 7%, because of the involuntariness and uncontrollability of the risk.67 With this revision, along with the revision for income growth, the value of a statistical life would rise from $6.1 million to $7.2 million.68 In fact there are reasons to suggest that this amount might be far too low. Dean Revesz suggests that “the value of avoiding a death from an involuntary, carcinogenic risk should be estimated as four times as large as the value of avoiding an 64 See Table I supra. 65 Viscusi and Aldy, at 25. 66 See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. 67 66 Fed. Reg. at 7014. 68 Id. instantaneous workplace fatality.”69 If we take this approach, the VSL, in the context of arsenic, jumps from $6.1 million to $24.3 million. I am not arguing that $24.3 million is the correct number; I am suggesting only that VSL is almost certainly risk-specific. 
about heightened public concern70 may not translate into higher WTP. Social scientists might be able to show that certain qualitative factors make people especially concerned about certain risks, but it is an independent question whether and how much WTP increase as a result. Fortunately, a number of studies of WTP contain at least suggestive answers to that question, demonstrating that VSL does vary significantly across areas.71 
Second, it is important not to think that there is a rigid dichotomy between the involuntary/uncontrollable and the voluntary/controllable.72 This is a continuum, without sharp divisions among various points, and hence it is a mistake to believe that risks can be neatly separated into the two categories. Are the risks from air pollution in Los Angeles involuntarily incurred? The answer might seem to be affirmative, but people have a choice whether or not to live in Los Angeles. Are the risks of airplane travel uncontrollable? Many people think so, but the decision to fly is itself under human control. Death from an asteroid seems to be a model case of involuntariness, at an opposite pole from hang-gliding. But why? In deciding whether a risk is faced involuntarily, or whether it is within personal control, the underlying issues seem to be whether those exposed to the risk are exposed knowingly and whether it is costly or otherwise difficult for people to avoid the risk.73 When risks are approached in these terms, it is clear that some risks are worse than others, even if the probability of harm is identical. This point is enough to suggest that VSL cannot be uniform across risks. 
Third, it is possible that extreme aversion to certain risks reflects a form of bounded rationality74—and hence it is possible to doubt whether that extreme aversion should be allowed to play a role in regulatory policy. Suppose, for example, that people really are willing to pay twice as much to avoid a cancer risk as to avoid a sudden, 69 See Revesz, supra note 7, at 982. 70 See Slovic, supra note. 71 See Hammitt and Liu, supra note, and the meta-analysis in Viscusi and Aldy, supra note. 72 See Cass R. Sunstein, Bad Deaths, 14 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 259 (1997). 73 See id. 74 See Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay, supra note. (e) Very low probabilities and catastrophic risks. Suppose that everyone in the United States faces an annual death risk of 1/10,000,000—and that the risk, if it comes to fruition, will kill every person in the country. The expected number of annual deaths is 26, which would produce expected annual costs in excess of $158 million, assuming a VSL of $6.1 million. But if we attempt to elicit each individual’s WTP to avoid a risk of 1/10,000,000, we might well produce a number very close to zero—yielding both 26 expected annual fatalities and expected annual costs very close to zero. This seems to be an anomaly; is it really sensible to conclude that the prevention of 26 deaths is worth nothing? A fully ex ante perspective, based on people’s WTP to avoid very low probability risks, suggests an affirmative answer. But assigning a value near zero, for the prevention of dozens of deaths, seems quite implausible. In cases of this kind, we seem to find a serious problem with the ex ante perspective on VSL. 
This conclusion understates the problem. In the case at hand, the risk is potentially catastrophic; if the 1/10,000,000 chance comes through, every American will be dead. Even if people show a WTP near zero to avoid a risk of that size, it does not seem right to think that the nation should spend almost nothing to prevent it.128 The point has a general bearing on precautions against low probability risks of catastrophe: Some degree of prevention is justified even if WTP numbers do not justify them. Part of the problem with those numbers is that if individual behavior is consulted, it will not reflect a “catastrophe premium” or “extermination premium” that would almost certainly emerge if it were possible to test for it. But part of the problem may be that WTP is not an adequate measure of social responses to catastrophes, perhaps because people are not familiar with making choices about risks of that sort. 
I believe that this is a sound objection to the use of a (low or near-zero) VSL in the context of catastrophic risks, even if the WTP numbers justify that VSL. But this is an extremely limited objection; it does not apply to the overwhelming number of cases in which VSL is used. 
(f) Third party effects. A final objection would point to effects on third parties. If outsiders would be adversely affected, and if their welfare is not being considered, then the WTP calculus is seriously incomplete. This point creates a general and badly 128 See Richard Posner, supra note. neglected problem for WTP as it is currently used: Agencies consider people’s WTP to eliminate statistical risks, without taking account of the fact that others—especially family members and close friends—would also be willing to pay something to eliminate those risks. John might be willing to pay $25 to eliminate his own risk of 1/100,000, but his wife Jane might be willing to pay $25 to eliminate John’s risk too; if we add the WTP, on John’s behalf, of John’s friends and relatives, the total WTP might soon exceed $100. This point is a real problem for existing uses of WTP. 
But we are stipulating that there are no third party effects here. The argument for using WTP, on the stated assumptions, is that government should not force people to buy goods that are not worthwhile for them. At least at first glance, this argument seems sound with respect to statistical risks of the kind on which I am focusing here.129 B. WTP and Easy Cases: Demographic Differences, International Differences eliminate a statistical risk of 1/100,000, but that wealthy people are willing to pay $60. It would follow that the VSL would be lower for poor people than for wealthy people—and that a regulatory policy that focuses on WTP would provide a higher VSL for wealthy people ($6 million) than for poor people ($2 million). Is this unjust or unfair to poor people? On the current assumptions, it is not. Government should not force poor people to buy more than their WTP to eliminate statistical risks; forced exchanges of this kind do poor people no good and some harm. It is tempting to justify a uniform VSL, one that does not distinguish between rich and poor, on the ground that it embodies a form of risk equity, treating every person as no more and no less than one130 and redistributing resources in the direction of poor people. But this is an error. A uniform WTP, taken (let us suppose) from a population-wide median, does not produce redistribution toward the poor, any more than any other kind of forced exchange. Government does not require people to buy Volvos, even though Volvos would reduce statistical risks. If government 129 Note that the argument would not apply to risks faced by nonhuman animals; in that event, people’s WTP could not tell the whole story. 130 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value of Nothing (2003). required everyone to buy Volvos, it would not be producing desirable redistribution.131 A uniform VSL has some of the same characteristics as a policy that requires people to buy Volvos. 
risk regulation. I have suggested that people in poor nations show a lower VSL than people in wealthy nations.132 Building on evidence of this kind, some assessments of the effects of global warming find far higher monetized costs from deaths of people in rich countries than from deaths of people in poor countries.133 In its Second Report in 1995, the International Panel on Climate Change calculated that a life in an industrialized country was worth $1.5 million, while a life in a developing country was worth only $150,000.134 These assessments have been highly controversial; John Broome, for example, notes that under this approach, an American life is worth 10 or 20 Indian lives, a judgment that he deems “absurd.”135 Hence some analysts, including the International Panel, have opted for a world-wide VSL of $1 million, a choice that seems quite arbitrary and potentially harmful to people in rich nations and poor ones alike. The problem raises important dilemmas. 
a. Abstract values? How should global institutions assess the monetary value of human lives? What are the monetized costs of (say) 10,000 worldwide deaths from global warming, deaths that include (say) 8000 people from poor countries and 2000 from 131 Of course it is sometimes desirable for government to create “safety floors,” for automobiles and other consumer goods, in part as a response to an absence of adequate information in the market. But such floors should not be seen as a redistributive tool, simply because they are not likely to produce good redistribution. See Susan Rose-Ackerman, Progressive Law and Economics, 97 Yale LJ 1083 (1989). 132 See note supra. 133 See http://www.ipcc.ch/pub/reports.htm 134 See id. 135 See John Broome, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Population, 29 J Legal Stud 953, 957 (2000), noting that that this conclusion is a product of what Broome rejects, “a money-metric utility function to represent a person’s preferences. “ Id. (In the easy cases, I suggest that a money-metric utility function is not absurd, and it is not quite that in the hard cases either; see below.) See also the discussion of the International Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2001, available at http://www.grida.no/climate/ipcc_tar/wg3/302.htm: “The VSL is generally lower in poor countries than in rich countries, but it is considered unacceptable by many analysts to impose different values for a policy that has to be international in scope and decided by the international community. In these circumstances, analysts use average VSL and apply it to all countries. Of course, such a value is not what individuals would pay for the reduction in risk, but it is an ‘equity adjusted’ value, in which greater weight is given to the WTP of lower income groups. On the basis of EU and US VSLs and a weighting system that has some broad appeal in terms of government policies towards income distribution, Eyre et al. (1998) estimate the average world VSL at around 1 million Euros (approximately US$1 million at 1999 exchange rates).” wealthy ones? The discussion thus far suggests that there is no sensible abstract answer to these questions; we have to know what, in particular, the answer is for. If a general question is asked, outside of any particular context, about the monetary value of a stated number of deaths in 2020, it is best unanswered (except perhaps with laughter). The appropriate assessments of VSL, and variations across countries, depends on their intended use. If disparate numbers are meant to identify the actual monetary values of human lives, and to suggest that people in Canada are “worth” much more than people in Argentina or that poor people are “worth” less than rich ones, they are ludicrous as well as offensive. 
We can go further. If the disparate numbers are meant to suggest the appropriate amount that donor institutions should spend to reduce mortality risks, they make little sense. The fact that a poor person in a poor nation would be willing to pay $1 to eliminate a risk of 1/10,000, whereas a wealthy person in a wealthy nation would be willing to pay $100, cannot plausibly be used to defend the view that an international agency should devote its resources to the latter rather than the former. To see the point, suppose that you are asked to choose between two programs: (A) Program A would eliminate (at a stated cost to you of $500) a 1/10,000 risk faced by fifty poor people in Costa Rica, each willing to pay $2 to eliminate that risk. (B) Program B would eliminate (also at a stated cost of $500) a 1/10,000 risk faced by fifty wealthy people in Berlin, each willing to pay $350 to eliminate that same risk. 
In principle, there is no reason to think that you should prefer to save the Berliners, even those their VSL is far higher. In fact Program A has much higher priority, because it would help people who are facing extreme deprivation. What is true at the individual level is true across nations as well. 
(b) VSL in poor countries. But imagine that the government in a poor nation is deciding on appropriate policy to reduce workplace risks. At least under the assumptions I have given thus far, such a government would do well to begin by using the admittedly low WTP of its own citizens. If citizens in that nation show a WTP of $2 to eliminate risks of 1/10,000, then their government does them no favors by requiring them to pay $50 or $10. This is the sense in which VSL properly varies across nations, and in which citizens of poor nations have a lower VSL than citizens of wealthy ones. The point has strong implications for international labor standards. It is tempting to suggest that workers in poor countries, for example China and India, should receive the same protection as those in the United States; why should a worker in Beijing be subject to significantly higher death risks than a worker in Los Angeles? 
As a matter of basic principle, there is no good answer to this question. But as a matter of regulatory policy, the answer is straightforward. So long as the distribution of global income has the form that it does, a system that gives Chinese workers the same protection as American workers is not in the interest of Chinese workers—assuming, as we are, that the cost of that protection is borne by workers themselves. Requiring Chinese workers to have the same protection as Americans amounts to a forced exchange on terms that Chinese workers reject. The idea that workers in poor nations should have the “same” protection as workers in wealthy nations is an error, rooted in a moral heuristic involving the equal worth of all human lives—a heuristic that sometimes works well but that also misfires.136 
Note, once again, that the argument for using WTP does not imply satisfaction with the existing distribution of wealth. We might believe that the existing distribution is unjust and that it should be dramatically changed. The problem with forced exchanges is that they do nothing to alter existing distributions. In fact they make poor people worse off, requiring them to use their limited resources for something that they do not want to buy. 
There is an obvious artificiality in the assumptions thus far. Most important, people do not always bear the full social costs of the regulatory benefits they receive. Sometimes they pay only a fraction of those costs—or possibly even nothing at all. When this is so, the normative analysis is much more complicated. In the context of air pollution regulation, for example, there is a complex set of distributional effects, and on balance, poor people, and members of minority communities, appear to be net gainers.137 136 On moral heuristics in general, see Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics, Minn L Rev (forthcoming 2004). 137 See Matthew E. Kahn, The Beneficiaries of Clean Air Act Regulation, 24 Regulation 34 (2001). An efficiency analysis, based on WTP, might not produce an adequate account of the welfare effects of air pollution regulation. And even if it does, an account of welfare effects might not end the normative question, because the distributional gains are important to consider.138 The difficulty is that a high VSL, one that exceeds what WTP studies show for poor people, might produce outcomes that are in the best interest of poor people, in the sense that the result is a welfare improvement for them.139 Note that these points do not bear directly on the question whether VSL should vary across risks. But they do bear on the issue of varying VSL across persons, and in particular across differences that result from disparities in income and wealth. 
Suppose, for example, that beneficiaries of a proposed drinking water regulation are willing to pay only $80 to eliminate a risk of 1/80,000 in drinking water; that the perperson cost of eliminating a 1/50,000 risk is $100; but that for every dollar of that cost, the beneficiaries pay only 80 cents. The remaining 20 cents might be paid by water companies themselves, in the form of reduced profits, or by employees of the water companies, in the form of reduced wages and fewer jobs. In this example, the costs of the regulation exceed the benefits; it is inefficient. But by hypothesis, the regulation makes its beneficiaries of the regulation better off. If the WTP criterion is used, the fact that the monetized costs exceed the monetized benefits is decisive. But as a normative matter, the analysis here is far harder than in the easy cases. On what assumption should the WTP numbers be decisive? 
The assumption must be that economic efficiency is the goal of government, at least in the context of regulation—that in order to know what to do, we should aggregate the benefits and costs of regulation, and act if and only if the benefits exceed the costs. When using the WTP numbers, government is acting as a maximization machine, 138 The Office of Management and Budget has expressly recognized this point in its most recent guidelines governing regulatory impact analysis. See 2003 Report to Congress at 131: “Those who bear the costs of a regulation and those who enjoy its benefits often are not the same people. . . . Your regulatory impact analysis should provide a separate description of distributional effects (i.e., how both benefits and costs are distributed among sub-populations of particular concern) so that decision makers can properly consider them along with the effects on economic efficiency.” 139 For relevant discussion, see Christine Jolls, Accommodation Mandates, 53 Stan. L. Rev. 223 (2000). Jolls argues that accommodation mandates might produce desired redistributive gains whether or not they are efficient, and she supplies a detailed analysis of when those gains are most likely to occur. At present, there is no parallel discussion for regulation of the sort I am discussing here. My suggestion is that under imaginable assumptions, some such regulation will be defensible on distributive grounds. aggregating all benefits and costs as measured by the WTP criterion. But this is a highly contestable understanding of what government should be doing. In fact it represents a shift from the relatively uncontroversial Pareto criterion, exemplified above, to a version of the far more controversial Kaldor-Hicks criterion,140 which assesses policy by asking this question: Are the gainers winning more than the losers are losing? The Kaldor-Hicks criterion is sometimes described as potential Pareto superiority,141 because it asks whether in principle, the winners could compensate the losers, and a surplus could be left over. The difficulty of course is that Pareto superiority is merely potential. Some people really are losing and others are gaining. 
In the harder cases, the gainers are gaining less (in monetary terms) than the losers are losing—and hence the regulation is said to be unjustified. Under the assumptions I have given, the regulation is indeed inefficient: Its social cost is higher than its social benefit. But is the regulation undesirable? This is not at all clear. The first problem is that WTP is measuring gains and loses in monetary terms, rather than in welfare terms.142 It is possible that those who gain, in the harder cases, gain more welfare than the losers lose; WTP is not dispositive on that question. The second problem is distributional. Suppose that in terms of overall welfare, the regulation is not desirable; it makes aggregate welfare lower rather than higher. But suppose too that those who benefit are more advantaged than those who lose. If, for example, those who are willing to pay $80 are disproportionately poor, and those who pay the remainder are disproportionately wealthy, the regulation might be plausibly justified despite the welfare loss. 
It is natural to respond here that if redistribution is what is sought, then it should be produced not through regulation but through the tax system, which is a more efficient way of transferring resources to those who need help.143 I agree. But suppose that 140 It is only a version of that criterion, because it is measuring welfare in monetary equivalents. A direct assessment of welfare, if it were possible, might show that the regulation in question is justified on KaldorHicks grounds. 141 See, e.g., Richard Posner. Economic Analysis of Law 14 (4th ed. 1992) (“The Kaldor-Hicks concept is also and suggestively called potential Pareto superiority: The winners could compensate the losers, whether or not they actually do.”). 142 On the direct measurement of welfare, see Daniel Kahneman, forthcoming. 143 See, e.g., Louis Kaplow & Steven Shavell, Why the Legal System is Less Efficient Than the Income Tax in Redistributing Income, 23 J. Legal Stud. 667, 667 (1994) (“[R]edistribution through legal rules offers no advantage over redistribution through the income tax and typically is less efficient.”); Steven Shavell, A Note on Efficiency vs. Distributional Equity in Legal Rulemaking, 71 Am. Econ. Rev. (Papers & Proc.) 414, 414 (1981) (describing how income tax can compensate for inefficient liability rules and redistribution is not going to happen through the tax system. If so, then the regulation in the harder cases cannot be ruled off-limits despite its inefficiency. 
Return finally to the use of VSL in poor nations in the regulatory context that is my principal focus here. Suppose that in such nations, VSL turns out to be $100,000. If relevant governments use a VSL of $6 million, on the theory that their citizens should not be valued less than those of wealthy nations, social harm will almost inevitably result. In the easy cases, the forced exchanges will be ludicrously harmful to the people they are supposed to help. In the hard cases, where the beneficiaries pay only a fraction of the cost, such a nation will be spending far too much of its money on risk reduction (or more precisely, on reducing the risks that happen to get onto the regulatory agenda). The inefficiency of an extremely high VSL will be felt acutely and in many forms, including decreased employment. But if the costs of risk reduction will be paid by third parties— for example, wealthy nations—then the people in that poor country will be helped even if risk reduction is based on an excessive VSL. 
Of course they would almost certainly be helped more if they were given cash (supposing that it would not be squandered) rather than in-kind benefits. But if cash redistribution is not possible, regulatory benefits, provided for free or for a fraction of their cost, remain a blessing. If, for example, a global institution uses a world-wide VSL of $1 million, and if that amount exceeds the domestic VSL of people in poor nations, it is possible that poor people will gain a greater deal if the resources for risk-reduction are provided by wealthy nations. In the harder cases, the simple point is that many of the intended beneficiaries of regulation are in fact net gainers. 
Is there a reason to treat the harder cases as identical to the easy ones? Is this absurd144? Agencies do not distinguish between them, although recent guidelines, calling redistribute income); David A. Weisbach, Should Legal Rules Be Used to Redistribute Income?, 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 439, 439–40 (2003) (“[T]he tax system is a better tool for redistribution of income than legal rules.”). 144 See Broome, supra note, at 121. Broome urges that “there are separate reasons why preferences are an unsatisfactory basis for valuing lives,” including the fact that “in contexts involving risks, people’s preferences are generally muddled and incoherent” rather than rational. Id. at 122. If preferences are in fact muddled and incoherent, current practice is of course on thin ground. agencies to attend to distributional issues, might eventually encourage them to do so.145 A possible reason for treating the harder cases as the easy ones is optimistic: Perhaps everything will balance out in the end. Perhaps no group will be systematically helped or hurt, and the tax system will be used to produce appropriate redistribution. In the realworld domestic cases, we might also think that a direct inquiry into welfare, bypassing WTP, would be extremely difficult or perhaps even impossible to operationalize. If distributional considerations are deemed relevant, interest-group warfare might be the consequence, rather than distribution to those who particularly need and deserve help.146 More modestly, we might conclude that agencies should generally pursue efficiency, using VSL as the foundation for decisions, but should allow distributional findings to cut the other way in cases in which there is compelling reason to allow them to do so. In fact this approach is a plausible way of reading OMB’s current guidelines on regulatory impact analysis.147 
Let us return in this light to VSL. In the easy cases, the resulting redistribution is almost certainly perverse, because forced exchanges, under the stated assumptions, are highly likely to harm the people who are being coerced. But in the harder cases, it cannot be said that the beneficiaries of regulation will be harmed if government uses a number that exceeds their actual VSL. Everything depends on the distributional effects of the regulation. If the beneficiaries are well-off, a high VSL might produce perverse redistribution if those who lose are toward the bottom of the economic ladder. We could imagine this result, for example, with a pollution program that protects those who visit expensive recreational areas. If the beneficiaries are poor, and if the costs are born by the wealthy or more generally, a high VSL might be in the interest of those who need help. Air pollution programs, providing special protection for those in cities, appear to be an example.148 We can therefore reject the confident view of economically inclined analysts who believe that accurate VSLs, based on actual WTP (and hence individuated), should always be the basis of regulatory policy. But we can also reject the confident view of 145 See note supra. 146 See Viscusi, supra note. 147 See note supra. 148 See Kahn, supra note. skeptics who believe that a uniform WTP, refusing to make distinctions among persons, is best on distributive grounds. 
What are the implications for individuation of VSL? It remains true that according to the theory that underlies agency valuations, a higher degree of individuation would be desirable. It also remains true that with respect to risks, individuation is appropriate insofar as valuations differ depending on the nature of the risk at stake. The principal qualification is that a uniform VSL, one that gives disadvantaged people regulatory protection in excess of their WTP, might turn out to have fortunate distributional consequences in the harder cases. We should be careful about this point. It will not always hold, and if the goal is to provide more assistance to those in need, a uniform VSL is hardly the best way to achieve that goal. Consider the case of poor nations: a worldwide VSL, adopted by each nation, of $6.1 million would almost certainly be harmful, simply because the resulting levels of regulation would have such adverse effects on wages and employment levels. (In these circumstances it is unsurprising that workers in wealthy nations, not in poor ones, often clamor the loudest for greater protection of workers in poor nations; workers in wealthier nations would be the principal beneficiaries of such regulation, which would protect them against competition from those in poorer nations.) My only point is that in some cases, individuation across persons will produce worse outcomes on distributional grounds and possibly on grounds of welfare as well. 
How, then, should global institutions, like the International Panel on Climate Change, assess the monetary costs of risks faced by people all over the world? As I have suggested, the answer turns on the purpose of the assessment—on what issue the answer is supposed to be addressing. There is no good acontextual way of deciding on the aggregate costs of global climate change by 2050; actually that is a ludicrous question, because it does not (as stated) have any point. A far more sensible question is whether it would make sense for any particular nation to accept a particular way of responding to the problem, such as the Kyoto Protocol.149 At the national level, an assessment of the 149 See William Nordhaus and Joseph Boyer, Warming the World: Economic Models of Global Warming 168 (2000): “Finally, the Kyoto Protocol has significant distributional consequences. . . . The lion’s share of the costs are borne by the United States. Indeed, the United States is a net loser while the rest of the world on balance benefits from the Kyoto Protocol.” costs and benefits of the Kyoto Protocol is not much different from an assessment of the costs and benefits of any other regulation. If the risk of death, as a result of climate change, is in the neighborhood of 1 in 100,000, then the ordinary framework applies, with appropriate individuation across both risks and persons.150 For wealthy nations, the argument for signing the Kyoto Protocol is strengthened by the fact that the harms of global warming will be felt disproportionately in poor nations,151 and also by the fact that wealthy nations have done by far the most to produce the situation that makes global warming a serious problem. An analysis of these questions would make it necessary to go far beyond the present topic. My goal here has been to suggest that within nations, diverse VSL are perfectly sensible, and that answers to questions about valuation must be closely attuned to the purposes for which those questions are being asked. 
The theory that animates current valuations of mortality risks argues in favor of far more individuation. A uniform VSL cannot possibly cut across all risks and all individuals. Does the risk involve cancer? What kind of cancer? Does it involve air pollution or driving on the highways? It is obtuse to adopt an approach that values all statistically equivalent mortality risks in the same way. In addition, individuals display a great deal of heterogeneity in their VSL—not simply because of different tastes and values, but also because of different levels of income and wealth. Willingness to pay depends on ability to pay. Nothing I have said here is meant to suggest approval of existing distributions of resources. Of course poor people are not “worth less” than wealthy ones, and it is often appropriate for government to provide resources directly to poor people or instead to subsidize the provision of regulatory benefits. But forced exchanges are not a good way to assist poor people, and a uniform VSL is often a perverse response to inequality. In theory, risk reduction policies should be more fully individuated, giving each person regulatory protection that corresponds to his WTP for the particular risk in question. 150 See generally id. 151 See id. 
Of course this is not practicable. Government lacks the necessary information about individual risk preferences; categorical judgments are inevitable. In any case many of the benefits provided by regulation are collective in character. Regulators cannot feasibly provide protection to one person without simultaneously providing protection to many. But it is nonetheless important to see what the current theory counsels in principle, and to understand that the limitations are practical ones, some of which might be overcome as knowledge progresses. And even with the practical limitations, a uniform VSL is increasingly difficult to justify. 
We know enough to know that some risks produce a higher VSL than others—a judgment that would produce significantly different analyses in many cases, above all by producing a higher VSL for cancer risks. A program that protects old people will produce a lower VSL than one that protects younger people, and there is no ethical objection to variations on the basis of age.152 And if a program affects mostly wealthy people, a VSL based on the population-wide median will be too low. It would follow that the Federal Aviation Administration should have a relatively high VSL, because people who fly are wealthier than the population median—and when the EPA is engaging in cost-benefit analysis for programs protecting poor people from risks associated with hazardous waste sites, it should have a relatively low VSL. 
The principal qualification here is that when the beneficiaries of regulation do not pay all of its cost, a high VSL may actually be in their interests. The easy cases, in which the beneficiaries are forced to pay for regulatory benefits, are not the same as those in which they pay only a fraction of the cost. Nonetheless, current practice treats them as identical, perhaps because of the great difficulty in untangling the incidence of regulatory benefits and costs. My goal has not been to resolve that difficulty, but to suggest that the theory behind current practice justifies far more individuation of VSL than regulators currently provide. However we deal with distributional problems and the hardest cases, the use of a uniform VSL is unacceptably obtuse. 152 See Aldy and Viscusi, supra; Sunstein, supra. I am putting to one side the difficult questions raised by the need to produce a VSL for children. Readers with comments should address them to: 
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A “Third Way” (January 1999) Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 2000) 2000) 2000, revised May 2002) 
Position (August 2000) 
Internet (November 2000) 
System (November 2000) 
Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 2000) 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
Economic Approach (December 2000) (January 2001) 
Finance (February 2001) (March 2001) 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Age (April 2001) the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Outside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law Review) Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades: Success or Failure (March 2002) Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy: The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, The Antitrust Bulletin) David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture February 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 2003) Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002; revised March 2003) Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government as Insurer? (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refusal and the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contract Law (September 2002) Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on the File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) David A. Weisbach, Does the X-Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (October 2002) Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (November 2002) Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget (November 2002) Avraham D. Tabbach, Criminal Behavior: Sanctions and Income Taxation: An Economic Analysis (November 2002) 
William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 and 2000? (September 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage (September 2003) Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content (September 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003) Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable Leisure Time (October 2003) Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003) David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004) David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004) Cass R. Sunstein, Fear and Liberty (January 2004) Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004) Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004) Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of Statistical Lives (February 2004) 
BLACK ON BROWN Cass R. Sunstein Preliminary draft 1/29/03 All rights reserved 
The most important and illuminating early writing on Brown v. Bd. of Education is a nine-page essay by Charles Black. Black memorably shows that segregation was a crucial part of a racial caste system. At the same time, he cuts through legal abstractions that made it difficult to answer the question whether the Court’s decision was sufficiently “neutral.” At the same time, Black’s argument suffers from two serious problems: formalism and institution-blindness. Black writes as if his interpretation of the equal protection clause can be simply read off the clause, and he does not engage the complex institutional problems that were raised by the Court’s decision. Nonetheless, the legal culture needs more voices like Black’s. 
Of all the early writing on Brown v. Bd. of Education,1 the most striking is a ninepage essay by Charles Black.2 Black’s essay is striking because of its simplicity, its concreteness, and its realism—its clear statement of what the system of segregation did and meant, and of the relationship between that statement and Black’s reading of the Constitution. 
For three reasons, Black’s essay is worth careful consideration today. First, it gives a vivid sense of the social realities that Brown actually confronted—a sense that was entirely missing from the legal culture at the time, and one that often seems to have been lost in contemporary discussions of the Brown problem. Second, Black’s essay offers a distinctive understanding of what the equal protection clause should be taken, above all, to forbid: the maintenance of a caste system. That understanding of the clause seems to me correct, and it bears on a number of issues today. Third, Black provides a sophisticated and morally committed version of a certain approach to constitutional * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago Law School. 1 347 US 483 (1954). argument, one that retains considerable influence. I think that for all its virtues, his approach suffers from the serious vices of formalism and institutional blindness. In particular, Black’s approach suffers from its failure to see the issues that have arisen as a result of the institutional turn of post-1980s constitutional law.3 
We can learn a great deal about Brown by reading Black sympathetically. We can learn something about constitutional interpretation by reading him skeptically. Let us begin by listening to him. 
Black begins with a two-part argument that he describes as “awkwardly simple.”4 First, the equal protection clause is best read to forbid state law from significantly disadvantaging the Negro race as such. Second, segregation counts as a massive intentional disadvantaging of the Negro race as such. “No subtlety at all. Yet I cannot disabuse myself of the idea that that is really all there is to the segregation cases. If both these propositions can be supported by a preponderance of argument, the cases were rightly decided.”5 
Black attempts to support the first proposition by reference to precedent. In several cases, the Court had seemed to endorse it. To be sure, Plessy v. Ferguson6 appeared to be “a faltering from this principle.” But even in Plessy, the Court did not repudiate the principle. On the contrary, the Court found it necessary to show that any disadvantaging from segregation was produced not by state law, but by the “choice” of those who construed it as a form of disadvantaging. Hence the fault of Plessy lay not in 2 See Charles L. Black, Jr., The Lawfulness of the Segregation Decisions, 69 Yale LJ 421 (1960). 3 See Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions, 101 Mich L Rev 885 (2002). The institutional turn has many strands and can be found in many places. See, e.g., Gerald Rosenberg, The Hollow Hope (1993) (emphasizing limitations of courts in producing social change); Mark Tushnet, Taking the Constitution Away from the Courts (1999) (raising doubts about judicial review); David A. Strauss, Common Law Constitutional Interpretation, 63 U. Chi. L. Rev. 877 (1996) (emphasizing common law approach toward Constitution). For my own views, see Cass R. Sunstein, One Case At A Time (1999). 4 Id. at 421. 5 Id. 6 163 US 537 (1896). its treatment of principle, but “in the psychology and sociology” of its approach to racial separation.7 Of course Black recognizes that the idea of equal protection allows disadvantages to be placed, intentionally, on some people rather than all; bad drivers can be deprived of drivers’ licenses. The real question is whether there is a reasonable basis for inequality. This question is not always easy to answer. “But history puts it squarely out of doubt that the chief and all-dominating purpose” of the equal protection clause “was to ensure equal protection for the Negro.”8 Thus the fourteenth amendment rules out all possible arguments for discrimination against African-Americans. 
Black is aware that history is not without some ambiguity here and that some people believe that at the time of adoption, the fourteenth amendment was not taken to forbid racial segregation. By way of response, he urges that any judgment about “the ‘intent’ of the men of 1866 on segregation as we know it calls for a far chancier guess than is commonly supposed, for they were unacquainted with the institution as it prevails in the American South today. To guess their verdict upon the institution as it functions in the mid-twentieth century supposes an imaginary hypothesis which grows more preposterous as it is sought to be made more vivid.”9 
It is at this point that Black starts to pick up steam. He asks whether segregation violates the equality principle, properly understood. He acknowledges that equality “has marginal areas where philosophic difficulties are encountered. But if a whole race of people finds itself confined within a system which is set up and continued for the very purpose of keeping it in an inferior station, and if the question is the solemnly propounded whether such a race is being treated ‘equally,’ I think we ought to exercise one of the sovereign prerogatives of philosophers—that of laughter.” This is my favorite sentence in Black’s essay; it ranks among the best sentences ever written by an American law professor. 7 Id. at 422. 8 Id. at 423. 9 Id. at 424. 
Black continues that the real “question remaining (after we get our laughter under control) is whether” segregation meets that description. Here Black confesses “a tendency to start laughing all over again.” The initial reason is that he himself grew up under conditions of segregation, and “it never occurred to anyone, white or colored, to question its meaning.” Nor was personal experience the only support for this conclusion. “Segregation in the South comes down in apostolic succession from slavery and the Dred Scott case. The South fought to keep slavery, and lost. Then it tried the Black Codes, and lost. Then it looked around for something else and found segregation.”10 There was nothing consensual about segregation. It was imposed by whites, not agreed to by all. 
Drawing on national experience, Black contends that separate was almost never really equal. When African-Americans were given separate beaches and washrooms, they were far worse than the beaches and washrooms given to whites. In education, “colored schools have been so disgracefully inferior to white schools that only ignorance can excuse those who have remained acquiescent members of a community that lived the Molochian child-destroying lie that put them forward as ‘equal.’”11 Segregation could be understood only in its historical setting, as part of a culture in which a “society that has just lost the Negro as a slave, that has just lost out in an attempt to put him under quasiservile ‘Codes,’ the society that views his blood as a contamination and his name as an insult, the society that extralegally imposes on him every humiliating mark of low caste and that until yesterday kept him in line by lynching . . .” Those who see what segregation actually means will not fall victim to arguments that amount to “one-stepahead-of-the-marshal correction” (another memorable phrase from Black, capturing many forms of legal argument). 
Black also seeks to explain the evident puzzlement of those in the legal culture about the plain “fact that the social meaning of segregation is the putting of the Negro in a position of walled-off inferiority.”12 How, he asks, can people actually wonder about that not-hard question? Black contends that the answer lies in a fundamental mistake, 10 Id. 11 Id., at 426. which is to ask the question whether “segregation amounts to discrimination” acontextually and in a historical vacuum. For lawyers and judges, the question cannot sensibly be put that way. The real question is whether segregation amounts to discrimination when it “is imposed by law in the twentieth century in certain specific states in the American Union.” That question is hilariously easy. If it seems difficult, it is only because of the absence of a “ritually sanctioned way in which the Court, as a Court, can permissibly learn what is obvious to everybody else and to the Justices as individuals.” But if this is the situation, the task of legal acumen is to find “ways to make it permissible for the Court to use what it knows; any other counsel is of despair.” 
To be sure, it had been argued, most prominently by Herbert Wechsler,13 that the Brown decision should be understood to involve a conflict between the associational preferences of whites and those of African-Americans. Wechsler thought that if the Court was bound by neutral principles, that conflict would be hard to resolve: “For me, assuming equal facilities, the question posed by state-sponsored segregation is not one of discrimination at all. Its human and its constitutional dimensions lie entirely elsewhere, in the denial by the state of freedom to associate, a denial that impinges in the same way on any groups and races that may be involved. I think, and I hope not without foundation, that the Southern white also pays heavily for segregation, not only in the sense of guilt he must carry but also in the benefits he is denied.”14 Wechsler supported this claim with an anecdote: “In the days when I was joined with Charles H. Houston in a litigation in the Supreme Court, before the present building was constructed, he did not suffer more than I in knowing that we had to go to Union Station to lunch together during the recess.”15 
Here again we can hear Black’s ringing laughter. Houston was an exceptionally distinguished lawyer, unable to eat lunch with his white co-counsel in the nation’s capitol when engaged in legal argument before the nation’s highest court. In this world (almost) anything is possible, but it would be astonishing if Houston “did not suffer more than” 12 Id. at 427. 13 Herbert Wechsler, Toward Neutral Principles of Constitutional Law, 73 Harv L Rev 1 (1959). 14 Wechsler, supra note, at 34. 15 Id. Wechsler as a result of racial segregation. In any case Wechsler’s general challenge to Brown was simple: A preference for one set of associational preferences seems to violate the obligation of neutrality. How can a Court committed to neutral principles choose one set over another? To this Black responds that Wechsler has badly misconceived the idea of equality and hence that of neutrality. Of course any requirement of equality will “entail some disagreeableness for” those who benefit from inequality. In other words, the idea of equality does not counsel equality between equality and inequality; it favors the former. If the fourteenth amendment is committed to equality, then it settles the question of how to handle the conflict between the competing associational claims. 
Black concludes that Brown is correct if the Constitution is “inconsistent with any device that in fact relegates the Negro race to a position of inferiority.”16 In an uncannily prescient statement, he urges that “in the end the decisions will be accepted by the profession on just that basis.” He contends that the Court’s “judgments, in law and in fact, are as right and true as any that ever was uttered.” In a footnote, Black makes just one critical remark about the Court’s opinion, as distinct from its holding: “the venial fault of the opinion consists in its not spelling out that segregation . . . is perceptibly a means of ghettoizing the imputedly inferior race. (I would conjecture that the motive for this omission was reluctance to go into the distasteful details of the southern caste system.)”17 
Black’s essay has two cardinal virtues. The first is that he provides a clear and appealing interpretation of the equal protection clause. In Black’s view, the clause forbids state law from creating anything like a caste system. He uses the term “caste” twice, and an anticaste principle18 unambiguously infuses his treatment of the problem of segregation and indeed the principle for which he takes the equal protection clause to 16Black, supra, at 429. 17 Id. 18 I have argued in favor of this idea in Cass R. Sunstein, The Anticaste Principle, 92 Mich. L. Rev. 2410 (1994). stand. What makes racial segregation impermissible is that it works, in intention and in effect, to turn African-Americans into members of a lower caste. Black does not quote from Justice Harlan’s dissenting opinion in Plessy v. Ferguson, but it is reasonable to speculate that one of Harlan’s sentences helped to inspire him: “There is no caste here.”19 Note in this regard Black’s criticism of the Court’s opinion, charitably relegated to a footnote, for its failure to spell out what segregation really is and does. Within the legal culture, the failure to explore the “southern caste system,” or even to name it as such, was remedied above all by Black’s own article. 
The anticaste principle behind Black’s argument has not played the dominant role in the constitutional law of equal protection. The clearest use of that principle was in Loving v. Virginia,20 in which the Court struck down a ban on racial intermarriage with a reference to the effort to maintain “White Supremacy.”21 But in the modern era, the equal protection clause has been read to forbid governments from drawing distinctions on the basis of race22—a reading that is fundamentally different from Black’s. Notice that Black did not contend that segregation was unlawful because it amounted to an effort to make race relevant for purposes of policy; he did not argue for a principle of color-blindness. His claim was that segregation was unlawful because it amounted to an effort to keep one group below another—to maintain the Southern caste system. In the modern era, this view of the equal protection clause has had only one strong endorsement in a majority opinion: Justice Ginsburg’s opinion for the Court in the Virginia Military Institute case.23 I believe that the anticaste principle is the correct reading of the clause, even though its implementation would impose formidable burdens on courts.24 
The second virtue of Black’s essay is that it offers a vivid, concrete, and realistic understanding of segregation—a historicized understanding that cuts through the almost comically uninformative and abstract accounts offered by Wechsler and others. Black’s 19 163 US at xx. 20 388 US 1 (1967). 21 Id. at xx. 22 See Adarand Contractors v. Pena, 115 S Ct 2097 (1995). Of course the doctrine here has become quite complex and unruly. 23 US (199X). emphasis on the need to attend to “social meaning” is highly illuminating here; he rightly suggests that segregation can be appreciated only if it is taken as a particular practice in the American South. He is also correct to suggest that we ought to meet with “laughter” the question whether racial segregation might not be a way of treating African-Americans equally. Not incidentally, and in Black’s spirit, I believe that laughter is also the appropriate reaction to the equally solemn question, usually answered “yes” by the current Supreme Court,25 whether affirmative action programs deprive white Americans of the equal protection of the laws. To be sure, such programs present difficult questions of policy; they are often bad ideas. But on the constitutional question, the extraordinary success of constitutional assaults on affirmative action programs is shocking and disgraceful. 
Black’s understanding of the anticaste principle does leave many open questions. At times he speaks of purpose. At times he speaks of effect, as in the suggestion that the Constitution “is inconsistent with any device that in fact relegates the Negro race to a position of inferiority.” We can imagine cases in which either intent or effect is operative, but not both. In any case many officials practices might be seen as entrenching a caste system based on race. Does Black’s principle raise doubts about poll taxes, literacy tests for voting, educational funding systems that disproportionately benefit whites, or admissions requirements for universities that ensure overwhelming white student bodies? Would Black’s principle raise questions about inadequate welfare and job training programs? Do these also “relegate” African-Americans to a position of inferiority? And if the equal protection clause forbids the maintenance of a system of racial caste, does it also forbid the maintenance of a caste system based on gender? It would be possible to generalize, from Black’s understanding of the equal protection clause, a principle that forbids all official practices that turn morally irrelevant characteristics into a basis for social subordination. Such a generalization is very much in the spirit of Black’s analysis. But is this what he intends? And would the anticaste principle, thus understood, bear on current debates about discrimination on the basis of disability and sexual orientation? 24 See id. 25 See note XX supra. Would it require something like an Americans with Disabilities Act as a matter of constitutional law? Would it require states to recognize same-sex marriages? 
On Black’s behalf we might respond that however these questions might be answered, the segregation issue was an easy one. With respect to that issue, the conventional responses do have a “one-step-ahead-of-the-marshal” character. It is hardly a decisive objection to Black’s argument that he has not specified all of its implications. Insofar as Black sketched an appealing conception of the equal protection clause, and memorably argued why segregation is inconsistent with that conception, he provided an enduring service for the legal culture. 
The vices of Black’s essay are as interesting as its virtues, and they are no less important. In a way, Black’s essay seems of its time; its sense of moral engagement with the issue of segregation has the unmistakable feel of certain academic writing in the late1960s. But there is also a sense in which it is barely dated, taking the form of an entirely recognizable kind of modern legal argument, academic and otherwise. Black’s effort to identify the principle behind the equal protection clause, and his explanation of why the practice in question violates that principle, is akin to countless current explorations of constitutional issues. 
Like many of those explorations, Black’s effort suffers from two serious problems. The first is a kind of formalism—an approach that ignores the inevitable role of evaluative judgments in constitutional interpretation. The second is a blindness to institutional considerations—a neglect of variables that might make courts hesitate to implement what would, as a matter of principle, count as the best interpretation of the Constitution. The legal culture has obtained a far better understanding of those considerations in the last two decades, and they help to illuminate difficulties in Black’s approach. 
Formalism first. Black assumes far too readily that the equal protection clause forbids any intentional disadvantaging of African-Americans. The clause does not unambiguously do any such thing. It would be possible to understand the clause far more narrowly, in a way that does not touch the practice of “separate but equal.” All by itself, Plessy v. Ferguson provides some evidence of the plausibility of this reading: If an overwhelming majority of the Supreme Court concluded, not long after ratification, that the Fourteenth Amendment does not forbid “separate but equal,” then there is reason to think that this interpretation is at least textually plausible. In any case, a great deal of historical research supports the view that the Fourteenth Amendment was not meant to eliminate racial segregation and indeed that it was not meant to prohibit all intentional disadvantaging of 
The 
Reconstruction 
Congress expressly permitted the schools of the District of Columbia to remain segregated.27 The Fourteenth Amendment was meant to constitutionalize the Civil Rights Act of 1866, and the sponsors of that Act specifically disclaimed any intention to interfere with segregated education.28 
In these circumstances, it is implausible to say that the equal protection clause necessarily has the meaning that Black ascribes to it. On narrow “originalist” grounds, Brown is not simple to defend. Without adopting anything like Black’s general understanding of the clause, Judge Michael McConnell, a committed originalist, has made the most sustained, even heroic effort to demonstrate that racial segregation was inconsistent with the original meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment.29 McConnell places a great deal of emphasis on the efforts of Republicans in the Reconstruction Congress to include schools within the scope of the 1875 Civil Rights Act; and he does provide strong evidence that many and perhaps most legislators in that Congress believed 26 See Richard Kluger, Simple Justice 633-34 (1976); Frank and Munro, The Original Understanding of Equal Protection of the Laws, 1972 Wash U L Q 421, 460-62 (1977); Raoul Berger, Government by Judiciary 123-25 (1977). 27 See Frank and Munro, supra, at 460-62. 28 See Statement of James Wilson, Cong Globe, 39th Cong, 1st Sess 1117-1118 (1866). 29 See Michael McConnell, Originalism and the Desegregation decisions, 81 Va L Rev 947 (1995). that segregated schools were inconsistent with the principles underlying the Fourteenth Amendment. The fact remains, however, that the post-ratification views of members of Congress are not decisive evidence about constitutional meaning. Even more fundamentally, the efforts to ban segregated schools ultimately failed (even if they received considerable support within both houses of Congress). At most, Judge McConnell has demonstrated that Congress had the constitutional authority to outlaw racial segregation under the enforcement clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. He does not come close to showing what is necessary to establish the correctness of Brown on originalist grounds -- that the equal protection clause was originally understood as a selfexecuting ban on such segregation. Certainly Black does not demonstrate or even maintain that it was so understood. 
It is not even clear what approach to constitutional interpretation Black means to endorse. Much of his argument seems to be roughly originalist, in the sense that he seems to understand the meaning of the clause in accordance with the understanding of its ratifiers. But he investigates the original understanding barely at all; his is not a historical exegesis. The most he does is to urge, in response to originalist-style objections to Brown, that any understanding of the view of 1866 calls for a “guess.” His fragmentary argument on this count is quite sophisticated: “To guess their verdict upon the institution as it functions in the mid-twentieth century supposes an imaginary hypothesis which grows more preposterous as it is sought to be made more vivid.” This suggestion presages some of the best contemporary discussions of how to deal with the original understanding in unanticipated circumstances.30 But all this point shows is that the original understanding is not necessarily fatal to Brown; Black does not urge that the original understanding, carried forward to 1954, condemns school segregation. If a “guess” is what is required, then Black’s reading of the fourteenth amendment is not, strictly speaking, mandatory according to the tools that he himself purports to be using. 30 See Mark Tushnet, Following the Rules Laid Down: A Critique of Neutral Principles and Interpretivism, 96 Harv L Rev 781 (1983); Larry Lessig, Fidelity in Translation, 71 Tex L Rev 1165 (1993). 
What tools is he actually using? To the extent that Black’s reading emerges as permissive, a choice among plausible alternatives, we should see him as engaged in a distinctive kind of legal formalism—regrettably, the dishonorable kind,31 one that pretends that a legal text has an unambiguous meaning even though normative judgments must be made in order to invest it with that meaning. For a modern analogue, consider the view, endorsed by a majority of the current Supreme Court, that strict scrutiny is required for affirmative action programs because the Constitution forbids states from denying equal protection to “any person.”32 This too is a form of dishonorable formalism: The fact that the clause protects “any person” is neither here nor there on the question whether strict scrutiny, or something else, should be applied to affirmative action programs. 
In the end, Black’s reading of the equal protection clause can only be understood interpretive in Ronald Dworkin’s sense of the word.33 Black is attempting not to track the unambiguous meaning of that clause but to make best constructive sense of it, in a way that inevitably involves judgments of Black’s own. Among the various possible interpretations, those that “fit” the clause and its history, Black is venturing an approach that seems most attractive to him on normative grounds. This point is not meant as an objection to Black’s conclusions about the clause or the case. For constitutional interpretation, there is no avoiding normative judgments of one or another kind.34 And perhaps his interpretation is preferable to any other; in fact I believe that it is.35 The problem is that Black does not defend his approach against imaginable alternatives; he writes as if the principle can be read off the Constitution itself. If we were to be harsh, we might even say that Black’s confidence about his view of the clause emerges as a form of self-delusion, a claim of necessity that masks normative judgments of Black’s own. 31 This kind of dishonorable formalism is an ugly sibling of the entirely honorable (though controversial) view that texts should be interpreted in accordance with their ordinary meaning and that judges ought not to rely on legislative history, statutory “purpose,” and the like. The best discussion is Adrian Vermeule, Interpretive Choice, NYU L Rev. 32 See City of Richmond v. Croson, 488 US 469 (1989). 33 See Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire (1985). 34 I cannot defend this point in detail here. See Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict (1996), for general discussion. Note that originalism itself represents a normative choice – to be originalist – and then in hard cases, of which Brown (as Black shows) is an example, originalists are unlikely to be able to make decisions simply by looking at history. 35 See Cass R. Sunstein, The Anticaste Principle, 92 Mich. L. Rev. 2410 (1994). 
The second problem is that Black neglect institutional issues. He see his tasks as twofold: first, identification of the proper reading of the equal protection clause and second, measurement of segregation against the clause, properly read. This approach to the Constitution was typical of academic work in the 1960s and 1970s. It remains common today. But it has a significant weakness. Black does not admit the possibility that for a court, the proper reading of the clause is closely attuned to the institutional limitations of judges. The institutional turn of post-1980s scholarship has pointed to several reasons why this might be so. Judicial efforts to promote social reform might not be productive; they might even be counterproductive, endangering the very goals that the judges seek.36 Judicial judgments about (legally relevant) moral values might not be reliable, and hence it might be best if judges, aware of their own moral fallibility, are reluctant to impose those values on the nation.37 In any case judicial insistence on certain moral commitments, even appealing ones, might preempt democratic deliberation on the underlying questions; and if citizens have a right to be self-governing, judges might be interpret the Constitution with that right in mind. 
If any of these claims is correct, then judges with a set of reasonable, optional interpretations might select the interpretation that the one that minimizes the judicial role in American society—not because that interpretation is best out of context, but because it is best-suited to judicial capacities. Emphasizing that their own readings are prone to error, judges might read constitutional clauses, whenever possible, in such a way as to minimize judicial intrusions into democratic processes. James Bradley Thayer famously defended “the rule of clear mistake”—the view that courts should uphold legislation unless it is unambiguously unconstitutional.38 A limited reading of the equal protection clause, one that would not reach segregation, might be defended on the ground that it 36 See Rosenberg, supra note. 37 See Tushnet, supra. 38 See James Bradley Thayer, The Origin and Scope of the American Doctrine of Constitutional Law, 7 Harv L Rev 129 (1893). reduces the judicial role in American life. I am not defending that limited reading; I am simply noticing that Black fails to explore the arguments that might be made in its favor. 
Note that this limited reading would be a court-specific one. It would not preclude the possibility that other institutions, not facing the limitations of the judiciary, would understand the equal protection clause more broadly. Black did not pause to consider the possibility that in some areas, constitutional rights might be judicially underenforced, for institutional reasons stemming from the courts’ properly limited role in American government.39 If we take seriously a more general anticaste principle, judicial limitations seem highly relevant. A court that is committed to counteract the caste-like features of American society would closely scrutinize a number of seemingly neutral practices that have racially discriminatory effects, such as tests for education and employment on which whites do systematically better than African-Americans. To say the least, this close scrutiny would put courts into an awkward position.40 
I have suggested the possibility that judges should adopt a narrower understanding of the equal protection clause simply because of an awareness of their own institutional weaknesses, recognizing that the broader reading might be acceptable or even preferable for other branches of government. If the meaning of the Constitution, at the judicial level, is a product of substantive theory and institutional constraint, then Black’s reading of the equal protection clause might be rejected on the ground that it emphasizes the former but neglects the latter. Compare the contemporary question whether the Constitution requires states to recognize same-sex marriages. Let us suppose, as I believe, that the best interpretation of the equal protection clause does so require— that states have no adequate basis for discriminating against gays and lesbians in this way. Even if this is so, federal courts might hesitate to insist on that interpretation for prudential reasons.41 The nation might reject the courts’ interpretation, in a way that 39 See Lawrence Sager, Fair Measure: The Status of Underenforced Constitutional Norms, 91 Harv L Rev 1212 (1978). 40 See Washington v. Davis, 426 US 229 (1976). 41 The case of state courts is different. See Cass R. Sunstein, The New Republic (2003). disserves the very values at stake—a possibility that is relevant, whether or not it is decisive, for constitutional law.42 
Alternatively, judges might have chosen to read the equal protection clause narrowly in the particular context of segregation, not because they are generally errorprone, but in the interest of ensuring that courts are not placed in an especially difficult remedial role. There can be no doubt that the political question doctrine has a pale echo in the numerous cases interpreting constitutional clauses so as to avoid collisions with other institutions.43 In some contexts, the echo deserves to be a bit louder, simply because a ruling would force courts to engage in managerial tasks that are beyond their competence. Black does not confront this possibility in the context of school segregation, and it is a serious gap in his argument. His silence here is characteristic. Later in his life, Black made eloquent pleas on behalf of a constitutional requirement that governments provide a decent economic minimum -- a social safety net below which no citizen may be allowed to fall.44 Put to one side the question whether this requirement can be found in the Constitution through appropriate interpretive methods. Even if it can, judicial oversight of the welfare system would put courts in a position for which they are especially ill-suited.45 
None of this means that Brown is wrong; like nearly everyone else (now, as opposed to during the 1960s, when the legal culture was sharply divided), I believe that Black was right to insist that it was right. But Black’s argument on its behalf is badly incomplete. It is not sufficient to identify the most appealing interpretation of a clause and then to measure a challenged practice against that interpretation. A pervasive question has to do with judicial capacities and competence. 
In a sense, Black’s argument can be seen as a great triumph for legal realism in American constitutional law. What makes his essay so important is that it cuts through abstractions, pervasive in law schools and in courts, that had made it nearly impossible to see what Brown was about. I have criticized Black for his formalism and for his neglect of institutional considerations. But we need more voices like Charles Black’s. 
To see why, return to Herbert Wechsler’s puzzlement about the lawfulness of the segregation decision. If we are to laugh at Wechsler, our laughter had better not be complacent. We should not treat Wechsler as a relic of history, someone whose errors cannot find analogues today. After all, Wechsler was extremely active in the civil rights movement, to which he was personally dedicated. As a lawyer, he helped to assist Thurgood Marshall and others in the attack on segregation. His difficulty in justifying Brown was not motivated by the slightest sympathy for the practices that the Court invalidated. Wechsler was anguished by that difficulty. 
Wechsler’s closing question was this: “Given a situation where the state must practically choose between denying the association to those who wish it or imposing it on those who would avoid it, is there a basis in neutral principles for holding that the Constitution demands that the claims for association should prevail?”46 Questions like this continue to haunt the legal system. But Black’s answer is simple. By its very nature, the equality principle is not neutral between inequality and equality; and this is not an embarrassment for the equality principle. That answer is not just Black’s but Brown’s as well. I think that it has enduring and insufficiently appreciated implications for constitutional law in general. 45 I discuss this question in Cass R. Sunstein, The Partial Constitution (1993). 46 Wechsler, supra note. Readers with comments may address them to: 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (November 1999; Ethics, v. 110, no. 1). 
Joseph Isenbergh, Impeachment and Presidential Immunity from Judicial Process (November 1999; forthcoming Yale Law and Policy Review v.18 #1). Cass R. Sunstein, Is the Clean Air Act Unconstitutional? (August 1999; Michigan Law Review #3). 
Elizabeth Garrett, The Law and Economics of “Informed Voter” Ballot Notations (November 1999, University of Virginia Law Review, v. 85). 
David A. Strauss, Do Constitutional Amendments Matter? (November 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Standing for Animals (November 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Culture and Government Money: A Guide for the Perplexed (April 2000). 
Emily Buss, Without Peers? The Blind Spot in the Debate over How to Allocate Educational Control between Parent and State (April 2000). 
David A. Strauss, Common Law, Common Ground, and Jefferson’s Principle (June 2000). 
Curtis A. Bradley and Jack L. Goldsmith, Treaties, Human Rights, and Conditional Consent (May 2000; Pennsylvania Law Review v. 149). 
Mary Ann Case, Lessons for the Future of Affirmative Action from the Past of the Religion Clauses? (May 2001, Supreme Court Review, 2000) Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights? Lessons from South Africa (May, 2000). 
Jill Elaine Hasday, Parenthood Divided: A Legal History of the Bifurcated Law of Parental Relations Elizabeth Garrett, Institutional Lessons from the 2000 Presidential Election (May 2001). 
Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons: Parking and Stopping on the Commons (August 2001). 
Jack Goldsmith, The Internet and the Legitimacy of Remote Cross-Border Searches (October 2001). 
Adrian Vermeule, Does Commerce Clause Review Have Perverse Effects? (October 2001). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Of Artificial Intelligence and Legal Reasoning (November 2001). 
Elizabeth Garrett, The Future of Campaign Finance Reform Laws in the Courts and in Congress, The William J. Brennan Lecture in Constitutional Law (December 2001). 
Julie Roin, Taxation without Coordination (March 2002). 
Geoffrey R. Stone, Above the Law: Research Methods, Ethics, and the Law of Privilege (March 2002; forthcoming J. Sociological Methodology 2002). 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 218 
(2D SERIES) 
Company Stock, Market Rationality, and Legal Reform Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein 
July 2004 
Shlomo Benartzi The Anderson School at UCLA 
110 Westwood Plaza 
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481 Shlomo.Benartzi@anderson.ucla.edu 
Richard H. Thaler 
University of Chicago Graduate School of Business 
1101 E. 58th St. 
Chicago, IL 60637 Thaler@gsb.uchicago.edu 
Stephen P. Utkus Vanguard Center for Retirement Research 100 Vanguard Blvd., M38 
Malvern, PA 19355 Steve_utkus@vanguard.com 
Cass R. Sunstein University of Chicago Law School 
1111 E. 60th St. 
Chicago IL, 60637 csunstei@uchicago.edu 
July 10, 2004 We would like to thank Mark Iwry, Olivia Mitchell, Ehud Peleg, and participants in a work-in-progress lunch at the University of Chicago Law School for their comments. Benartzi is grateful for financial support from the law firm of Reish, Luftman, McDaniel & Reicher. All opinions expressed herein are those of the authors alone, and not necessarily those of The Vanguard Group. Some eleven million 401(k) plan participants take a concentrated equity position in their retirement savings account, investing more than 20% of the balance in their employer’s common stock. Yet investing in the stock of one’s employer is a risky investment on two counts: single securities are riskier than diversified portfolios (such as mutual funds), and the employee’s human capital is typically positively correlated with the performance of the company. In the worst-case scenario, illustrated by the Enron bankruptcy, workers can lose their jobs and much of their retirement wealth simultaneously. For workers who expect to work for the company for many years, a dollar of company stock can be valued at less than 50 cents to the worker after accounting for the risks. But employees still invest voluntarily in their employers’ stock, and many employers insist on making matching contributions in stock, despite the fact that a dollar of investment or contribution may be worth only 50 cents on the dollar. How can competitive labor markets sustain a situation in which employers and employees make such a fundamental miscalculation? We provide evidence that employees underestimate the risk of owning company stock, while employers overestimate the benefits associated with employee stock ownership relative to its costs. This evidence provides strong reasons to consider legal reforms in this domain. We make suggestions that would increase employees’ freedom of choice and improve their welfare, but without imposing significant costs on well-meaning but ill-informed employers. 
When the stock of the Enron Corporation suddenly collapsed, and eventually became worthless, many employees discovered that they had simultaneously lost their jobs and much of their retirement savings. Before the stock price fell, fully 62% of the assets in the Enron 401(k) plan were in the shares of Enron stock (based on the 11-k filings at the end of 2000). Now, more than two years after this wellpublicized incident, it is still common for employees to have significant portions of their retirement investments in their employer’s stock. Some examples are shown in Table 1. [Insert Table 1 here] 
In the aftermath of the Enron fiasco, Congress has considered a range of legal reforms that would protect employees against the risks associated with investments in their employer’s securities (hereafter “company stock”). The most cautious proposal would require that sponsors provide an annual disclosure about company stock risks to participants, and would limit an employer’s ability to restrict a participant’s right to diversify company stock investments. More ambitious initiatives would require mandatory diversification above some limit (such as 20% of the account balance), or disallow employee contributions in stock when employers already “match” in stock.1 However, no legislation has passed, in part because of questions about its necessity. Employers argue that the provision of company stock in the 401(k) plan is part of voluntary agreements between employers and employees, agreements on which government should not intrude. If these agreements are mutually beneficial, as their pervasiveness suggests, then the presumption should be against legal intrusion. 
Our goal here is to investigate whether those agreements are in fact mutually beneficial. We provide evidence that they are not. On the contrary, we suggest that their pervasiveness reflects some combination of information failure and bounded rationality on the part of both employers and employees. Participants making voluntary investments in company stock appear to do so ignorantly, with no knowledge of the risks, investing a dollar in company stock when it is often in reality worth only 50 cents. Employers behave in a fashion that also reflects inadequate information. A naive analysis is that firms seem to be paying part of their compensation in the equivalent of Canadian dollars (that is, valued at less than one US dollar), and to be paying nearly a dollar for those. We ask two questions: First, is this naive analysis approximately correct? We find that it is. Second, in light of that finding, what should the law be? We suggest that sensible reforms should attempt to preserve freedom of choice while also ensuring that people are not steered in welfare-reducing directions. We offer some suggestions about how legal reforms might fit with the general project of “libertarian paternalism,” which calls for strategies that are choice-preserving but self-consciously concerned with promoting individual welfare.2 1 Purcell (2002) provides a good summary of recent proposals. 2 See Thaler and Sunstein (2003). 
As a practical matter, the issue is exceedingly important. According to Mitchell and Utkus (2004), some eleven million participants in US defined contribution plans have over 20% of their account balance invested in company stock. Within this group, some five million have over 60% of their account concentrated in employer stock. Many large US firms encourage this practice by making their own “matching” or other contribution in the form of company stock. These firms typically restrict an employee’s ability to diversify these contributions, often until the employee reaches age 50 or 55.3 As reported by Benartzi (2001), employees perceive the employer’s decision to match in stock as an implicit endorsement of the stock, and so invest even more of their own money in the stock than they otherwise might. 
Encouraging or forcing employees to invest in a single stock, as opposed to a diversified fund such as a mutual fund, violates the first principle of investing—diversify! As we describe below, concentrated holdings in employer stock can be extremely costly to employees. For example, in a paper we will discuss below, Lisa Meulbroek (2002) estimates that a large position in company stock held by employees over a long period is effectively worth less than 50 cents on the dollar, after accounting for the costs of inadequate diversification. Moreover, many employers are providing matching stock contributions that cost them nearly a dollar, but are again worth less than 50 cents on the dollar. 
How can competitive labor markets sustain an equilibrium in which employees and employees make such fundamental miscalculations about the value of an investment asset? We investigate the puzzle from the perspectives of both employees and employers, comparing those perspectives with what is known about the real-world effects of company stock. Our survey of over 500 employees indicates that most workers do not correctly appreciate the risks associated with company stock. In particular, employees believe that shares in their company are relatively safe; many think it is safer than a “diversified fund with many different stocks.” Moreover, their perceptions of risk seem largely related to past returns rather than the volatility of those returns. We find similar misconceptions on the part of firms. The actual cost of giving a dollar of company stock to the employee is quite close to a dollar, and the benefits, at least in terms of employee productivity, are probably quite small. Employers appear to significantly overestimate those beneficial effects. 
With respect to legal reform, these findings suggest, first and foremost, that the current situation is unsatisfactory. Informed employers and informed employees would be quite unlikely to agree that employee savings should be invested mostly or entirely in company stock. The least intrusive reforms 3 Only 3% of defined contribution plans in the US offer company stock, but these are the plans of the largest firms, covering over 40% of participants, according to Mitchell and Utkus (2004). About half of firms make a contribution in stock, while the other half simply make stock available as one of many plan investments. The decision to provide an employer contribution in stock is generally a feature of large firms. Benartzi (2001) reports than roughly 40 would require either disclosure of information to employees or limitations on the time periods for which employees may be required to hold company stock. While such reforms are not without promise, they are unlikely to be adequate. It is appropriate to consider more aggressive approaches that simultaneously protect employees’ freedom to choose and protect them from mistakenly taking unnecessary risks. 
This Article proceeds as follows. In Part II, we discuss our research methodology, which consists of surveying employees and employers. In Parts III and IV, we discuss the costs and benefits of company stock to employees and employers respectively. We draw on what is known about those costs and benefits and compare the reality to existing perceptions. In Part V, we offer suggestions for legal reforms. 
Our data and tests are based on two surveys—a telephone survey of employees and an online survey of employers.4 For the employee telephone survey, we drew a random sample of participants who are able to invest in company stock through their employer’s defined contribution plan from the plan recordkeeping system of the Vanguard Group.5 Our sample includes 501 respondents from employees at roughly 100 different companies. A copy of the survey is attached in Appendix A. Our goal here was to obtain a better understanding of how employees think about the costs and benefits of owning company stock. The survey included, for example, a question on the perceived risk of company stock relative to a diversified fund with many different stocks (see Q6 of the employee survey). The complete surveys were linked to the recordkeeping system to obtain additional demographic and investment information, although the identity of the individual respondents was kept confidential. 
The employer survey was sent to a group of 150 employers who offer company stock within their retirement savings plans: 135 were Vanguard retirement recordkeeping clients and 15 were firms for whom Vanguard provides investment services. Half of the respondents were in the human resources department, typically an individual with the title of director of benefits or vice-president of human resources, while just under half (43%) were in the corporate Treasury function. The response rate was 50 percent, resulting in 76 complete surveys. Of the respondents, 45 percent provide at least a portion of their contribution in the form of company stock and the remaining 55 percent made their contribution “in cash”—that is, they left the investment of the employer contribution to the discretion of the employees.6 percent of the S&P 500 firms require that the matching contributions they provide to their employees be invested solely in company stock. 4 Additional detail on the survey can be found in Vanguard, 2003. 5 Employers often hire third parties such as Vanguard to administer their 401(k) plan, a task that includes keeping track of the investments of each employee. This recordkeeping and plan administration business is separate from the portfolio management business. 6 Employer stock contributions in a defined contribution plan can take several forms: a matching contribution, such as $0.50 of stock for each $1.00 contributed by the participant, up to 6% of pay; a non-matching employer The survey instrument, including the distribution of responses, is attached in Appendix B. The goal of the employer survey was to obtain a better understanding of employers’ perspective on the costs and benefits of requiring employees to own company stock. Hence, beside background information on the individual responding to the survey and the structure of the specific retirement plan, the employer was asked to rate the degree of agreement or disagreement with about a dozen statements on the costs and benefits of requiring employees to own company stock (see Q8 and Q9 of the employer survey).7 The complete surveys were linked to recordkeeping data for information such as asset allocation. 
III. Employees and Company Stock: Reality and Perception 
What is the value of company stock to employees? The most careful estimates come from a 2002 study by Lisa Meulbroek, who focuses on the cost of failing to diversify the idiosyncratic risk of company stock.8 The relative value to the employee of a dollar of company stock, as opposed to a diversified stock portfolio, is inversely related to the proportion of wealth held in company stock, the number of years the stock will be held, and the volatility of the stock. For example, with an assumed investment horizon of ten years and 25 percent of the assets in company stock, a dollar in company stock is only worth 58 cents. Lengthening the investment horizon to 15 years, and increasing the allocation to company stock to 50 percent, would further reduce the value to 33 cents on the dollar. All other things being equal, more volatile small-cap stocks have a lower risk-adjusted value than blue-chip issues. But as Brown et al. (2004) point out, it is principally large blue-chip firms that encourage concentrated stock positions, and so for many participants the risk adjustment should be based on the volatility of large-cap stocks. 
Meulbroek’s calculations actually understate the costs of holding company stock because human capital considerations are not included. Since employees typically do well when their company does well, and vice versa, an investment in company stock is worth less, on average, than an investment in a single company picked at random. As the employees at Enron learned the hard way, workers with a significant portion of their wealth invested in company stock can end up losing their job and a significant portion of their savings simultaneously. 
For workers who expect to stay with the firm for an extended period of time, a dollar that remains invested in the employer’s stock can easily be worth less than 50 cents on the dollar. 
For employees, then, the problem with investing in company stock is that it exposes them to idiosyncratic risk as well as to the possibility of suffering simultaneous reductions in both retirement contribution that can vary from year to year, such as a 3% of pay stock contribution to all eligible employees; or an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) contribution, a stock contribution made to all eligible employees that is entitled to certain additional tax benefits. 7 To ensure that we did not miss some important aspects of the costs and benefits of company stock, the survey questions were based on focus groups that we conducted with employers earlier on. savings and wages. On the other hand, there could be some advantages to investing in company stock from the employees’ perspective. For example, employees could enjoy certain tax benefits if they invest in company stock. In the rest of this section, we explore how employees view the advantages and disadvantages of owning company stock, and we attempt to compare their perceptions to rational calculations. 
other investment funds in 401(k) plans. First, when changing jobs or retiring, a participant may elect to have all appreciation in company stock taxed at a preferential capital gains tax rate. For example, suppose a participant retires with $250,000 invested in company stock, with a cost basis of $100,000.9 The participant may elect an “in-kind” distribution (i.e., a distribution of share certificates), and transfer those assets to a taxable brokerage account. The participant must pay ordinary income taxes on the cost basis of $100,000 at the time of distribution. If she decides to sell her stock then, she pays a lower capital gains tax on the $150,000 of appreciation. Second, if she chooses to continue to hold the stock, she is able to defer the capital gains tax. While she must pay the ordinary income tax on the $100,000 cost basis immediately, the capital gains tax on the $150,000 appreciation—and on any future appreciation—is deferred until the shares are sold. Finally, because the company stock shares are now in a taxable brokerage account, the participant can pass these shares at death to heirs at a “stepped up” basis. In effect, this eliminates all capital gains tax on the stock’s appreciation for her heirs. By comparison, all other investments in a retirement savings plan are subject to ordinary income tax rates—either when they are withdrawn from the plan, or when they are withdrawn from a rollover IRA.10 
Can this potential tax benefit be of sufficient value to explain why employees would be willing to invest a large proportion of their retirement money in company stock? We assume that employees cannot be valuing something that they do not know about, so we began our investigation by simply surveying employees about the capital gains tax treatment of company stock. Interestingly, only one in ten of the respondents is even aware of the preferential tax treatment of company stock (see Q13 of the employee survey), a bit less than the 12 percent of employees who think that company stock is taxed at a higher 8 See also calculations by Poterba (2003) and Ramaswamy (2004). 9The cost basis of shares acquired in a retirement plan is the average cost of shares acquired by the trustee, rather than on specific share purchases by individuals. Because of plan forfeitures and other factors, an employee’s cost basis at the time of the lump-sum distribution from the plan may be lower than the actual dollar value of her contributions, which provides an additional tax benefit to the employee. 10Upon death of an IRA account holder, spouses are allowed to retain the assets in an IRA, benefiting from continued tax deferral, while other beneficiaries must pay tax. All withdrawals are still taxed at ordinary income rate! Most survey respondents either do not know the answer (35 percent) or think that company stock has the same tax treatment as other investments (44 percent). 
Next, we explored whether awareness of the tax benefits of company stock translates into a higher allocation of employees’ own contributions into company stock. We actually found the opposite. Those who know that company stock enjoys a preferential tax treatment allocate 20.9 percent of their monthly contributions to company stock, whereas those who think that company stock has a tax disadvantage allocate 28.3 percent. Hence, it seems unlikely that the tax benefits of company stock could explain why employees choose to invest their own discretionary contributions in company stock. Similarly, it seems unlikely that the tax benefits could explain why employees are willing to accept 50 cents on the dollar. 
We do not find it surprising that employees are unaware of the tax benefits, given our own experience with leading 401(k) providers. One anecdote comes from a dinner two of us had with a dozen consultants who specialize in advising large 401(k) plans. Even those experts could not agree on the tax benefits to employees. Given that most people (even experts) are unaware of the tax treatment of company stock, we explored whether company stock provides other benefits that employees find valuable enough to sustain an equilibrium that requires them to own company stock. 
outside investors. As a result, they might be able to earn abnormal returns. This private information hypothesis, however, makes more sense for employees’ discretionary funds than for amounts being required to stay in company stock. After all, if employees are required to own the stock for many years, they have no opportunity to use their private information. 
We believe that the private information hypothesis is actually unconvincing even with respect to employees’ discretionary funds. First, the typical employee at a large company is unlikely to know much about all the different products and divisions. And even if she knows a lot about the company, she still has to assess whether the information is already incorporated in price or not. Second, the calculations by Meulbroek (2002) indicate that the lack of diversification can be extremely costly. Hence, the degree of private information that is required to justify a substantial allocation to company stock has to be correspondently high. It seems unlikely that the typical employee in a large corporation would have sufficient private information to justify the observed allocations. Third, the extent to which employees invest in company stock is often public information (i.e., filed in 11-K forms). So arbitrageurs could limit employees’ profits. rates. All account holders, either original owners or spouse heirs, must also begin withdrawals, taxed at ordinary income rates, beginning at age 70 ½. 
Fourth, and most damagingly, the private information hypothesis has no empirical support. Benartzi (2001) sorted firms based on the extent to which employees invest their discretionary funds in company stock. He found no correlation between the amount invested in company stock and subsequent investment returns. Similarly, Huberman and Sengmuller (2002) regressed current investment choices on the future performance of company stock and did not find any significant correlation.11 employees with non-monetary benefits such as feeling part of a team. (We are referring here to the benefits that accrue to the employee from such feelings. Below we will consider potential benefits to the firm.) Since we cannot observe the non-monetary benefits, it is somewhat difficult to assess how important these are. However, we attempted to gauge these benefits by asking employees how their dayto-day attitudes and feelings are affected by owning company stock (see Q9 of the employee survey). While 32 percent of the respondents confirm that it makes them feel better, 55 percent indicated that it either does not affect them or it even makes them feel worse. Furthermore, those who claim to feel better owning company stock seem to be concentrated in the best performing stocks. For example, 54 percent of those claiming their employer’s stock performed much better than the market also believe that owning it makes them feel better. In contrast, when company stock performed much worse than the market, only 19 percent feel that owning it makes them feel better. We suspect that some of those who claim to feel better owning company stock just feel better when they pick a winner regardless of its being company stock or not. 
We also investigated whether making money on company stock feels better than making money on the overall stock market, because company stock provides additional non-monetary benefits. In particular, we asked individuals whether they would feel more regret “missing the boat” on company stock versus “missing the boat” on the stock market in general (see Q11 and Q12 of the employee survey). In a pilot test of the survey, we found that asking both Q11 and Q12 over the phone was somewhat confusing. Hence, we used a between-subject approach, where half the subjects answered Q11 and the other half answered Q12. We did not find any significant differences in regret whether one misses a run up in company stock or the overall stock market. 
To summarize, we find no evidence that employees value the potential benefits of owning company stock. The vast majority are unaware of the main monetary benefit (i.e., the capital gains tax incentive). Most employees do not seem to appreciate the potential non-monetary benefits—and to those that do, the benefit appears more to do with “picking a winner.” Hence, the ostensible benefits of owning company stock could not fully explain why employees are willing to receive 50 cents on the dollar. To 11 See also related work by Choi et al. (2004). get a better understanding of the puzzle, we explore a key question: whether employees are aware of the costs of investing in company stock. 
idiosyncratic risk is considered. This is especially true when an employee invests in her employer’s stock, because she could lose her retirement funds and job at the same time. But there is some evidence that employees do not fully understand the risk of investing in company stock. For example, John Hancock Financial Services (1999) reports that only 18 percent of employees realize that their employer’s stock is riskier than a stock fund. Similarly, Benartzi (2001) finds that only 16 percent of employees understand that their employer’s stock is riskier than the overall stock market. Furthermore, only six percent of those with high school education or less recognize the risk of company stock. Mitchell and Utkus (2004) report on Vanguard survey data showing that the average participant views company stock as safer than a diversified stock fund. 
We revisited employees’ understanding of the risk of company stock for two reasons. First, we wanted to test the possibility that employees might have learned from the well-publicized Enron bankruptcy case in particular, and the market decline in general, that company stock could be very risky.12 Second, we rephrased the questions used in the earlier studies to make it more transparent that a stock fund includes many different stocks. In particular, our question read “would you say your employer’s stock is more risky, less risky or has about the same level of risk as an investment in a diversified stock fund with many different stocks?” In a sense, we gave employees another chance to show that they recognize the risk associated with holding shares of a single company. 
Our results indicate that despite the Enron bankruptcy case and the bear market, most respondents do not appreciate the risk of company stock. In particular, 25 percent of the respondents believe that their company stock is safer than a diversified stock fund and another 39 percent believe that company stock has the same level of risk as a stock fund (see Q6 of the employee survey). Only three out of ten respondents realize that company stock is riskier than a diversified stock fund (33 percent). Our results are consistent with recent evidence by the Boston Research Group (2002) indicating that employees are aware of the Enron bankruptcy case, but they have a hard time applying any lessons about diversification to their own company stock holdings. 
Part of the issue may be that participants do not think of “risk” as related to return volatility, the typical modern portfolio theory measure of risk. For 415 out of 501 participants, we were able to link their survey risk ratings to the five-year return and standard deviation of the company stock they owned (Table 2). In this subsample, four in ten (42 percent) claimed their company stock had the “same level of risk” as a diversified fund. Yet their actual holdings had an average standard deviation of 36% versus the market’s 18%. Two in ten (22 percent) thought their company stock was “less risky.” However, these “less risky” stocks had an average standard deviation of 31% versus the market’s 18%. One-third of participants appeared to get the risk assessment right. They claimed their company stock holdings were “more risky,” and indeed they were, with an average volatility of 40%. [Insert Table 2 here] 
So one possibility is that only one-third of participants understand return volatility. But perhaps a more plausible explanation, suggested by the relationship between participants’ understanding of risk and five-year returns, is that all of the participants are basing their risk perceptions on past returns, not volatility of returns. In Table 2, participants’ risk perceptions correlate neatly with past returns. From this perspective, it is not surprising that eleven million participants over-invest in company stock and fail to construct mean-variance efficient portfolios for their retirement savings. Their conception of company stock risk appears largely unrelated to modern portfolio theory notions of volatility of returns. Overall past performance appears to be a pervasive decision-making heuristic for participants and company stock. It drives holdings, as Benartzi (2001) has shown. And as we have noted, it appears to drive both motivation levels and risk perceptions. 
Next, we tried to assess the monetary value employees place on company stock, assuming they cannot sell it until they reach age 50 (a relatively common restriction). We did so by asking employees to choose between $1,000 they can invest as they wish or $1,000 worth of employer’s stock which they cannot sell until age 50 (see Q10a of the employee survey). Among those under 50 years old, 20 percent prefer $1,000 worth of employer’s stock, despite not being rewarded for the idiosyncratic risk. We continued by asking the remaining 80 percent who prefer to invest the $1,000 at their discretion whether they would take $1,100 in company stock or $1,000 to invest as they wish (see Q10b of the employee survey). Another 14 percent select company stock when offered the 10 percent premium, and then we found that an additional 29 percent choose company stock when the premium goes up to 50 percent (see Q10c of the employee survey). Adding up the responses to the three scenarios, 63 percent of our respondents prefer company stock when it provides a premium of 50 percent. 
We repeated the above analysis for people under the age of 40, since the requirement to hold company stock till age 50 imposes greater costs on them. We found that 16 percent prefer company stock even when it offers no premium; an additional 14 percent choose company stock when a premium of 10 percent is offered and then 26 percent switch to company stock when the premium is raised to 50 percent. 12 Our employee survey was administered in September and October 2002. Adding up the responses, 56 percent of our respondents prefer company stock when it provides a premium of 50 percent. 
The aforementioned calculations by Meulbroek (2002) suggest that employees ought to ask for a premium of approximately 100 percent if they cannot (or choose not to) sell company stock for a period of 10 to 15 years. A comparison of Meulbroek’s calculations with our own findings indicates that at least six in ten respondents ought to ask for a higher premium if they are required to hold company stock for more than a decade. This is consistent with our earlier result that roughly six in ten respondents do not understand that company stock is riskier than a diversified fund with many different stocks. Put differently, participants do not fully understand the costs that are associated with owning company stock and being undiversified. This lack of understanding provides at least part of the explanation for employees’ willingness to accept an equilibrium in which they are required to own company stock or in which they voluntarily concentrate their portfolios in company stock. 
nonmonetary costs such as feeling that they have betrayed their employer. Similarly, employees who do not invest in company stock might feel peer pressure to invest at least a little bit in it. But there appears to be little evidence for this speculation. Benartzi (2001) used the Organizational Commitment Questionnaire of Mowday, Steers, and Porter (1979) to estimate loyalty and he found no evidence that loyalty correlates with the decision to invest in company stock. Similarly, he did not find any evidence that peer pressure plays a significant role in the decision to invest in company stock. 
In this section, we evaluated the costs and benefits of owning company stock from the perspective of the employee. We found that the vast majority of employees do not place much weight on the alleged benefits of owning company stock. For example, only one in ten individuals are aware of the advantageous tax treatment of company stock, whereas the rest are either unaware of the preferable tax treatment or think that company stock has a tax penalty. We also explored the alleged non-monetary benefits of owning company stock, and again, found that most employees do not find those extremely valuable. 
With respect to the costs of owning company stock, our main finding is that most employees do not appreciate the risk of investing in a single stock. For example, six out of ten individuals believe that company stock is either safer or at least no riskier than a diversified fund with many different stocks. And for all participants risk perceptions seem more related to past performance than for portfolio volatility. But perhaps employers have good reasons to favor company stock – an issue to which we now turn. IV. Employers and Company Stock: Reality and Perception 
At first glance, employee investments in company stock could offer many advantages and disadvantages to the employer. Stock ownership could motivate employees to work harder. On the other hand, if company stock under-performs the stock market, worker motivation might be adversely affected, and in extreme situations, management could face legal liability as plan fiduciaries. In this section, we explore how employers view the effects of requiring employees to invest in company stock. In particular, we are interested in comparing employer’s perceptions of the costs and benefits of employee stock ownership with more objective evaluations. 
Benefits to the Employer 
ownership is increased motivation and productivity. There are, however, several problems for the increased productivity hypothesis. One major problem is that for a (rational) rank and file employee at a large company, stock ownership provides virtually no monetary incentive to work hard, because his work effort has an extremely small effect on the company’s overall performance. This has often been referred to as the “1/N” problem. If there are many employees, and many shareholders, then any one employee’s effort will only have a trivial impact on the overall profits of the firm, and this employee will only receive a trivial portion of that profit. But perhaps employees do not understand this point; perhaps ownership of company stock spurs productivity through forms of “magical thinking” that reduce or even eliminate the “1/N” problem. 
Of course, whether stock ownership increases productivity is an empirical question, but the existing literature does not suggest that the effect is a strong one. In their review of this literature, Kruse and Blasi (1995) note that only two of the nine studies examining the relation between employee ownership and productivity find significant results. And the magnitude of the effect is typically small. In particular, Kruse and Blasi (1995) calculated the change in sales per employee around the time an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) was adopted, using the average effect across several studies. They found a one-time increase in productivity of about four percent and no change in the long-term growth rate. However, as noted by Prendergast (1993), the results are very difficult to interpret because most studies do not properly control for the trend in productivity. Firms that adopt ESOPs typically have enjoyed a relatively high growth rate prior to the adoption point. Hence, it is possible that the continuing growth around the adoption point is simply an extension of the trend. More importantly, the increase in productivity typically occurs in firms adopting cash profit-sharing plans as opposed to deferred plans. In fact, the increase in productivity for firms adopting deferred plans is a mere 0.9 percent of sales, a change that is not statistically significant (Kruse, 1993, p. 70). Thus, the empirical evidence of a relation between employee ownership and productivity is weak at best. 
An additional problem with the studies on the association between stock ownership and productivity is that they covered time periods with mostly rising stock prices. During a bear market, it is entirely possible that company stock ownership could actually de-motivate employees. We find some support for this possibility in our employee survey. Specifically, we asked employees to rate their motivation level and job satisfaction as well as the performance of company stock (see questions 7, 8 and 14 of the employee survey). We find a small but significantly positive correlation between stock performance and motivation level (r = 0.10, p < 0.03). Similarly, we found a positive correlation between job satisfaction and stock performance (r = 0.14, p < 0.01). Thus, employees should be expected to be more motivated and work harder when the company is doing well, but be less motivated and less eager to contribute when the company does poorly. This is unlikely to be the type of incentive program that CEOs would choose to maximize shareholders’ value. 
Still, let us assume, for the purpose of discussion, that employee ownership actually does yield a one-time increase in productivity by 0.9 percent for deferred type of plans as estimated by Kruse, 1993. One question to explore is whether that increase in productivity would be sufficient to compensate the firm for the risk premium that (informed and rational) employees might require for holding an undiversified portfolio. In trying to answer this question, we consider a typical plan in which the employer matches employee contributions at 50 cents on the dollar up to six percent of pay. (That is, if the employee contributes six percent of her salary, she gets another three percent contributed by the firm.) If the match is provided in company stock, we assume that employees understand that they get only 50 cents on the dollar on a risk-adjusted basis, and hence, would be indifferent between an unconstrained 50 percent match, as above, and a 100 percent match (up to six percent) if constrained to invest in company stock. Thus, firms would essentially be buying the 0.9 percent productivity increase at a cost of and increase in compensation of (up to) three percent (if every worker contributed enough to receive the entire match). This is likely to be an expensive way to buy productivity. Consider, for example, United Airlines with $14 billion of revenues and $7 billion of salaries. The potential increase in productivity of $126 million (i.e., 0.9 percent of $14 billion) is quite a bit less then the potential increase in compensation of $210 million (i.e., 3 percent of $7 billion). 
But there is another reason to be skeptical of the productivity argument. Suppose that employee ownership does in fact increase productivity. It must be the case that the source of this increase in productivity comes from the idea of owning employer’s securities rather than the extent of ownership, because an individual employee has no more than a miniscule portion of the outstanding shares. In their review article, Kruse and Blasi (1995, p. 24) confirm that “where there were differences in attitudes or behavior linked to employee ownership, they were almost always linked to the status of being an employee-owner, and not to the size of one’s ownership stake.” Since it is the idea of ownership rather than the magnitude of ownership that seems to matter, why do competitive labor markets sustain an equilibrium where eleven million participants invest more than 20% of their account balance in company stock, and many firms require the entire match to be invested in company stock? In particular, given that employees who are required to have the match in company stock have approximately half their plan assets in company stock (Benartzi, 2001), why don’t the forces of the labor market dictate that only a portion of the match be invested in company stock? 
One potential explanation for the existing equilibrium is that employers over-estimate the potential increase in productivity. The U.S. General Accounting Office conducted a related survey in 1986, asking employers to indicate factors that influenced their decision to adopt an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (U.S. GAO, 1986). They found that whereas 70 percent of the survey respondents indicated the plan was formed to achieve increased productivity, only about half as many (36 percent) claimed their firms actually realized such an advantage. The GAO survey is consistent with the notion that employers might over-estimate the potential increase in productivity. We would reiterate, however, that even if employers estimate the projected increase in productivity precisely, there is no need to require that the entire match be invested in company stock. 
Nevertheless, in our survey we find that, on average, employers rate increased motivation and productivity as the most important benefit to making contributions in company stock. Using a scale of 1 to 10, where “10” means agree completely and “1” means disagree completely, employers rate increased motivation and productivity as 6.30. Consistent with the GAO survey, it seems that employers may well be over-estimating the effect of employee ownership on motivation and productivity. Furthermore, those matching at least partially in company stock rate the importance of increased motivation and productivity higher than those matching in cash (7.97 vs. 4.93, p < 0.01; see Table 3). [Insert Table 3 here] 
several tax benefits over the years. Prior to the 1986 Tax Act, company stock provided employers with a tax credit. The 1984 Tax Act and the 1986 Tax Act replaced the tax credits with a different tax benefit geared towards leveraged ESOPs.13 In particular, lending institutions were allowed to exclude half the interest revenues they derive from ESOP loans from their taxable income (IRC Section 133). Scholes and 13 This paper addresses 401(k) plans, not stand-alone ESOPs. However, most of the tax benefits of ESOPs could be applied to most retirement saving plans using combination plans like KSOPs (i.e., a combined 401(k) / ESOP plan). Wolfson (1989) estimated that the present value of this benefit amounts to less than 10 percent of the fair market value of the stock, too small to make up for the diversification costs to employees. In any case, the interest revenue exclusion was repealed in 1996, so it is no longer applicable. The rest of our discussion focuses on the current tax benefits. 
The main tax benefit of company stock is the deductibility of dividends (of course, this could only benefit firms that pay dividends). There are several ways to receive the dividend tax deduction (IRC Section 404(k)). First, dividends used to pay interest on ESOP loans are deductible. However, since interest is generally deductible, company stock does not provide any incremental benefit. Second, dividends used to pay off the principal of the ESOP loan are also deductible. However, paying off the principal is equivalent to allocating shares from the ESOP trust to the individual employee accounts, so it would be deductible in any case as compensation expense. Third, dividends that are paid in cash directly to the employees are also deductible. However, it is rare for companies to pay dividends in this manner in 401(k) plans. A new, more advantageous form of dividend deduction became effective December 31, 2001, where employers were permitted to deduct dividends that are voluntarily reinvested in company stock by employees. While this provides an incremental tax benefit to the employer beyond the deduction of compensation expense, several caveats are worth noting. All the retirement saving plans in our sample were established before the dividend deduction was available. In addition, the dividend deduction is most valuable when the dividend yield is high. However, the average dividend yield for our sample firms is 1.7 percent and the median is 0.9 percent. Assuming a net tax benefit of less than one percentage point per year, the present value of the benefits over a ten-year period is roughly five to ten percentage points. Again, it seems as though employers are spending 90 cents and employees receive approximately 50 cents on a risk-adjusted basis. The magnitude of the tax benefit seems far too small to explain the labor market equilibrium. 
In our survey, employers rate tax benefits as the second most important factor in choosing to match in company stock. Using the 1 to 10 agree / disagree scale, tax benefits receive an average score of 5.43 (recall that “10” means agree completely). Again, those matching in stock rate the tax benefits higher than those matching in cash (6.10 vs. 4.86, p = 0.11; see Table 3). Consistent with the tax savings hypothesis, those matching in stock have a higher dividend yield than those matching in cash (2.36 percent vs. 1.34 percent, p = 0.06). However, given that the present value of the tax benefits does not amount to more than five to ten percent of the market value of the stock, it seems that employers are overestimating the tax benefits. 
plans also enjoys an important benefit under federal fiduciary law, namely the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA). ERISA sets forth three fiduciary principles for retirement plan investments: the exclusive benefit rule, that plans be managed exclusively for the benefit of participants; the prudence rule, that plan assets be invested according to a “prudent investor” standard; and the diversification rule, that plan assets be diversified so as to minimize the risk of large losses. Most notably, company stock is exempt from the diversification requirement in defined contribution plans— largely because, at the time ERISA was passed, large employers with profit-sharing plans invested in company stock lobbied Congress to exempt them from the diversification requirements imposed on defined benefit plans.14 Employers are still expected to act prudently, however, in determining whether company stock is a suitable investment. 
In our survey we asked employers about fiduciary risk by asking whether it was a bad idea from a fiduciary perspective to make matching contributions in stock. We know that plans that match in stock tend to have significantly higher concentrations than plans that match in cash, presumably raising fiduciary exposure. Using a 1 to 10 agree/disagree scale, fiduciary risks of matching in stock received a 5.6 score (with “10” meaning that matching in company stock was a bad idea because of increased fiduciary risk). Yet those matching in stock rated the fiduciary risks significantly lower than those matching in cash (4.56 vs. 6.51, p< = 0.01; see Table 3). 
This suggests the perplexing result that the more employers encourage plan concentration by matching in stock, the lower they perceive their fiduciary risk to be. This over-optimism about fiduciary risk is even more striking, since the only significant round of fiduciary litigation affecting 401(k) plans has centered on those plans with significant concentrations in company stock. 
risk of a takeover. Since employees typically vote with management, employee ownership serves as a takeover defense mechanism. Rauh (2003) investigates this hypothesis and finds some support for it (though the magnitudes are not large). Perhaps not surprisingly, employers do not offer this as their primary reason for supporting employee ownership. In the 1986 GAO survey only five percent of employers stated that takeover defense was a motive for setting an ESOP back in the 80s (U.S. GAO, 1986). Our employers do offer some support for the potential value of getting shares into the friendly hands of employees. (See Table 3.) Note, however, that the fraction of outstanding shares held by retirement saving plans is typically modest. Mitchell and Utkus (2004) report that employees in a sample of very large companies controlled 6% of the firm’s outstanding market capitalization. These figures are 14 Mitchell and Utkus (2004) report that the retailer Sears had a profit-sharing plan invested largely in company stock and pressed Congress to exempt defined contribution plans from the 10% diversification rule being applied to defined benefit plans. Sears was once a highly successful firm and its employees previously retired with large balances from the company stock plan. not enough to exercise significant managerial control, but presumably could be important in deciding closely contested shareholder votes. 
Perhaps more important to discussions of legal reform, if employers are requiring their workers to hold shares in the company in order to avoid takeovers, their claims to protection by the law are rather flimsy. Indeed, if this is the true explanation for why firms pay the match in company stock, then the argument for restricting or even prohibiting such policies is significantly enhanced. 
compensation, because the employer could issue shares without having to spend cash. For example, an article in Institutional Investor argues that “companies make the match in their own shares because it’s a lot cheaper than shelling out hard cash” (Hawthorne, 2002). We find it difficult to take such an argument seriously. After all, employers could issue shares to the market and then use the proceeds to contribute cash to employees’ retirement accounts.15 
What makes the cash flow hypothesis even more puzzling is the fact that many employers actually buy the shares on the market and then contribute them to employees’ retirement accounts. Hence, the cash is spent in any case. In our survey, we find that 56 percent of the firms buy the shares on the market; another 15 percent sometimes buy it on the market and sometimes issue shares, and the remaining 30 percent issue shares to the plan. It should be unsurprising that the cash flow argument did not score very high in as a motive for matching in stock (a score of 4.53 on the agree / disagree scale). And the difference in responses between those matching in stock versus those matching in cash was statistically insignificant (4.77 vs. 4.34; see Table 3). 
reporting benefits. ESOP debt could remain off the employer’s balance sheet. Contributions were reported at historic cost, not market value, at least during the term of the ESOP loan. In this way firms could contribute stock at fair market value to employees accounts, while reporting pension plan expense to shareholders at a much lower historic cost. Some existing ESOPs still take advantage of these benefits. However, only four firms in our sample have leveraged ESOPs. Furthermore, the financial reporting aspect of leveraged ESOPs did not score high on our agree / disagree scale (mean = 3.53), most likely because only four out of 76 firms received any such benefit. 15 Obviously the cash argument has more legitimacy for firms using privately held company stock in their 401(k) plans. Such firms accounted for less than 5% of our respondents. 
Source: Pensions and Investments, January 20, 2003. “Would you save your employer’s stock is more risky, less risky or has about the same level of risk as an investment in a diversified fund with many different stocks? (n=415) Percent of respondents 
Average standard deviation* Panel A: Potential Advantages of Making Contributions in Company Stock More risky About the same level of risk Less risky Don’t know REFERENCE: S&P 500 33% 42% 22% 3% 40%** 36%** 31%** 35% 18%** * Returns and standard deviations calculated for subsample of participants (n=415 out of 501) for the period ended September 30, 2003. Standard deviation is calculated over 60 months and annualized. ** “More,” “same,” and “less risky” categories are significantly different from one another at the 95% or 99% level. Standard deviations for company stock respondents were significantly higher than the S&P 500 at the 99% level. Returns for “more risky” (“less risky”) are significantly lower (higher) than the S&P 500 at the 99% level. 
Average 5 
year annualized return* -8.8%** -2.0%** -6.0% -1.1%** Employers Were Asked to Rate their Level of Agreement with the Following Advantages of and Drawbacks to Making Contributions in Company Stock on a Scale of One (Disagree) to Ten (Agree) Employers Contributing Cash (n=42) 
Employers Contributing 
Company Stock (n=34) Panel A: Potential Advantages of Making Contributions in Company Stock p-value for the 
Difference A. Increased motivation and productivity B. Cash flow C. Friendly hands D. Status quo E. Advantageous tax treatment F. Financial reporting A. Compliance with SEC and DOL rules B. Fiduciary Risk C. Lack of Diversification Panel B: Potential Drawbacks to Making Contributions in Company Stock Employers were asked to rate their level of agreement with the potential advantages of and drawbacks to making contributions in company stock on a scale of one (disagree completely) to ten (agree completely). The mean level of agreement is reported in the table for employers who match in cash versus employers who match, at least partially, in company stock. We also provide the p-value for the difference in the degree of agreement between the two groups using a t-test. The Explanatory Variables are the Degree of Agreement with the Following Factors being Relevant to the Decision whether to Match in Company Stock (10 = agree completely; 1 = disagree completely) Intercept Cash flow Friendly hands Status quo Increased motivation and productivity Advantageous tax treatment Compliance with SEC and DOL rules Fiduciary Risk Lack of Diversification Dividend Yield Coefficient 
Estimate (n = 52) The above table displays the results of a Logit regression with the dependent variable being an indicator whether employer’s contributions are provided, at least partially, in the form of company stock. The dependent variables are the degree of agreement with various factors being relevant to the decision whether to provide employer contributions in company stock. The dependent variables are a measured on a scale of one to ten, with one being “disagree completely” and ten being “agree completely.” * Statistically significant at the 0.10 level. ** Statistically significant at the 0.05 level. *** Statistically significant at the 0.01 level. 
YES NO (SKIP TO Q3) 
DON’T KNOW (SKIP TO Q3) Approximately what percentage of your retirement account is invested in your employer’s stock? [Note that the sample for this question is conditional on having some money in company stock.] RANGE 0 TO 100 -7 DON’T KNOW Mean = 26%; Median = 17% 
n/a = 23% (IF Q2 <> -7, SKIP TO Q3) 2a. 
Would you say it is: >>READ LIST<<? 
Less than 20%.. 
Between 20% and 40% Between 40% and 60% Between 60% and 80%, or Over 80% DON’T KNOW Too low About right, or (SKIP TO Q6) Too high DON’T KNOW (SKIP TO Q6) 
APPENDIX A Employee Company Stock Survey 
October 2002 
(N = 501) And in your retirement savings plan at work, do you have monies invested in the stock of your employer, also known as the company stock fund? Would you say the percent of money you have in your employer’s stock in your retirement savings plan is: >>READ LIST<<? 
1 2 3 4 5 -7 1 2 3 -7 73% 25% 2% 53% 16% 5% 1% 0% 25% 14% 67% 13% 6% 
Which of the following statements best describes what you’d like to do about this? >>READ LIST<< 
You said you think you have TOO LITTLE in company stock. 
Which of the following statements best describes what you’d like to do about this? >>READ LIST<< Would you say your employer’s stock is MORE RISKY, LESS RISKY or has ABOUT THE SAME LEVEL OF RISK as an investment in a diversified stock fund with many different stocks? Using a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 meaning you are extremely motivated and 1 meaning not at all motivated, how would you describe your level of motivation at work these days? RANGE 1 TO 10 -7 DON’T KNOW Mean = 7.20; Median = 8.00 n/a = 1% I’d like to REDUCE my company stock investment soon I’d like to REDUCE my company stock investment over the next year or two I’d like to REDUCE my company stock investment over the next five years I’d like to REDUCE my company stock investment at some point, but I’m not sure when, or I’m not sure what to do DON’T KNOW I’d like to INCREASE my company stock investment soon I’d like to INCREASE my company stock investment over the next year or two I’d like to INCREASE my company stock investment over the next five years I’d like to INCREASE my company stock investment at some point, but I’m not sure when, or I’m not sure what to do DON’T KNOW MY EMPLOYER’S STOCK IS MORE RISKY ABOUT THE SAME LEVEL OF RISK LESS RISKY 
DON’T KNOW 
1 2 3 4 5 -7 1 2 3 4 5 -7 1 2 3 -7 11% 23% 13% 21% 27% 6% 16% 16% 16% 27% 24% 0% 33% 39% 25% 3% 
We would like to understand whether investing in your employer’s stock affects your day-to-day attitudes and feelings. 
Owning stock in your company might affect you in a positive way—for instance, some people say owning stock makes them happy, energized and excited; or, it could also affect you in a negative way—for instance, some people say it makes them feel unmotivated, anxious or negative. 
Which of the following statements best describes you? >>READ LIST<< 
Owning my employer’s stock makes me feel better Owning my employer’s stock makes me feel worse Owning my employer’s stock does not affect my attitudes and feelings, or I don’t invest in my employer’s stock 
DON’T KNOW 
Overall, how do you feel about your job? Would you say: >>READ LIST<<? 
I love it I like it It is an OK job I dislike it, or I hate it DON’T KNOW 
[IF LESS THAN 50 IN QS2, CONTINUE; 
ELSE SKIP TO INSTRUCTION BEFORE Q11] READ: Now I’d like to ask you some questions about matching contributions made by an employer. 10a. 
Let’s suppose your employer gives you $1,000 a year as a matching contribution in your savings plan. Which of the following choices would you prefer? Would you rather receive: >>READ LIST<<? (Note that the sample size is 323, because individuals above 50 years old were not asked the question.) 
One-thousand dollars ($1,000) to invest as you wish, or One-thousand dollars ($1,000) worth of employer’s stock which you cannot sell until age 50 (SKIP TO Q11) >>DO NOT READ<< DOES NOT MATTER >>DO NOT READ<< DON’T KNOW 79% 1% 1% 1 2 3 -7 32% 4% 55% 7% 2% 22% 55% 19% 2% 1% 1% 20% $1,000 to invest as I wish $1,100 in employer stock (SKIP TO Q11) DOES NOT MATTER DON’T KNOW $1,000 to invest as I wish $1,500 in employer stock DOES NOT MATTER 
DON’T KNOW Next, what if your employer offers you the following choice: one-thousand dollars ($1,000) to invest as you wish OR one-thousand one-hundred dollars ($1,100) worth of employer’s stock which you cannot sell until age 50. Which would you prefer? (Note that the percentages are calculated as of those answering Q10a, so they do not add to 100.) Last, what if your employer offers you the following choice: one-thousand dollars ($1,000) to invest as you wish or one-thousand five-hundred dollars ($1,500) worth of employer’s stock which you cannot sell until age 50. Which would you prefer? (Note that the percentages are calculated as of those answering Q10a, so do not add to 100.) 10c. 
[USE QUOTA MAP TO ASSIGN RESPONDENTS TO Q11 OR Q12] Suppose you could have invested in your employer’s stock but did not, and over a two-year period the stock price of your company doubles. On a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 meaning severe regret and 1 meaning no regret at all, to what extent would you regret having not invested in your employer’s stock? RANGE 1 TO 10 -7 DON’T KNOW Mean = 5.76; Median = 5.00 
n/a = 2% [SKIP TO Q13] Suppose you could have invested in the stock market, not your employer’s stock, but didn’t, and over a two-year period the stock market doubles. On a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 meaning severe regret and 1 meaning no regret at all, to what extent would you regret having not invested in the stock market? RANGE 1 TO 10 -7 DON’T KNOW Mean = 5.40; Median = 5.00 n/a =3% 63% 14% 2% 1% 36% 29% 1% 1% Now I’d like to ask you a question about the tax rules that govern retirement savings plans. Suppose you are retiring, and you plan to take your retirement plan savings out of your employer’s plan and spend it. Do you have to pay a higher tax rate, a lower tax rate, or the same tax rate on your company stock as the other investments in your plan? Compared to the overall stock market, how would you rate the past performance of your employer’s stock over the last five years? Would you say your employer’s stock has performed: >>READ LIST<<? 
HIGHER LOWER SAME 
DON’T KNOW Does your employer offer a PENSION PLAN to you? A pension plan provides you with a set monthly income when you retire; and pension payments typically depend on your salary and years of service with the company. 12% 10% 44% 35% 12% 20% 30% 19% 13% 7% 73% 23% 4% 
APPENDIX B 
Employer Survey on Company Stock Thank you for agreeing to participate in this survey of the role of company stock in employer-sponsored retirement plans. Please note that your responses to the following questions will be kept strictly confidential. All answers and opinions will be combined and reported only in the aggregate. Throughout this survey, please respond to the questions based on your company's perspective or philosophy regarding the use of company stock in retirement programs. 
name of the defined contribution plan that covers your largest non-unionized employee group. Name of plan ____________________ 
Throughout the survey, when referencing your plan, we will be referring to this plan. profit-sharing contribution, with or without a separate match) (30%) contribution) (16%) (IF Q2 = 1, 2 or 3, SKIP TO Q5) (IF Q3 = 2 or 3, SKIP TO Q5) expire? Median = 2 years (33%) (50%) (17%) your plan? (If Q5 = 3, 4, or 5, skip to Q7) contributions in the form of company stock, how does your company provide shares to the plan? (56%) (30%) (15%) (0) through defined contribution plans sponsored by your company? Please answer this question for all tax-qualified defined contribution retirement plans sponsored by your company. 
Median = 8% (n = 23) If you’re uncertain of the exactly amount, select one of the following ranges: (70%) (9%) (4%) (7%) (0) (11%) Some companies make employer contributions in company stock, while others do not. Regardless of your current practice, we are interested in learning your company’s views on the potential advantages and drawbacks of making employer contributions in company stock. Please note we are interested in the point of view of your organization. 
Please rate how much you agree with each statement on a scale of 1 to 10, where 10 means you agree completely and 1 means you disagree completely. 
A. Making employer contributions in company stock is a good idea because it helps the company realize benefits from employee stock ownership (including higher motivation, productivity and shareholder value). Mean = 6.30 B. Making employer contributions in company stock is a good idea because it saves the company cash—it’s cheaper to issue new shares than to make cash contributions. 
Mean = 4.53 C. Making employer contributions in company stock is a good idea because it means that more shares of stock of the company are in friendly employee hands, for shareholder voting purposes. Mean = 5.01 D. Making employer contributions in company stock is a good idea because it’s the way we have always done things here—and it’s easier to keep it that way. Mean = 2.29 E. Making employer contributions in company stock is a good idea because it generates tax benefits for the company (such as the ESOP dividend deduction). Mean = 5.43 F. Making employer contributions in company stock is a good idea because it means better shareholder financial reporting for the company (such as grand-fathered accounting treatment of leveraged ESOP shares). Mean = 3.53 G. For what other reasons do you think making employer contributions in stock is a good idea? (Please specify reason) _______________________________________________ 
Please rate how much you agree with each statement on a scale of 1 to 10, where 10 means you agree completely and 1 means you disagree completely. 
Making employer contributions in stock is a bad idea because it is too complicated legally because of SEC and Department of Labor rules. Mean = 3.18 Making employer contributions in stock is a bad idea because it raises fiduciary risk and the chance of lawsuits against the company and its management. Mean = 5.62 Making employer contributions in stock is a bad idea because it reduces diversification of participant accounts. Mean = 6.56 D. For what other reasons do you think making employer contributions in stock is a bad idea? (Please specify reason) ______________________________________________ employer contributions? 
(If Q5 = 2, 3, 4, or 5, skip to instructions before Q11B) 11A. 
(Asked only of those who make ER contributions in stock only.) Suppose your company decided to switch from making contributions in company stock to making contributions in cash. How would the company change the amount of its own contribution? 
(If Q5 = 1, 3, 4, or 5, skip to instructions before Q11C) (0%) (17%) (78%) (0%) (0%) (6%) 
(Asked only of those who make ER contributions partly in stock and party in cash.) Suppose your company decided to switch from making contributions partly in stock and partly in cash to making contributions all in cash. How would the company change the amount of its own contribution? 11C. 
(Asked only of those who make ER contributions in cash only.) Suppose your company decided to switch from making contributions in cash to making contributions in company stock. Would the company change the amount of its own contribution? If so, how? 
(If Q5 = 1, 2, 4, or 5, skip to instructions before Q12) (8%) (25%) (58%) (0) (0) (8%) (0) (3%) (79%) (0) (0) (18%) Readers with comments should address them to: 
J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997) Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997) Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997) William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998) Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A “Third Way” (January 1999) Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-toCarry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2’s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd’s Legacy and Blackstone’s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000, revised May 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2000) Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000) 
Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes, The Dormant Commerce Clause and the Internet (November 2000) Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent System (November 2000) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 2000) Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care: Vicarious Liability, Class Actions and the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art: An Economic Approach (December 2000) Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital (January 2001) Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consumer Finance (February 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) (March 2001) Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost-Benefit Analysis: A Positive Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale? Rights of Publicity in the Digital Age (April 2001) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? (May 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights? Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution: The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 2001) Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft: The Declining Need for Centralized Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry: Creating Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons: Parking and Stopping on the Commons (August 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha “Solution” (February 2002) 
Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. 
Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, Journal of Legal Studies 2002) Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy: Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) David A. Weisbach, Thinking Outside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law Review) Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades: Success or Failure (March 2002) Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy: The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, The Antitrust Bulletin) David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture February 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 2003) Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002; revised March 2003) Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government as Insurer? (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refusal and the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contract Law (September 2002) Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on the File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) David A. Weisbach, Does the X-Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (October 2002) Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (November 2002) Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget (November 2002) Avraham D. Tabbach, Criminal Behavior: Sanctions and Income Taxation: An Economic Analysis (November 2002) Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of “Old” Public Health: The Legal Framework for the Regulation of Public Health (December 2002) Richard A. Epstein, Animals as Objects, or Subjects, of Rights (December 2002) David A. Weisbach, Taxation and Risk-Taking with Multiple Tax Rates (December 2002) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, The End of Bankruptcy (December 2002) Richard A. Epstein, Into the Frying Pan: Standing and Privity under the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and Beyond (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) 
David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short-Term Assets (January 2003) Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come with the 1996 Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunications: Iowa Utilities and Verizon (January 2003) William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An Economic Perspective (February 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003) Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003) Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost-Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003) Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (May 2003) Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 2003) Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2003) Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003) Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003) Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003) David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs (September 2003) William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 and 2000? (September 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage (September 2003) Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content (September 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003) Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable Leisure Time (October 2003) Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003) David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004) David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004) Richard A. Epstein, Liberty versus Property? Cracks in the Foundations of Copyright Law (April 2004) Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004) Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004) Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of Statistical Lives (February 2004) Richard A. Epstein, Disparities and Discrimination in Health Care Coverage; A Critique of the Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004) Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for Pharmaceutical Patents: Steady the Course on Hatch-Waxman (March 2004) Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Complexity of Legal Rules (April 2004) Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus Ad Bellum (April 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute (May 2004) 
TABLE OF CONTENTS IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
Sunstein: Taking FDR Seriously .................................................... 221 Barnett: Why Do "Constitutive Commitments" Matter? ........... 222 Sunstein: FDR's Incomplete Success .......................... 
Barnett: Constitutive Commitments Do Not Matter, But If 223 They D o ... ...................................................................................... 224 
On January 11, 1944, the United States was involved in its longest conflict since the Civil War. The war effort was going well. In a remarkably short period, the tide had turned sharply in favor of the Allies. " Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago; A.B., Harvard University, 1975; J.D., Harvard Law School, 1978. Law Clerk, Justice Thurgood Marshall, U.S. Supreme Court, 1979-80. - Austin B. Fletcher Professor of Law, Boston University School of Law; B.A., Northwestern University, 1974; J.D., Harvard Law School, 1977. 
Author's recent book, CASS R. SUNSTEIN, THE SECOND BILL OF RIGHTS: FDR's UNFINISHED REVOLUTION AND WHY WE NEED IT MORE THAN EVER (2004). Ultimate victory was no longer in serious doubt. The real question was the nature of the peace. 
At noon, America's optimistic, aging, self-assured, wheelchair-bound president, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, delivered his State of the Union Address to Congress.2 His speech was not elegant. It was messy, sprawling, unruly, a bit of a pastiche, and not at all literary. It was the opposite of Lincoln's tight, poetic Gettysburg Address. But because of what it said, this forgotten address, proposing a "Second Bill of Rights," has a strong claim to being the greatest speech of the twentieth century.3 
Roosevelt began by emphasizing that that war was a shared endeavor in which the United States was simply one participant: "This Nation in the past two years has become an active partner in the world's greatest war against human slavery."'4 The war was in the process of being won. "But I do not think that any of us Americans can be content with mere survival."5 Hence "the one supreme objective for the future"-the objective for all nations-was captured "in one word: Security. '6 Roosevelt argued that the term "means not only physical security which provides safety from attacks by aggressors," but includes as well "economic security, social security, moral security."7 Roosevelt insisted that "essential to peace is a decent standard of living for all individual men and women and children in all Nations. Freedom from fear is eternally linked with freedom from want."8 
Moving to domestic affairs, Roosevelt emphasized the need to bring "security" of all kinds to America's citizens. He argued for "[a] realistic tax law-which will tax all unreasonable profits, both individual and corporate, and reduce the ultimate cost of the war to our sons and daughters."9 The nation "cannot be content, no matter how high that State of the Union Address (Jan. 11, 1944), in 13 THE PUBLIC PAPERS AND ADDRESSES OF FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT 32-42 (Samuel I. Rosenman ed., Harper & Bros. 1950) thereinafter Roosevelt, State of the UnionAddress]. 
REV. 421, 423 (1987) (quoting Roosevelt's "Second Bill of Rights"); see generally SUNSTEIN, supra note 1 (recovering and reemphasizing Roosevelt's Second Bill of Rights). 

general standard of living may be, if some fraction of our people-whether it be one-third or one-fifth or one-tenth-is ill-fed, ill-clothed, ill-housed, and insecure."' 10 At this point the speech became spectacularly ambitious. Roosevelt looked back, and not entirely approvingly, to the framing of the Constitution. At its inception, the nation had grown "under the protection of certain inalienable political rights-among them the right of free speech, free press, free worship, trial by jury, freedom from unreasonable searches and seizures."'" But over time, these rights had proved inadequate. Unlike the Constitution's framers, [w]e have come to a clear realization of the fact that true individual freedom cannot exist without economic security and independence.... In our day these economic truths have become accepted as selfevident. We have accepted, so to speak, a second Bill of Rights under which a new basis of security and prosperity can be established for all-regardless of station, race, or creed. 12 Then he listed the relevant rights: 
or farms or mines of the Nation; 
recreation; 
atmosphere of freedom from unfair competition and domination by monopolies at home or abroad; 
and enjoy good health; 
sickness, accident,and unemployment; 
The right to a good education.13 
Having catalogued these eight rights, Roosevelt immediately recalled the "one word" that captured the overriding objective for the future. He argued that these "rights spell security" -and hence that the recognition of the Second Bill was continuous with the war effort.14 "[Aifter this war is won," he said, "we must be prepared to move forward, in the implementation of these rights." 15 There was a close connection between this implementation and the coming international order. "America's own rightful place in the world depends in large part upon how fully these and similar rights have been carried into practice for our citizens. For unless there is security here at home there cannot be lasting peace in the world.' 16 He concluded that government should promote security instead of paying heed "to the groups who seek to feather their newsthsinwinhgiledyeomuanngdAsmoefriscealnfissharperdesysinugre. 17 
What made the Second Bill of Rights possible? Part of the answer lies in a simple idea, one pervasive in the American legal culture during Roosevelt's time: No one really opposes government intervention. Markets and wealth depend on government. Without government creating and protecting property rights, property itself cannot exist. Even the people who most loudly denounce government interference depend on it every day. Their own rights do not come from minimizing government but are a product of government. Political scientist Lester Ward vividly captured the point: "[T]hose who denounce state intervention are the ones who most frequently and successfully invoke it. The cry of laissez faire mainly goes up from the ones who, if really 'let alone,' would instantly lose their wealthabsorbing power."'" Think, for example, of the owner of a radio station, a house in the suburbs, an expensive automobile, or a large bank account. Every such owner depends, every day of every year, on the protection given by a coercive and well-funded state, equipped with a police force, judges, prosecutors, and an extensive body of criminal and civil law. 
SIDNEY FINE, LAISSEZ FAIRE AND THE GENERAL-WELFARE STATE 262 (1964). 
quite well. In accepting insisted that "[wie must lay hold of the fact that economic laws are not made by nature. They are made by human beings." 19 Or consider Roosevelt's Commonwealth Club Address in the same year, where he emphasized "that the exercise of ... property rights might so interfere with the rights of the individual that the Government, without whose assistance the property rights could not exist, must intervene, not to destroy individualism, but to protect it."20 The key point here is that without government's active assistance, property rights could not exist at all. As Walter Lippmann wrote in 1937: 
While the theorists were talking about laissez-faire, men were buying and selling legal titles to property, were chartering corporations, were making and enforcing contracts, were suing for damages. In these transactions, by means of which the work of society was carried on, the state was implicated at every vital point.21 
In this light it was implausible to contend that government should simply "stay out of the way" or "let people fend for themselves." Against the backdrop of the Great Depression, and the threat from fascism, Roosevelt was entirely prepared to insist that government should "protect individualism" not only by protecting property rights but also by ensuring decent opportunities and minimal security for all. The ultimate result was his proposal for the Second Bill of Rights.22 
Roosevelt, dead within fifteen months of delivering this speech, was unable to take serious steps toward implementing the Second Bill. But his proposal, largely unknown within the United States, has had an extraordinary influence internationally. It played a major role in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, finalized in 1948 under the leadership of Eleanor Roosevelt and publicly endorsed by American officials at the time. The Universal Declaration proclaims that [e]veryone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control. 23 
The Universal Declaration also provides a right to education 4 and social security. 5 It proclaims that everyone "has a right to work, to free choice of employment, to just and favorable conditions of work and to protection against unemployment. 26 
By virtue of its effect on the Universal Declaration, the Second Bill has influenced dozens of constitutions throughout the world. In one form or another, it can be found in countless political and legal documents. The current Constitution of Finland states that "[e]veryone shall be guaranteed ... the right to basic subsistence in the event of unemployment, illness, and disability and during old age as well as at the birth of a child or the loss of a provider." 27 The Constitution of Spain announces, "[t]o citizens in old age, the public authorities shall guarantee economic sufficiency through adequate and periodically updated pensions. 2 Similarly, the constitutions of Ukraine, Romania, Syria, Bulgaria, Hungary, Russia, and Peru recognize some or all of the social and economic rights catalogued by Franklin Roosevelt. We might even call the Second Bill of Rights a leading American export. As the most recent example, consider the interim Iraqi Constitution, written with American help and celebrated by the Bush Administration. In Article XIV, the interim Iraqi Constitution proclaims, "[t]he individual has the right to security, education, health care, and social security;" it adds that the nation and its government "shall strive to provide prosperity and employment opportunities to the people. '29 In terms of constitutional thought, Article XIV can be directly traced to Franklin Delano Roosevelt and his Second Bill of Rights. 
In fact the United States itself continues to live, at least some of the time, under Roosevelt's constitutional vision. A consensus underlies U.N. GAOR, 3d Sess., Supp. No. 16, at 5, U.N. Doc. A/810 (1948). 

at http://www.oefre.unibe.ch/law/icl/izOOOOO-.html (last visited Jan. 7, 2005). 
several of the rights he listed, including the right to education, the right to social security, and the right to be free from monopoly. In the 1950s and 1960s, the Supreme Court started to go much further, embarking on a process of giving constitutional recognition to some of the rights that Roosevelt listed. The idea that the Constitution might protect social and economic rights can be traced to an obscure Supreme Court decision in 1941 30-revealingly, the very same year as Roosevelt's "four freedoms" speech. California had enacted a law banning people from bringing indigents into the state. 31 The Court ruled that the ban violated the commerce clause. 2 States are not entitled to regulate interstate commerce, and if a state prohibited people from transporting the poor from one state to another, it was effectively regulating such commerce. 33 Justice Robert Jackson, a close adviser to Roosevelt and his former Attorney General, went much further, with an emphasis on the idea of citizenship: "Indigence" in itself is neither a source of rights nor a basis for denying them. The mere state of being without funds is a neutral factconstitutionally an irrelevance, like race, creed, or color.... Property can have no more dangerous, even if unwitting, enemy than one who would make its possession a pretext for unequal or exclusive civil rights. 34 
This passage, and especially Jackson's last sentence, could be understood to have far-reaching implications. In fact, Jackson was speaking Roosevelt's language here. In a short period from 1957 through 1969, the Court explored several of these issues, and it reacted sympathetically to people's complaints. In some of them, the Court went so far as to hold that the government must subsidize poor people in certain domains. In several, the Court ruled that indigent criminal defendants have a right to a lawyer at taxpayer expense.35 Building on "the right to protect your rights," the Court struck down poll taxes.36 In other cases, the Court went further still. In Shapiro v. Thompson,37 the Court seemed to come close to saying that the Constitution conferred a right to welfare benefits. The case involved a Connecticut law imposing a one-year waiting period before new arrivals to the state could receive welfare benefits. 38 Obviously the state was trying to avoid becoming a magnet for poor people. Was this constitutional? Connecticut argued that states should have the right to create waiting periods to prevent fraud and to protect the state's taxpayers from a flood of out-of-staters hoping to get benefits. 9 In response, those attacking the law argued that the waiting period discriminated against them by depriving them of the basic necessities of life.40 
The Court agreed. In striking down the waiting period, the Court relied on the constitutional right to travel.4 The waiting period would "penalize" impoverished travelers and thus violate their constitutional right to go from one state to another.42 By itself, this conclusion seemed to raise the possibility that states might have an obligation to provide welfare benefits, and perhaps moderately generous benefits at that. If a state had no welfare programs at all, wouldn't it "penalize" travelers in just the same way? If a state provided welfare benefits significantly below those of their neighbors, might it be "penalizing" travelers too? In any case, the Court spoke explicitly of the special needs of poor people, suggesting that those needs were relevant as a constitutional matter. In the Court's words, Connecticut "denied welfare aid upon which may depend the ability of the families to obtain the very means to subsist-food, shelter, and other necessities of life."43 If the decision turned only on the right to travel, this suggestion would seem purposeless. Thus the Court's emphasis on "food, shelter, and other necessities of life" seemed to be a recognition of the special status of at least parts of the Second Bill. The Shapiro opinion embodied some of Roosevelt's most dramatic claims about individual rights. 
The Court went even further a few years later, in Memorial Hospital v. Maricopa County.44 Arizona required one year's residence in the county as a condition for receiving nonemergency medical care at county expense.45 The state argued that nonemergency medical care was quite Pennsylvania, see id. at 625-26 & n.5, and the District of Columbia, see id. at 623-25 & n.3. All three were struck down by the Court. Id. at 642. 

Constitutive Commitments and Roosevelt's Second Bill of Rights 213 different from "the very means to subsist ' 46 and that the right to travel was not involved.4 7 The Supreme Court disagreed. 48 It read Shapiro as holding that the "denial of the basic 'necessities of life' [is] a penalty. '49 In an echo of Roosevelt, the Court added that it is "clear that medical care is as much 'a basic necessity of life' to an indigent as welfare assistance. '50 Thus a majority of the Court said that "[i]t would be odd" to conclude that a state must afford a poor person "welfare assistance to keep him from the discomfort of inadequate housing or the pangs of hunger but could deny him the medical care necessary to relieve him from the wheezing and gasping for breath that attend his illness."" On the basis of this language, it would not be implausible to see the Court as suggesting that the Constitution requires the state to provide a degree of medical care. 
County, the Court dealt with a form of discrimination. It did not say that the Constitution requires government to provide all citizens with a basic minim an especially dramatic ruling. There it concluded that welfare benefits count as a kind of "new property," entitled to the protection of the Constitution's due process clause.53 The problem stemmed from the fact that New York refused to provide a full hearing before removing people from the welfare rolls. 54 Was this constitutionally permissible? Under the Due Process Clause, people are entitled to a hearing only if they can show that their "life, liberty, or property" is at stake. But since the nation's beginning, welfare benefits had been seen as a mere privilege, not a right. 5 Such benefits certainly were not "liberty" or "property" within the meaning of the Constitution. The Court restricted the category of rights to the old kind of "property," such as land, cash, bank accounts, and investments. Government benefits were in a quite different category. Of course Roosevelt believed that a fair minimum should be seen as a matter 5t. Id. at 259-60 (footnote omitted). 
YALE L.J. 733 (1964) (urging the abandonment of the "rights-privileges" distinction). 
security benefits as a privilege, not a right). of right, not charity. But the Constitution had not been understood in Rooseveltian terms. To succeed, welfare recipients had to convince the Court to reconsider its longstanding view about the meaning of the Constitution. 
In Goldberg, the Court abandoned the right-privilege distinction and ruled that welfare was indeed a form of constitutional "property. 5 6 Under the Due Process Clause, the government must provide a hearing before it removes people from the rolls. In Goldberg, the Court emphasized the "brutal need" of those who depended on welfare benefits.57 In its most extraordinary passage, it noted that "[flrom its founding the Nation's basic commitment has been to foster the dignity and well-being of all persons within its borders. We have come to recognize that forces not within the control of the poor contribute to their poverty."5'8 Here is a clear reminder of a central lesson of the Great Depression. The Court continued: Welfare, by meeting the basic demands of subsistence, can help bring within the reach of the poor the same opportunities that are available to others to participate meaningfully in the life of the community.... Public assistance, then, is not mere charity, but a means to "promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity. '59 In a key footnote, the Court said "[i]t may be realistic today to regard welfare entitlements as more like 'property' than a 'gratuity.' Much of the existing wealth of this country takes the form of rights that do not fall within traditional common-law concepts of property." 60 
By the late 1960s, respected constitutional thinkers could conclude that the Court was on the verge of recognizing a right to be free from desperate conditions-a right that captures many of the rights that Roosevelt attempted to catalogue. But all this was undone as a result of the election of President Richard Nixon in 1968. President Nixon promptly appointed four justices-Warren Burger, William Rehnquist, Lewis Powell, and Harry Blackmun-who showed no interest in the Second Bill. In a series of decisions, the new justices, joined by one or two others, rejected the claim that the existing Constitution protects the rights that 
Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. at 262-65 & n.8. 
Id. at 261 (quoting Kelly v. Wyman, 294 F. Supp. 893, 900 (1968)). 
Id. at 264-65 (footnote omitted). 
Id. at 265 (quoting U.S. CONST. pmbl.). 
Id. at 262 n.8. 
Roosevelt catalogued. 61 
Roosevelt himself did not argue for constitutional change (and on this I believe that he was right). He wanted the Second Bill to be part of the nation's deepest commitments, to be recognized and vindicated by the public, not by federal judges. He thought that the Second Bill should be seen in the same way as the Declaration of Independence-as a statement of the fundamental aspirations of the United States, which we might see as the nation's constitutive commitments.6 2 But Roosevelt's hopes have not been fully realized. Much of the time, the United States seems to have embraced a confused and pernicious form of individualism, one that has no real foundations in our history. This is an approach that endorses rights of private property and freedom of contract, and respects political liberty, but claims to distrust "government intervention" and to insist that people must largely fend for themselves. This form of so-called individualism is incoherent-a hopeless tangle of confusions. As Roosevelt well knew, no one is really against government intervention. The wealthy, at least as much as the poor, receive help from government and from the benefits that it bestows. 
Roosevelt himself pointed to the essential problem as early as 1932. In his words, the exercise of "property rights might so interfere with the rights of the individual that the Government, without whose assistance the property rights could not exist, must intervene, not to destroy individualism, but to protect it. ''63 The key phrase here is "without whose assistance the property rights could not exist." Those of us who are doing well, and who have plenty of money and opportunities, owe a great deal to an active government that is willing and able to protect what we have. Once we appreciate this point, we will find it impossible to complain about "government interference" as such or to urge, ludicrously, that our rights are best secured by getting government "off our backs." The same people who object to "government intervention" depend on it every day of every year. Roosevelt was entirely aware of this point. 
Remarkably, the confusions that Roosevelt identified have had a rebirth since the early 1980s. Time and again, politicians argue that they oppose government intervention, even though property rights themselves cannot exist without such intervention. While proposing a sensible system of federal tax credits to increase health insurance coverage, President George W. Bush found it necessary to offer the senseless suggestion that what he was proposing was "not a government program."64 Time and again, American culture is said to be antagonistic to "positive rights," even though property rights themselves require "positive" action and even though the Second Bill helped capture our nation's political reforms for much of the twentieth century. Both at home and abroad, we are seeing a false and ahistorical picture of American culture and history. Unfortunately, that picture is far from innocuous. America's self-imageour sense of ourselves-has a significant impact on what we actually do. We should not look at ourselves through a distorted mirror. 
Roosevelt was right to insist that there is an inextricable link between freedom from fear and freedom from want.6 5 Liberty and citizenship are rooted in security. In a sense, America lives under the Second Bill. But in another sense, we have lost sight of it. The Second Bill of Rights should be reclaimed in its nation of origin. 
[Editor's Note: As a guest blogger on the Volokh Conspiracy6,6 Professor Sunstein advanced, in abbreviated form, the argument of the previous essay. What resulted was a colloquy between him and Professor Randy Barnett on the nature and status of what Professor Sunstein calls "constitutive commitments." That exchange, with some editing, appears below, and is followed by concluding remarks by Professor Barnett written for the DrakeLaw Review.] 
It is standard to distinguish between constitutional requirements and mere policies. An appropriation for Head Start is a policy, which can be changed however Congress wishes; by contrast, the principle of free speech overrides whatever Congress seeks to do. But there is something important, rarely unnoticed, and in between-much firmer than mere policies, but falling short of constitutional requirements. These are constitutive commitments. (We are still talking, or at least not not talking, about FDR's Second Bill of Rights.) 
Constitutive commitments have a special place in the sense that they are widely accepted and cannot be eliminated without a fundamental change in national understandings. These rights are "constitutive" in the sense that they help to create, or to constitute, a society's basic values. They are also commitments, in the sense that they have a degree of stability over time. A violation would amount to a kind of breach-a violation of a trust. 
Current examples include the right to some kind of social security program; the right not to be fired by a private employer because of your skin color or your sex; the right to protection through some kind of antitrust law. As with constitutional provisions, we disagree about what, specifically, these rights entail; but there is not much national disagreement about the rights themselves. (At least not at the moment.) 
We could learn a lot about a nation's history if we explored what falls in the category of constitutional rights, constitutive commitments, and mere policies-and even more if we identified migrations over time. Maybe some of the commitments just mentioned will turn into mere policies. Sometimes policies are rapidly converted into constitutive commitments (consider the 1964 Civil Rights Act). Sometimes constitutive commitments end up getting constitutional status (the right to sexual privacy is, to some extent, an example, with the line of cases from Griswold v. Connecticu6t7 to Lawrence v. Texas68). 
Back to FDR's Second Bill of Rights: He was not proposing a formal constitutional change; he did not want to alter a word of the founding document. He was proposing to identify a set of constitutive commitments. 
Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479 (1965). 
Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003). One possible advantage of that strategy is that it avoids a role for federal judges; another possible advantage is that it allows a lot of democratic debate, over time, about what the constitutive commitments specifically entail. 
Presidents Johnson and Reagan also tried to redefine the nation's constitutive commitments, but FDR was much more ambitious. He did not quite succeed in turning the Second Bill of Rights into constitutive commitments; but if you go over the list,69 you'll see that he didn't exactly fail. 
Randy Barnett,June 24, 2004, at 6:43p.m.: 
III. TAKING "CONSTITUTIVE COMMITMENTS" SERIOUSLY 
In his recent post, Cass invokes the concept of a "constitutive commitment," by which he means something more than "a policy" and something less than "a constitutional requirement."70 I take it that he would distinguish between constitutive commitments and Ackermanian ethereal unwritten constitutional amendments adopted during so-called "constitutional moments."71 But I am still wondering about the concept of "constitutive commitment" itself. 
Cass writes, "[t]hese rights are 'constitutive' in the sense that they help to create, or to constitute, a society's basic values. '72 In a pluralist or diverse society (what Hayek called the "Great Society"73 ), however, this brief description of the basic idea gives rise to some obvious questions: who exactly is constituted by which commitments? The claim is probably not that everyone has made this commitment, or is constituted by it, but then who? A majority? A super majority? A critical mass, whether a majority or not? An intellectual elite? The proletariat? 
the Second Bill of Rights). 

1726, 410 (1998) (defining, identifying, and discussing "constitutional moments" as moments when the Constitution was, in effect, transformed through popular mandate, during periods such as the Reconstruction and New Deal). 

MIRAGE OF SOCIAL JUSTICE (1976) 
Assuming one of these is specified, in what manner does the "commitment," whatever it may be, constitute the relevant "us"? Are we somehow defined as individuals by a commitment external to us, or is the group to which be belong so defined, and "defined" in what sense? 
As a matter of political science, how does one determine the existence of such a commitment? Opinion polls? Opinion polls over time? In other words, if anything of importance turns on the existence of such a commitment (another question I raise below), what reliable means is there for ascertaining its existence, breadth and content? 
In short, how is the concept of "constitutive commitment" of an entire "society" less epistemically and metaphysically problematic than the much-maligned collective "intentions of the framers"? The serious problems with discerning collective group intentions are well-known. I am wondering how constituent commitments are any easier either to identify or defend as real.7 4 
Then there is the question of how uncontested such a commitment needs to be to be counted as constitutive? Does it matter that a substantial minority dissent? Does it matter if they do not speak up much any more because, however substantial in numbers, they know they are in the minority and would be pummeled by the majority if they did? (Think of the thirty to thirty-five percent of the Massachusetts electorate who are, gasp, Republicans. Given the stability of the Democrat majority among voters, it is as though these thirty to thirty-five percent do not even exist. They certainly lack all representation at the federal level. Would their silent and/or ignored dissent detract from the "constitutive commitment" of the majority?). 
Relatedly, how does one distinguish such a constitutive commitment among the general public in practice from one that "constitutes" the world of elite intellectual opinion makers, such as those in academia or in certain media outlets? Another reason why a member of even a majority of the general public who holds a different view from that of the opinion elite might remain silent is to avoid the very real suffering that can be meted out by this crowd with they are crossed. Someone who not as impervious to hostile criticism as, say, Hootie Johnson or Richard Epstein-which describes most people I think-is likely to remain silent even when their interpretation in favor of an "original meaning" approach that is based on the public meaning of the words used at the time of their enactment. See RANDY E. BARNETT, RESTORING THE Losr CONSTITUTION: THE PRESUMPTION OF LIBERTY 89-117 (2003). views are shared by a "silent majority" of the public. How do we detect this phenomenon in assessing the existence of a constitutive commitment? 
What turns on the existence of a constitutive commitment? That those who share it vote or act in certain ways? That the minority who dissent remain silent or acquiesce in some way? That legislators vote in certain ways? Cass says that one advantage of FDR's constitutive commitment "strategy is that it avoids a role for federal judges,"75 so I assume judicial review is more or less out of the picture, which distinguishes a constitutive commitment from an Ackermanian unwritten amendment. But perhaps I am misconstruing him here. I guess this is the eternal "so what?" faculty workshop question that I normally avoid asking. 
Speaking of avoidance, is there any way of avoiding the sense that someone who invokes the concept of constitutive commitment is trying somehow to elevate, privilege or reify his or her own commitments or moral judgments-giving these judgments some higher status in the General Will of the Community, rather than that of a mere moral judgment, or even that of a mere consensus or a majority view? 
All this does seem to relate to Cass's invocation of a Second Bill of Rights. When he first posted, I had thought to inquire as to the sense in which these claims are "rights." I was going to ask whether they are natural rights that belong to persons regardless of whether recognized by government-like the freedom of speech. Or are they positive rights that exist because they are adopted as part of the human laws-like the right to a jury trial. As James Madison explained, the original ten amendments included both of these two types, though I have concluded that the Ninth Amendment refers only to natural rights.76 But it now appears that Cass 
bill of rights, he categorizes the "Contents of Bill of Rhts." Under this heading he distinguishes between "3. Natural rights retained as speach" and "4. positive rights resultg. as trial by jury." James Madison, Speech to the House ExplainingHis Proposed Amendments and His Notes for the Amendment Speech, in THE RIGHTS RETAINED BY THE PEOPLE: THE HISTORY AND MEANING OF THE NINTH AMENDMENT 51, 64 (Randy E. Barnett ed., 1989) [hereinafter BARNETT, RIGHTS RETAINED]. In the published account of his delivered speech Madison elaborates on the latter category: "Inother instances, they specify positive rights, which may result from the nature of the compact." He then elaborates on the example given in his notes: "Trial by jury cannot be considered a natural right, but a right resulting from a social compact which regulates the action of the community, but is as essential to secure the liberty of the people as any one of the pre-existent rights of nature." 1 THE DEBATES AND PROCEEDINGS IN THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES 454 (Joseph Gales & William Seaton eds., 1834) (statement of Rep. Madison). In addition to establishing the 
means to claim Roosevelt's list, or some portion thereof, as "constitutive commitments," which are neither natural rights nor positive rights, thereby making a more precise account of this type of animal (or is it vegetable?) important to assessing the exact nature of his current argument. 
IV. TAKING FDR SERIOUSLY 
Thanks to Randy Barnett, and assorted emailers, for excellent questions and comments about constitutive commitments and FDR's Second Bill of Rights. Constitutive commitments first: They are not part of the formal constitution and they are certainly not for judicial enforcement. They nonetheless matter, because they have sufficiently wide and deep political support that they are effectively binding-unless and until there is a major transformation in public values. 
It would be nice to have a clear sense of necessary and sufficient conditions for constitutive commitments, but lacking these, let's make a rough first cut: A constitutive commitment is in place if over a significant period of time, a presidential candidate could not seriously question that commitment without essentially disqualifying himself. This means that the commitment must have both wide and deep support (and not just among academics, elites, or the media; a strong political majority is needed). We can imagine hard intermediate cases and the definition leaves ambiguities; but the prohibition on racial discrimination in employment, the antitrust laws, and some kind of social security program are evident examples-and so too, I think, with a ban on the nationalization of industries and on federal taxes above a certain rate (e.g., Kennedy-era levels). Any nation will have some constitutive commitments that some reasonable people will reject; and reasonable people sometimes get those commitments to change distinction between natural and positive rights, this passage in Madison's notes is also significant evidence that the rights "retained by the people" to which the Ninth Amendment refers are natural liberty rights, rather than positive rights. Another vital piece of evidence is a draft of a bill of rights written by Representative Roger Sherman who served with Madison on the House select committee to draft a bill of rights. Sherman's proposed second amendment begins: "The people have certain natural rights which are retainedby them when they enter into Society .... " Roger Sherman's Draft of a Bill of Rights, in BARNETr, RIGHTS RETAINED, app. A, at 351 (emphasis added). For other evidence that "retained rights" was a reference to natural rights and that "natural rights" meant liberty rights, see BARNETT, supranote 74, at 54-60. over time. 
In the sense in which FDR meant his Second Bill to contain "rights": He was not much of a theorist (Trotsky famously criticized him for just that reason: "Your President abhors 'systems' and 'generalities" 77), and he saw (positive, in the sense of legally protected) rights as instruments for protecting the most important human interests. Randy asks whether the Second Bill should be seen as protecting "natural rights." 78 To say the least, the natural rights tradition has multiple strands; a good contemporary version is elaborated by Amartya Sen.79 A possible position: if we believe that human beings have certain rights by virtue of their humanity, it is plausible to say that those rights include a decent chance to achieve wellbeing by their own rights and also a minimal level of security if, for one or another reason (e.g., disability, illness, atrocious luck), that chance is not enough. Roosevelt's focus was on decent opportunities and minimal security, and while his Second Bill of Rights was an innovation, he can claim clear antecedents in Montesquieu, Blackstone, and even Madison. 
Randy Barnett,June25, 2004, at 12:49p.m.: 
V. WHY DO "CONSTITUTIVE COMMITMENTS" MATTER? 
I believe that Cass is describing a very real social phenomenon. There surely are, and have always been, some positions or "norms" that are sufficiently "beyond the mainstream" as to disqualify someone from national office. These norms are "effectively binding"80 in the sense that one publicly disavows them at one's peril. While these norms remain stable over time, they can also be contested and eventually supplanted. All this sounds perfectly reasonable and plausible as a description of social norms, but I am still left wondering: 
(a) In what sense is such a norm accurately described as a "commitment"; (b) In what sense is such a norm "constitutive"; 
What argumentative purpose is served by invoking the concept availableat http://www.socialistviewpoint.org/sept-01/sept-01_12.html. 

of "constitutive commitment"? That is, what does it add to otherwise familiar normative or descriptive claims about rights, law, justice, etc.? Clarifying these three matters would go a long way to helping me better understand the normative and/or descriptive claim Cass is making about the Second Bill of Rights. 
VI. FDR's INCOMPLETE SUCCESS 
With or without written constitutions, all nations have constitutive commitments, some codified in some form, others just widely understood as such. Randy Barnett asks, rightly, the sense in which these are "commitments" and "constitutive."'" They are commitments in the sense that they are taken (politically, that is) to be binding, and not to be subject to change with the political winds. The United States is firmly committed to some kind of social security program, in a way that it is not committed to particular appropriations, or the Toxic Substances Control Act, or Head Start, or Americorps, or the Superfund statute. These commitments are "constitutive" in the sense that they help define, and hence constitute, the nation's self-understanding. The self-understanding of the United States would not allow it to accept a proposal to nationalize the automobile industry or to repeal the laws forbidding racial discrimination by private employers. (If you do not like these examples, choose your own; there are many other possibilities.) 
argumentative purpose, so far as I can tell, but it might help illuminate a nation's political and even legal culture as it changes over time. It might also help clarify what particular debates are really abo to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program lacked constitutional status, but it was a constitutive commitment, and some judicial decisions appeared to be influenced by that fact (the decisions involved statutory interpretation, not constitutional law). By 1990, the AFDC program was a mere policy. Changes inthe other direction are also common; the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) has probably moved, in a short time, into the category of the constitutive commitment (not its particular provisions, but the general idea). 

See supraParts III, V. 
FDR wanted the Second Bill of Rights to stand as a constitutive commitment. While it would be wrong to say he failed, he did not really succeed. The nation is committed, at least in principle, to some of the rights he listed (e.g., the right to free from domination by monopolies) but not to others (including my least favorite, the farmers' rights provision, which fits uneasily with the right to be free from domination by monopolies). 
Thanks much to Eugene for the forum, and to emailers for the many excellent comments, criticisms, and suggestions; I've learned a lot. 
VII. CONSTITUTIVE COMMITMENTS Do NOT MATTER, 
BUT IF THEY Do... 
The online exchange between my friend Cass Sunstein and me reveals a wonderful feature of blogging that largely does not exist in academic discourse. The normal exchange in a faculty workshop, for example, would be for an author like Cass to present a paper, and then be subjected to questions from the professors in attendance. I might get in the queue and ask the first of my questions above in a very truncated fashion, and Cass would respond. In some circumstances I might be permitted a follow up but it would be considered rude to extend the dialogue between us any farther. Even in normal law review publications, I might be permitted a comment on Cass's original essay, to which he would be given the opportunity to respond. That would be the end of the dialogue. 
But by undertaking to blog, Cass implicitly committed himself to answering a series of questions that might be put to him. Perhaps "commitment" is not the right term, but provided my questions were fair and appropriate, any failure on his part to respond would have been taken by the audience as an abdication of his self-assumed duty to engage in the discourse of the blog. And Cass proceeded to uphold his commitment until his time as guest blogger ran out. 
As a result, I believe we learned something that we otherwise might never have known about his provocative Essay, which summarizes the thesis of his provocative new book.8 2 What we learned is that constitutive 
See generally SUNSTEIN, supra note 1. 
Constitutive Commitments and Roosevelt's Second Bill of Rights 225 commitments do not matter. Ok, well that may be a bit hyperbolic. What I mean is that, as further explained by Cass in our exchange, a constitutive comment is purely descriptive of a kind of general attitude in the body politic. I think the questioning also made clear how difficult it is to understand the nature of this attitude so that it can be detected by purely descriptive techniques. Whether or not they can be accurately identified, however, this attitude appears to have no normative bite. The existence of a constitutive commitment adds nothing to normative discourse over what our basic political commitments ought to be, which is what normal political discourse is all about. 
In his final blog entry, Cass writes, tellingly I think: "The idea of constitutive commitments does not serve an argumentative purpose, so far as I can tell, but it might help illuminate a nation's political and even legal culture as it changes over time." 3 And so it might. What it will not do is add anything to normative discourse over what rights people have that are worthy of government respect. The assertion of a constitutive commitment amounts to the very conventional claim that ". . and lots of people agree with me!" Of course, having lots of people agree with one's position may add some plausibility to one's normative claims. Sometimes such a claim establishes a baseline of agreement between members of a conversation that enables them to move on to other more contested matters. ("We both agree about X, so what we must really be disagreeing about is Y."). But such a claim does next to nothing to resolve any normative challenge to the descriptive claim being made by the speaker. It is largely bootstrapping. 
Suppose I deny that there is a natural right to a decent home, by which I mean that one person has no enforceable moral claim on another person, or group of persons, to provide him with a house. Classical natural rights thinkers distinguished between "perfect rights" which ought to be enforceable and "imperfect rights" which entail unenforceable moral duties. By denying that there is a perfect right to a house, I would not be denying that some persons could decide to give a portion of their property to others so that they may afford a house. Likewise, a government program could be created to provide housing by means of tax dollars (unless taxation itself is theft, in which case such a program would be unjust for that reason). The denial of the alleged "right" to a home would be denying only that, in the absence of government, one person can demand that another person be compelled to labor for him to build him a house. What policies government chooses to adopt, even in the absence of an enforceable moral claim, is another matter. 

See supra Part VI. 
Supposing that it is possible to identify the constitutive commitments of an entire society of 280 million diverse persons and that it matters what these commitments may be, the particular constitutive commitments emphasized by Cass are highly contestable. First, the exact content of the alleged commitment is contestable-for example, is a commitment to an enforceable or "perfect right" of the poor to the assistance of others, or a commitment to voluntarily honor an unenforceable duty or "imperfect right" to provide assistance to those in need by means of a voluntary public program? As a purely descriptive matter, it seems that it is the latter, not the former, that has "real foundations in our history," 84 but who can be sure? And how could this interpretive dispute about unwritten constitutive commitments ever be settled? That is the point of my doubts about the uncertain conditions of what makes a commitment constitutive and how we would know one if it existed. 
Second, assuming there are such things as constitutive commitments, it is not at all clear that ours today are the same as those in Roosevelt's day. In the 1940s, the idea of a national welfare state had great appeal among intellectuals. It promised a more effective means to achieve the liberal ends of individual well-being. Then it was tried. Remember "The Great Society" with its "War on Poverty" and "Urban Renewal," which was initiated during the Johnson Administration and greatly expanded by Richard Nixon (who also added the "War on Drugs" to the program)? Did poverty end? Were cities restored to their previous greatness? Was illicit drug use eradicated? Well, no. The underclass expanded as more people came to rely on government benefits as "entitlements." The inner cities grew more impoverished and dangerous. Government housing projects were erected and fell into the control of gangs and thugs, and are now being demolished. Government schools declined precipitously. Stagflation hit the national economy. The War on Drugs has fueled inner city street gangs and international terrorist organizations, and undermined democracy in Third World countries."' 
All these pernicious effects of implementing something like Roosevelt's Second Bill of Rights are the reasons why "welfare state" is now an epithet rather than a noble goal. Why courts in the 1980s backed 
Bill of Rights, it appears to be as much an unquestioned political stance-and hence a constitutive commitment-as any other item on Roosevelt's list. For an introduction to the perniciousness of this governmental policy, see generally Randy E. Barnett, Bad Trip: DrugProhibitionand the Weakness of PublicPolicy, 103 YALE L. J. 2593 (1994). 
away from imposing these policies as constitutional rights. Why Ronald Reagan was elected in 1980. Why Republicans took control of the House of Representatives in 1994, ending 50 years of Democratic dominance. Why all three branches of government are now controlled by Republicans. Why European social welfare states, all built on Rooseveltian foundations, are in grave economic crisis, with intractably high unemployment and obligations to pay for social programs outstripping the ability to tax those who work. 
In short, our real world experience since the 1940s undermined any "constitutive commitment" that may have existed to a Second Bill of Rights in a manner that no academic argument ever could. But academic arguments explaining theoretically why Roosevelt's approach leads to disastrous consequences have also boomed since his speech, beginning with the explosive popularity of F.A. Hayek's The Road to Serfdom in 1949.86 If forced to choose whether the vision of Roosevelt or of Hayek is ascendant, I think clearly it is the latter. How could Cass prove me wrong? 
Does a rejection of the Second Bill of Rights entail a return to a ruthless, Social Darwinist, atomistic individualism? No. First, because ruthless, Social Darwinist, atomistic individualism was always a straw man against which Progressives loved to tilt. Classical liberals committed to private property rights and freedom of contract as the twin engines of liberty and prosperity never justified their commitment on grounds of atomistic individualism. Rather, from before Adam Smith they justified these fundamental rights on the ground that human beings were highly both dependent on each other and vulnerable. Properly defined property rights served to protect the individual from the more powerful group, and freedom of contact provided the most effective means of obtaining the support of others.87 In a crucial passage of his Lectures on Jurisprudence8, Adam Smith wrote: 
Man continually standing in need of the assistance of others, must fall upon some means to procure their help. This he does not merely by coaxing and courting; he does not expect it unless he can turn it to your 
several property, freedom of contract, first possession, restitution, and self defense as necessary to address the pervasive social problems of knowledge, interest and power, see generally RANDY E. BARNETT, THE STRUCTURE OF LIBERTY: JUSTICE AND THE RULE OF LAW (1998). 
1978). advantage or make it appear to be so. Mere love is not sufficient for it, till he applies in some way to your self love. A bargain does this in the easiest manner.89 As for Social Darwinism, at one time it was a very popular "scientific" theory among all the intelligentsia including, most notably, Progressives themselves. 90 But that is a story for another day. 
Nor were classical liberals somehow confused, as Cass seems to think, 91 about the need for government to "positively" enforce properly defined natural rights of property and contract, when they opposed governmental interference with these rights. Indeed, the purpose for making claims of perfect rights is as much to justify government protection of these rights as it is to deny government the power to interfere with their proper exercise. That the first duty of government is the equal protection of properly defined rights was always at the heart of the Lockean justification of government itself.92 That government is thought to be needed to enforce properly defined rights, therefore, provides no support whatsoever for extending governmental enforcement to rights claims that themselves interfere with properly defined rights. 
So what then are our "constitutive commitments" today? Today more than any time since the nineteenth century, American culture is committed to rights of private property and freedom of contract. It is against this intellectual tide that Cass Sunstein makes his plea, asserting Rooseveltian constitutive commitments as a sort of rear guard action. But this American commitment to property and contract is tempered by the age-old classical liberal concern with the welfare of those who slip between the cracks-the group that used to be called the "deserving poor." 
True, today most still accept the Progressive proposition that government rather than private institutions should assist these people. Nevertheless, most also complain that the nondeserving poor are assisted as well as those who deserve aid, a complaint that led to historic welfare reforms in the 1990s. I believe both the deserving poor and the greater society would be better served if more of this well-motivated assistance Progressive hero, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., wrote that "[t]hree generations of imbeciles are enough." Id. at 207. 

the FourteenthAmendment, 41 DUKE L.J. 507, 512-20 (1991). 
were channeled through private competitive institutions, as it once was. 93 Time will tell whether we will move farther in this direction or be frozen in place. 
But the proof of the pudding is in the eating. To the extent it matters, Roosevelt's Second Bill of Rights was abandoned as a constitutive commitment-if it was ever truly adopted-by the bitter taste of the Great Society. If increased reliance on the voluntary duty of beneficence is allowed by the political establishment to be tried and it proves to work better in practice than government welfare programs, as theory says that it should, then such an approach is likely to expand. The principal obstacle to discovering who is correct as a practical matter is the effective obstruction of these reforms by reactionaries in academia, the media and public sector unions who call themselves, ironically, "Progressives." In the end, individual liberty is the one continuous constitutive commitment of the American polity. Only time will tell whether the best means to that end is Roosevelt's or Hayek's. I know on whom my bet would be placed. 
STATE: FRATERNAL SOCIETIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES, 1890-1967 (2000). 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Environment" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 227, 2004). 
Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Environment 
Cass R. Sunstein 
October 2004 draft 9/27/04 
This review-essay explores the uses and limits of cost-benefit analysis in the context of environmental protection, focusing on three recent books: Priceless, by Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling; Cellular Phones, Public Fears, and A Culture of Precaution, by Adam Burgess; and Catastrophe: Risk and Response, by Richard A. Posner. The review-essay emphasizes three principal limitations on the use of costbenefit analysis. First, it is important to distinguish between the easy cases for costbenefit analysis, in which the beneficiaries of regulation pay all or almost all of its cost, from the harder cases, in which the beneficiaries pay little for the environmental protection that they receive. In the harder cases, net welfare gains and distributional advantages are possible even if environmental regulation fails cost-benefit analysis. Second, there are possible uses, in the environmental context, of maximin rather than cost-benefit analysis, especially when regulators are attempting to control catastrophic risks where probabilities cannot be assigned. An Anti-Catastrophe Principle makes sense for such situations. Third, human beings are citizens, not merely consumers, and this point requires abandonment of the willingness to pay criterion in some contexts. 
In the United States, cost-benefit analysis (CBA) is in the ascendancy. For over twenty years, American presidents have required agencies to perform CBA for major regulations; indeed, they have told agencies to regulate only if the benefits of regulation justify its costs.1 Congress has also shown considerable interest in CBA, most prominently in the Safe Drinking Water Act, which asks agencies to produce quantitative assessments of both costs and benefits. For their part, federal courts have adopted a series of principles that promote CBA, saying that if Congress has not been clear, agencies may consider costs, take account of the substitute risks introduced by regulation, and exempt trivial risks from governmental control. * I am grateful to Elizabeth Emens, Charles Larmore, Martha Nussbaum, and Richard Posner for extremely valuable comments on an earlier draft of this review. 1 The developments discussed in this paragraph are traced in Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). 
In its enthusiasm for cost-benefit analysis, the United States provides a sharp contrast to Europe, which has shown intense interest in a quite different organizing principle for environmental protection: the Precautionary Principle.2 According to the Precautionary Principle, regulation is required even in the face of scientific uncertainty— even if it is not yet clear that environmental risks are serious. A central point of the Precautionary Principle is to recognize the limitations of existing knowledge and to protect against harm that cannot yet be established as such. 
CBA and the Precautionary Principle can lead in radically different directions. For example, many Europeans argue that the consequences of genetic modification are uncertain, that real harm is possible, and hence that stringent regulation is readily justified. By contrast, many Americans respond that the likely benefits of genetic modification are far greater than the likely harms and that stringent regulation is therefore unsupportable. Or consider global warming. Many European leaders have argued in favor of precautions, even extremely expensive ones, simply to reduce the risk of catastrophe. But under President George W. Bush, American officials have called for continuing research on the costs and benefits of controlling greenhouse gas emissions. 
The tension between CBA and the Precautionary Principle raises serious questions about the theory and practice of environmental protection. To engage in costbenefit analysis, regulators must make difficult and often speculative judgments about the likely effects of alternative regulatory strategies.3 The easiest task is often the identification of costs, but even here there are formidable empirical problems. It is difficult to project the expense of regulations of different levels of stringency, especially because environmental protection often spurs technological innovation, greatly reducing the cost of pollution reduction. The identification of benefits presents even harder empirical problems -- and knotty normative and conceptual ones as well. At a minimum, agencies must estimate the savings that are likely to result from regulation, including reductions in mortality and morbidity, along with improvements in terms of visibility, 2 See, e.g., Arie Trouwborst, Evolution and Status of the Precautionary Principle in International Law (Kluwer Law International, 2002); The Precautionary Principle in the 20th Century: Late Lessons from Early Warnings (Poul Harremoes et al. eds.) (London: Earthscan, 2002). 3 The Office of Management and Budget has issued guidelines to govern and to standardize the use of costbenefit balancing. See Office of Management and Budget, Regulatory Analysis, Circular A-4 (September 17, 2003), available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/regpol.html#rr recreation, aesthetics, animal welfare, property values, and more. When science leaves room for doubt, as it often does, agencies typically specify a range of possibilities, representing low-end estimates and high-end estimates in addition to the best “point” estimate. Agencies might, for example, project that a certain regulation will save as many as eighty lives each year and as few as zero, with a preferred estimate of twenty-five.4 These numbers inevitably involve a degree of guesswork. 
After specifying the likely benefits, CBA requires agencies to engage in multiple acts of conversion, assigning economic values to human lives, human morbidity, and a range of harms to the environment. Typically American agencies assign monetary values on the basis of private “willingness to pay” (WTP).5 For example, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) values a human life at about $6.1 million, a figure that comes from real-world markets.6 In the workplace and for consumer goods, additional safety has a price; market evidence is investigated to identify that price. The $6.1 million figure, known as the value of a statistical life (VSL), is a product of studies of actual workplace risks, attempting to determine how much workers and others are paid to assume mortality hazards. Suppose that people must be paid $600, on average, to eliminate risks of 1/10,000; suppose, for example, that workers who face risks of that magnitude generally receive $600 in additional wages each year. If so, the VSL would be said to be $6 million. Where market evidence is unavailable, agencies often produce monetary valuations on the basis of contingent valuation surveys, which ask people how much they are willing to pay to save coral reefs or endangered species, to eliminate a risk of chronic bronchitis or curable lung cancer, and much more. Drawing on market evidence and contingent valuation studies, the EPA has recently valued a case of chronic bronchitis at $260,000, an emergency hospital visit for asthma at $9,000, hospital admission for pneumonia at $13,400, a lost work-day at $83, and a specified decrease in visibility at $14.7 4 See Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, in Risk and Reason (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). 5 See W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993). 6 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value of Nothing (New York: The New Press, 2003). 7 See Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State 145 (American Bar Association: Washington, DC 2002). 
Once a CBA is produced, what should be done with it? The most ambitious answer is that agencies should adopt regulations only when the likely benefits exceed the likely costs—and that if several regulations meet this test, agencies should select the one that “maximizes net benefits.” On this approach, CBA provides a clear rule of decision, one by which regulators should be bound. A more cautious response would be that agencies should generally require benefits to exceed costs, and also seek to maximize net benefits, but that they need not do so; on this view, the outcome of the CBA provides a presumption but no more. The presumption could be rebutted by showing that the particular situation justifies a departure from the result indicated by CBA—as, plausibly, in cases in which poor people would stand to gain a great deal. A still more cautious approach would be that in deciding what to do, agencies should consider the outcome of CBA alongside such other variables as they deed relevant. There are important differences between those who would make CBA determinative and those who would merely make it relevant. But even on the most cautious understandings of the role of CBA, government’s choices would be significantly affected by the translation of environment benefits into monetary equivalents. 
To say the least, it is highly controversial to say that people’s protection against environmental risks is properly measured by their WTP to avoid those risks. It is at least equally controversial to use WTP as the basis for policies protecting endangered species, nature, and wildlife. But the Precautionary Principle raises serious problems of its own. How much precaution is the right level of precaution? Are costs relevant to the answer? In any case human beings face a number of risks, not simply one, and any effort to reduce one risk might well increase another risk. Is it possible, even in principle, to take precautions against all risks, rather than a subset? If all risks cannot be reduced at once, how should regulators set priorities? 
In this essay, I approach these questions through a discussion of three illuminating books that offer radically different approaches to environmental protection. Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling believe that CBA is a hopelessly crude tool, one that buries indefensible judgments of morality and politics.8 Drawing on the war on terrorism, they argue for the Precautionary Principle instead. By contrast, Adam Burgess uses the 8 See id. controversy over cell phones to suggest that the Precautionary Principle capitulates to, and even promotes, baseless public fears.9 Objecting to what he sees as excessive fear of new technologies, Burgess argues for careful attention to scientific evidence and for regulation only when the risk is real. Richard Posner argues for CBA and economic analysis in a context in which it seems least promising: catastrophic risk.10 He contends that global warming, and other potentially catastrophic problems, cannot sensibly be approached without a disciplined effort to quantify and monetize both costs and benefits. But where Ackerman and Heinzerling see CBA as an excuse for regulatory inaction, Posner invokes CBA on behalf of aggressive controls on greenhouse gases and other sources of potentially serious danger. Indeed his central goal is to draw private and public attention to catastrophic risks that are exceedingly unlikely to come to fruition. 
Building on the arguments made by Burgess and Posner, I shall mount a qualified defense of CBA here. Without some sense of both costs and benefits—both nonmonized and monetized—regulators will be making a stab in the dark. Human beings have a great deal of difficulty in assessing risks, making them prone to both hysteria and neglect; CBA does not supply definite answers, but it can help to establish which risks are serious and which are not.11 By contrast, the Precautionary Principle approaches incoherence. Because risks are on all sides of social situations, and because regulation itself increases risks of various sorts, the principle condemns the very steps that it seems to require. 
But building on the arguments made by Ackerman and Heinzerling, I shall suggest that there are two serious problems with CBA. The first is that WTP is sometimes an inappropriate basis for environmental policy. Human beings are citizens, not merely consumers, and their consumption choices, as measured by WTP, might be trumped by their reflective judgments as citizens. In any case, WTP is dependent on ability to pay; when the poorest members of societies stand to gain from environmental protection, they should be protected even if their poverty ensures that their WTP is low. The second problem is that regulators cannot always assign probabilities to environmental outcomes. 9 See Adam Burgess, Cellular Phones, Public Fears, and a Culture of Precaution (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004). 10 See Richard A. Posner, Catastrophe: Risk and Response (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004). 11 See Allan Gibbard, Risk and Value, in Values At Risk 94 (Douglas MacLean ed.) (New Jersey: Rowman and Allanheld, 1986), for an exploration of “a principal rationale for wanting something like risk-costbenefit analysis: for seeking a way to regiment our judgments about risk, and so to avoid the blatant irrationalities of unaided common sense.” If probabilities cannot be assigned, regulators are unable to engage in CBA; they might do well to follow the maximin principle, taking steps to avoid the worst-case scenario. This point helps pave the way toward a narrower and more refined use of the Precautionary Principle, one that has important real-world applications and that provides a valuable complement to approaches based on CBA. 
Ackerman and Heinzerling do not object to efforts to specify the range of outcomes associated with alternative courses of action.12 Their principal objection is to the WTP criterion. Insisting that human deaths are not mere “costs,” Ackerman and Heinzerling contend that CBA is morally obtuse. They argue that a well-functioning democracy should respect the informed judgments of citizens, rather than aggregating private consumption choices. Ackerman and Heinzerling much prefer the Precautionary Principle, which, in their view, is “a more holistic analysis ” that argues for regulation in the face of scientific uncertainty and that is “committed to fairness within and beyond this generation” (p. 234). 
Ackerman and Heinzerling are aware that many people have turned to CBA because of widely publicized studies that purport to show a high level of arbitrariness in modern regulation.13 According to such studies, regulations in the United States are wildly inconsistent. Sometimes the United States spends $100,000 (or less) to save a human life. Sometimes it spends tens of millions. Cost-benefit supporters ask: Shouldn’t nations be devoting their resources to serious health problems rather than trivial ones? If a nation can spend ten million dollars to save one thousand lives, shouldn’t it do that, rather than wasting the money on a similarly priced program that saves only one or two people? In any case human beings make many errors in assessing risks, using heuristics and demonstrating biases that make them exaggerate some dangers and underestimate 12 I discuss their book for a popular audience in Cass R. Sunstein, Your Money or Your Life, The New Republic 27 (March 15, 2004); my treatment here borrows from that discussion. 13 The most well-known is John F. Morrall III, A Review of the Record, Regulation, November/Decmebr 1986, 25, 30, Table 4. For an updated treatment, see John F. Morrall III, Saving Lives: A Review of the Record, 27 J. Risk and Uncertainty 221 (2003) as a promising corrective to blunders in citizens’ perception of risk. In these ways, interest in CBA has been fueled less by contentious claims of value than by the pragmatic suggestion that it can assist in more intelligent priority-setting.15 
Ackerman and Heinzerling believe that the attack on the current system is based on misleading studies, burying controversial and indeed implausible judgments of value. True, some regulations do not prevent many deaths, but they do prevent serious (nonfatal) harms to human health and also harms to ecosystems. The resulting benefits should not be disparaged. More fundamentally, Ackerman and Heinzerling argue that the key studies find low benefits partly because they greatly “discount” future gains to life and health. Everyone agrees that a dollar today is worth more than a dollar in twenty years; economists use a standard “discount rate” (often 7% annually) to convert future dollars into current equivalents. In calculating the benefits of regulation, they use the same discount rate for lives saved and illnesses averted. Ackerman and Heinzerling contend that this approach wrongly shrinks the value of regulations that will save people in the future. One of their central claims, then, is that the standard discount rate should not be applied to future savings in terms of life and health. 
Suppose that their arguments are right—that once economic values are properly assigned to environmental gains, few existing regulations will be condemned as requiring huge investments for trivial benefits. Regulators still might want to use cost-benefit analysis to improve current decisions.16 Ackerman and Heinzerling complain that to do this, they will have to produce a dollar value for a human life—and any such effort will be arbitrary, offensive, or worse. They reject the view that WTP, based largely on workplace studies, produces information that agencies should use. In their view, workers 14 A good collection is Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment (Thomas Gilovich et al. eds) (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). For use of this idea in (qualified) defense of costbenefit analysis, see Gibbard, supra note. 15 David M. Driesen, The Economic Dynamics of Environmental Law (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003), offers a powerful criticism of cost-benefit analysis insofar as it offers a static account of both costs and benefits and fails to see that regulation and other forces often produce innovation, thus reducing the expense of environmental protection. I believe that this argument is best taken as a reason for skepticism about existing figures about likely costs, rather than as an attack on cost-benefit analysis as such. See Matthew Adler, Cost-Benefit Analysis, Static Efficiency, and the Goals of Environmental Law, 31 B. C. Environmental Affairs Law Review 591 (2004). 16 See W. Kip Viscusi, Rational Risk Regulation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001). often have little information about the risks that they face, and hence they cannot be charged with consciously trading hazards against dollars. Even when workers are informed, they may have few options and hence little choice. If they accept a job with significant hazards for a low premium, it is not because they are genuinely free to choose. 
Some anomalies in the empirical literature are highly relevant here. Nonunionized workers have sometimes been found to receive little or nothing for the reduction of statistical risks, and African-Americans have been found to receive much less than white people do.17 Does it follow that regulators should treat the lives or nonunionized workers, or African-Americans, as worth especially little? Ackerman and Heinzerling add that the key studies ask only how much individuals care about risks to themselves. They ignore the fact that many of us value the lives of others too. I might be willing to pay only $60 to eliminate a 100,000 risk that I face, but I might be willing to pay much more than that to eliminate that risk from my child’s life, and substantial amounts to help reduce the risks of my friends. Altruism is ignored in the current calculations. 
Ackerman and Heinzerling also contend that statistically equivalent risks should not be treated the same, because people’s valuations of mortality risks depend not only on the probability of harm but also on their nature and their context. About 3000 people died from the terrorist attacks of 9/11—a much smaller number than die each year from suicide (30,500), motor vehicle accidents (43,500), and emphysema (17,500). Ackerman and Heinzerling approve of the fact that the reaction of the United States to the 9/11 attacks was not based on simple numerical comparisons. Drawing on work by psychologist Paul Slovic,18 Ackerman and Heinzerling emphasize that the risk judgments of ordinary people diverge from the risk judgments of experts—not because ordinary people are stupid or confused, but because they have a different normative framework for evaluating risks. While experts focus on the number of deaths at stake, most people are especially averse to risks that are unfamiliar, uncontrollable, involuntary, irreversible, 17 John D. Leeth & John Ruser, Compensating Wage Differentials for Fatal and Nonfatal Injury Risk by Gender and Race, 27 J. Risk & Uncertainty 257 (2003). 18 See Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk (London: Earthscan, 2000). inequitably distributed, man-made, or catastrophic.19 Diverse valuations of diverse risks should play a role in regulatory policy. 
For example, most of us are not greatly troubled by the cancer risks associated with x-rays, partly because they are voluntarily incurred. By contrast, the risks of terrorism and even pesticides and air pollution are more alarming because individuals cannot easily control them. And when a risk is faced by an identifiable community—as, for example, when landfills with toxic chemicals are located in largely poor areas—the public is especially likely to object to what it will perceive as unfairness.20 Ackerman and Heinzeling thus complain that CBA disregards important qualitative differences among quantitatively identical risks. It also tends to ignore, and often to reinforce, patterns of social inequality, above all because it pays no attention to a key question, which is distributional: Who receives the benefits and who incurs the costs? For both domestic and international environmental issues, Ackerman and Heinzerling emphasize the importance of fairness. If environmental threats mostly burden poor people, regulators should take that point into account, whatever the cost-benefit ratio. 
Ackerman and Heinzerling are also concerned about how cost-benefit analysts value nature. How much will human beings pay to save an animal or a member of an endangered species? Economists have tried to answer the question by actually asking people. For example, one study find that the average American family is willing to pay $70 to protect the spotted owl, $6 to protect the striped shriner (an endangered fish), and as much as $115 per year to protect major parks against impairment of visibility from air pollution. Ackerman and Heinzerling ridicule these numbers, complaining that any precise monetary value fails to provide useful information. Bans on whaling, for example, are rooted in a widely shared ethical judgment, not on cost-benefit analysis. A democracy should base its decisions about the protection of nature on such ethical judgments, rather than by aggregating people’s willingness to pay. 19 But see Howard Margolis, Dealing With Risk (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), for a challenge to this account of the lay/expert division in risk perceptions. 20 Note, however, that the Not In My Backyard Syndrome – known in the trade as NIMBY – suggests that many people will make self-serving judgments about the proper location of environmentally risky activities. This point is related to the suggestion, developed below, that people tend to become intuitive cost-benefit analysts when both the benefits and the costs of environmental regulation are on-screen. 
Ackerman and Heinzerling offer a final objection to cost-benefit analysis: the rights of future generations. I have noted that economists generally apply a discount rate to future gains and losses. With a 7 percent discount rate, $1000 in twenty years is worth only $260 today. Cost-benefit analysts within the federal government have long applied the usual discount rate for money (7 percent) to the benefits of safety and health regulation, so that prevention of 1000 fatal cancers in 2025 is equivalent to the prevention of 260 fatal cancers in 2005. Ackerman and Heinzerling respond that lives are not like money; they cannot be placed in a bank for the accumulation of interest. A discount rate of 7 percent radically shrinks the value of reductions in risk for those born, say, one hundred years from now. But current generations owe obligations to the future and should not discount measures that protect people not yet born. 
Invoking the Precautionary Principle, Ackerman and Heinzerling argue that nations are obliged to take action against serious threats even before there is a scientific consensus. Above all, they want regulators to make regulatory decisions by attending to the worst-case scenario. If the worst case is extremely bad, aggressive regulation is desirable even if it might result in wasted money. When a nation spends too much on regulatory protection, it loses limited resources, which admittedly is undesirable; but waste is far better than catastrophe. Hence their “preference is to tilt toward overinvestment in protecting ourselves and our descendents” (p. 227). Ackerman and Heinzerling urge that this approach was taken in the context of the military spending of the Cold War, arguing that the nation rightly prepared for the high-risk case. They see protection against terrorism in similar terms. Ackerman and Heinzerling want to treat health and environmental risks in the same way. 
Ackerman and Heinzerling do not focus in detail on any particular regulatory issue. By contrast, Burgess explores the idea of “precaution” with close reference to a single controversy: the health risks associated with cellular phones. Burgess does not explicitly discuss CBA, but he is highly skeptical of the Precautionary Principle, which, in his view, leads regulators to capitulate to baseless public fear. One of Burgess’ central claims is that public fears are often manufactured rather than found; for this reason, Burgess describes himself as a “social constructivist” (p. 11). But with respect to risk, Burgess is no constructivist at all. He believes that some risks are serious and that others are not, and that science is the best way to tell the difference. 
Burgess contends that notwithstanding countless efforts, no reputable study has demonstrated significant health risks as a result of emissions from cell phones and cell phone towers.21 To date, much of the so-called evidence comes from anecdotes of the sort provided by anti-cell phone activist Debbie Collins, who contended that her daughter’s health had significantly improved after she was removed from a school near a cell phone tower. Rejecting expert opinion, Collins stated: “She’s a different child now—it’s all the proof I need to convince me there is a link between those wretched masts and the health of children” (p. 1). Another mother said, “I needed no more proof than that. This term he started at a new school and I can already see the change in him. His memory has improved and his headaches have gone” (p. 2). Burgess is concerned that a precautionary approach, founded on statements of this kind, will both aggravate fear and impose costs for no good reason. 
Burgess’ tale begins with a media campaign. In the early1990s, a number of newspaper stories in the United Kingdom contended, on the basis of little evidence, that mobile phones and base stations were producing harmful health effects. Apparently influenced by these stories, the European Commission in Brussels began an official inquiry in 1995, ultimately funding future research and concluding that adverse effects could not be ruled out. Public fears intensified in 1996 after the issue received attention in a consumer health program on the BBC and a widely read news story in the Sunday Times featuring the headline, “Mobile phones cook your brain.” In 1997, alarmist reports grew in the media, suggesting that cell phones could produce illness and premature mortality (and also reduce sex drives). These reports helped to spur citizen action. By 1999, local political campaigns against cell phone towers became prominent, and they received favorable coverage in local and regional newspapers, which further energized public concern. 21 A different set of issues is raised by the risks associated with use of cell phones while driving. Here there is much stronger evidence of serious hazards. For an overview, see Robert Hahn and James Prieger, The Impact of Driver Cell Phone Use on Accidents (July 2004), available at http://www.aeibrookings.org/publications/abstract.php?pid=806 
These campaigns significantly affected both private and public institutions. The London Metropolitan police service told its officers to limit cell phones as a “purely precautionary measure” (p. 87). Harrods banned cell phones from its premises. Speaking in explicitly precautionary terms, entrepreneur Richard Branson recommended the use of safety devices for his employees. Local governing councils across the United Kingdom attempted to ban or restrict mobile towers, particularly those near schools. At the national level, the Minister for Public Health legitimated public fears, insisting that in such a context, “it is very important that” officials “work very hard to keep ahead of public anxiety” (pp. 88-89). In Burgess’ account, precautionary responses by official institutions helped to fuel that very anxiety. Thus it “is only through being taken seriously by state bodies that the allegations about hypothetical risks have been able to command authority and acquire momentum beyond the immediate reactions of some individuals” (p. 222). 
Burgess also makes some interesting and somewhat puzzling remarks about crosscultural comparisons. In the United Kingdom, there was intense public focus on cell phone risks; similar concerns have been found in Australia, Italy, and South Africa. In Italy, the Environment Minister established a “green hotline” asking people to state their complaints about “abusive” siting of cell phone towers. The Australian government funded a large-scale research project on potential adverse health effects. But in the United States, the brief burst of concern in the early 1990s rapidly dissipated, to the point where it is hard to find any serious private or public concern about health risks. And in Finland, no discernible public fear has arisen at all, even though Finland has the highest percentage of cell phone users in the world. (The fact that Nokia is Finland’s biggest company is highly relevant here—a point, bearing on both precautions and CBA, to which I will return.) 
Burgess thinks that the cell phone controversy is merely one example of the misuse of precautionary thinking in domains in which scientific evidence fails to support people’s fears. For example, he challenges European skepticism about genetically modified food, describing it as “alarm” (p. 259); and he mounts a broader attack on what he sees as the unhelpful belief that it is wrong to interfere with nature. He is therefore troubled by a wide climate of sensitivity to small risks, especially those that are novel and associated with technological innovation. Precautionary thinking, he believes, helps to create a culture of fear. 
Judge Richard Posner is one of the founders of the economic analysis of law, and he should be expected to be enthusiastic about CBA. In Catastrophe: Risk and Response, he does not disappoint that expectation. What makes the book noteworthy is its focus on the application of CBA to truly catastrophic risks—those that might threaten the survival of the human race. Posner covers an extraordinarily wide range of hazards, including genetically modified crops, robotics, and nanotechnology, but he focuses in particular on four: asteroid collisions, particle-accelerator disasters, global warming, and bioterrorism. Posner believes that none of these risks can be dismissed, and he thinks that cost-benefit analysis should be applied to each of them. 
Consider, for example, the dangers associated with very powerful particle accelerators. It is extremely unlikely, but not impossible, that such accelerators will produce a highly compressed object called a “strangelet,” which has the ability to convert whatever it encounters into a new form of matter. Posner quotes Sir Martin Rees, professor of physics at the University of Cambridge, who writes, “A hypothetical strangelet disaster could transform the entire plant Earth into an inert hyperdense sphere about one hundred meters across.”22 Posner accepts the widely held view that a strangelet disaster is exceedingly improbable, but he insists that it cannot be ruled out. As a result, he thinks that nations should at least be willing to ask whether the benefits of very powerful particle accelerators justify incurring the risk. On that question, he is quite doubtful. 
Posner’s discussion extends over a wide range. Because my topic is environmental protection, I shall focus on his treatment of global warming.23 Posner believes that the associated risks should be taken seriously, above all because of the possibility of truly catastrophic harm. He acknowledges that the leading economic expert 22See Martin Rees, Our Final Hour 120 (New York: Basic Books, 2003). 23 For a general discussion, see Stephen Gardiner, Ethics and Global Climate Change, 114 Ethics 555 (2004). on global warming, William Nordhaus, estimates its total cost at $4 trillion24—a high off the ground. (The United States has an annual GDP of $10 trillion, and as Posner points out, $4 trillion represents present value, which might be compared with the present economic value of the United States, which is roughly $100 trillion.) Nordhaus produces his $4 trillion figure essentially through the methods that Ackerman and Heinzerling deplore—using WTP and discounting the future. 
Posner is concerned not with the objections made by Ackerman and Heinzerling, which he implicitly rejects, but with the possibility that Nordhaus’ estimate greatly understates the problem, above all because of the dangers of abrupt warming, which would be especially destructive. Thus Posner thinks that existing models do not rule out the possibility of (for example) very rapid changes in both temperature and sea levels, the evolution and migration of deadly pests, and even a runaway greenhouse effect, produced by melting of tundras, thus releasing large quantities of additional greenhouse gases. One worst-case scenario is “snowball earth,” covering the world with a layer of ice several kilometers thick, a result of massive increases in cloud cover, preventing sunlight from reaching the earth. Sounding very much like Ackerman and Heinzerling, Posner seeks to draw attention to the worst that might happen. 
Many scientists and economists, including Nordhaus, believe that global warming is not likely to create catastrophic harm, and that the real costs, human and economic, will be high but not intolerable. In their view, the worst-case scenarios can be responsibly described as improbable.25 Posner disagrees. He believes that “no probabilities can be attached to the catastrophic global-warming scenarios, and without an estimate of probabilities an expected cost cannot be calculated.” In the terms of decision theory, Posner contends that global warming presents a situation of uncertainty, where probabilities cannot be assigned to outcomes, rather than risk, where such probabilities can be assigned.26 In this way, global warming differs from other potentially catastrophic 24 See William Nordhaus and Joseph Boyer, Warming the World (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000). 25 See id. at 88, suggesting a 1.2% probability of a catastrophic impact with 2.5 C warming and of 6.8 percent with 6 C warming. 26 See Frank H. Knight, Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1933); Paul Davidson, Is Probability Theory Relevant for Uncertainty? A Post-Keynesian Perspective, 5(1) J. of Econ. Perspectives 129 (1991). Some people object that uncertainty does not exist, because it is always possible risks that Posner explores, such as the strangelet disaster, which everyone characterizes as exceedingly unlikely. 
In general, Posner does not claim that responses to catastrophic risks should be chosen solely by reference to CBA. But he proposes that CBA “is an indispensable step in rational decision making in this as in other areas of government regulation. Effective responses to most catastrophic risks are likely to be extremely costly, and it would be mad to adopt such responses without an effort to estimate the costs and benefits.” While favoring CBA, Posner rejects the Precautionary Principle because of its “sponginess.” He contends that once that principle becomes sensibly tempered, it turns into a form of CBA with risk aversion—that is, a form of CBA that creates a margin of safety to protect against those dangers that produce special concern. This understanding of the Precautionary Principle, he believes, is perfectly reasonable, but it turns the principle into a version of CBA, not a rival (as Ackerman and Heinzerling claim). 
Posner emphasizes that any effort to apply CBA to catastrophic risks requires a great deal of guesswork. Consider the proposal to build a new and very powerful particle accelerator, Brookhaven’s Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider. Posner is concerned about the remote possibility that the Brookhaven Collider will destroy the earth; he wants to evaluate the proposal by reference to CBA. He notes that no effort has been made to monetize its benefits, but he ventures a “wild guess” that they amount to $250 million per year. (It is extremely hard to produce a figure, monetized or nonmonetized, to capture the benefits of basic research; for this reason Posner’s guess is indeed wild.) With that amount, the Collider would have a net present value of $400 million: $21.1 billion in benefits, assuming a 3% discount rate, over a projected ten-year span, minus the accelerator’s construction and operating costs, which are $1.1 billion. But what is the monetized value of the extinction risk? To answer that question, Posner needs to estimate both the probability of extinction and its monetized cost if it comes to fruition. For probability, he ventures a figure of 1 in ten million—a figure that he also deems “arbitrary,” though it is in line with several estimates by expert risk assessors. For for decisionmakers to produce probability assignments by proposing a series of lotteries over possible outcomes; but such assignments have no epistemic credentials if unrooted in either theory or repeated experiences, and some environmental problems, plausibly including global warming, are that sort of case. monetized cost, based on WTP to reduce statistical risks27 and a 3% discount rate, he values the loss of the human race at $600 trillion. Doing the arithmetic, Posner believes that the net benefits of the Brookhaven Collider are negative: –$100 million. Thus he concludes that the Collider should not be built. 
Posner acknowledges that “global warming is the poster child for the limitations of cost-benefit analysis” (p. 222). But even here, he thinks that it is possible to make progress by attempting to be as quantitative as possible. Most economists, armed with cost-benefit analysis, oppose the Kyoto Protocol, arguing that its monetized costs probably would exceed its monetized benefits. Recall that the monetized costs of global warming are estimated at around $4 trillion. For the world as a whole, the monetized benefits of the Kyoto Protocol are estimated at far less than those costs: only $108 billion.28 The reason is that the protocol would do relatively little about the problem of global warming. Greenhouse gases stay in the atmosphere for a long time, and the Kyoto Protocol would not, of course, affect those emissions that have already occurred. In addition, its provisions do not limit developing nations, primary sources of greenhouse gases, at all (a primary complaint of the Bush Administration); and for the industrialized world, it would merely stabilize emissions modestly below 1990 levels. Hence the benefits of the Kyoto Protocol would be modest, consisting as they would of a mere reduction in the increase of global warming emissions. At the same time, the Kyoto Protocol would impose significant costs on those subject to it, producing a total global cost ranging from $59 billion to $884 billion.29 The standard view is that the Kyoto Protocol fails CBA, because it is likely, in its implementation, to inflict costs in excess of the $108 billion gains. 
Posner thinks this analysis is badly incomplete, because it ignores the possibility that government regulation will force technological innovation, thus producing dramatic decreases in greenhouse gas emissions; and dramatic decreases are necessary to reduce the risk of catastrophe. Posner is particularly interested in the potentially desirable effects 27 To produce this number, Posner values an individual life at only $50,000, based on an assumption of a very low WTP for tiny risks. He emphasizes that this is a quite conservative assumption and that it would be reasonable to choose higher values. 28 See Nordhaus and Boyer, supra note, at 167. 29 Id. at 156. The low end of the range represents the cost with fully global emissions trading; the high end represents the cost without trading. If trading occurs within the nations listed in an annex to the protocol, the costs are estimated at $217 billion. of significant taxes on carbon emissions. Such taxes would create economic incentives to develop clean fuels and better methods of carbon sequestration. Posner acknowledges that in view of existing uncertainty and the high costs of emissions controls, it is tempting simply to wait for more scientific information (as the Bush Administration has argued). One problem with this approach is that of irreversibility: Once greenhouse gases are in the atmosphere, they stay there for a long time. In a key passage, he argues that making “shallower cuts now can be thought of as purchasing an option to enable global warming to be stopped or slowed at some future time at a lower cost.” 
Posner does not offer a formal CBA for various approaches to the global warming problem. The reason is that his fundamental concern is abrupt warming, to which he believes that no probability can be assigned. In contrast to his quantitative analysis of particle accelerators, his analysis of global warming does not offer many numbers. Indeed, his own form of balancing does not have a transparent structure; his major argument involves the option analysis just described, with the suggestion that current cuts give us the flexibility to reduce warming in the future if that is what we choose to do. He thus argues in favor of aggressive emissions taxes on greenhouse gases, above all to reduce the possibility of catastrophic risk. 
These three books cover three quite different issues: the idea of precaution; the translation of environmental harms into monetary equivalents; and the appropriate approach to environmental regulation in the face of scientific uncertainty. Let us explore these issues in turn. 
Ackerman and Heinzerling argue in favor of the Precautionary Principle. Burgess rejects it as leading to nonsensical outcomes. Posner believes that it must be converted into a form of CBA, one that embodies an aversion to those risks that deserve particular concern. At first glance, it is tempting to say, with Burgess, that the idea of precaution will lead to excessive controls on small or nonexistent risks. It is equally tempting to say, with Posner, that the idea is simply too vague to provide guidance; how much precaution is enough? But the most serious problem lies elsewhere. In many contexts, the Precautionary Principle is incoherent.30 Risks are often on all sides of social situation, and risk reduction itself produce risks. Hence the Precautionary Principle, taken for all that it is worth, forbids the very measures that it requires. Ackerman and Heinzerling neglect the fact that regulation can create dangers of its own, in a way that suggests that along some dimensions, many precautions are not precautionary at all. Advocates of precaution often emphasize the costs associated with a product or process, without seeing that it may have benefit as well; and sometimes those benefits involve the environment itself. Why should regulators examine only one side of the ledger? 
For example, regulation often gives rise to substitute risks, in the form of hazards that materialize, or are increased, as a result of regulation. Consider the case of DDT, often banned or regulated in the interest of reducing risks to birds and human beings. From the standpoint of the Precautionary Principle, the problem with such bans is that in poor nations, they eliminate what appears to be the most effective way of combating malaria—and thus significantly undermine public health.31 Or consider the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s effort to ban asbestos, a ban that, on health grounds, might well seem justified or even compelled by the Precautionary Principle. The difficulty, from the standpoint of that very principle, is that substitutes for asbestos also carry risks. The problem is pervasive. The Precautionary Principle is often invoked as a reason for banning genetic modification of food, on the ground that genetic modification creates risks to human health and to the environment. The problem is that genetic modification of food also promises benefits to human health and the environment—and by eliminating those benefits, regulation itself threatens to run afoul of the Precautionary Principle. When the principle seems to give guidance, it is often because those who use it are focusing on one aspect of risk-related situations and neglecting others. 
It is possible to go much further. A great deal of evidence suggests the possibility that an expensive regulation can have adverse effects on life and health.32 It has been 30 I develop this claim in some detail in Cass R. Sunstein, Laws of Fear: Beyond the Precautionary Principle (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 2005). 31 See Indur Goklany, The Precautionary Principle (Washington, DC: Cato, 2002). 32Ralph Keeney, Mortality Risks Induced by Economic Expenditures, 10 Risk Anal. 147 (1990); Randall Lutter & John F. Morrall, III, Health-Health Analysis: A New Way to Evaluate Health and Safety Regulation, 8(1) J. Risk & Uncertainty 43, 49 table 1 (1994). welfare, the rights of those citizens have been violated, even if their WTP is low. Indeed, some such systems impose strict liability for harms. Well-functioning legal systems make wrongdoers pay for the injuries they inflict. 
As abstract claims about people’s rights, these objections are entirely plausible. Something has gone badly wrong if people are exposed to serious risks and if their low WTP prevents them from doing anything in response. Things are even worse if government uses their low WTP to justify inaction in the face of those risks. It would be ludicrous to suggest that WTP is determinative of the appropriate use of government subsidies; a redistributive policy hardly tracks people’s WTP. (Would it make sense to say that government will give poor people a check for $100 only if they are willing to pay $100 for that check?) 
In many cases of environmental regulation, however, rights violations are not involved; we are speaking here of statistically small risks. Even if rights are involved when people are subject to small risks, people should be permitted to waive those rights at an agreeable price (at least on the assumptions that I am making). The proper response to an apparent rights violation is not to force people to buy protection that they do not want, but to provide a subsidy that will give them the benefit for free or enable them to receive the benefit at what is, for them, an acceptable price. But regulation—and this is the key point—often does not such thing; and for the easy cases, the question is one of regulation under the stated assumptions. So long as that is the question, use of WTP does not violate anyone’s rights. 
What about environmental wrongdoers? If a company has intentionally, recklessly, or even negligently exposed people to harm, it should be held accountable through the payment of damages, even if the WTP of the affected population is low. It is possible for the tort system to go much further. A sensible legal system might well choose to force companies to internalize the costs of their activities by requiring them to pay for the harms they have caused, even if there has been neither intentional nor reckless wrongdoing. Within tort theory, there is an active debate on this question, and it is possible to support strict liability by reference to a range of theoretical positions.45 But 45 See Richard A. Epstein, A Theory of Strict Liability, 2 J. Legal Stud. 151 (1973); Richard Posner, Economic Analysis of Law 175-82 (New York: Aspen Publishers, 4th ed., 1992). the subject here is regulation, not compensation via the tort system. It would be odd to say that people have a right to be required to pay more for risk reduction than they are willing to pay, at least if they are adequately informed. If people are willing to pay only $25 to eliminate a risk of 1/100,000, a reference to their “rights” cannot plausibly justify the conclusion that government should impose a regulation that costs them $75. 
An independent objection would stress, as Ackerman and Heinzerling do, that people are citizens, not merely consumers. On this view, regulatory choices should be made not after aggregating WTP, but after citizens have deliberated with one another about their preferences and values. The argument against forced exchanges treats people as consumers; it sees their decisions about safety as the same as their decisions about all other commodities. For some decisions, this approach is badly misconceived. The American constitutional system is a deliberative democracy,46 not a maximization machine, and many social judgments should be made by citizens engaged in deliberative discussion with one another rather than by aggregating the individual choices of consumers. 
In the context of racial and sex discrimination, for example, sensible societies do not aggregate people’s WTP. The level of permissible discrimination is not set by using market evidence to see how much people would be willing to pay to discriminate (or to be free from discrimination). Even if discriminators would be willing to pay a great deal to avoid associating with members of unpopular groups, such discrimination is banned. Nor is the protection of endangered species chosen on the basis of aggregated WTP. Whether and when to protect members of endangered species is a moral question to be resolved through democratic discussion, not through exercises in consumer sovereignty. In many environmental contexts, use of WTP would wrongly see people as consumers, purchasing products, rather than as citizens, deliberating about values. Speaking in this vein, Amartya Sen emphasizes that “discussions and exchange, and even political arguments, contribute to the formation and revision of values.”47 He urges that in the particular context of environmental protection, solutions require us “to go beyond looking 46 See William Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992). 47 Amartya Sen, Rationality and Freedom 287 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001). only for the best reflection of existing individual preferences, or the most acceptable procedures for choices based on those preferences.”48 
Sen’s claims identify some serious limitations on the use of WTP. But such objections should not be read for more than they are worth. In trading off safety and health in our own private lives, we do not have static values and preferences. Much of the time, our choices are a product of reflection, even if we are simply acting as consumers. To be sure, moral questions are not to be resolved by aggregating private willingness to pay. Some preferences, even though backed by WTP, are morally off-limits, and policy should not take account of them. In addition, many people are unwilling to pay a great deal for goods that have strong moral justifications; animal welfare is an example. In these circumstances, the market model is inapplicable and WTP tells us very little. 
But what about the easy cases? Do these arguments suggest that government should override individual choices about how much to spend to eliminate low-level risks, even when those choices are adequately informed? For environmental protection generally, it is indeed important to go beyond “the best reflection of existing individual preferences.” But this point does not establish that people should be required to pay (for example) $100 to eliminate mortality risks of 1/100,000 when they are willing to pay only $75. If people’s WTP reflects impulsiveness, recklessness, an absence of information, or insufficient deliberation, then it is important for other people, in government as elsewhere, to draw their attention to that fact. And in some cases, a low WTP might be overridden on the ground that it is rooted in errors, factual or otherwise. But these points should not be taken as a general objection to my conclusion about the easy cases, and to suggest that government should force people to reduce statistical risks at an expense that they deem excessive. 
A final objection would emphasize the possibility that people’s preferences have adapted to limitations in existing opportunities, including deprivation.49 Perhaps people show a low WTP for environmental goods, including health improvements, simply because they have adjusted to environmental bads, including health risks. Perhaps people’s WTP reflects an effort to reduce cognitive dissonance through the conclusion 48 Id. at 289. 49 See Jon Elster, Sour Grapes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983); Martha Nussbaum, Women and Human Development (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001). that risks are lower than they actually are.50 To generalize the objection, perhaps people suffer from a problem of “miswanting”51; they want things that do not promote their welfare, and they do not want things that would promote their welfare. If this is so, then WTP loses much of its underlying justification; people’s decisions do not actually promote their welfare,52 and their autonomy, properly understood, may not require respect for their decisions, which may be nonautonomous. In other words, the idea of autonomy requires not merely respect for whatever preferences people happen to have, but also social conditions that allow preferences to be developed in a way that does not reflect coercion or injustice. With respect to some risks, the relevant preferences are nonautonomous; consider the fact that many women face a risk of male violence under circumstances in which they believe that little can be done and hence adapt. If government can be confident that people are not willing to pay for goods from which they would greatly benefit, government should probably abandon WTP. 
In the context of ordinary regulatory policy, however, this objection has more theoretical than practical interest. Typically we are speaking of steps that would reduce low-level mortality risks (say, 1/50,000). Much of the time, there is no reason to believe that the use of informed WTP (say, $100) is a product of adaptive preferences. When there is such a reason, the judgment about the easy cases must be revised. 
There is an obvious artificiality in the assumptions behind the easy cases. Most important, people do not always bear the full social costs of the regulatory benefits they receive. Sometimes they pay only a fraction of those costs—or possibly even nothing at all. When this is so, the analysis is much more complicated. In the context of air pollution regulation, for example, there is a complex set of distributional effects, and on balance, 50 See George A. Akerlof, An Economic Theorist’s Book of Tales 123-37 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1984). 51 Daniel T. Gilbert & T.D. Wilson, Miswanting, in Thinking and Feeling: The Role of Affect in Social Cognition 178 (Joseph P. Forgas ed., 2000); Timothy D. Wilson & Daniel T. Gilbert, Affective Forecasting, Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, June 2003, at 345. 52 For general discussion, see Daniel Kahneman, A Psychological Perspective on Economics, 93 Am. Econ. Rev. (Papers & Proc.) 162 (2003); Daniel Kahneman et al., Back to Bentham? Explorations of Experienced Utility, 112 Q.J. Econ. 375, 379–80 (1997). poor people, and members of minority communities, appear to be net gainers.53 A CBA, based on WTP, might not produce an adequate account of the welfare effects of air pollution regulation.54 And even if it does, an account of welfare effects would not end the normative question, because the distributional gains are important to consider. 
Suppose, for example, that beneficiaries of a proposed drinking water regulation are willing to pay only $80 to eliminate a risk of 1/50,000 in drinking water; that the perperson cost of eliminating a 1/50,000 risk is $100; but that for every dollar of that cost, the beneficiaries pay only 70 cents. The remaining 30 cents might be paid by water companies themselves, in the form of reduced profits, or by employees of the water companies, in the form of reduced wages and fewer jobs. In this example, the costs of the regulation exceed the benefits; it is inefficient. But by hypothesis, the regulation makes its beneficiaries of the regulation better off. If CBA provides the rule of decision, and if the WTP criterion is used, the fact that the monetized costs exceed the monetized benefits is decisive. But as a normative matter, the analysis here is far harder than in the easy cases. On what assumption should the WTP numbers be decisive? 
The assumption must be that economic efficiency is the goal of government, at least in the context of environmental regulation—that in order to know what to do, we should aggregate the benefits and costs of regulation, and act if and only if the benefits exceed the costs. When using the WTP numbers, government is acting as a maximization machine, aggregating all benefits and costs as measured by the WTP criterion. But this is an implausible understanding of what government should be doing. In fact it represents a shift from the relatively uncontroversial Pareto criterion, exemplified in the easy cases, to a version of the far more controversial Kaldor-Hicks criterion,55 which assesses policy by asking this question: Are the gainers winning more than the losers are losing? The Kaldor-Hicks criterion is sometimes described as potential Pareto superiority, because it asks whether in principle, the winners could compensate the losers, and a surplus could 53 See Matthew E. Kahn, The Beneficiaries of Clean Air Act Regulation, 24 Regulation 34 (2001). 54 On the relationship between welfare and cost-benefit analysis, see Gibbard, supra note; Adler and Posner, supra note. 55 It is only a version of that criterion, because it is measuring welfare in monetary equivalents. A direct assessment of welfare, if it were possible, might show that the regulation in question is justified on KaldorHicks grounds. be left over. The difficulty of course is that Pareto superiority is merely potential. Some people really are losing and others are gaining. 
In the harder cases, the gainers are gaining less (in monetary terms) than the losers are losing -- and hence CBA suggests that regulation is unjustified. Under the assumptions I have given, the regulation is indeed inefficient: Its social cost is higher than its social benefit. But is the regulation undesirable? This is not at all clear. The first problem is that WTP is measuring gains and loses in monetary terms, rather than in welfare terms. It is possible that those who gain, in the harder cases, are gaining more welfare than the losers lose; WTP is not dispositive on that question.56 The second problem is distributional. Suppose that in terms of overall welfare, the regulation is not desirable; it makes aggregate welfare lower rather than higher. But suppose too that those who benefit are poorer and more disadvantaged than those who lose. If, for example, those who are willing to pay $80 are disproportionately poor, and those who pay the remainder are disproportionately wealthy, the regulation might be plausibly justified despite the welfare loss. 
It is natural to respond here that if redistribution is what is sought, then it should be produced not through regulation but through the tax system, which is a more efficient way of transferring resources to those who need help.57 But suppose that redistribution is not going to happen through the tax system. If so, then the regulation in the harder cases cannot be ruled off-limits despite its inefficiency. The fact that a regulation is helpful to the most disadvantaged is not decisive in its favor. If it is trivially helpful, and if it inflicts huge costs on everyone else, little can be said for it. But everything depends on the magnitude of the relevant effects. A program that produces large gains for the least welloff would seem to be justified even if it imposes, in terms of WTP, slightly higher costs than benefits on balance. 
The simple conclusion is that the argument for using WTP is most plausible in cases in which the beneficiaries of regulation pay all or most of its cost. In such cases, WTP is reasonably used so long as people are adequately informed and so long as the 56 On CBA and welfare, and for a welfarist defense of CBA as a decision procedure, see Adler and Posner, supra note. 57 See, e.g., Louis Kaplow & Steven Shavell, Why the Legal System is Less Efficient Than the Income Tax in Redistributing Income, 23 J. Legal Stud. 667, 667 (1994). question is how much they should be forced to spend to avoid existing risks. The analysis must be different when the beneficiaries of regulation are paying only a small fraction of its costs. In such cases, it is possible that the regulation can be justified as a redistributive measure or on welfare grounds. To know whether it can be so justified, it is necessary to go beyond CBA and to identify the winners and losers.58 Ackerman and Heinzerling neglect to distinguish between the easy cases and the harder ones, and thus fail to appreciate the arguments that lie behind use of WTP. 
Many of the most interesting arguments offered by Ackerman and Heinzerling are best seen as attacks on CBA as currently practiced, not on CBA as such. Consider, for example, their suggestion that it is foolish to extrapolate, from workplace studies, a single figure for the value of statistical risks. Ackerman and Heinzerling note that people care not only about the magnitude of the risk (is it 1/10,000 or 1/100,000?) but also about its nature and context. A risk of death from cancer might well be worse than a statistically equivalent risk of a sudden, unanticipated death. A risk of death from air pollution, or drinking water, might well produce a higher WTP than a statistically equivalent risk of death from a workplace accident. 
This claim is plausible, but it is most sensibly taken as an argument for a more refined version of CBA, one that insists on variations among statistically equivalent risks.59 A single number is genuinely obtuse; in fact it is inconsistent with the very theory that gives rise to the use of WTP in the first place. Recall that if WTP is relevant, it is because its use promotes welfare, autonomy, or both. If this is so, regulators should consult actual WTP, which varies across risks, rather than a single or unitary WTP, which grows only out of one set of risks, and which (as Ackerman and Heinzerling say) cannot plausibly be applied to every risk of a given statistical magnitude. The real question is not whether to have more differentiated monetary values for qualitatively identical risks, but 58 A possible defense of CBA would be that individualized identification of winners and losers would be extremely difficult, that agencies would not make defensible distributional judgments, and that CBA works better, on balance, that any approach that attempts to make finer distinctions. A great deal of empirical work would be necessary to make this defense convincing. My goal here is to sort out the theoretical issues; CBA might look especially good, or especially bad, when we investigate empirical issues as well. 59 I develop this point in Sunstein, Laws of Fear, supra note. where to find reliable evidence on which to base those values. Economists are starting to fill the relevant gaps, in a way that supports the suggestion that a single WTP is far too crude.60 It would not be difficult to continue to use WTP, but to take account of the fact that it varies across risks, even if they are statistically identical. 
Ackerman and Heinzerling also object, plausibly, to the application of the standard discount rate for money to the valuation of future gains in terms of both mortality and morbidity.61 But suppose that no discount rate is appropriate -- that deaths in 2050 should be valued the same way as deaths in 2010. If so, the analysis of costs and benefits would not be the same; but it would remain possible to calculate both costs and benefits. In any case the analysis of discounting must make a distinction to which Ackerman and Heinzerling devote insufficient attention.62 Sometimes environmental regulation protects living people from latent harms -- risks that will come to fruition not now, but ten, twenty, or thirty years from now. It seems clear that some discount rate should be applied to latent harms. Most people, intuitively and on reflection, would much prefer to face a harm in the future rather than immediately.63 Hence some kind of discount rate makes a great deal of sense for harms that will not come to fruition for a long time (even if the discount rate for such harms does not turn out to be the same as the discount rate for money). But sometimes environmental regulation protects members of future generations; and this is a quite different problem. If a program would save one hundred people born in 2020, it is not clear that it deserves less enthusiasm than a program that would save one hundred people born in 2002. 
On the other hand, a refusal to use a discount rate creates a number of logical and practical conundrums, especially if it would impose high costs on current generations—a particular problem in light of the fact that if current generations face high costs, posterity 60 See id. 61 See Tyler Cowen & Derek Parfit, Against the Social Discount Rate, in Justice Between Age Groups and Generations 144-45 (Peter Laslett & James S. Fishkin eds.) (New Haven: Yale University Press,1992). 62 See the illuminating discussion in Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Cost-Benefit Analysis, and the Discounting of Human Lives, 99 Colum. L. Rev. 941, 962–74 (1999). 63 It is difficult to separate, in practice, the fact that people would prefer more life-years rather than fewer from the fact that people would prefer a distant death rather than an immediate one. If most people would much prefer a fatal illness in 2050 to a fatal illness in 2010, there may be no discounting; the choice might be based on the fact that the later date ensure more life-years. The question of morbidity present a simpler test of discounting: Most people would rather have a month of illness in 2010 than a month of illness in is likely to be hurt too. Hence aggressive regulation, at least if it is extremely costly, may not help future generations at all. It has also been argued that if regulators are indifferent as between lives saved now and lives saved in the future, but discount costs at some positive rate, then it makes sense for them to delay life-saving expenditures indefinitely.64 In any case it has been suggested that instead of discounting lives, regulators might simply use the future discounted (monetary) cost of saving lives at the time when lives are saved—an approach that is mathematically identical and hence produces the same analysis.65 
I cannot resolve here the complex questions raised by individuation of WTP and by discount rates.66 Ackerman and Heinzerling are right to raise questions about existing practice.67 It seems clear that greater individuation is justified for statistically equivalent risks that people consider different to be qualitatively different; it also seems clear that a discount rate should be used for latent harms. The appropriate approach to risks faced by future generations remains unsettled. The simplest point is that if these questions are properly answered, CBA will be mended, not ended. 
Thus far I have emphasized issues of monetization, as highlighted by Ackerman and Heinzerling. But as Posner’s discussion demonstrates, some of the most interesting problems raised by CBA have nothing to do with the translation of risks into monetary equivalents. Recall that Posner’s assessment of the risks of particle accelerators contains what he himself describes as arbitrariness. Nor is the problem limited to unconventional problems of this kind. Consider a fairly mundane issue under the Safe Drinking Water Act: If government reduces permissible levels of arsenic in drinking water from 50 parts 64 Emmett B. Keeler and Shan Cretin, Discounting of Life-Saving and Other Nonmonetary Effects, 29 Management Science 300 (1983). Ackerman and Heinzerling discuss this claim and reject it (pp. 193-94), in part on the ground that allowing numerous current deaths would be politically unacceptable; but the claim is one of the logical implication of refusing to discount, and the fact that it entails a politically unacceptable outcome does not mean that it is wrong. 65 See Morrall, supra note. Note that many people believe that because of technological advances, future risks are unlikely to come to fruition, simply because new technologies will permit us to prevent them. This is not, however, a point about discounting itself. 66 An especially good discussion is Revesz, supra note. 67 They are also right to contend that regulators should consider not only the WTP of those who face mortality risks, but also that of others who care about them. See Eric A. Posner and Cass R. Sunstein, Dollars and Death, U Chi L Rev. (forthcoming 2005). per billion (ppb) to 10 ppb, what, exactly, are the expected benefits? On the basis of existing evidence, many answers are scientifically respectable.68 For a regulation mandating that reduction, the EPA estimated that it would prevent about twenty-five premature deaths and roughly an equivalent number of nonfatal cancer cases. But on the basis of the same inconclusive evidence that was before the EPA, it would have been reasonable to project that the regulation would prevent as few as six deaths or as many as 
As a result, critics of CBA might contend the method gives only the illusion of precision. Even before deaths are translated into monetary equivalents, regulators might well be required to make judgments of value, not merely fact, in projecting the likely effects of regulatory protection. But this point should not be read for more than it is worth. When specific estimates are not feasible, the evidence often permits agencies to specify a range. For the arsenic rule, they could say, for example, that a 10 ppb standard is likely to prevent a minimum of six and a maximum of 110 deaths, and they might undertake cost-benefit analysis with reference to the range. Such an analysis would not resolve the question of what to do, but it would greatly discipline the inquiry. 
In some circumstances, however, existing information puts regulators in a far more difficult situation. These are cases of genuine uncertainty, in which probabilities cannot be assigned to the expected outcomes. Posner is much concerned with these situations. While he does not spell out the argument, his treatment of catastrophic risks points to a promising possibility for a narrower, and more appealing, version of the Precautionary Principle, a kind of Anti-Catastrophe Principle. Suppose that citizens face catastrophic risks to which probabilities cannot be assigned; suppose, that is, that they are operating under conditions of uncertainty rather than risk. If regulators are operating under such conditions, they might well do best to follow maximin, identifying the worstcase scenarios and choosing the approach that eliminates the worst of these. It follows that if aggressive measures are justified to reduce the risks associated with global warming, one reason is that those risks are potentially catastrophic and existing science does not enable us to assign probabilities to the worst-case scenarios. Maximin is an appealing decision rule whenever uncertainty is present, but in the regulatory context, it 68 See Sunstein, supra note. is particularly important for extremely bad outcomes. When Ackerman and Heinzerling suggest the value of focusing on the worst case, they are offering bad advice under circumstances of risk; but if they are understood to be speaking of uncertainty, they are on much firmer ground (see pp. 225–26). 
In an illuminating effort to recast the Precautionary Principle,69 Stephen Gardiner adapts John Rawls’s argument that when “grave risks” are involved, and when probabilities cannot be assigned to the occurrence of those risks, maximin is the appropriate decision rule, at least if the chooser “cares very little, if anything, for what he might gain among the minimum stipend that he can, in fact, be sure of by following the maximin rule.”70 Applying Rawls’ claims about the original position and distributive justice to the environmental setting, Gardiner urges that maximin, and hence a “core” Precautionary Principle, is justified (1) in the face of potentially catastrophic outcomes (2) where probabilities cannot be assigned and (3) when the loss, from following maximin, is a matter of relative indifference. Gardiner adds, sensibly, that to justify maximin, the threats that are potentially catastrophic must satisfy some minimal threshold of plausibility. If they can be dismissed as unrealistic, then maximin should not be followed. Gardiner believes that the problem of global warming can be usefully analyzed in these terms and that it presents a good case for the application of maximin. 
This argument seems to me on the right track, but its conclusion, as stated, risks triviality, above all because of condition (3). If individuals and societies can eliminate an uncertain danger of catastrophe for essentially no cost, then of course they should eliminate that risk. But the real world rarely presents problems of this form. In real disputes, the elimination of uncertain dangers of catastrophe imposes both costs and risks. In the context of global warming, for example, it is implausible to say that regulatory choosers can or should care “very little, if anything,” for what might be lost by following maximin. If we followed maximin for global warming, we would spend a great deal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and the result would almost certainly be higher prices for gasoline and energy, probably producing increases in unemployment and poverty. 69 See Stephen Gardiner, The Core Precautionary Principle (unpublished manuscript 2003). 70 See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 134 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, revised edition 1999). Rawls draws in turn on William Fellner, Probability and Profit (Homewood, Ill., R.D. Irwin., Inc. 1965). 
For environmental problems, does the argument for maximin provide help beyond the trivial cases? I believe that if properly reformulated, it does, for one simple reason: Condition (3) is too stringent and should be abandoned. Even if the costs of following maximin are significant, and even if choosers care a great deal about incurring those costs, it makes sense to follow maximin when they face uncertain dangers of catastrophe. The hardest question here is: Under circumstances of uncertainty, how much cost does it make sense to incur in the service of maximin? Consider a straightforward case: The catastrophic dangers associated with global warming could be eliminated if every nation contributed $2 million to a fund to combat that risk. Surely that cost would be acceptable. Consider a very different case: The catastrophic dangers associated with global warming could be eliminated only if every nation contributed enough resources to reduce standards of living by 50% world-wide, with a corresponding increase in global poverty. If global warming really does pose an uncertain danger of total catastrophe, the logic of maximin argues in favor of this extraordinary reduction in world-wide standards of living; but it is not clear that following that logic would be reasonable. To incur costs of this magnitude, we might want to insist that the danger of catastrophe rises above a minimal threshold— that there be demonstrable probability, and a not-so-low one, that the catastrophic risk will occur. It would seem far more sensible to take less costly steps now and to engage in further research, attempting to learn enough to know more about the probability that the catastrophic outcomes will occur.71 71 Sometimes the Precautionary Principle is urged in situations in which one or another course seems irreversible; and Posner attends to issues of reversibility in discussing global warming. But the issue of irreversibility raises many problems. Any death, of any living creature, is irreversible, and those who invoke irreversibility do not intend the notion of irreversible harm to apply to each and every mortality risk. And because time is linear, every decision is, in an intelligible sense, irreversible. If I play tennis at 11 am today, that decision cannot be reversed, and what might have been done at that time will have been permanently lost. If government builds a new highway in upstate New York in May, that particular decision will be irreversible, even though the highway can be replaced or eliminated. 
Those who are concerned about irreversibility have something far more particular in mind. They mean something like a large-scale alteration in environmental conditions, one that imposes permanent, or nearly permanent, changes on those subject to them. But irreversibility in this sense is not a sufficient reason for a highly precautionary approach. At a minimum, the irreversible change has to be for the worse, and it must also rise to a certain level of magnitude. A truly miniscule change in the global temperature, even if permanent, would not justify expensive precautions if it is benign or if it imposes little in the way of harm. The idea of irreversibility is really important for two reasons. The first, referred to by Posner, draws on the analogy to stock options, and suggests that it is worthwhile to spend resources on (bounded) precautions to wait for more information to emerge before incurring a substantial and irreversible loss. The second reason involves the relationship between irreversibility and catastrophic harm; a harm is unlikely to 
For global warming, Posner’s interesting recommendations seem vulnerable for this reason. Though a firm defender of quantification, he offers too little in the way of numbers here. To evaluate his proposal for new taxes on greenhouse gas emissions, designed to produce technological innovation, it would be valuable to know both the costs of that initiative and the likely benefits. Assessment of costs would not be easy, because we cannot project the rate of technological innovation; but if the taxes are significant, large increases should be expected in the price of energy, including gasoline, with particularly serious effects on poor people. Because of the range of uncertainties in the science of global warming, assessment of benefits is even harder. But at the very least, it should be possible to measure the likely effects of such taxes on greenhouse gas emissions. If the relevant taxes can be projected to spur significant reductions, then the argument for them is certainly strengthened. 
Unlike Posner, I suspect that the likelihood of real catastrophe from global warming is low, and hence that he is wrong to say that no probability can be assigned to it. But I am far from an expert on the underlying science, and in any case Posner convincingly argues that some kind of positive tax on carbon emissions would be costjustified. The larger point is that an Anti-Catastrophe Principle has a legitimate place in environmental regulation, applying to uncertain dangers of catastrophe, at least when the costs of reducing those dangers are not huge and when incurring those costs does not divert resources from more pressing problems. The Anti-Catastrophe Principle is not the Precautionary Principle; it is far narrower than that, and it covers only a small set of environmental problems. But it nonetheless deserves to play a role in environmental protection, plausibly including global warming—calling for significant (but not hugely costly) steps now, accompanied by further research to obtain a better understanding of the likelihood of real disaster. 
Four qualifications are important. First, the Anti-Catastrophe Principle must be attentive to the full range of social risks; it makes no sense to take steps to avert catastrophe if those very steps would create catastrophic risks of their own. Second, use of the principle should be closely attentive to the idea of cost-effectiveness, which be catastrophic if it can be reversed. For discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, Laws of Fear: Beyond the Precautionary Principle (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 2005). requires regulators to choose the least costly means of achieving their ends. In the context of global warming, there are many methods by which to reduce the relevant risks. Both nations and international institutions should choose those methods that minimize costs. Third, distributional considerations matter. The principle should be applied in a way that reduces extreme burdens on those least able to bear them. For global warming, there is a particular need to ensure that citizens of poor nations are not required to pay a great deal to contribute to the solution of a problem for which wealthy nations are most responsible—partly because the latter caused the problem in the first place, but also because poor people, faced with a global risk, need and deserve help from those who can provide it. Fourth, costs matter. The extent of precautions cannot reasonably be divorced from their expense. Where the worst-case scenario is truly catastrophic and when probabilities cannot be assigned, a large margin of safety makes a great deal of sense. 
Because regulation itself often introduces new hazards, the Precautionary Principle risks incoherence; it forbids the very steps that it requires. For its part, CBA runs into two serious difficulties. The first involves the specification of both probabilities and outcomes. The second involves the translation of environmental risks into monetary equivalents. 
For many of the problems involved in environmental regulation, it is possible to identify a range of outcomes, in a way that allows CBA to get off the ground. But where catastrophic outcomes are possible and where regulators are operating under circumstances of uncertainty, it may well make sense to follow maximin. Even in such circumstances, however, an inquiry into costs cannot sensibly be avoided, not least because nations that impose high costs might increase mortality and morbidity risks as a result. 
With respect to monetization, I have suggested that it is important to distinguish between the easy cases for using WTP and the harder ones. Where the beneficiaries of environmental regulation pay all or most of its cost, the argument for using WTP is especially strong. In such cases, beneficiaries are unlikely to be helped if they are required to pay more than they are willing to pay; and requiring them to do so is an insult to their autonomy.72 But when the beneficiaries of environmental regulation pay little or none of the costs, the regulation might be justified even if it fails CBA. To decide whether it is, it is necessary to identify the likely winners and losers. The most general conclusion is that CBA does not tell regulators all that they need to know; but without it, they will know far too little. 
University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 72 As I have emphasized, a low WTP does not mean that government should not subsidize the good; but regulation is not a subsidy. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Recommended Citation 
  
Debiasing through Law  Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein  
T H E   L A W   S C H O O L   T H E   U N I V E R S I T Y   O F   C H I C A G O   
September 2004, revised March 2005  
This paper can be downloaded without charge at:  The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html  and at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection:  
 http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=590929  
Debiasing Through Law 
Human beings are often boundedly rational. In the face of bounded rationality, the legal system might attempt either to “debias law,” by insulating legal outcomes from the effects of boundedly rational behavior, or instead to “debias through law,” by steering legal actors in more rational directions. Legal analysts have focused most heavily on insulating outcomes from the effects of bounded rationality. In fact, however, a large number of actual and imaginable legal strategies are efforts to engage in debiasing through law – to help people reduce or even eliminate boundedly rational behavior. In important contexts, these efforts promise to avoid the costs and inefficiencies associated with regulatory approaches that take bounded rationality as a given and respond by attempting to insulate outcomes from its effects. This paper offers both a general description of debiasing through law and an account of how such debiasing does or could work to address central legal questions across a range of areas, from consumer safety law to corporate law to property law. Discussion is also devoted to the risk of government manipulation that is sometimes created when debiasing through law is employed.. * Professor of Law, Harvard Law School. ** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. For helpful comments, we are very grateful to Bruce Ackerman, Ian Ayres, Lucian Bebchuk, Cary Coglianese, Richard Craswell, Barbara Fried, Bert Huang, Louis Kaplow, Jerry Mashaw, Paul Oyer, Eric Posner, Jeffrey Rachlinski, Roberta Romano, Frederick Schauer, Reva Siegel, Peter Siegelman, Matthew Stephenson, Adrian Vermeule, and participants in workshops at Boston University Law School, Columbia Law School, Fordham Law School, Harvard Law School, the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, Stanford Law School, and Yale Law School. For outstanding research assistance, we thank Michael Fertik, Audrey Lee, Pat Robertson, and Daniel Schwarcz. 
Introduction 
A growing body of legal analysis focuses on how human behavior deviates systematically from what would be predicted by the traditional economic assumption of unbounded rationality.1 To the extent that legal rules are designed on the basis of their anticipated effects on behavior, bounded rationality is obviously relevant to the formulation of legal policy. But an important and little addressed question is precisely how it is relevant to the formulation of legal policy. The most obvious possibility is that, given a demonstration of the existence and importance of a particular aspect of bounded rationality, the law should be structured to presume the existence of that particular shortcoming in human behavior. 
Most existing work in behavioral law and economics is of this character. Consider, for instance, the large literature examining the belief by boundedly rational consumers that potentially risky products are substantially safer than they in fact are. In the presence of such beliefs, the law might – and to some degree does – respond by adopting heightened standards of manufacturer liability for consumer products (e.g., Hanson and Kysar 1999a:1511-12). Or consider the argument that “Monday morning quarterbacking” by judges or juries adversely affects judgments reached by these decision makers on matters of corporate law, so that corporations are held liable for bad events even if preventing those events would have been extremely difficult (Rachlinski 1998:620-21). If so, then the law could respond, as indeed it has with the “business judgment rule,” by largely vitiating the liability of corporate law actors, who would otherwise be vulnerable to such second-guessing on the part of adjudicators. More generally, rules and institutions might be, and frequently are, designed so that legal outcomes do not fall prey to problems of bounded rationality. 
Boundedly rational behavior thus might be taken to justify a strategy of insulation, attempting to protect legal outcomes from falling victim to bounded rationality. To date, most treatments of bounded rationality in law have been of this character. Strategies for insulation can be characterized as a method for “debiasing law.” 1 See, for example, Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998), Korobkin and Ulen (2000), Parisi and Smith (2004), Sunstein (2000), and law review symposia in Northwestern University Law Review (2003) and Vanderbilt Law Review (1998). 
A quite different possibility – one that has received much less attention in law and elsewhere – is that legal policy may respond best to problems of bounded rationality not by insulating legal outcomes from its effects, but instead by operating directly on the boundedly rational behavior and attempting to help people either to reduce or to eliminate it. We describe legal policy in this category as “debiasing through law.” Debiasing through law will often be a less intrusive, more direct, and more democratic response to the problem of bounded rationality. 
In fact there exists a substantial, empirically-oriented social science literature on prospects for debiasing of individuals after a demonstration of a given form of bounded rationality.2 But empirical findings on these forms of debiasing have made only limited appearances in the legal literature,3 and equally important, social scientists interested in such forms of debiasing have generally not investigated the possibility of achieving them through law. In many important settings, empirical evidence suggests the substantial potential of these sorts of debiasing strategies, and from a legal policy perspective it is obviously important to ask about the role that law can play in facilitating such debiasing. That is our major focus in this paper. 
When debiasing through law has been discussed in the legal literature, the treatment has focused on existing or proposed steps taken in procedural rules governing adjudication by judges or juries. A well-known example stems from the work by Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, Samuel Issacharoff and Colin Camerer (1995) on the tendency of litigants to evaluate likely outcomes, as well as questions of fairness, in ways that systematically serve their own interests. Thus, for instance, these authors find that individuals assigned to the role of the plaintiff and presented with exactly the same information as is presented to individuals assigned to the role of the defendant offer far higher estimates of the likelihood of a plaintiff victory in a lawsuit. Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff (1997) find, however, that in an experimental setting, this self-serving bias may be eradicated by requiring litigants to consider the weaknesses in their case or reasons that the judge 2 Leading examples include Fischhoff (1982), Sanna, Schwarz and Stocker (2002), and Weinstein and Klein (2002). Many other illustrations appear in the body of the paper. 3 As noted in the text just below, where debiasing of boundedly rational actors has been examined in the legal literature, the focus has been on achieving debiasing through procedural rules governing adjudication by judges or juries. We discuss several examples below. might rule against them. In these circumstances, individuals in the plaintiff’s and defendant’s roles have similar views on likely trial outcomes and fair settlements.4 The present paper, by contrast, gives primary emphasis to a different and broader form of debiasing through law – a category we call “debiasing through substantive law.” 
The central idea of debiasing through substantive law is that in some cases it may be desirable to structure the substance of law – not merely the procedures by which the law is applied in an adjudicative setting – with an eye toward debiasing those who suffer from bounded rationality. Through a series of examples from areas of law outside of adjudicative procedure, we hope to show that the prospect of reducing bounded rationality through substantive law holds previously unrecognized promise for both understanding and improving the legal system. 
Section 1 below begins by offering a general description of debiasing through law. Our analysis emphasizes the basic distinction between debiasing of boundedly rational actors and the provision of incentives – another important instrument for affecting actors’ behavior. 
Section 2 focuses on debiasing through substantive law. It illustrates the general scope and power of this form of debiasing by describing the role it does or could play in addressing important questions across a range of legal domains, from consumer safety law to corporate law to property law. Our analysis of debiasing through substantive law contrasts with the almost reflexive focus in the existing legal literature in these domains on “debiasing law” solutions to problems of bounded rationality. 
Section 3 explores some of the normative questions raised by debiasing through law (whether achieved through procedural rules or through substantive law). Compared to the usual approach of “debiasing law,” an important advantage of strategies for debiasing through law is that they aim to correct errors while still preserving some opportunity to make choices. Under Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff’s approach of debiasing through procedural rules in response to litigants’ self-serving bias, for instance, no decision making power or information is removed from litigants’ hands; by contrast, a “debiasing law” approach to litigants’ self-serving bias suggests keeping information out of their hands entirely (Issacharoff and 4 It is possible that “real” self-serving bias – outside of the lab – is more resilient (Farnsworth 2003:582-85). Loewenstein 1995). An important corollary of this attribute of debiasing through law is that, unlike “debiasing law” strategies, the approach of debiasing through law will frequently make it possible for government to improve outcomes for individuals who exhibit bounded rationality while leaving unrestricted the choices of those who would not otherwise err. An emerging theme in the legal literature on bounded rationality is that it is preferable, when possible, to avoid imposing significant costs on those who do not exhibit boundedly rational behavior (Camerer, Issacharoff, Loewenstein, O’Donoghue and Rabin 2003:1212; Mitchell 2002:132); below we describe specific strategies for debiasing through law that achieve this goal. In this sense, debiasing through law provides real advantages over “debiasing law” strategies. 
Still, at bottom, debiasing through law in either of its two varieties (substantive or procedural) involves the government in a self-conscious process of changing the behavior of at least some people by altering their perceptions of the reality around them. In some respects such government action is entirely routine, as government frequently and uncontroversially regulates in response to individuals’ misinformation; many strategies for debiasing through law are of just this character. But in some contexts debiasing through law could come to resemble a system of government propaganda in violation of widely-shared normative commitments; as our examples below will illustrate, however, many actual and conceivable forms of debiasing through law do not have this problem. 
A General Description of Debiasing Through Law 
If debiasing through law is a response to bounded rationality, then an obvious first step is to understand the basic idea of bounded rationality. As is now well known in the legal literature and beyond, researchers in psychology and behavioral economics have uncovered a wide range of departures from unboundedly rational behavior. These departures take one of two general forms. First, individuals may exhibit “judgment errors.” Second, human behavior may deviate from the precepts of expected utility theory. We briefly describe these two basic categories. 
Judgment errors stem from “heuristics” and “biases” that often shape human decision making. Begin with a familiar example of a heuristic. Asked how many words in a 2,000-word section of a novel end in “ing,” people give much larger estimates than those asked how many words have “n” as the second-to-last letter in the same material, notwithstanding the obvious fact that more words must satisfy the latter criterion than the former (Tversky and Kahneman 1983:295). According to the “availability heuristic” at work in cases of this sort, the probability of an event is estimated after an assessment of how easily examples of the event can be called to mind. The availability heuristic often produces sensible judgments and behavior for people who lack detailed statistical information, but it can lead to significant and severe errors. The prospect of errors in some cases does not suggest that the behavior in question is “irrational” in the sense of being arbitrary or lacking plausible justification. The point instead is that the behavior, even if sensible in many cases, leads to systematic error in some of them. Bounded rationality is hardly the same as “irrationality.”5 
The use of heuristics has also been shown to lead people to misestimate probabilities by committing the “conjunction fallacy” (concluding that characteristics X and Y are more likely to be present than characteristic X alone) – errors produced by the so-called representativeness heuristic. For instance, after reading a paragraph about a thirty-one year old woman, Linda, who was concerned with issues of social justice and discrimination in college, most people erroneously tend to say that Linda is more likely to be “a bank teller and active in the feminist movement” than to be “a bank teller” (Tversky and Kahneman 1982:92-94). Heuristics, then, are not themselves biases, but they can produce biases. Thus “availability bias” might be said to arise when the availability heuristic leads people to make predictable errors in assessing probabilities. 
A related set of findings by psychologists and behavioral economists emphasizes not mental short-cuts, but more direct biases that lead to inaccurate judgments. An example is hindsight bias, in which decision makers attach excessively high probabilities to events that ended up occurring; we referred to this bias above in discussing corporate law’s business judgment rule. We also referred above to self-serving bias – in which individuals interpret information in directions that serve their own 5 For further discussion, see Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998:1594). interests – in illustrating prospects for successful debiasing through procedural rules. 
Another bias that has received significant attention in the legal literature – and that we suggest in section 2 creates important opportunities for debiasing through substantive law – is optimism bias. Optimism bias refers to the tendency of people to believe that their own probability of facing a bad outcome is lower than it actually is. People typically think that their chances of having an auto accident, contracting a particular disease, or getting fired from a job are significantly lower than the average person’s chances of suffering these misfortunes – although of course this cannot be true for everyone. Estimates offered by individuals for their own probabilities range from twenty to eighty percent below the average person’s probability.6 
While this “above average” effect is well established, it does not by itself establish that people optimistically underestimate their statistical risk (Viscusi 2002:162-66). People could believe, for example, that they are less likely than most people to contract cancer, while also having an accurate sense of the probability that they will contract cancer. But substantial evidence suggests that people sometimes exhibit optimism bias in the estimation of actual probabilities, not simply relative risk. For example, professional financial experts consistently overestimate likely earnings, and business school students overestimate their likely starting salary and the number of offers that they will receive (Armour and Taylor 2002:334-35). People also underestimate their own likelihood of being involved in a serious automobile accident, and their frequent failure to buy insurance for floods and earthquakes is consistent with the view that people are excessively optimistic.7 It is also noteworthy that these data pointing to optimism bias come from individuals making judgments that they make regularly in their everyday lives, rather than judgments far removed from those they would ordinarily make. 1.1.2 
Departures from Expected Utility Theory 
Along with the category of judgment errors, the idea of bounded rationality includes ways in which actual choices depart from the predictions of expected utility theory – a foundational feature of standard rational-choice 6 See Jolls (1998:1659-62) for a discussion of the relevant studies. 7 Jolls (1998:1660-61) describes the relevant studies. analysis. While departures from expected utility theory have received only modest attention in the existing social science literature on debiasing of boundedly rational actors (for reasons we shall explain), below we suggest their relevance to debiasing through law. 
A leading alternative to expected utility theory is Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky’s (1979) prospect theory. According to this theory, people evaluate outcomes based on the change they represent from an initial reference point, rather than based on the nature of the outcome itself. For example, discovering that one will receive a bonus of $2500 is often experienced differently if the previous year’s bonus was $0 than if the previous year’s bonus was $5000, wholly apart from any tangible financial obligations the individual faces. Prospect theory also posits that people weigh losses more heavily than gains, thus showing “loss aversion.” 
Related to loss aversion is the “endowment effect,” according to which an individual’s valuation of an entitlement depends on whether the individual is given initial ownership of that entitlement (Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler 1990). Thus, for example, individuals endowed with university mugs demand substantially more to sell these mugs than unendowed individuals are willing to pay to buy them. 
Also related to loss aversion are framing effects. Losses matter more than gains, and thus framing outcomes as losses rather than gains will greatly affect how people respond. Many studies support this idea8 – as does a widely-publicized dispute over the content of a government advertising campaign in the United States (Peterson 2003). The advertising campaign in question involved the effects of breastfeeding of newborns. In the approach favored by breastfeeding advocates, the advertisements would refer to the risks to the child of leukemia and other diseases from not consuming breast milk – whereas infant formula manufacturers favored an approach that stressed the benefits to the child from breastfeeding. Showing an intuitive understanding of prospect theory, the infant formula manufacturers fought to have the government emphasize the advantages of breastfeeding rather than the affirmative harms (losses) of not breastfeeding. 
1.2 
Debiasing Versus Incentives 
What does it mean, in general, to “debias” boundedly rational actors? The general question of what counts as “debiasing” of boundedly rational actors is important because there are many channels by which boundedly rational behavior may be made to “go away” or diminish in degree. Some but not all of these qualify as debiasing of boundedly rational actors under the general definition we develop here. 
Consider the following examples: (1) People are prone to social influences, so much so that many people will ignore the clear evidence of their own senses, and hence provide incorrect answers, if they are confronted with the unanimous views of others (Asch 1955). This kind of “conformity bias,” in which the views of others are used as a kind of heuristic for the proper answer, is significantly reduced when financial incentives are provided. When people stand to gain economically from a correct answer and when they have confidence in their own judgment, they are far more likely to ignore the crowd, to say what they think, and to answer correctly (Baron 1996). 
(2) Recall from the introduction that individuals in the role of litigants have a tendency to see cases in the light most favorable to their own side. But imagine that they are required to consider weaknesses in their side or reasons that the judge might rule against them. In that case, the “self-serving bias” bias they had previously exhibited vanishes (Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff 1997). 
(3) We have already mentioned thirty-one year old Linda, who was concerned with issues of social justice and discrimination in college. Recall from section 1.1.1 above that most people tend to say that Linda is more likely to be “a bank teller and active in the feminist movement” than to be “a bank teller.” This is a familiar example of the conjunction fallacy, produced by the representativeness heuristic. But as Gerd Gigerenzer has demonstrated, people are less likely to commit the conjunction fallacy when asked about frequencies rather than probabilities. If asked, “of 100 people who fit the description” of Linda, how many are bank tellers and how many are bank tellers and active in the feminist movement, the level of conjunction violations drops from 80 percent or more to 20 percent or less (Gigerenzer 2000:250). 
The first of these examples is one in which boundedly rational behavior is eliminated by the provision of financial incentives. A broad definition of debiasing of boundedly rational actors might embrace this sort of technique, but we think it is preferable to exclude the underlying form of behavior here from the category of boundedly rational behavior (so that the removal of the behavior by the provision of incentives does not count as “debiasing” of boundedly rational actors in the sense that we use that term). For some purposes, it might be useful to understand incentives as a way of overcoming boundedly rational behavior by increasing the stakes. Baruch Fischhoff, for instance, describes “rais[ing] stakes” as a possible strategy for debiasing of boundedly rational actors (Fischhoff 1982:424; Fischhoff 2003:732). 
But it seems most conservative, and most consistent with existing conventions in analyses of bounded rationality, to limit the category of boundedly rational behavior to that which survives even in the presence of financial or other consequences for exhibiting the behavior.9 If an apparent departure from unbounded rationality is eliminated with the provision of financial incentives, then many would conclude that it was not a departure from unbounded rationality at all, but instead a mere result of lazy or careless decision making by an actor who had no reason to be other than lazy or careless. Under our definition, therefore, the technique used in the first example above is not a strategy for debiasing of boundedly rational actors. And the same goes for techniques that eliminate boundedly rational behavior by improving a previously faulty aspect of an experimental design – although here again Fischhoff’s broad conception of debiasing of boundedly rational actors embraces such manipulations. 
The second and third examples above are standard cases of debiasing of individuals exhibiting bounded rationality. Subjects are asked to consider arguments or information of a particular sort, and the consideration of such arguments or information reduces or eliminates the boundedly rational behavior they previously exhibited. It is important to emphasize how the technique here differs from incentives. Actors are not asked to repeat the very same task with the very same structure, with the sole difference that they now have greater reason to take care in making their choices (which in the legal domain would correspond to some, although not all, “debiasing law” 9 Camerer and Hogarth (1999) make this implicit claim, and offer a great deal of evidence that many cases of boundedly rational behavior are not eliminated by the provision of incentives. strategies – for instance, those that increase punishments for certain types of behavior); instead the environment is restructured in a way that alters not actors’ motivation but the actual process by which they perceive the reality around them. Thus, we define debiasing of boundedly rational actors as using techniques that intervene in and alter the situation that produces the boundedly rational behavior, without operating on the degree of motivation or effort an actor brings to the task. Debiasing through law is then the use of legal rules to achieve such debiasing of boundedly rational actors. 
Debiasing Through Substantive Law 
This section fills out the general description offered in section 1 by developing a set of organizing examples of debiasing through substantive law. (The introduction and the appendix refer to existing examples of debiasing through procedural rules.) We show how the idea of debiasing through substantive law can or does address important choices the legal system must make across a range of legal domains. Our discussion follows the division in section 1.1 between bounded rationality in the form of judgment errors and bounded rationality in the form of departures from expected utility theory. 
The domain of our analysis in this section is forms of bounded rationality that the existing social science literature has shown to be responsive to strategies for debiasing of boundedly rational actors. This point is important because not all types of bounded rationality respond well to such strategies. Many manipulations fail to reduce hindsight bias, for instance; and, even worse, some seemingly sensible strategies for reducing this bias have actually increased it (Sanna, Schwarz and Stocker 2002). To be sure, studies that have required subjects to “rethink the inferences that they have made upon learning [an] outcome” and have then “demonstrated to them that other inferences remained plausible” have shown some success in reducing hindsight bias (Rachlinski 1998:586-88).10 However, in most cases strategies – even fairly aggressive ones – for debiasing boundedly rational actors have enjoyed limited, if any, success in combating hindsight bias (Fischhoff 1982:427-31; Hastie and Viscusi 1998:917; Kamin and Rachlinski 1995:9798; Rachlinski 1999:824). But in other contexts, techniques for debiasing of boundedly rational actors have shown substantial promise. One example is 10 Stallard and Worthington (1998:680-81) is an example of successful debiasing of hindsight-biased behavior. the case of self-serving bias; as noted, having subjects consider the weaknesses in their case or reasons that the judge might rule against them appears effective in eliminating self-serving bias in litigation – a form of debiasing through procedural rules (Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff 1997). We focus below on cases in which debiasing of boundedly rational actors has shown a strong likelihood of success in the existing social science literature. 2.1 
Debiasing Through Substantive Law in Response to Judgment Errors 2.1.1 
Debiasing Through Consumer Safety Law 
A vast number of federal and state laws regulate the safety of products used by consumers.11 A major impetus for these laws is the belief that consumers often do not adequately understand the potential risks of such products. Consumers may not adequately understand such risks because they are imperfectly informed, because they suffer from bounded rationality – most familiarly because of the phenomenon of optimism bias described in section 1.1 above – or both. 
The traditional law and economics view of the consumer safety context is that the problem (if there is one at all) merely involves imperfect information, and thus is appropriately corrected by the straightforward provision of additional information (Stiglitz 1986:90-91). However, as the earlier discussion of optimism bias suggested and as Jon Hanson and Douglas Kysar (1999a:1511-12; 1999b:729-30), among others, have emphasized, optimism bias will lead many consumers to underestimate their personal risks even if they receive accurate information about average risks. To be sure, optimism bias is context-dependent (Armour and Taylor 2002:338-41). But the factors that tend to reduce the extent of the bias – deliberation, close temporal proximity between the decision and the outcome of the decision, 11 See, for example, 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601-2692 (2000) (Toxic Substances Control Act); 15 U.S.C. §§ 2051-2084 (2000) (Consumer Product Safety Act); Restatement (Third) of Torts: Products Liability (state tort law). and severe consequences of error – are likely to be absent in the consumer safety context, with the possible exception of the severity of consequences.12 
It would not be unreasonable to conclude that optimism bias justifies heightened standards of products liability as an alternative to the provision of additional statistical facts about the product in question. Hanson and Kysar (1999a:1560), for instance, argue in favor of enterprise liability on the basis of (among other factors) optimism bias. However, such an approach – seeking to “debias law” by insulating outcomes from the effects of boundedly rational behavior – imposes large costs of its own (Priest 1987). A still more aggressive “debiasing law” approach, available under existing law in the case of some products, is an across-the-board ban on the product’s use. A number of federal statutes give agencies a choice among disclosure requirements and partial or complete bans.13 In response to evidence of inadequate information, optimism bias, and other consumer errors, some regulators might well be tempted to impose a ban even if the statute reflects a preference for disclosure.14 
An alternative to these “debiasing law” strategies is to use the law to reduce the occurrence of boundedly rational behavior in the first instance. At the broadest level, strategies for debiasing through consumer safety law provide a sort of middle ground between inaction or the economists’ spare prescription of “more information,” on the one hand, and the aggressive “debiasing law” strategies of heightened products liability standards or outright bans, on the other. Strategies for debiasing through consumer safety law may be far more successful than the mere provision of statistical facts, and also far more protective of consumer prerogatives than the strategy of an across-the-board ban. Our analysis shares a starting point with traditional proposals for better “informing” consumers, but comes to a quite different end point given our empirically-based appreciation of the limits of some forms of information provision, such as those that simply offer general statistical facts. 12 Hanson and Kysar (1999a:1511-12) provide further discussion of the role of contextual factors in determining optimism bias in the consumer safety context. 13 See sources cited in note 11 above. 14 See Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir. 1991) (interpreting Toxic Substances Control Act to require the least restrictive regulatory alternative). 
In our discussion below of debiasing through consumer safety law, we will focus on scenarios in which optimism bias is likely to produce an overall underestimation by consumers of the risk associated with a given product. In some circumstances, a competing form of bounded rationality could lead consumers to overestimate rather than underestimate the risk associated with a product. For instance, highly available instances of accident or injury can lead to excessive pessimism – a distortion opposite to the one produced by optimism bias (Schwartz and Wilde 1983:1437). Alternatively, likelihoods of very low probability events may be overestimated, although the empirical evidence here is mixed, with some studies suggesting overestimation of the likelihood of very low probability events (Viscusi 1988:287-88) and other studies suggesting underestimation of the likelihood of such events (Kunreuther 1976:231-39). A general countervailing factor in the consumer product context – suggesting overall underestimation of risk in many cases – is that market pressures will tend to lead manufacturers of such products to present their products in ways that minimize consumers’ perceptions of risk (Hanson and Kysar 1999a:1425-26). Our focus in this section is on cases in which optimism bias leads to underestimation of the risks associated with a given product. 2.1.1.1 Evidence on Debiasing in Response to Optimism Bias 
Straightforward potential strategies in the social science literature for debiasing in response to optimism bias include suggesting reasons that negative outcomes might occur and considering risk factors related to negative outcomes. However, such approaches usually fail to reduce optimism bias (Weinstein and Klein 2002:322-23). The social science evidence thus suggests that successful strategies for debiasing in response to optimism bias will typically require harnessing separate aspects of boundedly rational behavior. Consider two distinct possibilities. 
Debiasing through the availability heuristic. One potential response to the risk that optimistically biased individuals believe “it won’t happen to them” is the availability heuristic described in section 1.1.1 above. Recall our earlier example of this heuristic: individuals asked how many words in a 2,000-word section of a novel end in “ing” give much larger estimates than individuals asked how many words have “n” as the second-to-last letter (Tversky and Kahneman 1983:295). Use of the availability heuristic often produces a form of judgment error; as with optimism bias, availability can lead to systematic mistakes in the assessment of probabilities. (Thus “availability bias,” in the form of excessively high estimates, and “unavailability bias,” in the form of excessively low estimates, involve complementary errors stemming from the use of this heuristic.) But because making an occurrence “available” increases individuals’ estimates of the likelihood of the occurrence (Sherman, Cialdini, Schwartzman and Reynolds 2002), availability has been found to be a promising strategy for debiasing of boundedly rational actors suffering from excessive optimism. 
In fact a recent series of studies of smoking behavior finds a phenomenon of this kind. A notable theme of the book-length treatment by Sloan, Taylor and Smith (2003) is that smokers are more likely to believe that smoking will harm their health if they are aware of specific instances of such harm. 
As an example of the basic idea of debiasing through the availability heuristic, consider the finding of Neil Weinstein (1980:810) that many people substantially underestimate their risk of cancer. Imagine that women asked to estimate their risk of breast cancer are told, before giving their estimates, a poignant and detailed story about a woman their age with similar family and other circumstances who was diagnosed with breast cancer. If so, then the empirical results noted above (Sherman, Cialdini, Schwartzman and Reynolds 2002) suggest that their estimated probabilities will typically be higher. (Of course, they may be too much higher or not enough higher – points we discuss at some length in our normative analysis in section 3 below). 
Debiasing through framing. A second possible mechanism for debiasing in response to optimism bias involves framing effects of the sort discussed in section 1.1.2 above. As we noted, the social science evidence shows that many people weigh losses more heavily than gains in evaluating potential outcomes. This evidence suggests that framing the presentation of information to exploit the extra weight attached to losses may counteract bounded rationality in the form of optimism bias. 
Consider one well-known illustration of the effects of framing. In a study involving breast cancer risk and breast self-examination, material that describes the positive effects of self-examination – such as a higher chance of discovering a tumor at an earlier stage – is ineffective. By contrast, significant behavioral changes result from material that stresses the negative consequences of failing to undertake self-examination – such as a decreased chance of discovering a tumor when it remains treatable (Meyerowitz and Chaiken 1987:505). Thus, if women are optimistically biased about the prospects that they will suffer from breast cancer and hence underestimate the value of engaging in recommended self-examinations, then framing the recommendation to self-examine in terms of losses rather than gains should increase the probability they attach to benefiting from a self-examination. 
Debiasing through the availability heuristic. In the consumer safety context, debiasing through the availability heuristic would focus on putting at consumers’ cognitive disposal the prospect of negative outcomes from use, or at least unsafe use, of a particular product. Specifically, the law could impose a set of requirements on the way that information about the product would be presented to consumers. Firms might be required – on pain of administrative penalties or tort liability – to provide a truthful account of consequences that resulted from a particular harm-producing use of the product, rather than simply providing a generalized warning that fails to harness availability. To enhance the efficacy of this proposed strategy, the law could further require that the real-life story of accident or injury be printed in large type and displayed prominently, so that consumers would be likely to see and read it before using the product. Mandatory warnings could conceivably raise first amendment issues, but so long as there is no political or ideological disagreement with the content of the message such warnings are likely to be constitutional.15 
The evidence suggests that the approach of requiring the specific account as opposed to the generalized warning would help to reduce optimism bias (Sherman, Cialdini, Schwartzman and Reynolds 2002). Our point here is similar in spirit to Chris Guthrie’s suggestion that legal policy makers bring “vivid information about plaintiff losses in frivolous litigation” to bear in reducing plaintiffs’ overestimation of the probability of success in 15 Glickman v. Wileman Brothers & Elliott, 512 U.S. 1145 (1997). The Supreme Court will consider a related set of issues this Term in Veneman v. Livestock Marketing Ass’n, cert. granted 124 S.Ct. 2389 (mem.) (No. 031164). such litigation – an illustration of debiasing through procedural rules (Guthrie 2000:210). More generally, the guiding idea is that the way information is provided may be just as important as (or more important than) that information is provided. 
It bears noting that an effort to use availability to counteract optimism bias would improve not only the decision making of consumers suffering from optimism bias but also that of consumers suffering from simple information failures. A conspicuous, prominent account of injury from a product may help to correct the estimated probability of harm attached to the product by an optimistically biased consumer. At the same time, it should improve the behavior of imperfectly informed but not necessarily biased consumers. 
Our earlier mention of the prospects for manufacturers’ influence over how consumers perceive their products (Hanson and Kysar 1999a:1425-26) suggests the importance of legal control over the nature of the accounts manufacturers are required to provide. It is possible – and commentators such as Hanson and Kysar might well fear – that manufacturers, influenced by market pressures, would manage to subvert attempts to achieve debiasing through consumer safety law. Ultimately the question is an empirical one, but in our view the costs that Priest and others have noted of “debiasing law” alternatives suggest the value of investigating the efficacy of alternative strategies involving debiasing through law. 
The effort to achieve debiasing through law in the way described here should be modest along two separate dimensions. First, a successful strategy would need to target a limited number of discrete products for which the problem of consumer optimism bias was most important. Consumers would begin to suffer from “information overload” if every time they went to buy any product – from a lawnmower to a candy bar to a fast food hamburger – they were hit with a real-life story of an individual harmed by use or consumption of the product. Their natural response might be to tune out all of the accounts provided by firms, even assuming these accounts were prominently displayed (Viscusi 1996:665-66).16 16 Elsewhere Professor Viscusi discusses ways of implementing multi-tiered systems, where high-risk products contain warnings on their labels while stores offer binders with risk information for low-risk products. 
Second, the law would need to avoid overreaching in the severity of the featured outcomes. Firms should not be required to provide anecdotes reflecting highly unusual consequences of using their products; only if an outcome occurs with some frequency should the law seek to induce firms to make consumers aware of the prospect. An emphasis on worst-case scenarios might produce excessive responses (Sunstein 2002). If requirements of anecdote-based warnings sweep in extremely unusual or unlikely scenarios, consumers might overreact – or alternatively they might lose faith and fail to attach any weight at all to the accounts. Of course there are line-drawing problems here, but the basic point is straightforward. 
Note in addition that worst-case scenarios are likely to be much more easily avoided with our suggestion of a legal requirement that firms provide truthful anecdotes about genuine harms than with the alternative strategy – frequently used by government – of public information campaigns concerning risky consumer products. Such campaigns have often resulted in the use of extremely vivid and salient images, to the point of seriously risking overreaction or even backlash as a result of citizens’ perceptions of government “manipulation.” In the smoking context, for instance, the European Union has experimented with requirements that a percentage of cigarette packages sold have their fronts covered with vivid pictures of rotting teeth and blackened lungs.17 We think the approach suggested here is sounder because it is more restrained. Similar to the European Union, the Canadian Health Ministry has required not only clear warnings (“Cigarettes cause strokes,” “Tobacco smoke hurts babies,” “Don't poison us,” and “Tobacco can make you impotent”) but also graphic pictures such as bleeding gums and two lungs with cancerous tumors.18 Likewise, in the United States a well-known anti-drug advertisement from the 1980s featured a picture of an egg frying in a pan with the voiceover, “This is your brain on drugs” (Dawan 2004). Again, we think it is often valuable to avoid such extreme messages. 
In sum, our suggestion of requiring, on pain of administrative sanctions or tort liability, truthful narratives of harm is a more modest and measured response to optimism bias than the approaches just described – approaches that harness availability by aggressively exploiting highly salient, 17 See http://lists.essential.org/pipermail/intl-tobacco/2001q1/000426.html (visited 9/3/04). 18 See http://www.abc.net.au/news/science/health/2000/12/ item20001224133940_1.htm (visited 9/3/04). costs on those who are unlikely to err. Colin Camerer, Samuel Issacharoff, George Loewenstein, Ted O’Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin (2003:1212), for instance, have argued on behalf of “asymmetrical paternalism,” that is, a strategy that counteracts forms of bounded rationality that reduce welfare, but that does not significantly affect people who did not previously exhibit boundedly rational behavior. Strategies of this kind are desirable because some people, intuitively or reflectively alert to the risk of such behavior, can be expected to take responsive action on their own (Rachlinski 2003:121119). 
To the extent that debiasing through law has no significant effects on those whose behavior did not initially exhibit bounded rationality, the approach greatly contrasts with the alternative approach of “debiasing law.” Suppose, for instance, that one responds to optimism bias on the part of consumers not by trying to reduce biased judgments but by insulating legal outcomes from the effects of such judgments through a mandatory rule expanding manufacturer liability for consumer products. If so, then one will have altered some legal outcomes that were not in any need of reform at all. The potential contrast with strategies for debiasing through law is clear.30 
In all of our examples of debiasing through law, the government intervention is unlikely to be entirely cost-free for those who did not previously show bounded rationality. But any provision of information by government – often a wholly uncontroversial strategy – will impose costs on those who did not err prior to the intervention simply because of the burden of processing the information. If the intervention produces important benefits for those who are prone to bounded rationality, then the intervention may be desirable even if it imposes modest costs on others. Here, as in other contexts, the only option is to weigh the effects of the different possible strategies. Of course efforts to debias people through law should be undertaken, whenever possible, in ways that do not produce confusion or misperception, as we discuss more fully in the next subsection. 3.4 
Overshooting and Autonomy 30 As Jeffrey Rachlinski (2003:1224) has written (in the course of discussing forms of debiasing different from the approach emphasized in this paper), “[G]overnments can adopt measures that restructure decisions as a less intrusive alternative to paternalistic restrictions on choice.” 
Strategies for debiasing through law that harness other departures from bounded rationality raise two additional concerns that require separate analysis. The first is the risk of overshooting. If truthful narratives are used in the context of consumer safety law, individuals who previously showed optimism bias might be led to exaggerate the risks of consumer products. The effort to debias through law would then be producing biases and errors of its own. 
Experimentation would be required to calibrate the degree to which availability or another form of bounded rationality would need to be brought to bear in engaging in debiasing through law – just as, in a conventional “debiasing law” approach, experimentation is necessary to determine the appropriate level or scope of the legal response. The problem of the scope of a legal corrective is ubiquitous in the law, not specific to strategies for debiasing through law. 
A second and more fundamental concern, however, involves individual autonomy. The point is most obvious with respect to debiasing through law in response to the endowment effect, for any determination that the excess of individuals’ willingness to accept over their willingness to pay is an “error” requiring correction is likely to be controversial to some. Thus, debiasing through law in this setting inevitably raises important issues of autonomy, as people’s preferences are, in a fundamental sense, indeterminate in the presence of the endowment effect. 
But even debiasing through law in response to judgment errors raises important issues of individual autonomy. In some such cases of debiasing through law, government seems to be correcting bounded rationality by exploiting it, in a way that might give rise to fears of manipulation. In the applications discussed in section 2.1, this occurs most obviously with respect to harnessing availability and framing in response to optimism bias. Is this a legitimate form of government action? Under what circumstances? 
If heuristics and biases are pervasive, then an informed government is likely to have little trouble in manipulating people in its preferred directions. The problem here is that government should respect its citizens, as emphasized, for instance, by the publicity condition in John Rawls’s A Theory of Justice (1971). Government should not engage in acts that it could not defend in public to those who are subject to those acts. If a public defense could not be made, the acts are an insult to the autonomy of citizens. In our applications in section 2.1, however, there is no reason to think government would have to conceal or ambiguate its efforts to correct individuals’ judgment errors. 
Indeed, government efforts to correct such mistakes are widespread and largely uncontroversial; the worry about government “manipulation,” if there is a worry, arises even with the widely accepted approach under which the government corrects simple information failures (where people are mistaken because they lack information entirely, rather than because they process information in a biased way) among citizens. As framing effects as well as other departures from unbounded rationality reveal, there is usually no neutral way to present information. Whenever the government is presenting even accurate information, it is making choices about presentation, choices that will affect how citizens perceive the reality around them (Benartzi and Thaler 1999). Thus, it is far too simple, and behaviorally naive, to draw a sharp line between acceptable “provision of information” and unacceptable “mind control.” Unless the concern with government manipulation is strong enough to suggest that the government should never provide information to its citizens (an implausible suggestion), there must be some willingness to tolerate the prospect of government influence over citizens’ perceptions of reality and the attendant risk of government manipulation. 
Thus, for instance, if smokers were determined to discount the risks that accompany smoking, in part because of optimism bias, it is not obvious that government would violate their autonomy by giving a more accurate sense of those risks, even if the best way of giving that accurate sense were through concrete accounts of suffering. And it is far from clear in such a case that the government could not publicly defend its strategy to citizens as required by the publicity condition; recall in this connection the American Legacy Foundation letters campaign described in section 2.1.1 above. 
This is not to say, of course, that no form of debiasing through law in response to judgment errors of the sort discussed in section 2.1 could be objectionable on autonomy grounds. Some forms might resemble systems of propaganda in clear violation of the publicity condition. If so, there is a real risk that the one-sidedness and aggressiveness of the government’s effort will be exposed. If this happens, public trust will unquestionably be reduced. And if trust is reduced, government strategies are much less likely to succeed. These instrumental concerns are aggravated by strong moral ones: At least when minors are not involved, the law should treat citizens with respect, and extreme marketing strategies (going well beyond what we have suggested in discussing strategies for debiasing through law in response to judgment errors) violate that principle. 
With respect to autonomy, no general conclusion is likely to make sense; the nature and force of the objections discussed above will generally depend on the setting. However, these objections seem weakest when government is responding to a form of bounded rationality that unquestionably qualifies as an “error” and is using methods that do not distort the facts. “Behavioral Bureaucrats” 
Nothing said thus far denies the important fact that legal policymakers and administrators, including those who seek to engage in debiasing through law, will often suffer from both inadequate information and bounded rationality themselves. No less than ordinary people, bureaucrats use heuristics and are subject to predictable biases31; they are also susceptible to the influence of powerful private groups with stakes in the outcome. The combination of informational failures, cognitive biases, and interest-group power can lead government in extremely unfortunate directions (Noll and Krier 1990; Kuran and Sunstein 1999). In this light we do not make the naive and implausible suggestion that in the real world, strategies for debiasing through law will always be well-motivated and well-designed. (Nor will their “debiasing law” counterpart strategies.) Our claim is only that if people exhibit bounded rationality, debiasing through law may often be a promising response – one that it would be foolish to eliminate from the government’s repertoire. 
Conclusion 
The central goal of this paper has been to draw attention to the broad importance of debiasing through law. The social science literature has devoted a great deal of effort to the study of debiasing of boundedly rational actors, but with little effort to see how law and legal institutions might accomplish it. Those interested in bounded rationality and law have argued mostly that legal institutions should be insulated from the effects of 31 For a general discussion of “behavioral bureaucrats,” see Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998:1543-44). boundedly rational behavior, and in some cases that debiasing of boundedly rational actors should be pursued through changes in procedural rules governing the adjudicative process. In our view, debiasing through law – especially debiasing through substantive law – is a distinctive and sometimes far preferable alternative to the strategy of insulating legal outcomes from the effects of bounded rationality. Such debiasing – distinct from the more familiar approach of attempting to control behavior through incentives – often promises to be both more successful and less invasive than the more standard alternatives. 
From the normative point of view, we have emphasized that many forms of debiasing through law may be seen as a distinctive kind of informational regulation. In many cases, the major questions are standard: whether such efforts are effective and whether their benefits justify their costs. 
Nothing in our analysis is inconsistent with the claim that in some contexts unfettered markets are the best response to bounded rationality. Such markets might reduce the effects of bounded rationality by raising the stakes, as noted above32; it is also possible that the costs of boundedly rational behavior are, in some contexts, lower than the costs of any effort to counteract it. We also do not disagree with the now-familiar suggestion that in the face of bounded rationality, aggressive regulation – some form of “debiasing law” – might sometimes be justified.33 Instead our aim in this paper has been to chart the possibility of a middle course, one that asks legal institutions not to ignore people, but instead to reduce their bounded rationality. In some contexts, debiasing through law is likely to be effective, cost-justified, and minimally intrusive. We believe that some areas of the law reveal an appreciation of these points and hence an implicit behavioral rationality, using legal strategies as a mechanism for debiasing of boundedly rational actors. Our principal goal has been to understand those strategies in these terms and to explore the possibility of building on them to do more. 32 But for an entertaining demonstration of the persistence of bounded rationality amidst high stakes, see Lewis (2003). 33 Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998) provide various examples. Arlen, Jennifer, Matthew Spitzer and Eric Talley. 2002. Endowment Effects Within Corporate Agency Relationships, Journal of Legal Studies 31:1-37. Armour, David and Shelley E. Taylor. 2002. When Predictions Fail: The Dilemma of Unrealistic Optimism. In Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Asch, Solomon. 1955. Opinions and Social Pressure. Scientific American 193(5):31-40. 
Ayres, Ian. 1998. Protecting Property with Puts. Valparaiso University Law Review 32:793-831. 
Babcock, Linda, George Loewenstein, Samuel Issacharoff and Colin Camerer. 1995. Biased Judgments of Fairness in Bargaining. American Economic Review 85:1337-43. _____, George Loewenstein and Samuel Issacharoff. 1997. Creating Convergence: Debiasing Biased Litigants. Law and Social Inquiry 22:913925. 
Baron, Robert. 1996. The Forgotten Variable in Conformity Research: Impact of Task Importance on Social Influence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 71:915-927. 
Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler. 1999. Risk Aversion or Myopia? Choices in Repeated Gambles and Retirement Investments. Management Science 45:364-381. 
Besharov, Gregory. 2004. Second-Best Considerations in Connecting Cognitive Biases (mimeo). 
Calabresi, Guido and A. Douglas Melamed. 1972. Property Rules, Liability Rules, and Inalienability: One View of the Cathedral. Harvard Law Review 85:1089-1128. 
Camerer, Colin and Robin Hogarth. 1999. The Effects of Financial Incentives in Experiments: A Review and Capital-Labor-Production Framework. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 19:7-42. _____, Samuel Issacharoff, George Loewenstein, Ted O’Donoghue and Matthew Rabin. 2003. Regulation for Conservatives: Behavioral Economics and the Case for “Asymmetric Paternalism.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 151:1211-44. 
Dawan, Shaila K. The New Public Service Ad: Just Say “Deal with It,” N.Y. Times, Jan. 11, 2004, §3, at 5. Easterbrook, Frank H. and Daniel R. Fischel. 1982. Corporate Control Transactions. Yale Law Journal 91:698-737. 
Farnsworth, Ward. 2003. The Legal Regulation of Self-Serving Bias. University of California Davis Law Review 37:567-603. 
Fischhoff, Baruch. 1982. Debiasing. In Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, edited by Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky. New York: Cambridge University Press. _____. 2002. Heuristics and Biases in Application. In Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. New York: Cambridge University Press. Gigerenzer, Gerd. 2000. Adaptive Thinking. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Gilson, Ronald J. and Reinier Kraakman. 1991. Reinventing the Outside Director: An Agenda For Institutional Investors. Stanford Law Review 43:863-906. 
Guthrie, Chris. 2000. Framing Frivolous Litigation: A Psychological Theory. University of Chicago Law Review 67:163-216. 
Hanson, Jon D. and Douglas A. Kysar. 1999a. Taking Behavioralism Seriously: Some Evidence of Market Manipulation. Harvard Law Review 112:1420-1572. _____ and Douglas A. Kysar. 1999b. Taking Behavioralism Seriously: The Problem of Market Manipulation. New York University Law Review 74:630749. 
Hastie, Reid and W. Kip Viscusi. 1998. What Juries Can’t Do Well: The Jury’s Performance as a Risk Manager. Arizona Law Review 40:901-921. Jolls, Christine, Cass R. Sunstein and Richard Thaler. 1998. A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics. Stanford Law Review 50:1471-1550. _____, Cass R. Sunstein and Richard Thaler. 1998. Theories and Tropes: A Reply to Posner and Kelman, Stanford Law Review 50:1593-1608. _____. 1998. Behavioral Economic Analysis of Redistributive Legal Rules. In Symposium: The Legal Implications of Psychology: Human Behavior, Behavioral Economics, and the Law. Vanderbilt Law Review. 51:1653-1677. Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch and Richard Thaler. 1990. Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem. Journal of Political Economy 98:1325-1348. _____ and Amos Tversky. 1979. Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk. Econometrica 47:263-292. 
Kamin, Kim A. and Jeffrey J. Rachlinski. 1995. Ex Post ≠ Ex Ante: Determining Liability in Hindsight. Law and Human Behavior 19:89-104. Kaplow, Louis and Steven Shavell. 1996. Property Rules Versus Liability Rules: An Economic Analysis. Harvard Law Review 109:713-790 . Karkkainen, Bradley. 2001. Information As Environmental Regulation. Georgetown Law Journal 89:257-370. 
Korobkin, Russell. 2003. The Endowment Effect and Legal Analysis. In Symposium: Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment of Law and Human Behavior. Northwestern University Law Review 97:12271293. _____ and Thomas Ulen. 2000. Law and Behavioral Science: Removing the Rationality Assumption from Law and Economics. California Law Review 88:1051-1144. 
Kunreuther, Howard. 1976. Limited Knowledge and Insurance Protection. Public Policy 24:283-294. 
Kuran, Timur and Cass R. Sunstein. 1999. Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation. Stanford Law Review 51:683-768. 
Kysar, Douglas A. 2003. The Expectations of Consumers. Columbia Law Review 103:1700-1790. 
Langevoort, Donald C. 2001. The Human Nature of Corporate Boards: Law, Norms, and the Unintended Consequences of Independence and Accountability. Georgetown Law Journal 89:797-832. _____. 1997. Organized Illusions: A Behavioral Theory of Why Corporations Mislead Stock Market Investors (And Cause Other Social Harms). University of Pennsylvania Law Review 146:101-172. 
LeDoux, Joseph. 1996. The Emotional Brain. New York: Simon & Schuster. Lewinsohn-Zamir, Daphna. 2001. The Choice Between Property Rules and Liability Rules Revisited: Critical Observations from Behavioral Studies. Texas Law Review 80:219-260. 
Lewis, Michael. 2003. Moneyball. New York: W.W. Norton. 
Mellers, Barbara A. 2004. Pleasure, Utility, and Choice. In Feelings and Emotions: The Amsterdam Symposium, edited by Antony S.R. Manstead, Nico Frijda, and Agneta Fischer. New York: Cambridge University Press. Meyerowitz, Beth E. and Shelly Chaiken. 1987. The Effect of Message Framing on Breast Self-Examination: Attitudes, Intentions, and Behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 52:500-510. 
Mitchell, Gregory. 2002. Why Law and Economics’ Perfect Rationality Should Not Be Traded for Behavioral Law and Economics’ Equal Incompetence. Georgetown Law Journal 91:67-167. 
Noll, Roger G. and James E. Krier. 1990. Some Implications of Cognitive Psychology for Risk Regulation. Journal of Legal Studies 19:747-779. Parisi, Francesco and Vernon Smith eds. 2004. The Law and Economics of Irrational Behavior. Stanford University Press. 
Peters, Philip G., Jr. 1999. Hindsight Bias and Tort Liability: Avoiding Premature Conclusions, Arizona State Law Journal 31:1277-1314. Petersen, Melody. Breastfeeding Ads Delayed By a Dispute Over Content, N.Y. Times, Dec. 4, 2003, at C1. 
Priest, George L. 1987. The Current Insurance Crisis and Modern Tort Law. Yale Law Journal 96:1521-1590. 
Pozen, Robert C. 1994. Institutional Investors: The Reluctant Activists. Harvard Business Review, Jan.-Feb. 72(1):140-149. 
Rachlinski, Jeffrey. 2003. The Uncertain Psychological Case for Paternalism. In Symposium: Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment of Law and Human Behavior. Northwestern University Law Review 97:1165-1225. _____. 1999. Regulating in Foresight Versus Judging Liability in Hindsight: The Case of Tobacco. Georgia Law Review 33:813-845. _____. 1998. A Positive Psychological Theory of Judging in Hindsight. University of Chicago Law Review 65:571-625. _____ and Forest Jourden. 1998. Remedies and the Psychology of Ownership. In Symposium: The Legal Implications of Psychology: Human Behavior, Behavioral Economics, and the Law. Vanderbilt Law Review 51:1541-1582. 
John Rawls. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 
Sale, Hillary. 2004. Delaware’s Good Faith. In Symposium: Enron and the Future of U.S. Corporate Law. Cornell Law Review 89:456-495. Sanna, Lawrence, Norbert Schwarz and Shavaun L. Stocker. 2002. When Debiasing Backfires: Accessible Content and Accessibility Experiences in Debiasing Hindsight. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition 28:497-502. 
Schwartz, Alan and Louis L. Wilde. 1983. Imperfect Information in Markets for Contract Terms: The Examples of Warranties and Security Interests. Virginia Law Review 69:1387-1485. 
Sherman, Steven J., Robert B. Cialdini, Donna F. Schwartzman and Kim D. Reynolds. 2002. Imagining Can Heighten or Lower the Perceived Likelihood of Contracting a Disease: The Mediating Effect of Ease of Imagery in Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Sloan, Frank A., Donald H. Taylor and V. Kerry Smith. 2003. The Smoking Puzzle: Information, Risk Perception, and Choice. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. 
Stallard, Merrie Jo and Debra L. Worthington. 1998. Reducing the Hindsight Bias Utilizing Attorney Closing Arguments. Law and Human Behavior 22:671-683. 
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1986. Economics of the Public Sector. New York: W.W. Norton. 
Sunstein, Cass R. 2003. Why Societies Need Dissent. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. _____. 2002. Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law. Yale Law Journal 112:61-107. _____. 2000. Behavioral Law and Economics. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Symposium, Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment of Law and Human Behavior. 2003. Northwestern University Law Review 97:1075-1392. 
Symposium, The Legal Implications of Psychology: Human Behavior, Behavioral Economics, and the Law. 1998. Vanderbilt Law Review 51:14971795. 
Tor, Avishalom. 2002. The Fable of Entry: Bounded Rationality, Market Discipline and Legal Policy. Michigan Law Review 101:482-568. Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. 1983. Extensional Versus Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunction Fallacy in Probability Judgment. Psychological Review 90:293-315. _____ and Daniel Kahneman. 1982. Judgments of and by Representativeness. In Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, edited by Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Viscusi, W. Kip. 2002. Smoke-Filled Rooms. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. _____. 1996. Individual Rationality, Hazard Warnings, and the Foundations of Tort Law. Rutgers Law Review 48:625-671. _____. 1988. Predicting the Effects of Food Cancer Risk Warnings on Consumers, Food Drug Cosmetic Law Journal 43:283-314. _____ and Wesley A. Magat. 1987. Learning About Risk: Consumer and Worker Response to Hazard Information. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Weinstein, Neil D. and William M. Klein. 2002. Resistance of Personal Risk Perceptions to Debiasing Interventions. In Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. New York: Cambridge University Press. _____. 1980. Unrealistic Optimism About Future Life Events. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39:806-820. Appendix: Debiasing of Boundedly Rational Actors Through 
Procedural Rules and Substantive Law 
This appendix briefly summarizes some leading empirical research on debiasing of boundedly rational actors and its implications for debiasing through law. 
debiasing debiasing through through procedural substantive rules? law? 
ERRORS bias bias bias Almost all approaches Source: Fischhoff (1982). 
Alerting people to existence of the bias Source: Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff (1997). 
Almost all approaches that directly target optimism bias. Source: Weinstein and Klein (2002). Telling people not to be “Monday morning quarterbacks.” Source: Stallard and Worthington (1998). 
Asking people to make other side’s argument. 
Source: Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff (1997). 
Giving people a vivid sense of the relevant harms Source: Sloan, Taylor and Smith (2003). 
THEORY 
Endowment effect Almost all approaches. 
Source: Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler (1990). Protecting entitlements by liability rule rather than property rule; having agents make decisions. 
Sources: Rachlinski and Jourden (1998); Arlen, Spitzer and Talley (2002). 
University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 csunstei@uchicago.edu Property law governing remedies (section 2.2.1); agency law (section 2.2.2). 2.  William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished  Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991)  Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom  in the Law of Tort (August 1991)  Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991)  Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992)  Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February  1992)  Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992)  Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992)  William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July  1992)  William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A  Quantitative Study (August 1992)  Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey  With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992)  Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992)  Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993)  J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning  Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993)  Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993)  Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing  Everyone Else Does) (April 1993)  Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial  Entrenchment, and Firm‐Specific Human Capital (August 1993)  J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the  Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993)  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory  Adjudication (September 1993)  Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993)  Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993)  Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994)  Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994)  William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994)  J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan  (August 1994)  Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994)  Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property  Protection of Software (August 1994)  Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994)  David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December  1994)  29.  160.  161  
William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories:  What Was the Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in  Preterm Labor between 1985 and 2000? (September 2003)  Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality,  and Marriage (September 2003)  Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content  (September 2003)  Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on  Federal Courts of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003)   Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with  Variable Leisure Time (October 2003)  Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003)  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003)  David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004)  David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004)  Richard A. Epstein, Liberty versus Property? Cracks in the Foundations of Copyright  Law (April 2004)  Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004)  Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February  2004)  Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the  Value of Statistical Lives (February 2004)  Richard A. Epstein, Disparities and Discrimination in Health Care Coverage; A  Critique of the Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004)  Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for  Pharmaceutical Patents: Steady the Course on Hatch‐Waxman (March 2004)  Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Complexity of Legal Rules (April 2004)  Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus Ad Bellum (April 2004)  Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute  (May 2004)  Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The  Division of Labor within and between Law Firms (April 2004)  Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Hierarchies, Specialization, and the  Utilization of Knowledge: Theory and Evidence from the Legal Services Industry  (April 2004)  James C. Spindler, Conflict or Credibility: Analyst Conflicts of Interest and the  Market for Underwriting Business (July 2004)  Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of Public International Law (July 2004)  Douglas Lichtman and Eric Posner, Holding Internet Service Providers Accountable  (July 2004)  Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein,  Company Stock, Market Rationality, and Legal Reform (July 2004)  Cass R. Sunstein, Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information  Markets (August 2004)  Cass R. Sunstein, Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross‐ Cultural Risk Perceptions (August 2004)  
Dollars and Death Eric A. Posner and Cass R. Sunstein 
September 2004 September 5, 2004 Preliminary draft 
All rights reserved Abstract. Administrative regulations and tort law both impose controls on activities that cause mortality risks, but they do so in puzzlingly different ways. Under a relatively new and still-controversial procedure, administrative regulations rely on a fixed value of a statistical life representing the hedonic loss from death. Under much older law, tort law in most states excludes hedonic loss from the calculation of damages, and instead focuses on loss of income, which regulatory policy ignores. Regulatory policy also disregards losses to dependents; tort law usually allows dependents to recover for loss of support. Regulatory policy generally treats the loss of the life of a child as equivalent to the loss of the life of an adult; tort law usually treats the loss of the life of a child as less valuable. Regulatory policy implicitly values foreigners as equal to Americans; tort law does not. We argue that both areas of law make serious mistakes in valuing life and that each should learn from the other. Regulatory policy properly focuses on hedonic loss from death, and tort law should adopt this approach. But regulatory policy should imitate tort law’s individualized approach to valuing the loss from death, including its inclusion of losses to dependents. If these changes were made, tort awards would be more uniform and predictable, and regulations would be less uniform and more stringent. In addition, average tort damages for wrongful death would be at least twice as high as they are today. With respect to dollar judgments for mortality risks, a pervasive issue is how to combine accuracy with administrability and predictability; both bodies of law could do far better on this score. 
How should the legal system assign dollar values to human lives? Consider a highly publicized example. 
On September 22, 2001, Congress enacted legislation to compensate the survivors of the attacks of eleven days earlier.1 Under the final regulations,2 survivors were permitted to claim amounts for both economic and non-economic losses. The economic losses were to be measured by calculating each victim’s expected lost wages from * Kirkland and Ellis Professor of Law, University of Chicago Law School. ** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. Thanks to Matthew Adler, Ward Farnsworth, Robert Hahn, Saul Levmore, Richard Posner, Adrian Vermeule, and W. Kip Viscusi for comments, and to Nikkie Eitmann, Josh Kluewer, Wayne Hsiung, Gavin Martinson, and Andres Sawicki for research assistance. Posner thanks the Russell Baker Scholars Fund for financial support. 1 Air Transportation Safety and System Stabilization Act, § 405(c)1-2, 49 U.S.C § 40401 (2001). 2 See http://www.usdoj.gov/victimcompensation/. For discussion, see Symposium, 53 DePaul L Rev 205 (2003). 
September 11, 2001 through the anticipated date of retirement, subject to several adjustments, including a reduction by an estimate of household consumption or expenditure by the victim. Noneconomic losses were set at $250,000 per victim plus $100,000 per surviving spouse and for each surviving child.3 
In all, 2,878 families, about 97 percent of those eligible, received compensation from the fund, with amounts ranging from a low of $250,000 to a high of $7.1 million; the average award totaled about $2.1 million per family.4 Hence there was significant variability among awards. But the variability came amidst a serious effort to produce presumptive floors and caps, with a “baseline” for single decedents of $300,0005 and a commitment to allow awards exceeding $3,000,000 only in unusual circumstances. These awards have been attacked on multiple grounds, including excessive and insufficient variability.6 
The September 11 awards reflect a strong influence from tort law, which they simultaneously modify. But in American law, tort doctrines provide only one of two sets of rules for monetizing death. The other comes from administrative regulations, and there are striking contrasts between the two bodies of law. One of our main goals here is to bring the two in contact with one another. 
Countless regulations now attempt to reduce statistical risks. Cost-benefit analysis must generally accompany these regulations, at least if their costs are high,7 and to undertake that analysis, agencies must turn human lives into monetary equivalents.8 For example, the Environmental Protection Agency values each life at a uniform number, most recently $6 million.9 Through tort law, courts provide a set of fact-specific awards 3 28 C.F.R. § 104.44 (2004). 4 See David W. Chen, After Weighing Value of Lives, 9/11 Fund Completes Its Task, The New York Times, June 16, 2004, at A1. 5 66 Fed Reg 66,274-75. 6 See Alina Tugend, Lives in the Balance, The National Journal Government Executive, September 2003, at 50; David W. Chen, Man Behind Sept. 11 Fund Describes Effort as a Success, With Reservations, The New York Times, January 1, 2004, at B3. 7 See Stephen Breyer et al., Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 120-35 (5th ed. 2002). 8 A general overview can be found in Office of Management and Budget, Regulatory Analysis, Circular A4 (September 17, 2003), available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/regpol.html#rr 9 See 66 Fed. Reg. at 7012. In its July 2003 regulation governing food labeling of trans fatty acids, the Food and Drug Administration used a VSL of $6.5 million, see 68 Fed. Reg. 41434, 41488 (July 11, 2003); in its March 13, 2003 proposed rule on dietary ingredients and dietary supplements, the same agency suggested a VSL of $5 million, see 68 Fed. Reg. 12158, 12229 (using this value to calculate the “value of a statistical life day”). that attempt to compensate for and to deter wrongful death. The resulting awards are highly variable. For example, courts have recently given successful plaintiffs as little as a few thousand dollars and as much as tens of millions of dollars.10 
Notwithstanding their overlapping goals, administrative regulations and tort law diverge from one another in dramatic and puzzling ways. The most obvious difference is that tort law generally disregards the welfare loss to the person who has died; regulatory policy treats that loss as its central and indeed exclusive focus. Consider a few other differences: 
Tort law focuses directly on the loss to dependents;11 regulatory policy pays no attention to that loss.12 disregards lost income. 
Some individuation has been suggested by the interest in statistical life-years, a measure that naturally produces a higher degree of particularity. Office of Management & Budget, Circular A-4, Regulatory Analysis, at 30 (Sept. 17, 2003), available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a004/a4.pdf. More specifically, the guidelines say: 
Another way that has been used to express reductions in fatality risks is to use the life expectancy method, the "value of statistical life-years (VSLY) extended." If a regulation protects individuals whose average remaining life expectancy is 40 years, a risk reduction of one fatality is expressed as "40 life-years extended." Those who favor this alternative approach emphasize that the value of a statistical life is not a single number relevant for all situations. In particular, when there are significant differences between the effect on life expectancy for the population affected by a particular health risk and the populations studied in the labor market studies, they prefer to adopt a VSLY approach to reflect those differences. You should consider providing estimates of both VSL and VSLY, while recognizing the developing state of knowledge in this area. 
Longevity may be only one of a number of relevant considerations pertaining to the rule. You should keep in mind that regulations with greater numbers of life-years extended are not necessarily better than regulations with fewer numbers of life-years extended. In any event, when you present estimates based on the VSLY method, you should adopt a larger VSLY estimate for senior citizens because senior citizens face larger overall health risks from all causes and they may have accumulated savings to spend on their health and safety. 
The valuation of fatality risk reduction is an evolving area in both results and methodology. Hence, you should utilize valuation methods that you consider appropriate for the regulatory circumstances. Since the literature-based VSL estimates may not be entirely appropriate for the risk being evaluated (e.g., the use of occupational risk premia to value reductions in risks from environmental hazards), you should explain your selection of estimates and any adjustments of the estimates to reflect the nature of the risk being evaluated. You should present estimates based on alternative approaches, and if you monetize mortality risk reduction, you should do so on a consistent basis to the extent feasible. Id. 10 See below. 11 For this and other statements about tort law, see notes below. 12 See, e.g., Regulatory Analysis, supra note, and 66 FR 6976-01 (2001) (arsenic regulation), in support of all of the statements in this section on regulatory policy. Tort law uses a case-specific number to assess damages, making individual differences crucial; regulatory policy embodies a uniform number per life saved, one that fails to pay attention to individual differences. 
Tort law focuses directly on the suffering and distress felt by the decreased; regulatory policy does not attend to that issue. 
Tort law generally treats children as worth less than adults, because survivors lose less, in economic terms, when children die; regulatory policy generally treats children as equivalent to adults.13 Tort law treats foreign victims of torts differently from American victims, implicitly valuing them less, because of deference to local law, unless they are killed in the United States, in which case American values are used. Insofar as regulations affect people outside of the country, regulatory policy generally ignores foreigners altogether, implicitly treating their lives as valueless. 
What accounts for these differences? It is tempting to say that the answer lies in the conflicting goals of the two sets of controls. While tort law seeks to ensure compensation, especially for family members, regulatory policy is designed to produce optimal levels of risk. This point contains some truth. Tort law has long focused on the compensation of those still living—a focus that naturally leads to disregard of the deceased, an emphasis on what the plaintiffs have lost, and an interest in a set of highly individuated awards. By contrast, regulatory policy, which has assigned monetary values to statistical lives for little more than two decades, is concerned above all with producing the right deterrent signal, a concern that might seem to explain the use of a single, uniform number for the valuation of what most matters: the loss of life. But as a full account of the differences, this explanation is much too simple.14 Tort law does and should provide deterrence as well as compensation, and if wrongful death actions produce significant underdeterrence, something is seriously amiss. In any case the catalogue of differences raises many questions about regulatory policy even if it is focused on deterrence. If the goal of administrative regulation is optimal risk levels, 13 The recent interest in “statistical life-years” would value children more than adults; see below. 14 We return to this question in Part V. should regulators really use a uniform value per life saved? Should they disregard the suffering felt by dependents—and by those who die?15 
For both bodies of law, a pervasive question is how to combine accuracy with administrability. A simple and uniform number, accompanied by blanket exclusions of values that are hard to calculate, might well be simplest to administer—and regulatory policy generally takes this approach.16 In addition, an effort at greater accuracy might invite interest-group maneuvering; a uniform number provides a degree of insulation against special pleading. But if full compensation and optimal deterrence are the goals, then a high degree of individuation should be expected, tailoring dollar amounts to the precise circumstances of mortality risks. Suppose, for example, that both regulators and courts possessed “hedometers,”17 costlessly able to calculate the anticipated or actual loss, to all, from every human death. If hedometers were available, courts could ensure perfectly accurate compensation, and both courts and regulators would bring about optimal deterrence, attuned to individual circumstances. If administrative costs were zero, different agencies should offer a wide range of diverse values for statistical lives, subject 15 It would be possible to argue that both of these are picked up by figures for VSL: we explore that question below. 16 The most explicit discussions of varying VSL have come from the EPA. In its 2003 discussion of hazardous air pollutants, see 68 Fed. Reg. 1660, 1693 (Jan. 13, 2003), the EPA noted that there “is general agreement that the value to an individual of a reduction is mortality risk can vary based on several factors, including the age of the individual, the type of risk, the level of control the individual has over the risk, the individual’s attitude toward risk, and the health status of the individual.” Nonetheless, the agency announced, without offering reasons, that it “prefers not to draw distinctions in the monetary value assigned to the lives saved even if they differ in age, health status, socioeconomic status, gender or other characteristic of the adult population.” Id. 
An extended discussion of related issues can be found in the EPA’s arsenic proposal, see 65 Fed. Reg. 38888, 38945 (June 22, 2000). There the EPA noted that the “factors which may influence the estimate of economic benefits associated with avoided cancer fatalities include (1) a possible ‘cancer premium’ (i.e., the additional value or sum that people may be willing to pay to avoid the experiences of dread, pain and suffering, and diminished quality of life associated with cancer-related illness and ultimate fatality); (2) the willingness of people to pay more over time to avoid mortality risk as their income rises; (3) a possible premium for accepting involuntary risks as opposed to voluntary [sic] assumed risks; (4) the greater risk aversion of the general population as opposed to workers in the wage-risk valuation studies; (5) ‘altruism’ or the willingness of people to pay more to reduce risk in other sectors of the populationl and (6) a consideration of health status and life years remaining at the time of premature mortality.” The EPA acknowledged that these factors “may significantly increase the present value estimate,” but said that “there is currently neither a clear consensus among economists about how to simultaneously analyze each of these adjustments nor is there adequate empirical data to support quantitative estimates for all potentially significant adjustment factors.” Id. Hence the EPA solicited comments on these issues and said that it would ask its Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) to conduct a review. Id. 17 For those who are skeptical of utilitarian approaches, substitute the term “eudaimeters,” based on the Greek notion of eudaimonia, establishing a more complex notion of well-being. See Martha Nussbaum, The Fragility of Goodness (1986). to the limitation that regulatory programs often apply to many people at once; and courts, focusing on individual cases, would offer an even wider range of dollar awards in the event of wrongful death. 
Because administrative costs are high (and also because of political constraints on inequality18), more uniformity is inevitable; but how much? One of the most noteworthy features of the comparative exercise is that agencies opt for uniformity, whereas courts call for a high degree of individuation. Undoubtedly this difference is partly a function of the ex post focus of wrongful death actions and the ex ante focus of regulation. But it would be most surprising if the radical difference, on this count, could be justified by that difference in perspective. 
We believe that both bodies of law can learn a great deal from the other.19 In particular, we suggest five large-scale reforms. First, agencies should move in the direction of the more individuated approach of tort law. They should not use a uniform number per life saved. In addition, they should consider pain and suffering, dread,20 and loss to dependents. These changes would make a dramatic difference for administrative practice, replacing the crude current effort to use a single value for statistical lives. Second, courts should move in the direction of administrative regulation by taking account of the welfare loss to the decedent. This change would significantly alter wrongful death cases, by producing far higher recoveries in many cases. Third, agencies should move in the direction of courts by including the emotional distress and other welfare losses incurred by dependents; courts should not ignore losses of support for dependents (as agencies do), but they should offer more accurate and fine-grained understandings of that figure. These changes would increase the stringency of administrative regulations and promote less arbitrary figures from courts. Fourth, both courts and agencies should change their valuation of the deaths of children by taking the child’s welfare loss seriously while also accounting for the possibility of offsetting 18 See below. 19 There is a third body of relevant law: criminal prohibitions. These prohibitions overlap, to some extent, with both tort law and administrative regulation, carving out a subset of conduct for special sanctions. By attending to enforcement levels and sanctions, it might even be possible to deduce an implicit value of life, or of statistical risks, from criminal law. Ideally, of course, legislators would ensure that all three bodies of law worked well together, producing the right deterrent signal. For present purposes, however, we put criminal law to one side. 20On some of the complexities here, see Matthew Adler, Fear Assessment (unpublished manuscript 2004)). behavior by parents. Fifth, agencies and courts should evaluate mortality risks that are imposed on foreigners—both resident aliens and nonresident aliens whose mortality is affected by domestic activities—in a manner that is consistent with the diplomatic objectives of the political branches. 
This Article is organized as follows. Part I provides the background from both tort law and regulatory policy. Part II discusses the theoretical basis for valuing human lives. Part III investigates a range of methodological difficulties and implications. Part IV proposes reforms to tort law and regulatory policy. Part V explores the question why tort law and regulatory policy currently take such different approaches to valuing loss of life. I. Background 
A. How Tort Law Values Loss of Life 
At common law, victims (that is, their estates) and dependents could not recover damages for wrongful death. As a result, courts did not face the problem of calculating damages for loss of life. In the nineteenth century, however, many states enacted statutes that provided for recoveries. Wrongful death statutes provided that dependents, including spouses and children, may recover damages for lost support. Survival statutes provided that the victim’s estate may recover damages for certain losses that the victim incurred as a result of the tort, such as medical expenses and earnings lost between injury and death.21 Today, most states have one or both types of statutes, or statutes that combine elements of each type. In addition, there has been much judge-created common law that can be traced to these statutes. As a general proposition, one can say that courts now award damages on account of death caused by a tort, but the rules vary widely by jurisdiction. 22 
Despite the variations, there are common themes. Most courts award “noneconomic” damages, that is, damages for pain and suffering incurred by the victim as a result of the tort prior to death, and also for the distress and loss of companionship 21 2 Dan B. Dobbs, Law of Remedies 423 (2d ed. 1993). 22 Id., at 421-445. suffered by dependents or heirs.23 All states award “economic” damages. In states that use the “loss to dependents” measure, these damages are supposed to make dependents whole; roughly, they provide the support that dependents would have received if the victim had lived. This may be measured as lost contributions from victims to dependents (housing, food, and so forth), or, more crudely, future income minus victim’s expenses. In states that use the “loss to estate” measure, damages are supposed to approximate the victim’s estate if she had lived a natural life—total future income minus expenses.24 
Notice that the non-economic and economic measures do not provide an award for the loss of life per se—that is, the victim’s “loss of life’s pleasure,” also known as hedonic damages. Plaintiffs suing on behalf of a victim who has no future income, no dependents, and no spouse, and who dies without feeling pain, should ordinarily receive zero damages or damages sufficient only to cover funeral expenses.25 This large category of people includes elderly people who are living off savings and unemployed or homeless people. It also includes homemakers, unless an implicit value is assigned to household services. And it includes children—at least in “loss to dependent” states, because children do not have dependents who lose support as a result of their death.26 
Of course, this is a matter of formal law; in practice, damages are often awarded on account of the deaths of people who have no income, and often damages are in excess of lost income. This is partly because non-economic damages will be available in most cases, partly because juries are given a great deal of discretion to award damages in wrongful death cases and are provided little guidance by courts, and partly because courts use fictions in order to ensure a “reasonable” recovery.27 But if all this is true, then 23 Id. There is every reason to believe that the resulting awards have a high degree of arbitrariness. See David W. Leebron, Final Moments: Damages for Pain and Suffering Prior To Death, 64 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 256 (1989). 24 Id., at 430-38. 25 E.g., McGowan v. Wright, 524 So.2d 308 (Miss. 1988). 26 In “loss to estate” states, the child’s future income will be calculated, and awarded to parents or heirs. See Dobbs, supra, at 436. 27 For example, the household services of the child – which in most households, and certainly modern middle class households, are trivial – may be given a high value. See Dobbs, supra, at 440. damages for wrongful death are highly arbitrary,28 and indeed this is the conventional wisdom,29 supported by our own evidence as discussed below.30 
Only five states permit damages for hedonic loss: Arkansas,31 Connecticut,32 Hawaii,33 New Hampshire,34 and New Mexico.35 As a matter of theory, plaintiffs in these states can recover damages on account of the wrongful death of people who have no income and otherwise would not be entitled to non-economic damages. However, the statutes and judicial opinions in these states do not explain the methodology, and judges usually leave the calculation to the jury, with lax oversight.36 In some cases, courts appear to misunderstand the nature of hedonic loss—for example, confusing it with lost income.37 
The upshot is that it is exceptionally hard to predict, as a matter of formal law, what damages for wrongful death will be in any particular case. However, verdict and settlement data can be used to paint a rough picture. We examined data from two data sets: (1) an unscientific Jury Verdict and Settlement data set that provides a wealth of information about the characteristics of the cases (“JVS”)38; and (2) a more scientific 28 Even aside from the legal confusion, jurors do not do a good job of monetizing losses when provided with no clear guidance to discipline their judgments. David Schkade et al., Deliberating About Dollars: The Severity Shift, 100 Colum. L. Rev. 1139 (2000). 29 See, e.g., David Baldus, John C. MacQueen, and George Woodworth, Improving Judicial Oversight of Jury Damages Assessments: A Proposal for the Comparative Additur/Remittitur Review of Awards for Nonpecuniary Harms and Punitive Damages, 80 Iowa L. Rev. 1109 (1995). 30 See TAN infra. 31 See Durham v. Marberry, 2004 Ark. LEXIS 179 (interpreting ambiguous 2001 amendment to Arkansas survival statute (Ark. Code Ann. § 16-62-101(b)) as permitting recovery for hedonic loss). 32 See Katsetos v. Nolan, 368 A.2d 172 (Conn.1976); Chase v. Fitzgerald, 45 A.2d 789 (Conn.1946). 33 See Montalvo v. Lapez, 884 P.2d 345, 364 (Haw. 1994). 34 See Marcotte v. Timberlane/Hampstead School District, 733 A.2d 394 (N.H. 1999). 35 See New Mexico St. §41-2-1 (discussed in Smith v. Ingersoll-Rand Co., 214 F.3d 1235, 1245 (N.M. 2000)). Mississippi briefly allowed damages for hedonic losses in wrongful death cases, but the case that approved such damages – Choctaw Maid Farms v. Hailey, 822 So.2d 911 (2002) – was overturned by statute. See Brendan I. Koerner, What’s Your Happiness Worth?, Legal Affairs, January/February 2004. Hedonic losses may also be permitted in federal civil rights cases involving wrongful death. See Sherrod v. Berry, 629 F. Supp. 195, 205 (N.D.Ill.1985), rev’d on other grounds, 856 F.2d 802 (7th Cir. 1988); Frye v. Town of Akron, 759 F. Supp. 1320, 1325-26 (N.D. Ind. 1991). However, it is not yet clear whether other circuits will follow Sherrod. See Wescott v. Crinklaw, 133 F.3d 658, 660-61 (8th Cir. 1998). 36 See Dobbs, supra, at 445. 37 Cohen suggests that they have not, citing Lengel v. New Haven Gas Co., 111 A.2d 547 (1955), where the court reversed an award of $60,000 because not justified by the decedent’s lost income; the court did not mention hedonic loss. See Lloyd Cohen, Toward an Economic Theory of the Measurement of Damages in a Wrongful Death Action, 34 Emory L.J. 295, 307 (1985). 38 The data are from the Jury Verdict and Settlements, Combined database in Lexis. This data set appears to have been generated from various local verdict and settlement reporting services, whose selection methods Civil Justice System data set that contains little information about the characteristics of cases (“CJS”).39 selected to show the range of real world outcomes. auto accident (81 years old) railroad-auto accident (77 years old) $1.75 million are not disclosed. Thus, it is unsafe to assume that the data are randomly generated, and indeed Lexis explicitly disclaims that they are. 39 The data were generated by the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. Data and other information are available online at: http://webapp.icpsr.umich.edu/cocoon/NACJD-STUDY/ 03957.xml. The website includes information on verdicts and settlements of tort lawsuits between January and December 2001 from the 75 largest counties in the United States. These data were randomly generated. 40 We do not include punitive damages, pain and suffering damages, medical expenses, past income, and so forth, so this category is an attempt to determine the implicit valuation of the loss of life itself. Thus, we do include (after death) losses to dependents, both economic and noneconomic. 41 The driver was high on drugs; we suspect that in this case, as in other high award cases, the damages included a punitive element, even though not classified as such. 42 Classified as “pecuniary costs”; it is not clear what this means. 
In the JVS data set, the mean award for loss of life—meaning, usually, lost income to dependents or the estate, or mental distress to dependents (we tried to exclude punitive damages, damages for pain and suffering of the victim prior to death, medical expenses, funeral expenses, and so forth)—was $3.1 million, and the median was $1.1 million. This is roughly consistent with the findings of the CJS survey, in which the mean was about $3,759,000 and the median was $961,000 for a sample of cases from 2001.43 Thus, the CJS survey suggests that the JVS survey may be reasonably reliable.44 In any event, it seems clear enough that when outliers are excluded, the tort system values lost lives at well under $3 million, and about half the time under $1 million.45 We suspect that the real amounts are somewhat lower; the evidence suggests that awards generally decline during post-verdict proceedings.46 The considerable variance in both data sets also supports the conventional wisdom that the damage awards have a degree of arbitrariness, that is, they are not closely tied to the underlying concerns of the tort system and are also erratic and unpredictable.47 43 Thomas H. Cohen & Steven K Smith, Civil Trial Cases and Verdicts in Large Counties, 2001, Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin, April 2004, NCJ 202803, at p. 10. 44 Another data set was created by Jury Verdict Research, which claims, or appears to claim, that the data set is reliable. See Current Award Trends in Personal Injury (43rd ed. 2004). Statistics for 2002 jury awards (not settlements) are: median $1.6 million; mean $4.7 million; low of $5,809 and high of $100 million. Id., at 6. Note that these awards would include such (for us) irrelevant elements as punitive damages. And see Viscusi’s figures, generated from an earlier Jury Verdict Research data set, which show the same pattern. See W. Kip Viscusi, Reforming Products Liability 108-09 (1991). 45 We should note the problem of selection effects. Parties may be more likely to settle cases that are likely to produce high awards both because of risk aversion and of the likely higher litigation costs in high stakes cases. See A. Mitchell Polinsky, Are Punitive Damages Really Insignificant, Predictable, and Rational? A Comment on Eisenberg et al., 26 J. Legal Stud. 663, 668 (1997). To be sure, verdicts and settlements data includes settlements, and the settlements are lower than the verdicts; however, this may reflect the plaintiff’s risk of losing, a risk that is absent for verdicts. Still, all this means, for our purposes, is that there is a lot of unexplained variance in the cases: if some high amount, X, is the “real” level of damages for loss of life, then why are so many verdicts so much lower? 46 See, e.g., Ivy E. Broder, Characteristics of Million Dollar Awards: Jury Verdicts and Final Disbursements, 11 Just. Sys. J. 349 (1986) (finding that plaintiffs ultimately received about 57 percent of the verdict); Neil Vidmar et al., Jury Awards for Medical Malpractice and Post-Verdict Adjustments of Those Awards, 48 DePaul L. Rev. 265 (finding reductions of about 7 to 60 percent in different jurisdictions). 47 The standard deviation for the JVS data set is $6.1 million, with a minimum of $0 and a maximum of $50 million. We do find it difficult to believe that the data were selected because of their variance, however, so the variance may be reliable (or else it just reflects gaps and inaccuracies in the data, e.g., treating punitive damages as if they were economic loss damages). In the CJS data set, the standard deviation is $11.7 million, with a minimum of $705 and a maximum of $120 million, according to our own calculations. For analysis of product liability cases, See W. Kip Viscusi,, International Review of Law and Economics (1988); W. Kip Viscusi, J. Legal Studies (1988); W. Kip Viscusi, J. Legal Studies (1986). 
Hence two points emerge from the wrongful death cases. The first is that in principle, the law calls for a highly individuated approach, one that recognizes a wide range of factors that bear on the degree of loss to dependents. The second is that in practice, actual awards on account of loss of life are usually well below $3 million and also characterized by great variance. 
B. How Regulatory Policy Values Loss of Life 
As we have noted, agencies now assign monetary values to human lives. The practice is recent, having become systematized only as a result of an executive order from 1981.48 For a period, agency figures were highly and inexplicably variable.49 With some exceptions, however, most regulatory agencies have now converged on a fairly narrow range for the valuation of life: $5 million to $6.5 million. Consider the following table, accounting for agency valuations in the recent past: 48 See Exec. Ord. 12291, Fed. Reg. (1981). For discussion of the origins of cost-benefit balancing in federal regulation, see Richard Pildes and Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1 (1995). 49 See Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted, 29 J. Legal Stud. 1105 (2000) Dept. of Health & Human Services/FDA Dept. of Health & Human Services/FDA Dept. of Agriculture/Food Safety & Inspection Service 
Control of Emissions from Nonroad Large Spark-Ignition Engines, and Recreational Engines (Marine & Land-Based) November 8, 2002 67 FR 68242-01 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Arsenic and Clarifications to Compliance and New Source Contaminants Monitoring January 22, 2001 66 FR 6976-01 Control of Air Pollution from New Motor Vehicles: Heavy-Duty Engine and Vehicle Standards and Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur Control Requirements January 18, 2001 66 FR 5002-01 Control of Air Pollution from New Motor Vehicles: Tier 2 Motor Vehicle Emissions Standards and Gasoline Sulfur Control Requirements February 10, 2000 65 FR 6698-01 Findings of Significant Contribution and Rulemaking on Section 125 Petitions for Purposes of Reducing Interstate Ozone Transport January 18, 2000 65 FR 2674-01 Final Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Hazardous Waste Combustors September 30, 1999 64 FR 52828-01 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Disinfectants and Disinfection Byproducts December 16, 1998 63 FR 69390-01 Financial Responsibility Requirements for Licensed Launch Activities August 26, 1998 63 FR 45592-01 Quality Mammography Standards October 28, 1997 62 FR 55852-01 Regulations Restricting the Sale and Distribution of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to Protect Children and Adolescents August 28, 1996 61 FR 44396-01 Pathogen Reduction; Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) Systems July 25, 1996 61 FR 38806-01 $6 million Consumer Product Safety Commission Consumer Product Safety Commission 
Aircraft Flight Simulator Use in Pilot Training, Testing and Checking and at Training Centers July 2, 1996 61 FR 34508-01 Requirements for Labeling of Retail Containers of Charcoal May 3, 1996 61 FR 19818-01 Large Multiple-Tube Fireworks Devices March 26, 1996 61 FR 13084-01 
What is the source of these numbers? The answer involves real-world markets, producing evidence of compensation levels for actual risks.50 In the workplace and for consumer goods, additional safety has a price; market evidence is investigated to identify that price.51 Agency valuations are largely a product of studies of actual workplace risks, attempting to determine how much workers are paid to assume mortality hazards.52 The relevant risks usually are in the general range of 1/10,000 to 1/100,000.53 The calculation of the value of a statistical life is a product of simple arithmetic. Suppose that workers must be paid $600, on average, to eliminate a risk of 1/10,000. If so, the value of a statistical life would be said to be $6 million. Additional information comes from contingent valuation studies, asking people how much they are willing to pay to reduce statistical risks of death.54 But studies of this kind are not the foundation of agency policies in the domain of mortality risks, apparently on the theory that real-world evidence is more reliable. 
Several features of agency practice are noteworthy by way of comparison to wrongful death actions. The most obvious is that agencies provide a uniform number; they make no effort to individuate, even though more individuation would not be 50 See W. Kip Viscusi, supra. 51 A valuable and comprehensive overview can be found in W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph E. Aldy, The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates Throughout the World, 27 J. Risk and Uncertainty 5 (2003). 52 See Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs, supra note, for discussion. 53 See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Econ. Inquiry 29, 33 (2004) (showing fatality risks ranging from about 1/100,000 to 45/100,000). 54 See, e.g., James Hammitt and Jin-Tau Liu, Effects of Disease Type and Latency on the Value of Mortality Risk, 28 J. Risk and Uncertainty 73 (2004); George Tolley et al., Valuing Health For Policy (1995); Valuing Environmental Preferences (Ian Bateman & K. G. Willis eds., 1999); Peter Diamond & Jerry Hausman, Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better Than No Number, 8 J. Econ. Persp. 45, 4952 (1994); Note, Ask A Silly Question, 105 Harv L Rev 1981 (1992). difficult. In addition, agencies use a higher (average) value for loss of life to the victim but place no value on losses to spouses, friends, and others who suffer a welfare loss, economic and otherwise, in the event of death. The uniform numbers, refusing to make inquiries that would lead to less uniformity or that would be difficult to administer, are not surprising in light of the comparative youth of regulatory valuation and in light of the controversial nature of imaginable distinctions. More accurate, and more complex, valuations might be expected to follow an initial period in which assignment of some number of statistical lives becomes entrenched. But these points raise the theoretical questions that bear on both judicial and administrative practice. 
C. A Comparison: The September 11 Victim Compensation Fund 
As we mentioned at the outset, the September 11 Fund was influenced by tort principles, and it is instructive to compare the awards to dependents of deceased victims of the September 11 attacks both with tort wrongful death awards and with agency valuations of life. Table 3 displays the comparison. Agency55 
Mean $3.8 million $2.0 million $5. 4 million 
Median 
Minimum 
Maximum $961,000 $1.7 million Note: Tort awards from the CJS data set (2001); Sept. 11 awards from Fund Website;56 agency valuations from Table 2 (post-2000). The Sept. 11 data are based on amounts received after deductions for life insurance payments, and the like; they therefore understate true valuations, probably by a few hundred thousand dollars.57 
The Sept. 11 fund has a higher median but lower mean than the tort system does. The lower mean is due to the lack of extreme awards characteristic of the tort system. The higher median is probably due to two factors: (1) inflation from 2001 to 2004; and 55 The agency statistics cannot be straightforwardly compared to the statistics for the other systems, because the former will vary depending on the relative size of the populations that the different regulations affect. Still, they give a general sense of the differences. 56 Available at: http://www.usdoj.gov/victimcompensation/payments_deceased.html. The website provides the mean, median, and range; we calculated the standard deviation from the raw data (also provided by the website). 57 See the examples provided at: http://www.usdoj.gov/victimcompensation/award_summaries.pdf. We have been unable to find the appropriate statistics. 
Standard 
Deviation (2) the much higher average income of the September 11 victims compared to that of the general population. Putting aside the outliers, then, the Sept. 11 Fund and tort awards seem largely consistent, and both are much lower than agency valuations. What the Sept. 11 Fund shares with agency valuations is the much lower degree of variance than that found in the tort system. 
II. Theory: Why Should Loss of Life Be Valued? 
Many people believe that a human life is uniquely precious and therefore cannot be given a monetary valuation.58 Calculating the value of a human life demeans the victim of the wrong rather than vindicating his memory. The intuition is understandable. But for purposes of law and policy, what is the alternative? Awarding zero damages for wrongful death is hardly less demeaning, and an award of an “arbitrary” amount of money—either the jury or the legislature should pick a number out of thin air—is no better. Similarly, it is hard to believe that regulatory policy should assume that human life is worth nothing or, alternatively, that it has some arbitrary value. 
To understand how loss of life should be valued, we need to understand the social purposes such a practice would advance. There is no acontextual method for assigning monetary values to mortality and mortality risks. We start with tort law, which is conventionally said to have two goals: deterrence and compensation.59 Then we turn to regulatory policy, which shares tort law’s goal of deterrence. 
A. Tort Law and Deterrence 
The tort system has two purposes: compensation and deterrence. Frequently, but not always, the two purposes lead in similar directions. If the victim of a wrongful death action cannot be compensated, deterrence is still a possibility. The question we now investigate is what level of damages produces optimal deterrence of wrongful death. Our basic conclusion is that two approaches are formally equivalent and will accomplish that task: a monetary amount, before any harm occurs, that is the multiple of the magnitude of 58 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value of Nothing (2004). 59 E.g., Erny v. Estate of Merola, 792 A.2d 1208, 1217 (N.J. 2002). the harm and its probability, assessed for every person who is made to face the relevant risk; or a monetary amount, after the harm occurs, that reflects the magnitude of the harm. The choice between the two approaches largely depends on questions of administrability.60 
To understand how deterrence works, one must take an ex ante perspective.61 Suppose that at time 1 the legal rules are chosen; at time 2 everyone chooses how to act and what level of care to take; and at time 3 injuries and deaths occur, and liability and damages are determined for wrongful death actions. On the deterrence approach, we want to choose legal rules at time 1 that produce damages at time 3 that give everyone optimal incentives at time 2. 
As is well known, people can be given optimal incentives to take care if they are required to pay damages for any financial losses that they cause (or negligently cause).62 Imagine, for example, that a particular behavior, such as driving, will cause $1000 in losses if an accident occurs. A driver can control the probability that the loss will occur by taking more or less care. The cost of care increases with the amount of care that is taken. The efficient level of care is the amount at which the marginal cost of care equals the expected marginal cost of an accident. By requiring the tortfeasor to pay damages, the law forces the driver to internalize the losses that she creates, and so she will take precautions when the costs of those precautions are less than the expected losses.63 
We can think of the victim’s loss in two equivalent ways. We can say that the victim incurs the cost of the accident, L, at time 3. In our example, L = $1000. This is the “ex post” loss. Alternatively, we can say that the victim incurs an expected loss of pL at 60 There are also equitable issues here; from the equitable point of view, perhaps it is worse to compensate everyone ex ante for risks than to compensate those for harm when those harms come to fruition (insurance practices are obviously relevant to an evaluation). But our focus here is on deterrence, and we do not engage those issues. 61 As should be apparent, we are not dealing here with intentional killings, as in cases of homicide. It is not clear that the risk of being murdered should be analyzed in the same way as the risks ordinarily involved in wrongful death cases, which typically involve negligence in one or another form. Difficult questions are raised by the evident fact that people would be willing to pay different amounts to avoid statistically identical risks: A 1/100,000 risk of a cancer death is different from a 1/100,000 risk of a sudden unanticipated death (as we stress), and a 1/100,000 risk of being strangled, or of being killed in a terrorist attack, would undoubtedly produce its own distinctive numbers. 62 To keep things simple, we assume throughout that only the tortfeasor can control the probability of an accident. This allows us to focus on the optimal level of damages for loss of life. We also focus on optimal incentives to take care, in which case the tort rule can be either strict liability or negligence. 63 William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economic Structure of Tort Law (1987); Steven Shavell, Economic Analysis of Accident Law (1987). time 1, where p is the probability of the accident at time 3. This is the “ex ante” loss. From an economic perspective, these losses are equivalent. If an insurance market exists, people are assumed to be indifferent between being awarded pL, as potential victims, at time 1, and L, as actual victims, at time 3.64 Insurers will set the premium equal to pL, and they will pay out L if the accident occurs. Tort law, in theory, could either require all drivers to pay all potential tort victims pL at time 1, or (as in fact) only drivers who cause accidents to pay only actual victims L at time 3. If the insurer is subrogated (as is usually the case), then the victim is indifferent between these two systems, as is the insurer. Potential victims who want insurance can use their “damages” of pL under the first system to pay for the insurance premium, and simply collect from the driver under the second system without going through the insurance intermediary. Potential victims who do not want insurance could purchase an investment instrument that pays pL at time 1 in return for the chance of L at time 3.65 
Why does the tort system award damages of L to actual victims rather than damages of pL to potential victims, when the two awards are equivalent? A large part of the answer is one of practicality. Potential victims cannot be easily identified in advance, and many risks are difficult or even impossible to calculate. In the unusual cases when the reverse is true—when courts cannot award L to actual victims because the loss will occur in the distant future—some courts have been willing to force potential tortfeasors to pay potential victims damages equal to pL.66 Thus, tort law does not, in principle, bar awards of pL rather than L; its focus on L stems from the fact that L is a far simpler foundation for judicial decisions. 
Now let us turn to the problem of measuring L when the loss is death. To fix intuitions, suppose that the (multiply unfortunate!) victim of the wrongful death tort has no dependents, no spouse, no friends, and no income; suppose too that the death was instant, involving no pain, suffering, dread, or medical expenses. Putting aside funeral 64 We put to one side some complexities with this assumption. 65 Cf. Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Anti-Insurance, 31 J. Legal Stud. 203 (2002). 66 See Matthew D. Adler, Risk, Death and Harm: The Normative Foundations of Risk Regulation, U. Minn. L. Rev. 1419-21 (forthcoming 2004) and citations therein (discussing tort cases that recognize torts for increasing the risk of death). control) is based on a cost-benefit analysis that values foreign lives and American lives equally, at the American level. Under the stated assumptions, the second redistributes resources from Americans to people living in other countries. Which regulation is superior? 
In the abstract, the answer is hardly clear, and the question cannot be sensibly approached without consideration of American foreign policy toward the nations that benefit from the regulation. Let us consider the relation between the U.S. and, say, India. The two states can gain a lot from each other by cooperating, but there is also a danger of conflict. To simplify, suppose that the U.S. wants three things from India: security cooperation (such as flyover rights); an open market for U.S. goods; and an improvement in the treatment of religious minorities. India seeks from the U.S. similar things: diplomatic assistance with its ongoing disputes with Pakistan; an open market for Indian goods; and an improvement of American treatment of Indian residents. Suppose that at a hypothetical stage 1, India and the U.S. achieve a balance between their aims: each gives a little of what the other wants. 
Now at stage 2, an American regulatory agency issues an environmental regulation that happens to benefit India considerably, and at great cost to American citizens. At this point, the American diplomatic authorities might argue that because the U.S. is conferring a new benefit on India (say, less flooding of coastal areas), India should respond by conferring a new benefit on the U.S. (say, more trade). India could respond by saying thanks for reducing coastal flooding—that is important—but it is not more important to us than preserving our domestic X industry. In short, the new regulation disturbs the cooperative equilibrium between the U.S. and India: the U.S., perceiving itself as giving more than it is getting, will (in theory) respond by withdrawing some other benefits, and India will retaliate. The new equilibrium could involve a lower level of cooperation—one in which the U.S. gives India something of little value to India and so gets something of little value in return—unless the U.S. government can change the regulation in a way that benefits India less.141 
Our point is that under certain circumstances, regulations and tort rules that are based on inflated foreign VSLs will redistribute wealth from Americans to foreign 141 Of course, that may be impossible, in which case cooperation should not decline. governments. Such transfers would not be wildly popular in the abstract, at least among Americans. They may nonetheless be desirable for reasons of foreign policy or social justice, but they should be recognized as such; the use of the inflated VSL conceals the magnitude of the transfer and even its nature. Further, transfers—whether disguised through inflated VSLs or undisguised—should cohere with foreign policy; otherwise, they will lead to perverse results or be ineffective. The simple conclusion is that in many imaginable circumstances, a high VSL, for people in other countries, will produce perverse redistribution or redistribution for which there is no strong claim—and that even when the redistribution through a high VSL seems desirable (because it benefits poor people on balance), there are many questions about whether regulatory agencies should adopt it. It follows that as a general rule, both agencies and courts should use a VSL that attempts to match the figure in the relevant nation. 
IV. Proposals for Reform 
A. Use of VSL in Regulations 
Tort law offers two principal lessons for regulatory policy. The first involves the need for a greater degree of individuation. The second involves the need to pay attention to the interests of dependents. A properly designed system of valuation would move substantially in both directions. 
We have seen that under the theory that agencies now use, VSL is calculated on the basis of people’s willingness to pay. That very theory raises serious doubts about the government’s use of a uniform number. The appropriate value varies across both risks and persons. If, for example, the risk is accompanied by a high degree of pain and suffering, it deserves more attention than if it is not—a conclusion that is supported by studies finding a kind of “premium” for bad deaths.142 Agencies should therefore provide a higher VSL for cancer risks than for other risks, a possibility that EPA has recognized 142 See Revesz, supra note. in its “sensitivity analysis” for arsenic.143 A great deal more should be done in this vein.144 As tort law demonstrates, a uniform number is extremely difficult to defend. 
Variations across persons are important as well. To be sure, it is impractical to think that regulators should fully individuate risks across persons, in part because regulations often affect many people at once. But less fine-grained distinctions are possible. For example, people over sixty tend to show a lower VSL than people between thirty and forty.145 Regulators might build on these figures to generate different numbers for programs protecting people at different points along the age spectrum. Putting the difficult case of children to one side, agency rules should have a lower value when the benefited class consists largely of elderly people. A movement in this direction would have significant consequences for valuation; it would drive down the monetized benefits of a number of programs delivering health gains largely to senior citizens. 
Additional distinctions are possible. If a program would benefit largely wealthy people, regulators might use an unusually high VSL—a point that would support a higher VSL for safety decisions involving airlines (the exact opposite, not incidentally, of current practice, which involves an unusually low number for airline safety146). More controversially, programs protecting the poor might be given a lower VSL, in a way that tracks the approach of tort law, at least where those who benefit from regulation are also paying for it. A possible objection to this approach is that in some circumstances, a high VSL, for the poor, might be beneficial to the poor, simply because they receive benefits for which they pay only a fragment. We do not resolve the obvious empirical and ethical complexities here.147 We note simply that a higher degree of individuation would be desirable, that in most cases it would raise no serious ethical problems, and that tort law shows that a movement toward greater individuation is both feasible and consistent with longstanding practices and intuitions. 143 See note supra. 144 See Sunstein, supra note. 145 Joseph P. Aldy and W. Kip Viscusi, Age Variations in Workers’ Value of a Statistical Life (2003), forthcoming. 146 See Table 2, supra, showing a lower figure for the FAA than for the EPA. 147 See Sunstein, supra. 
For regulatory policy, the most obvious gap is that agency numbers do not recognize the fact that a death causes welfare losses to many people other than the victim. If a worker is killed as a result of carcinogens in the workplace, others will almost always be affected. Agency failure to take account of the welfare losses results in numbers that are far too low. 
We have suggested the importance of distinguishing between two sets of losses: grief on the one hand and lost income on the other. Following tort law, full individuation would take account of the fact that the size of those losses very much depends on the particular situation. Other things being equal, the loss of a parent with six young children causes more serious harm than the loss of someone without dependents. If our earlier calculations are correct, several million dollars would be added to the conventional assessment of the benefits of a regulation that saved that parent’s statistical life. A serious difficulty here is that agency regulations protect broad classes of people and hence it is quite impractical to think that agencies should make fully individual judgments about the welfare losses. But it is not impractical to think that agencies should adjust their numbers in a way that ensures that serious welfare losses are not ignored. As in the case of statistical risks, contingent valuation studies and market evidence might be consulted to generate appropriate numbers for grief. We have offered some suggestions about how this might be done. For regulations, individual assessments are of course impossible, but a positive number is better than no number, and population-wide means would be a sensible place to start. 
In the regulatory context, there is a cautionary note. Any effort at individuation would have a high degree of political salience and would undoubtedly mobilize affected interests. Even if the social science were less ambiguous than it now is, well-organized groups would undoubtedly engage in special pleading, attempting to move agency practices in their preferred directions. A uniform number helps to insulate agencies from the relevant pressures. In the context of tort suits, individuation does not face those pressures, and hence there is little need for insulation. In principle, however, individuation is clearly desirable, and it seems quite pessimistic to think that the effort to produce greater accuracy should be rejected because of the possible effects of interestgroup maneuvering. 
B. Use of VSL in Tort Law In wrongful death actions, damages should be calculated in the following way. 
For deterrence purposes, the tortfeasor should pay the amount that the victim would be willing to pay to avoid the risk that was imposed on him by the tortfeasor’s class of actions, divided by that risk (R/q). Damages should not be based on lost income; as in the regulatory context, lost income is at best a proxy for the victim’s loss. Deterrence can be satisfied through payment to the government, but if it is paid to the estate or dependents, then indirect compensation is also achieved. 
The amount can be calculated in two ways. First, the VSL (or VSLY) used by agencies could be used, with any adjustments as necessary to reflect individual factors: the defendant’s risk preference, life expectancy (if VSLY is used), wealth, quality of life, and so forth. Indeed, it is possible that the victim’s own wages will reflect his VSL, if he has a risky job. So long as agencies use a uniform figure, courts might start with the standard $6 million figure, and then make adjustments as appropriate. If agencies used more refined figures, as we have argued that they should, then courts might begin with those figures instead, and make appropriate adjustments from that amount. Second, the jury could be asked to determine the hedonic loss. However, the proper jury question is not “what is the value of the life’s pleasures lost by the victim?” This question is too abstract. A better question would be: “estimate the amount of money that the victim would have paid to avoid the risk in question.” 148 Of course an abstract answer to that question would be unreliable; VSL studies should be used to educate juries about common valuations, so that their own estimates will be informed rather than arbitrary.149 148 Arlen argues that courts are incapable of making such calculations, claiming that “courts’ inaccurate calculations would come no closer to efficient recovery amounts than would legislation establishing a flat statutory amount for wrongful death in the hope that the results would be efficient on average.” Arlen, supra, at 1134. It might be true that legislatures can do better than courts, but that is no argument for awarding zero damages or an (arbitrary) constant amount instead. Recall too that we are not exploring the complex issues raised by the possible difference between willingness to pay and willingness to accept. 149 Many courts have refused to admit testimony about VSL studies, arguing that the science does not meet the Daubert standard. See, e.g., Ayres v. Robinson, 887 F. Supp. 1049 (N.D. IL 1995). This seems to us a mistake. For a discussion, see Reuben E. Slesinger, The Demise of Hedonic Damages Claims in Tort Litigation, 6 J. Legal Econ. 17 (1996). Some courts also reject VSL studies on the ground that these studies To ensure consistent and rational awards, we would strongly prefer the first approach, on the ground that juries are not well-equipped to answer these questions; but if a strong role for the jury is deemed important, the second would also work so long as the jury’s judgments are disciplined by expert witnesses and the court. 
This reform would have a significant impact on tort awards, especially for the elderly in non-hedonic loss states. We can already see the logic of our argument at work in some of the hedonic loss states. Consider Thomas v. Hilburn,150 in which the jury awarded wrongful death damages of $300,000 to the son of the 75 year old victim. On appeal, the defendant argued that damages should be reduced to $66,311 for lost income, plus a few thousand dollars more for medical expenses, funeral expenses, and property damage. The court rejected the argument because Mississippi was (at the time) a hedonic loss state. Although our approach would have suggested a verdict of a few million or so, depending on the wealth and other characteristics of the victim, the court clearly recognized the key point that the hedonic loss of an elderly man is much higher than his lost income.151 
In the tort context, there is an additional complication. Valuation of statistical risks has occurred for risks of specified magnitudes, usually ranging from 1/10,000 to 1/100,000.152 Insofar as tort law is dealing with risks in this range, use of agency figures is fully appropriate. But it should be clear that these numbers need not be taken to support a VSL that is independent of probability.153 Suppose that people would be willing to pay $60 to eliminate a risk of 1/100,000. From this it does not follow that people would be willing to pay $6000 to eliminate a risk of 1/1000, or $60,000 to eliminate a risk of 1/100, reflect the losses to other people, not to the victim who is the subject of the tort dispute. However, courts frequently use statistics about other people in order to award damages in tort cases. For example, when courts calculate lost income in order to determine damages for dependents, they use mortality tables; these tables are based on the lives of other people, not on the victim’s own life, which would not make any sense. Just as courts use statistics about other people in order to estimate the victim’s life expectancy, courts should use statistics about other people in order to estimate how much the victim would have been willing to pay in order to avoid a risk of death. 150 654 So. 2d 898, 903 (Miss. 1995). 151 See also Motorola Communications and Electronics, Inc. v. Wilkerson, 555 So. 2d 713 (Miss. 1989) (allowing $150,000 award for the death of an 85 year old man); Marcotte v. Timberlane/Hampstead Sch. Dist., 733 A.2d 394, 407-08 (N.H. 1999) (allowing $900,000 award for the death of a child whose lost future income was about $700,000). New Hampshire also recognizes hedonic losses in wrongful death cases. See supra. 152 See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29, 33 (2004) (showing fatality risks ranging from about 1/100,000 to 45/100,000). 153 See Richard Posner, Catastrophe: Risk and Reason (forthcoming 2004). or $600,000 to eliminate a risk of 1/10. It is plausible to believe that people’s WTP to reduce statistical risks is nonlinear.154 As the probability approaches 100%, people become willing to pay an amount for risk reduction that rises nonlinearly to 100% of their income, and—at some point—become unwilling to accept any amount in return for giving up their entitlement to life.155 From this it follows that if a defendant imposes risks that are far higher than those with which agencies deal, the agency figures are too low, and hence the tort system should use significantly higher ones. 
The sheer variety of wrongful death actions, in terms of both probability and kind of death, severely complicates the inquiry into appropriate damage awards. Insofar as the tort system is dealing with probabilities in the general range with which agencies deal, it can build on (appropriately reformed) agency practice. Insofar as the tort system is dealing with the most egregious conduct—homicide, for example—the regulatory analysis of WTP does not apply directly, but a standard amount of (say) $6 million at least provides an appropriate floor. Insofar as the conduct imposes high probability risks, as through gross negligence, a similar floor is appropriate, supplemented perhaps by punitive damages. These suggestions are in line with our general emphasis on the fact that all mortality risks are not the same. What cannot be defended is the total exclusion of hedonic damages in wrongful death actions. 154 See id. 155 There is a great deal of work on disparities between willingness to pay and willingness to accept (WTA). See, for an overview, Russell Korobkin, The Endowment Effect and Legal Analysis, 97 Nw. U.L Rev. 1227 (2003). Such disparities are found in the context of risks. See, e.g., see W. Kip Viscusi et al., An Investigation of the Rationality of Consumer Valuations of Multiple Health Risks, 18 RAND J. Econ. 465 (1987). It follows that people would pay less to eliminate a risk of 1/100,000 than they would demand to be subject to that same risk. See id. One advantage of the market data on which agencies currently rely is that the WTP/WTA disparity is essentially irrelevant. If workers and consumers who face a risk of 1/100,000 receive $60 in compensation, the result can be described in terms of either WTA or WTP; any such description is simply a matter of framing. But we lack reliable market data about how to value much higher risks -- say, risks of 1/50, 1/20, or 1/10. And for such risks, willingness to accept and willingness to pay figures surely diverge, not least because the income constraint applies to WTP but not to WTA. People would undoubtedly pay a great deal to eliminate a mortality risk of 1/20; but they would demand even more to be subject to that risk, and many people would not incur that risk for any amount. It is not entirely clear, in principle, whether WTP or WTA is appropriate, though our view is that willingness to accept is correct and therefore the appropriate compensatory award is either infinite or higher than anyone can pay. Thus, a billionaire who murders someone ought to forfeit his entire wealth. As a practical matter, however, it probably does not make much difference that the tort system does not generate such high awards, given that the entire wealth of most murderers is extremely limited. 
As we have seen, calculating the loss to survivors is difficult in practice, but conceptually straightforward. For deterrence purposes, survivors should recover for their welfare loss—this means grief, mental distress, loss of companionship, and the like. It is less clear what dependents should recover in terms of lost support (such as lost income attributable to their care). The conceptually proper recovery is the amount of money that would make the survivor just as well off (financially) as he would have been if the death had not occurred, which will usually be tied to the loss of household economies of scale and the breadwinner’s degree of altruism. This amount may be higher than lost income (if the victim does a lot of work for the household that is not compensated in the market). And it may be lower (if the survivor can easily get a job and the victim was never very generous in the first place). 
If our approach were adopted, tort damages would rise, especially for children and the elderly. As we have seen, damages for wrongful death are currently under about $3 million, based on lost income, mental distress, and the like. Under our system, they are likely to be as much as $6 million or higher for the average person. As for children, tort damages currently should be low in jurisdictions that exclude lost income (though it is not clear that this is the case); and for the elderly, tort damages currently should be (and apparently are) low even in jurisdictions that include lost income, given that their earning years are almost over. By contrast, under our approach their damages are likely to be, again, in the $6 million or higher range.156 For adults with dependents, we suspect that an additional several hundred thousands of dollars per dependent would be added to the $6 million baseline. 157 156 Elderly people apparently have VSLs that are either equal to (or even higher than) or not much lower than those of younger people. See Aldy & Viscusi, supra. 157 If the victim incurs unusual pain and suffering prior to death, including the distress of anticipating one’s own death in the near future, this cost may not be reflected in standard VSLs. Thus, additional damages should be awarded for them. Damages for medical and funeral expenses should also be awarded. See Mark Geistfeld, Placing a Price on Pain and Suffering: A Method for Helping Juries Determine Tort Damages for Nonmonetary Injuries, who suggests using WTP estimates, 83 Calif. L. Rev. 773 (1995). See also David W. Leebron, Final Moments: Damages for Pain and Suffering Prior To Death, 64 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 256 (1989). V. Positive Questions 
Our comparison of tort law and regulatory policy raises an obvious positive question. Why do these two areas of law take such different approaches to valuing lives? The beginning of an answer to this question is that even though the two areas of law have an overlapping purpose—the deterrence of harmful conduct—they also have radically different historical origins and orientations: tort law is ex post and individualized, while regulatory law is ex ante and generalized. As a result, tort law is naturally more particularistic and less rule-bound. The ex ante focus of regulation pushes administrators away from case-specific standards and in the direction of rule-bound judgments. But this point raises many complexities. 
A. In General 
Tort law’s ex post and individualistic orientation has several consequences. First, the implicit (or explicit) valuation of human lives in the tort context is information-rich. Courts have access to a great deal of evidence about the particular parties and circumstances. Under the rules of evidence, all relevant evidence may be introduced to the court, and both plaintiff and defendant have strong incentives to take advantage of these rules. Given that the victim is a real, identifiable person, it is natural for the court to determine the actual loss, including losses to dependents, rather than to rely on statistical averages. In fact there is no need to rely on such averages, which provides less accurate information than the facts themselves. 
Second, tort remedies direct the decisionmaker to compare the victim’s post-tort state with her pre-tort state, and to ignore the rest of society. This approach works well enough when the tort causes a financial loss or a physical injury, but when it kills the victim, the decisionmaker has no way to compare post-tort and pre-tort well-being in a way that can be reliably monetized. To determine the hedonic loss from death, one cannot look at the actual victim’s experience of death; one can rely only on statistical inference based on generalization from the rest of society. But in view of judicial traditions, this would be unfamiliar and even odd in the tort setting. 
Third, and following from the first two points, tort damages tend to be highly variable. Juries lack reference points, so their judgments will depend heavily on the presentation of evidence by lawyers, and on whatever anchors,158 prejudices, and expectations citizens bring to the jury box. Juries might also react emotionally to the case, or misunderstand jury instructions, and allow irrelevant factors (like a desire for revenge) to influence their determination of the award. 
Fourth, tort law has low public visibility, at least at the system-wide level. Individual awards may receive considerable public attention, but the system of awards— the median award, the mean award, the variance—does not.159 Hence public scrutiny is relatively weak unless and until a salient network of awards (as in the case of the September 11 fund) is announced. The difficulties of monetization, the variable figures, and the possible arbitrariness of many outcomes attract little in the way of scrutiny and review, not least because of the ex post nature of litigation and the fact that awards are issued one at a time. 
Compare regulatory law. Regulatory decisions are ex ante and highly abstract. The victims of the regulated conduct are not identified, and so their personal characteristics do not stand out (although sometimes a disaster or crisis may provoke the regulation160). Whereas court cases are emotionally rich, regulatory decisions often (though not always) seem dry and technical, even though usually much more is at stake. 
The ex ante and general orientation of regulatory policy has several consequences. First, because one cannot identify the actual people benefited by a regulation, one must rely on averages. The usual notion is that although all individuals are different, differences will balance each other out, so that averages can be used. Thus, if a regulation protects people of type X with a VSL of $7 million and people of type Y with a VSL of $5 million, regulators use the average valuation of $6 million for a regulation that affects people evenly divided into the two types. 158 On the relevance of anchors, see Gretchen Chapman and Eric Johnson, in Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment (Thomas Gilovich et al. eds. 2002). 159 Indeed, the extreme awards that receive media attention are, according to some, too rare to be a matter of concern. See Deborah Jones Merritt and Kathryn Ann Barry, Is the Tort System in Crisis? New Empirical Evidence, 60 Ohio St. L.J. 315 (1999). A similar argument has been made about punitive damages; see Theodore Eisenberg, Neil LaFountain, Brian Ostrom, David Rottman, and Martin T. Wells, Juries, Judges, and Punitive Damages: An Empirical Study, 87 Cornell L. Rev. 743 (2002) (arguing that punitive damages are roughly correlated with compensatory damages); but see and Joni Hersch and W. Kip Viscusi, Punitive Damages, 33 J. Legal Stud. 1 (2004) (disputing this claim). 160 See Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, Stan L Rev (1999). 
This reasoning is not implausible, and sometimes averages are appropriate despite their crudeness; but they can lead regulators astray. Some regulations affect only persons of type X, and other regulations affect only persons of type Y; then different valuations should be used. Indeed, we know that some regulations protect people against cancer, a risk that people are willing to pay a premium to avoid, whereas other regulations protect people against sudden unanticipated death, a risk that occasions less in the way of public concern.161 So too, some regulations affect the poor more than the rich, urban people more than rural people, and so forth. Under the very theory that animates current regulatory practice, individualized VSLs, taking account of these differences, are important. 
Second, regulatory decisions affect more people than a tort award does, and thus are more politically salient. The greater political salience of regulatory decisions may have good effects simply because public scrutiny can be a corrective against ill-motivated or foolish decisions; but here we focus on some bad or troubling effects. The most obvious is that the symbolism of sensible and disaggregated regulatory decisions may bother people because such decisions seem in conflict with other values—here, we have in mind the controversy valuing human lives at all, or the likely more intense controversy over valuing the lives of the rich more than the lives of the poor.162 The risks of public skepticism may also explain agencies’ failure to value the lives of children properly and openly. 
By contrast, the isolation of tort awards suppresses these symbolic concerns. Almost no one complains about the fact that poor people obtain lower damages in tort awards because they have lost less future income; and the existence of the disparity, and its longstanding character, at least raises problems for those who believe that ethical principles require all deaths to be valued the same way. But it appears to be politically difficult to draw the logical conclusion that VSLs for poor people should be lower than VSLs for rich people in regulatory decisionmaking. 161 See Revesz, supra note; Hammit and Liu, supra note. 162 Consider the controversy over the idea of “life years,” an idea that strikes many people as ethically problematic because it treats elderly people as less valuable than younger people. See Ackerman and Heinzerling, supra note. 
We are unable to explain why agencies have neglected the losses to dependents. One possible answer is that agencies assume that victims’ WTPs for bearing risks of death incorporate these costs; but as we have explained, it is unlikely that these WTPs incorporate these costs fully. Another possible answer is lack of information; it is not easy to generate a plausible number to capture the costs to dependents on some population-wide basis. But this problem ought to be remediable. A probable contributor to the gap is that cost-benefit analysis and the use of VSLs is in its infancy—as a formal part of regulatory law, it is only about twenty-five years old163—and agencies have focused on the large problems while neglecting or overlooking more subtle issues. But it is now time for the VSL methodology to advance to a new stage of sophistication. 
B. September 11 and Compensation 
The different orientations of tort and regulatory law were reflected in an interesting way by the decisionmaking process of the commission that was set up to award compensation to victims of the 9/11 terrorist attack. We have briefly outlined the resulting regulations. Before returning to this topic, let us conduct two thought experiments. 
First, suppose that Congress had never set up the 9/11 compensation fund, and instead the victims and survivors had sued under state tort law. Suppose they succeeded in establishing the liability of defendants such as the airlines. How would damages have been awarded? It is clear that wealth differences would have been seen in wrongful death and survivors’ awards. The dependents of investment bankers would have obtained awards far in excess of those obtained by the dependents of fire fighters. In addition, the awards would have varied significantly in light of the different characteristics of each victim. But there also would have been considerable inexplicable variance in the awards, variance that would not be traceable to relevant factors but to the vagaries of jury decisionmaking and the law of tort. Hence inequalities would have been pervasive— some a justified product of existing rules, others a result of simple “noise” in the system. 
Second, suppose that an agency had, prior to the 9/11 attack, issued regulations designed to force the owners of buildings such as the World Trade Center to install safety devices that would have saved lives in case of a terrorist attack or similar disaster. Here, 163 See Executive Order 12291, supra. we can be sure that the agency would have used uniform valuations—such as $6.1 million per life saved—that would have ignored wealth differences and other differences between victims. The agency would also have ignored dependents. 
How did the 9/11 commission make its decisions? On the one hand, the commission was directed by Congress to rely on tort principles, and for that reason it used formulas that took into account wealth differences.164 Estates of investment bankers did receive more compensation than estates of fire fighters.165 In addition, awards were an increasing function of the number of dependents. On the other hand, public and political discomfort with these disparate awards—which seemed to dishonor the fire fighters, and also to distinguish victims along class lines—led the commission to adopt awards that were less dispersed than would have occurred under the tort system.166 
There is a lesson here. Because individual tort cases concern just one person or a few people, awards are unlikely to be politically salient or to be influenced by irrelevant political considerations. But because they are ex post and individualized, they usually fail to take advantage of information that is accessible only at the level of the general population. The 9/11 Commission combined the virtues and flaws of both approaches. Because of the political salience of the task, and because awarding damages to thousands of people made comparison easy and obvious, the commission was constrained, like regulatory agencies, to use relatively uniform numbers; recall that a standard number was used for noneconomic damages. At the same time, arbitrariness was therefore limited—in the sense that people in similar circumstances received similar awards. Because the commission was directed to use tort principles, the numbers were not fully uniform, and a degree of individual variation was properly allowed. But the use of tort principles also made it impossible to use figures for hedonic losses, and instead the commission relied on flawed figures such as lost income, with the result that average awards—in the $2 to 164 See Explanation of Process for Computing Presumed Economic Loss, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/victimcompensation/loss_calc_deceased.html. 165 For example, the spouse of a 40 year old with an income of $50,000 would receive a little over $1 million, whereas the spouse of a 40 year old with an income of $225,000 would receive about $3.5 million – not including non-economic loss. See Explanation of Process for Computing Presumed Economic Loss, supra. 166 See Chen, Man Behind, supra, at B3 (“The statute suffered from two conflicting impulses: to follow the standards of lost future income typical in tort cases, while at the same time making the fund fair to all income groups, Mr. Feinberg [the special master] said. He ultimately devised the program to prevent it from favoring the wealthy over the financially disadvantaged, he said.”) $3 million range—were less than the hedonic losses that actually occurred, according to the VSL methodology used by agencies.167 
In normal situations, significant improvements are possible. Courts can, and ought to, take advantage of information about average persons when the relevant information about a particular victim is lacking (such as WTP to avoid the risk that produced death).168 And although politics will always constrain agencies, there are certainly many steps that agencies can take to improve their use of VSLs without running afoul of political constraints. At a minimum, we see no reason why agencies cannot estimate the losses to dependents of people who are killed by regulated conduct, and it seems likely to us that at least some kinds of individualization will be possible—by, for example, giving a premium for risks that are especially dreaded. 
Conclusion 
In the United States, two independent bodies of law assign dollar values to deaths. Regulatory agencies, drawing on willingness to pay studies, use a uniform number that takes no account of losses to dependents and others. In wrongful death actions, courts attempt to compensate survivors, failing to incorporate the loss to the decedent and ensuring a high degree of variability in awards. For both bodies of law, deterrence is an important goal, and from the standpoint of deterrence, both make serious blunders. And for both, a key question is how to combine accuracy and administrability. 
There are two central problems with regulatory law. First, the value of a statistical life is uniform rather than disaggregated. The very theory that underlies current practice calls for far more in the way of individuation. Second, agency figures do not include the losses to dependents and others; the result is underdeterrence. We have made suggestions about how agencies might remedy these two problems. The central problem with tort law is that it does not include the welfare loss to the decedent; its current reliance on the decedent’s pre-death losses and the dependents’ losses results in undervaluation of 167 And, bizarrely, death benefits for soldiers and public safety officials as the basis for non-economic, that is, mental distress, compensation for the dependents of victims. See Explanation of Process for Computing Presumed Economic Loss, supra. 168 Compare the proposal of Baldus et al., supra. morality risks, and hence underdeterrence. We have also made suggestions about how both bodies of law should deal with the deaths of children and foreigners. 
If our recommendations were accepted, we would expect tort awards to become higher, more uniform, and less arbitrary than they currently are. We would also expect VSLs used by regulatory agencies to be more variable—in many cases lower and in many cases higher. The inclusion of losses to dependents should result in more stringent regulations, as the effective benefit from a life saved would be increased. 
University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions INTRODUCTION Whena nation'ssecurityis threateneda,re civillibertiesat undue risk?Ifso,why?Considera plausibleaccount.In themidstofexternal threatsp,ublicoverreactionasre predictableS.implybecauseoffear, thepublicand itsleaderswillfavormeasuresthatdo littleto protect securitybutthatcompromisiemportanftormosffreedom.T1heinternmentofJapanese-AmericadnusringWorldWarII is perhapsthemost salientexample,buttherearemanymore.Considerf,orexample,the McCarthyperiod,restrictionosn dissidentspeechduringWorldWar I,Lincoln'ssuspensionofhabeascorpusduringtheCivilWar,andthe impositionofmartialawin Hawaiiin 1941.Manypeoplebelievethat someoftheactionsoftheBushadministrationin,theaftermatohfthe September11 attack,fallinthesamebasiccategoryI.s itreallynecessaryto holdsuspectedterroristisn prisonin Guantánamo?Forhow long?Fortherestoftheirlives? 
In explaininghowpublicfearmightproduceunjustifiedintrusionson civillibertiesI,emphasizetwopotentiaslourcesoferrort:he availabilityheuristicand probabilityneglect.The availabilityheuristic,widelyusedbyordinarypeople,can lead to a grosslyexaggerated senseofrisk,as salientincidentsmakecitizensthinkthata riskis far moreseriousthanitactuallyis.Whenprobabilityneglectis at work, peoplefocuson the"worstcase" and disregardthequestionwhether itis likelythattheworstcase willoccur- an approachthatcan also leadtoexcessiveregulationW.ithan understandinogftheavailability heuristicand probabilityneglect,I believethatwe are able to havea betterappreciationofthesourcesofunsupportablientrusionosn civil social research Vol 71: No 4 : Winter2004 967 libertiesB.utthereisanadditionaflactoro,nethatrequiresa shiftfrom psychologicadlynamicsto politicalones. In respondingto security threatsg,overnmenotftenimposesselectiveratherthanbroadrestrictionson libertyS.electivitcyreatesseriousrisks.Iftherestrictionasre selectivem,ostofthepublicwillnotfacethem,andhencetheordinary politicalcheckson unjustifiedrestrictionasre notactivatedI.n these circumstanceps,ublicfearofnationalsecurityrisksmightwellleadto excessiverestrictionosfcivilliberties. 
Whatis necessaryt,hen,is a set ofsafeguardtshatwill insure againstthoserestrictionIsn. constitutiondalemocraciess,omeofthose safeguardasreprovidedbycourtsu,suallythroug hinterpretatioonfthe ConstitutionT.heproblemis thatcourtsoftenlacktheinformatiotno knowwhetherandwhenintrusionosn civillibertieasrejustifiedC. ivil libertariannseglectthispoint,tendingtothinkthatthemeaningofthe ConstitutiodnoesnotchangeinthefaceofintensepublicfearT.hisview is implausibleT.he legitimacyofgovernmenatctiondependson the strengtohftheargumentistcanmusterinitsfavora;ndifnationalsecurityisgenuinelaytriskt,heargumentwsillinevitablsyeem,andwilloften be,unusuallystrongI.nthecontexotfsafetyandhealthregulatiognenerally,cost-benefaintalysisisa partiaclorrectivaegainstbothexcessiveand insufficiefnetara;ndsometimecsourtscanusea formofcost-benefaintalysisas a checkonoverzealouasndinadequateregulationW. hennational securitiysthreatenedc,ost-benefaintalysisisfarlesspromisingb,ecause theprobabilitoyfanattackusuallycannotbe estimated. 
Butthisdoes notmeanthatcourtscannotplaya constructive role.I suggestthreepossibleapproachesF.irstc,ourtsshouldordinarily requirerestrictionosncivillibertietsobe authorizedbythelegislature, notsimplybytheexecutiveS.econd,courtsshouldgivemoreskeptical scrutinytomeasuresthatrestrictthelibertyofidentifiablmeinorities, simplybecausetheordinarypoliticalsafeguardasreunreliablewhen theburdensimposedbylawarenotwidelyshared.Third,case-by-case balancing,bycourts,mightwell authorizeexcessiveintrusionsinto liberties-andhenceclearrulesand strongpresumptionfs,orall their rigiditym, ightworkbetterthanbalancingintheactualworld. 968 social research Whymightthepublicshowexcessivefeari,na waythatleadstounjustifiedresponsestoexternatlhreatsorrisksgenerallyT?womechanisms playa largerole. 
A. Availability BeginwiththeavailabilityheuristicW.henpresentedwithhardquestions,people oftenask themselveseasierquestions,whichserveto simpliftyheirinquiry(KahnemanandFrederick2,002;Jolisetal.,1998: 1518-1519)T. heanswertotheeasierquestionsoperatesas a heuristic or a ruleofthumb.Oftheserulesofthumb,the"availabilityheuristic" is probablythe mostimportantforpurposesofunderstanding nationalsecurityandriskregulationT.hus,forexample,"a classwhose instancesareeasilyretrievedwillappearmorenumerousthana class ofequal frequencywhoseinstancesare lessretrievable("TVerskaynd Kahneman,1986: 38, 55).The pointverymuchbearson privateand publicresponsesto risks,suggestingf,orexample,thatpeoplewillbe especiallyfearfuolfthedangersofAIDS,crime,earthquakest,errorism,and nuclearpowerplantaccidentsifexamplesare easyto recall (Slovic,2000a:37-48). 
Inthisway,familiaritcyanaffectheavailabilityofinstancesB.ut salienceisimportanats well."Theimpactofseeinga houseburningon thesubjectivperobabilitoyfsuchaccidentsisprobablygreaterthanthe impactofreadingabouta fireinthelocalpaper"(Slovic,2000a:37-48). Similarlye,arliereventswillhavea smallerimpactthanlaterones.The pointhelpsexplainmuchaboutfearand abouthumanbehaviorwith respectto personalsafetyand risk.Forexample,whetherpeoplewill buyinsurancefornaturaldisastersis greatlyaffectebdyrecentexperiences(Slovic,2000a: 40). Iffloodshavenotoccurredin theimmediatepast,peoplewholiveon floodplainsarefarlesslikelytopurchase insurance(Slovic,2000a:40).Intheaftermatohfan earthquakei,nsurance forearthquakesrisessharply-butitdeclinessteadilyfromthat point,as vividmemoriesrecede(Slovic,2000a:40).Forpurposesoflaw andregulationt,heproblemisthattheavailabilityheuristicanleadto Fear and Liberty 969 seriouserrorsoffact,intermsofbothexcessivecontrolson smallrisks thatare cognitivelyavailableand insufficienctontrolson largerisks thatarenot. 
What,inparticularp,roducesavailabilityA?nilluminatinsgtudy attempttsotesttheeffectosfease ofimageryon perceive djudgments ofrisk(Shermanetal.,2002:82).Theexperimenterasskedsubjectsto readaboutan illness(Hyposcenia-Bth)at"wasbecomingincreasingly prevalento"n thelocalcampus.In one conditiont,hesymptomwsere concreteandeasytoimagin-e involvingmuscleaches,lowenergya,nd frequentsevereheadaches.In anotherconditiont,hesymptomwsere vagueand hardto imagine,involvingan inflamedliver,a malfunctioningnervoussystema,nd a vaguesenseofdisorientationS.ubjects in bothconditionswereaskedbothto imaginea three-weekperiod in whichtheyhad thediseaseand to writea detaileddescriptionof whattheyimaginedA.fterdoingso,subjectswereaskedto assess,on a 10-pointscale,theirlikelihoodofcontractintghedisease.Thebasic findingwas thatlikelihoodjudgmentswereverydifferenitn thetwo conditionsw,itheasilyimaginedsymptommsakingpeoplefarmore inclinedtobelievethattheywerelikelytogetthedisease(Shermanet al.,2002:88). 
Thereareseveralimplicationfsorfearp,olicya,ndlaw.Thepublic demandforlaw shouldbe muchhigherifpeoplecan easilyimagine theharmin question;in suchcases,thelaw mightwellreflecta kind ofhysteriaB. utiftheharmis difficultto imagine,we mightwellsee a patternofneglect.We wouldthereforperedictthateasilyimaginable harmswillleadto relativelygreaterprivateprecautionasnd relativelygreatergovernmentacloncern.Well-organizedprivategroups should,and do, takeadvantageofthisfact,attemptingto publicize visibleexamplesofharmstowhichtheyseektodrawattentionM.any suchgroupsworkas "availabilityentrepreneursi,n"vokingparticular eventsinordertodrivepublicfearintheirpreferreddirection(sKuran andSunstein1,999).Terroristms ightbe seen,inthislight,as extreme examplesofavailabilityentrepreneurus,singvividexamplesto harm tosuggestthatpeople"cannotbe safeanywhere." 970 social research 
Becausesafetyis alwaysa matterofdegree,theidea of"being safe"is itselfpreposterousb;utwhen an incidentis highlysalient, peopleare likelyto exaggeratethelikelihoodofitsoccurrenceA.nd whenexaggerationosccur,excessiveprecautionsare likely,in a way thatmightwellleadtounjustifierdestrictionosnlibertyT.heMcCarthy periodis an example.In fact,communisatgents,mostfamouslyAlger Hiss,werein thegovernmenitn the1930sand 1940s,buta fewavailableincidentsi,ncludingtheHisscase,led,inmanycirclest,oa kindof fear-drivewnitchhuntthatcouldnotbe justifiedbytherealityofthe 1950s. 
B. ProbabilityNeglect TheavailabilithyeuristicanproduceaninaccurataessessmentofprobabilityB. utsometimepseoplewillattempttomakelittleassessmentof probabilityat all,especiallywhenstrongemotionsare involvedF.ear can be imperviousto thefactthatit is highlyunlikelythattherisk willcometofruitionIn. suchcases,large-scalveariationsin probabilitiesmatterlittl-e evenwhenthosevariationsunquestionablyshould makea bigdifferencTe.hepointappliesto hopeas wellas fear;vivid imagesofgoodoutcomescan crowdoutconsiderationofprobability too.Lotteriesare successfuplartlyforthisreason,and stategovernmentsmakestrategiucse ofprobabilityneglectto convincepeopleto play.Governmentarlesponsesto fearare oftendrivenbyprobability neglecttoo. 
Probabilitnyeglecthas receiveditsmostdirectempiricaclonfirmationin a strikingstudyofpeople'swillingnestsopayto avoidelectricshocks.2Thecentralpurposeofthestudywastotesttherelevance ofprobabilityin "affecrtich"decisions.One experimenitnvestigated whethervaryingtheprobabilityofharmwouldmattermore,orless, insettingtshattriggesrtrongemotionsthaninsettingtshatseemrelativelyemotion-freIen.therelativelyemotion-freseettingp,articipants weretoldthattheexperimenetntailedsomechanceofa $20 penalty. In the"strongemotion"settingp,articipantwsereaskedto imagine thattheywouldparticipatein an experimenitnvolvingsomechance Fear and Liberty 971 ofa "short,painfulb,utnotdangerouselectricshock"(Rottenstreich and Hsee,2001: 181).Participantwsereaskedto sayhowmuchthey wouldbe willingto payto avoidparticipatinign therelevantexperiment.Someparticipantws eretoldthattherewas a 1 percentchance ofreceivingthebadoutcome(eitherthe$20lossortheelectricshock); othersweretoldthatthechancewas 99 percenta;nd stillotherswere toldthatthechancewas 100percent. 
Thekeyresultwas thatvariationsin probabilityaffectedthose facingthe relativelyemotion-freienjury,the $20 penalty,farmore than theyaffectedpeople facingthe more emotionallyevocative outcomeof an electricshock.Forthe cash penalty,the difference betweenthemedianpaymentfora 1 percentchanceandthemedian paymentfora 99 percentchancewas predictablylargeand indeed broadlyconsistenwtithstandardtheoriesofeconomicrationality$:1 to avoida 1 percentchance,and $18 to avoida 99 percentchance. Fortheelectricshock,bycontrastt,hedifferencien probabilitymade littledifferencteo medianwillingnessto pay:$7 to avoida 1 percent chance,and $10toavoida 99 percentchance.Apparentlypeoplewill paya significanatmounttoavoida smallprobabilityofa hazardthat is affectivellyaden- and theamountthattheywillpaywillnotvary greatlywithchangesinprobability. 
Toinvestigatteheroleofprobabilitaynd emotionsin responses to risk,I conductedan experimenta,sking83 UniversityofChicago law studentsto describetheirmaximumwillingnestso payto reduce levelsofarsenicin drinkingwater(Sunstein2,002a).Participantwsere randomlysortedintofourgroups,representintghe fourconditions in theexperimentI.n thefirstconditionp,eoplewereaskedto state theirmaximumwillingnessto payto eliminatea cancerriskof1 in 1,000,000.In thesecondcondition,peoplewereaskedto statetheir maximumwillingnestsopaytoeliminatea cancerriskof1 in 100,000. In thethirdconditionp, eoplewereaskedthesamequestionas inthe firstb,utthecancerwas describedin vividterms,as "verygruesome andintenselypainfula,s thecancereatsawayattheinternaolrgansof thebody."In thefourthconditionp,eoplewereaskedthesameques972 social research tionas inthesecond,butthecancerwas describedinthesameterms as inthethirdconditionT. hecentralhypothesiws asthattheprobabilityvariationwsouldmatterfarlessinthehighlyemotionalconditions thaninthelessemotionaclonditionsM.orespecificallyit,waspredicted thatdifferenceisn probabilitywouldmakelittleor no differencien thehighlyemotionaclondition-s andthatsuchvariationwsouldhave realimportancienthelessemotionalconditionsI.twas also expected thatthetenfolddifferencien probabilitie-s between1/100,000and 1/1,000,00-0wouldnot,in eitherconditiong, eneratea tenfolddifferenceinwillingnestsopay. 
The resultforthe centralhypothesiswas confirmedW.ithan unemotionaldescriptiont,he differencien probabilityproduceda statisticallsyignificandtifferencien meanwillingnestso pay;withan emotionaldescriptiont,hedifferencweas smallerandwas notstatisticallysignificanTt.hesecondhypothesiws asalsosupportedC. onsistent withotherworkon probabilityneglect,varyingtheprobabilityhad a relativelyweak effecton people's willingnessto pay:The tenfold increaseintheriskproducedbarelymorethana doublingofmeanwillingnessto pay.Fromthisexperimentt,hereis one othernoteworthy resultB.yitselfm,akingthedescriptionofthecancermoreemotional hada largeeffecotnmeanwillingnestsopay. 
Foran exampleofprobabilitnyeglectintheparticulacrontextof risksofterrorismco,nsideran illuminatinsgtudybyW.KipViscusiand RichardZeckhauser(2003).Theauthorsusedsurveytso see howmuch peoplearewillingtopaytoreducestatedrisksofterrorismT.hemedian willingnestsopay(WTP)todecreasethecurrenrtiskto 1/1,000,00w0as $25;themedianWTPto decreasethecurrentriskto 1/10,000,00w0as $27;themedianWTPtoreducetocurrenrtiskto zerowas $50(Viscusi and Zeckhauser2,003: 116).Thusa tenfolddifferencien risk-from 1/1,000,000to 1/10,000,000p-roducedno significantdifferencien WTP.Thisfindingisclearevidenceofprobabilitnyeglectc,ausedbythe emotionalvalenceoftheidea ofterrorismrisk.As theauthorsstate: "Whethetrheterroris mriskisreducedto50%ofitscurrenltevel,1 in 1 millionperflighto,r1 in10millionperflighotrzero,"doesnotproduce Fearand Liberty 973 "significantdliyfferenwt"illingnestsopay,andhence"[d]oingsomething aboutterroris mrisksthatisincompletbeutbeneficiaclonsequentlhyas a fairlysimilarattractivenesascross"options(ViscusiandZeckhauser, 2003:116).Heretooa formofprobabilitnyeglectseemstobe atwork. 
Anunderstandinogfprobabilityneglectcastsnewlighton the findingthatvisualizationor imagerymattersa greatdeal to people's reactiontsorisks(Slovicetal, 2000b).Whenanimageofa badoutcome is easilyaccessible,peoplewillbecomegreatlyconcernedabouta risk, holdingprobabilitcyonstant(Loewenstein2,001).Andwhenpeopleare askedhow muchtheywillpayforflightinsuranceforlossesresultingfrom"terrorismt,"heywillpaymorethaniftheyare askedhow muchtheywillpayforflightinsurancefromall causes(seeJohnsonet al., 1993).The evidentexplanationforthispeculiarresultis thatthe word"terrorisme"vokesvividimagesofdisastert,huscrowdingout probabilitjyudgmentsN.otealsothatwhenpeoplediscussa low-probabilityrisk,theirconcernrisesevenifthediscussionconsistsmostlyof apparentlytrustworthayssurancesthatthelikelihoodofharmreallyis infinitesim(aAllkahamaind Slovic,1994:1094).Thereasonis thatthe discussionmakesiteasiertovisualizetheriskandhencetofearit. 
Theimplicationforrestrictionosncivillibertieshouldbe clear.If an externatlhreatregisterass such,itis possiblethatpeoplewillfocus ontheworst-cassecenariow,ithoutconsiderinigts(low)probabilitTyh.e resultwillbe stepsthatcannotbe justifiedbyrealityT. heinternment ofJapanese-AmericadnusringWorldWarII undoubtedlyhad a great dealto do withprobabilitnyeglectA. vividsenseoftheworstcase- of collaboratiobnyJapanese-Americawnisthourenemyp,roducinga kind ofPearlHarborfortheWestCoast- helpedtofuela stepthatwentfar beyondwhatwasnecessaryorusefultorespondtothethreat. 
Boththe availabilityheuristicand probabilityneglectcan be connectedto "dualprocess"approachesofthesortthathavereceived considerablerecentattentionin psychology(see generallyKahneman and Frederick2,002).Accordingto suchapproaches,peopleuse two cognitivseystemsS.ystemI is rapid,intuitivea,nderror-pronSey;stem II is moredeliberativec,alculatives,lowera,ndmorelikelytobe error974 social research freeH.euristic-basetdhinkingisrootedinSystemI; itissubjecttooverride,undercertainconditionsb,ySystemII (KahnemanandFrederick, 2002).3Forpurposesofpolicyandlaw,an importanttaskis todevelop institutionasnd rightsthatcreatea kindof SystemII correctiveto heuristic-drivejundgmentsand probabilityneglect,simplybecause theseproduceerrorsandseriousrisksoftheirown. 
C. Social Dimensions Myemphasisthusfarhasbeenon individuatlhinkingaboutrisksB.ut ofcoursesocialinfluenceasrequiteimportantS.ometimesavailability and saliencespreadthroughsocialbandwagonsorcascades,in which apparentlyrepresentativaenecdotesand grippingexamplesmove rapidlyfromonepersontoanotherI.nfact,a processofthissortplayed a largerolein the2002Washingtonarea sniperattacks,in the2001 anthraxattacks,and in manyothersetsofsocial processesproducingpublicfear.Considera stylizedexample.Andrewhearsofa social risk,whichhe findsto be revealingor illustrative(T.heeventmight involvecrime,environmenthalazards,orthreatstonationalsecurity.) AndrewtellsBarryw, howouldbe inclinedtoseetheeventas notterriblyinformativbe,utwho,seeingAndrew'sreactionc,omestobelieve thattheeventdoesindeedreveala greatdeal.OnceCarolhearsfrom AndrewandBarrys,heislikelytofinditrevealingas well.Deborahwill requirea greatdealofprivateinformatiotnorejectthesharedopinion ofAndrewB,arrya,nd Carol(Hirschleife1r9,95).Stylizedthoughitis, theexampleshowsthatonceseveralpeoplestartto takean example as probativem,anypeoplemaycometobe influencebdytheiropinion, givingriseto cascadeeffectsF.orexample,vividexamples,alongside socialinteractionasc,countfordecisionstopurchaseinsuranceagainst naturaldisasters(Gersen,2001).In thedomainofsocialrisks,"availabilitycascades"are responsibleformanysocialbeliefs(Kuranand Sunstein,1999).Thepointis amplifiedbythefactthatfear-inducing accountsw,ithhighemotionavlalence,arepeculiarl ylikelytospread. 
Thereis a closelyrelatedphenomenonP. rocessesofsocialdeliberationtypicallylead like-mindedpeople to accepta moreextreme Fear and Liberty 975 versionoftheviewswithwhichtheybegan(Sunstein2,000).Thisisthe processknownas grouppolarizatio n(MoscovicaindZavalloni1,969).If severalpeoplefearglobalwarminga,ndspeaktooneanothert,heirfear islikelytoincreaseas a resultofinternadliscussionsI.fgroupmembers believethattheUnitedStatescannotbe trustedin itsdealingswith othernationst,hatverybeliefislikelytobe heightenedaftermembers havestartedtotalk.GrouppolarizationhasnotbeenstudiedinconnectionwiththeavailabilityheuristicB.uttheclearimplicationis that theeffecotfcertainavailableexampleswillbecomegreatlyamplified throughgroupdiscussion. 
Suppose,forexample,thatseveralpeoplearediscussinga recent wave ofsniperattacks,or cases involvingthe kidnappingofyoung girlso,rsituationisnwhichthegovernmenhtaswrongl yignoreda serious foreignthreatI.ftheparticularexamplesarementionedt,heyare likelyto stickA.ndifthegrouphas a predispositiotnothinkthatone oranotherriskisseriouss,ocialdynamicwsillleadthegrouptobelieve thattheexampleis highlyrevealingS.o tooifthegroupis fearfuAl. n initialpredispositiotnowardfearislikelytobe aggravatedas a resultof collectivedeliberations. 
It shouldbe clearthatin therealworld,somevoicesare more importantthanothers,especiallywhenavailabilityand salienceare involvedI.n particulart,hebehaviorand preoccupationosfthemedia playa largerole.Manyperceived"epidemics"are in realityno such thing,butinsteada productofmediacoverageofgrippingu,nrepresentativeincidents(Best,1999).Attentionto thoseincidentsis likely to ensureavailabilityand salience,promotingan inaccuratelyhigh estimateofprobabilitayndat thesametimesomedegreeofprobabilityneglectA.ndin thefaceofclosemediaattentiont,hedemandfor governmentralesponseswillbe significantalyffected. 
EXCESSIVE FEAR AND NATIONAL SECURITY A. Bad Balancing Wearenowina positiontomakesomegeneralclaimsaboutwhyindividualsand governmentmsightoverreactto perceivedsocial risks, 976 social research includingtherisksofterrorismA.readilyavailableincidentis likelyto lead peopleto exaggeratethethreatI.fthemediafocuseson one ora fewincidentsp,ublicfearmightbe grosslydisproportionatteoreality. Andifoneora fewincidentsarenotonlysalientbutemotionallygripping,peoplemightnotthinkaboutprobabilitaytall.Bothprivateand publicinstitutionwsilloverreactI.tis easyto thinkofexamples.This isalmostcertainlywhathappenedinthecaseoftheanthraxattacksin theUnitedStatesof2001,inwhicha fewincidentlsedbothprivateand publicinstitutiontsoexaggeratae smallthreat. 
Nowsupposethatin anysituationthereis somekindofbalancingbetweensecuritayndcivillibertyS.uppose,thatis,thatthedegreeof appropriatientrusioinntothedomainoflibertyispartlya functioonfthe improvedsecurittyhatcomesfromtheintrusionT.heproblemisthatif peoplearemorefearfutlhantheyoughttobe,theywillseekortolerate incursionisntothedomainoflibertythatcouldnotbe justifiediffear werenotdisproportionaItfet.hereisanoptimatlradeofafmongtherelè vantvariablest,heavailabilithyeuristiacndprobabilitnyeglectc,ombined withsocialinfluencews,illinevitablpyroducea tradeoftfhatislessthan optimal-thatundulysacrificelsibert yattheexpenseofsecurityI n.the contextofthreattsonationaslecurityit,ispredictabltehatgovernments willinfringoencivillibertiewsithouatdequatejustification. B. BetterBalancing? Dual Processing, System II,and Cost-BenefitAnalysis Areinstitutionaclorrectivepsossible?In thecontextofordinaryrisk regulationc,ost-benefaitnalysis,understoodas an effortto catalogue theconsequencesofbothriskandriskreductioni,sa possibleremedy. In factcost-benefaitnalysiscan be understoodas an institutionalized SystemII safeguardagainstSystemI errorsonthepartofordinarycitizensandevenpublicofficialsIf.thegovernmenatttempttsoassessthe costsandbenefitosfregulationi,tcanprovidea measureofprotection againstbothpublichysteriaand publictorpor(Sunstein2,002b).Such anassessmentmightshowthata riskthatiscausinga greatdealoffear is actuallylow; it mightdemonstrattehatthepublicis neglectinga dangerthatthreatentsokillmanypeople. 
Fear and Liberty 977 
Of course a large problemis how to quantifythe variables involvedI.n thecontextofrisksto nationalsecurityc,ost-benefaintalysisrunsintoespeciallyformidabloebstacles,becausecalculationof theexpectedbenefitosfriskreductio nisatbestguessworkF.requently regulatorasre operatingin circumstanceosfuncertaintyratherthan risk.Theycannotcalculatetheprobabilitythatharmwilloccur- an informationaglap thatconfoundsformalanalysisofthebenefitsof regulationI.n its2003 reportto Congresst,heOfficeofManagement and Budget(OMB)listsno fewerthan69 regulationrselatedto homelandsecurityi,ncludingregulationsgoverningagriculturablioterrorism,screeningaliens and othersseekingflighttraining,requiring identificatiocnardsforbordercrossing,registerinagnd monitoring certainnonimmigrantasn,d governingterrorismriskinsurance.For almostallofthese69regulationsn,eithercostsnorbenefitwserequantified.OMBemphasizesthat"thedifficultiyn estimatingthe likely benefitsfroma particularregulatoryaction"is a productnotonlyof thedifficultoyfpredictinga terrorisatttack,butalso ofthefactthat terrorist"scanreactand respondtothesecurityand othercounterterrorismmeasuresthatthegovernmenatndprivatesectoradopt"(OMB reporttoCongress2,003:83). 
Butevenwhendecidingabouthow to reducerisksassociated withterrorisma,n informavlersionofcost-benefaitnalysisis unquestionablyatwork.Theriskofterrorisatttackscouldsurelybe reducedif thenationeliminatedall airlineflightsb,utthecostsofeliminatinagll airlineflightiss simplytoohigh.So too,itwouldbe possibletorequire all thosewhoattendbaseballgamesto presenttheiridentificatioinn orderto gainadmission,butthebenefitsofthisrequiremenwtould be fartoolowtojustifythe(admittedllyow)costs.Whenrestrictions areimposeda, roughassessmentofbothbenefitasndcostsisnecessarilyinvolvedI.n fact,theOMBhas shownconsiderablienterestinmore formaalnalysesofantiterrorismeasurese,venrecognizintgheformidableinformationbalarriertsosuchanalyses(OMBreporttoCongress, 2003:85).To saytheleast,itis exceptionallydifficulntotonlyto estimateprobabilitiebsutalsotomonetizesomeoftherelevantcosts(for 978 social research example,curtailmenotfcivilrightasndlibertiesb);uttheefforttodoso canbe seenas an institutionaclheckoncognitivperocessesthatmight 
C. Worse Balancing: Selective Restrictions In the contextof nationalsecuritya,nd indeedmoregenerallya,n understandinogftheproblemofexcessivefearmustmakean importantdistinctionW. ecanimaginerestrictionosnlibertythatapplytoall ormost- as in,forexample,a generalincreasein securityprocedures at airportso,ra measurethatsubjectseveryonec,itizensand noncitizensalike,to specialscrutinywhentheyare dealingwithsubstances thatmightbe used in bioterrorismW. e can also imaginerestrictions on libertythatapplyto someorfew- as in,forexample,restrictions onJapanese-Americanrasc,ialprofilingo,rtheconfinemenotfenemy aliensatGuantánamoW.henrestrictionaspplytoall ormost,political safeguardpsrovidea strongcheckonunjustifiegdovernmenatction.If theburdenoftherestrictioinswidelyshared,itisunlikelytobe acceptableunlessmostpeopleareconvincedthatthereisgoodreasonforit; and forgenuinelyburdensomerestrictionsp,eoplewillnotbe easily convincedunlessa goodreasonis apparentorprovided(.I putto one sidethepossibilitythatbecauseofthemechanismsI havediscussed, peoplewillthinkthata goodreasonexistswhetherornotitdoes.)But iftherestrictioins imposedon an identifiablseubgroupt,hepolitical checkisabsent.Liberty-reduciinngtrusioncsanbeimposedevenifthey aredifficutltojustify. 
These claimscan be illuminatedby a glance at the views of FriedrichHayekabouttheruleoflaw.Hayek(1960)writes,"Ifall that is prohibitedand enjoinedis prohibitedand enjoinedforall without exception,"then"littlethatanybodymayreasonablywishto do is likelyto be prohibited.H"ence"howcomparativeliynnocuous,even ifirksomea,remostsuchrestrictionimsposedon literallyeverybody, as ... comparedwiththosethatare likelyto be imposedonlyon some!"Thusitis "significantthatmostrestrictionosnwhatwe regard as privateaffairss,uch as sumptuarylegislation,have usuallybeen Fear and Liberty 979 imposedonlyon selectedgroupsofpeopleor,as inthecaseofprohibition,werepracticableonlybecausethegovernmenrteservedtheright tograntexceptions.H"ayekurges,inshortt,hattheriskofunjustified burdensdramaticalliyncreasesiftheyareselectiveandifmostpeople havenothingtoworryabout.Theclaimisespeciallynoteworthiynsituationsin whichpublicfearis producingrestrictionosn civilliberties. Peopleare likelyto ask,withsomeseriousnessw,hethertheirfearis in factjustifiedifstepsthatfollowfromitimposeburdensomeconsequenceson them.Butifindulgingfearis costlessb,ecausea selectfew facetherelevantburdens,thenthemerefactof"risk,"and themere presenceoffearw,illseemtoprovidea sufficienjutstification. D. TradeoffNeglect Considerin thislightHowardMargolis's(1996)effortto explainwhy expertsand ordinarypeople sharplydivergewithrespectto certain risks.Margolisthinksthatin somecases,ordinarypeoplearealertto thehazardsofsomeactivityb,utnotmuchalerttoitsbenefitsw,hich are cognitively"off-screenI.n" suchcases,peoplewilltendto think, "Bettersafethansorry,a"ndtheywillhavea highlynegativereaction to therisk.In suchcases,theywilldemandaggressiveand immediate regulationI.n othercases,thebenefitsoftheactivitywillbe very muchon people'sminds,butnotthehazards- inwhichcasetheywill tendtothink,"Nothingventuredn, othinggained."In suchcases,they willthinkthatregulatorasreoverzealouse,venfanaticsI.n stillother cases- inMargolis'sview,thecasesinwhichobserverasrebeingmost sensible-bothbenefitsand riskswillbe "on-screen,a"nd peoplewill assessrisksbycomparingthebenefitwsiththecosts. 
Margolisoffersa nice exampleto supportthispredictionT.he removalofasbestosfrompublicschoolsinNewYorkCitywas initially quitepopulari,ndeeddemandedbyfearfuplarentse,venthoughexperts believedthattheriskswerestatisticallsymall.Butwhenitemergedthat theremovawlouldcauseschoolstobe closedfora periodofweeks,and whentheclosingcausedparentsto becomegreatlyinconvenienced, parentalattitudetsurnedaround,and asbestosremovalseemedlikea 980 social research reallybadidea.Whenthecostsoftheremovalcameon-screenp,arents thoughtmuchmorelikeexpertsa,ndtherisksofasbestosseemedlike therisksofX-raysS:tatisticallsymall,nota sourceofsignificanftear, and on balanceworthincurringI.n thislightit is bothmildlycounterintuitivaend reasonableto predictthatpeoplewouldbe willingto payless,intermsofdollarsandwaitingtime,toreducelow-probability risksofanairplanedisasteriftheyarefrequenttravelersA. preliminary study(Harrington20,02)findsexactlythateffect. 
Itis onlynatural,in thislight,thatthoseconcernedaboutcivil libertiestryto promoteempatheticidentificatiowniththoseat risk or to make people fearfutlhattheyare themselvesin danger.The pointoftheefforatt identificatioins to placetherelevantburdensor costs"on-screen,a"nd hencetobroadentheclassofpeopleburdened bygovernmenatction,ifonlythroughan act ofimaginationP.astor MartinNiemoller'sremarksaboutGermanyin the 1940shaveoften beenquotedbycivillibertarian"s:Firsttheycameforthesocialistsa,nd I didnotspeakoutbecauseI wasnota socialistT.hentheycameforthe tradeunionistsa,ndI didnotspeakoutbecauseI wasnota tradeunionist.ThentheycamefortheJewsa,ndI didnotspeakoutbecauseI was nota JewT.hentheycameforme,and therewas no one leftto speak forme."In manysituationst,heapparentlessonofthistaleis empiricallydoubtfulI.f"they"comeforsome,itdoes notat all followthat "they"willeventuallycomeforme.Everythindgependson thenature of"they"andof"me."Butthetaleis psychologicallaycute;itattempts toinculcatei,nthosewhohearit,a fearthattherisksofan overreachinggovernmenctannoteasilybe cabined. 
victimsoftheinfringemenctan be seenas an identifiablgeroupthat is readilyseparablefrom"us." Stereotypinogfgroupssignificantly increaseswhenpeopleare in a stateoffear;and ifpeopleareprimed to thinkabouttheirowndeath,theyaremorelikelyto thinkand act in accordancewithgroup-basedstereotype(s Experimentaflindingosfthiskindsupporttheintuitiviedeathatwhen peopleareafraidt,heyarefarmorelikelytotolerategovernmenatction Fear and Liberty 981 thatabridgesthefreedomofmembersofsome"out-groupA."ndifthis is thecase,responsesto socialfear,in theformofinfringemenotsn libertiesw,illnotreceivethenaturalpoliticalchecksthatarisewhen majoritiessuffears wellas benefitfromthem.Thesimpleideahereis thatliberty-infringaicntgionis mostlikelytobejustifiedifthosewho supportthatactionarealsoburdenedbyit;inthatevent,thepolitical processcontainsa built-inprotectionagainstunjustifiablreestrictions. Inall cases,itfollowsthatgovernmennteedssomemethodsforensuringagainstexcessivereactionsto social risks,includingunjustified intrusionosncivilliberties. 
PROTECTING LIBERTY Itwouldbe possibletotaketheargumentjsustmadeas a reasonforan aggressivjeudicialrolein theprotectionofcivillibertiese,venwhen nationalsecurit yis threatenedB.uttherearerealcomplicationhsere.4 Takinga pagefromtheenvironmentalistbso'ok,letus noticethatthe availabilityheuristicand probabilityneglectmightbe leadingpeople notto overstaterisksbutto takepreviouslyoverlookedhazardsseriously- topayattentiontohazardsthathadnotpreviouslyappearedon thepublicviewscreenI.n theenvironmentaclontextt,hepointseems right;readilyavailable incidentshelp to mobilizepeople formerly sufferinfgromtorporand indifferencTe.he cognitiveprocessesthat produceexcessivefearcancounteracitnsufficienftear. 
Thesamemightwellbe trueofriskstonationalsecurityIn.deed, lax airlinesecuritymeasuresbefore9/11wereundoubtedlya product ofthe"unavailabilityo"fterrorisatttacksA.vailabilitbyias,produced bythe availabilityheuristic,is accompaniedbyunavailabilitybias, producedbythesameheuristicI.fan incidentdoesnotcometomind, bothindividualsand institutionsshouldbe expectedto takeinsufficientprecautionse,veninthefaceofexpertwarnings(as in factwere commonlyvoicedabouttheabsenceofcarefuslecuritymeasuresbefore the9/11attacks)P.robabilityneglectcan produceintensefearoflowprobabilityrisks;butwhenrisksdo notcaptureattentionat all,they mightbe treatedas zero,eventhoughtheydeserveconsiderablaetten982 social research tion.Muchofthetime,publicfearis bipolar:eitherdangersappear "significanto"rtheyappearnottoexistat all.ThemechanismsI have discussedhelpexplainhystericaolverreactionsb,uttheycan provide correctionasgainstneglectas well. 
Thereisalsoaninstitutionpaloint.Courtsarenot,tosaytheleast, ina goodpositiontoknowwhetherestrictionosncivillibertyaredefensible.Theylackthefact-findincogmpetencethatwouldenablethemto makeaccurateassessmentosfthedangersT.heyarehardlyexpertson thequestionwhetherthereleaseofa dozenprisonerast Guantánamo wouldcreatea nontriviarliskofa terrorisatttack.Itis quitepossible thatan aggressivjeudicialposturein theprotectionofcivilliberties, amidwar,wouldmakethingsfarworseratherthanbetterI.nanycase, courtsaretraditionallryeluctanto interferwe ithpubliclysupported restrictionosncivillibertiest;heydo notlikesimplyto"block"restrictionsthathavebothofficiaalndcitizenapproval(Rehnquist1,998). 
I suggestthat courtsshould and can approachthe relevant issuesthroughan institutionallens,one thatplayscloseattentionto theunderlyinpgsychologicaalnd politicaldynamicsT.hereare three pointshere.Thefirstand mostimportanits thatrestrictionosn civil libertieshouldnotbe permitteudnlesstheyhaveunambiguoulsegislativeauthorizationS.uchrestrictionsshouldnotbe allowedto come fromthepresidentalone.Thesecondpointis thatin orderto protect againstunjustifierdesponsesto fear,courtsshouldbe relativelymore skepticaolfintrusionosn libertythatarenotgeneralandthatburden identifiablegroups.The thirdand finalpointis thatconstitutional principlesshouldreflectsecond-ordebralancing,producingrulesand presumptionrs,atherthanad hocbalancingT.hereasonis thatunder thepressureofthemomentc,ourtsarelikelytofavorthegovernment, evenwhentheyshouldnot. 
A. The Principleof Clear Statement Formanyyears,Israel'sGeneralSecurityServicehasengagedincertain formsofphysicalcoercion,sometimesdescribedas torturea,gainst suspectedterroristAs.ccordingto theGeneralSecurityService,these Fear and Liberty 983 practicesoccurredonlyin extremecases and as a last resort,when deemednecessaryto preventterrorisatctivityand significanltoss of life.Nonethelessp,racticesworthyofthe name "torture"did occur, and theywerenotrare.Thosepracticeswerechallengedbeforethe SupremeCourtofIsraelon the groundthattheywereinconsistent withthenation'sfundamentallaw.The governmenrtespondedthat abstractionasbouthumanrightsshouldnotbe permittetdoovercome real-worlndecessitiesoas tobana practicethatwas,incertaincircumstances,genuinelyessentialto preventmassivedeathsin an area of theworldthatwas oftensubjecttoterrorisatctivityA.ccordingto the governmentp,hysicacloercionwasjustifiedinthesecircumstanceAs. judicialdecisionto theoppositeeffecwtouldbe a formofunjustified activisme,venhubris. 
Indecidingthecase,theSupremeCourtofIsraelrefusedtoresolve themostfundamentaqluestions(AssociatifoonrCiviRlightisnIsraevl.The GeneraSlecuritSyervice1,999).Itdeclinedtosaywhetherthepracticesof thesecurityforceswouldbe illegitimatiefexpresslyauthorizedbya democratilcegislatureB.utthecourtnonetheleshseldthatthosepracticeswereunlawfulT.he court'sprincipalargumentwas thatifsuch coercionwereto be acceptable,it couldnotbe becausetheGeneral SecurityService,withitsnarrowagenda,said so. Ata minimumt,he disputedpracticesmustbe endorsedbythenationallegislaturea,ftera fulldemocratidcebateon theprecisequestion."[T]hisis an issuethat mustbe decidedbythelegislaturberanchwhichrepresenttshepeople. We do nottakeanystandon thismatterat thistime.Itis therethat variousconsiderationms ustbe weighed." 
It is worthwhileto pause overa centralfeatureofthisdecision.Insteadofdecidingthe fundamentailssue,the courtreliedon theinadequacyf,romthedemocraticpointofview,ofa judgmentby theGeneralSecurityServicealone.To saytheleast,membersofthat organizationdo notrepresenat broadspectrumofsocietyI.tis all too likelythatpeople who workwiththe GeneralSecurityServicewill sharepointsofviewandframesofreferenceW. hensuchpeopledeliberatewithone anotherg,rouppolarizationis likelytobe atwork;the 984 social research participantwsillprobablystrengthenr,atherthantest,theirexisting convictionsv,erypossiblytothedetrimenotfhumanrightsA.broader debate,witha greaterrangeofviews,is a necessarypreconditionfor coercionofthissort.TheSupremeCourtofIsraelrequiredclearlegislativeauthorizationforthisparticularintrusionon libertyi;tinsisted thatexecutiveaction,undera vagueorambiguouslaw,wouldnotbe enough. 
Wecangeneralizefromthisdecisiontosuggestthatas a rule,the legislativebranchofgovernmenmtustexplicitlyauthorizedisputed infringemenotns civillibertyT.hereasonforthissafeguardistoensure againstinadequatelyconsideredrestrictio-nsandto insistthatpolitical safeguardsin,theformofauthorizationfroma deliberativberanch ofgovernmenwtithdiversemembersa,rea minimalpreconditionfor intrusionosn civillibertiesA. specialriskis thatgrouppolarization, withintheexecutivberanchw,illleadtostepsthathavenotbeensubject tosufficientblyroaddebate.Deliberationwithinthelegislativberanch is morelikelytoensurethatrestrictionosn libertyareactuallydefensible.Preciselybecauseofitssize and diversitya,legislatureis more likelyto containpeoplewhowillspeakforthosewho are burdened, andhencelegislativperocesseshavesomepotentiaflorproducingthe protectionthatHayekidentifiewsiththeruleoflaw.In theseways, therequiremenotfclearlegislativsetatemenetnliststheideaofchecks andbalancesintheserviceofindividuarlight-s notthroughflatbans on governmenatction,butthroughrequiringtwo,ratherthanone, branchesofgovernmenttoapprove. 
In theUnitedStates,a goodmodelhereis theremarkabledecisioninKentv.Dulles(1958),decidedattheheightoftheColdWar.Inthat case,theSupremeCourtwasaskedtoconsiderwhetherthesecretaroyf statecoulddenya passporttoRockwelKlent,anAmericancitizenwho was a memberoftheCommunistPartyK.entarguedthatthedenial was a violationofhisconstitutionarlightsand shouldbe invalidated forthatreason.Thecourtrespondedbyrefusingtoruleon theconstitutionalquestion.Insteaditsaidthat,at a minimuma,nydenialofa passporton thesegroundswouldhavetobe specificallayuthorizedby Fear and Liberty 985 CongressT. hecourtthereforsetruckdownthedecisionofthesecretary ofstatebecauseCongresshadnotexplicitlyauthorizedtheexecutiveto denypassportsincasesofthiskind. 
Kentv.Dulleshas been followedbymanycases holdingthatthe executivecannotintrudeintoconstitutionalslyensitivdeomainsunless Congresshassquarelyauthorizedittodo so.WhatI am addinghereis thatbecauseoftheriskofexcessiveorunjustifiefdeart,hisisa salutary approachwheneverrestrictionosn civillibertyfollowfromactualor perceivedexternalthreatsI.fcongressionaaluthorizatio nis required, courtshavea simplequestiontoaskincasesinwhichtheBushadministratio nis allegedto haveviolatedcivillibertiesH:as Congressspecificallyauthorizedthepresidentto engagein theactionthatis being challenged? 
Ofcourse,requiringspecificauthorizationis no panacea. It is possiblethatCongress,itselfexcessivelyfearfulw,ill permitthe presidentto do somethingthatcannotbe justifiedin principle.It is also possiblethatCongresswill failto authorizethepresidentto act in circumstanceisn whichactionis justifiedor even indispensable.WhatI am suggestingis thatas a generalrule,a requiremenotf congressionaplermissionis probablythebestwayto reducetherelevantdanger-s thoseofexcessiveand insufficienptrotectionasgainst securityrisks. 
B. Special Scrutinyof Selective Denials of Liberty I haveemphasizedthatpublicfearmightwellproduceexcessivereactionsfromCongressT.he riskis especiallyseriouswhenidentifiable groupsr,atherthanthepublicas a whole,arebeingburdened. 
Considerin thisregardan illuminatingpassagefroma famous opinion(RailwayExpresAsgencyv.NewYork1,949) byJusticeRobert Jackson: 
persuadeus to use thedue processclauseto strikedown a substantivelaw or ordinance.Even its providentuse 986 social research against municipal regulationsfrequentlydisables all governmen-t state,municipaland federa-l fromdealing withthe conductin questionbecause the requirementofdueprocessis also applicableto StateandFederal GovernmentIsn. validationofa statuteoran ordinanceon dueprocessgroundsleavesungovernedandungovernable conductwhichmanypeoplefindobjectionable. 
hand,doesnotdisableanygovernmentablodyfromdealingwiththe subjectat hand. It merelymeansthatthe prohibitionor regulationmusthave a broaderimpact.I regarditas a salutarydoctrinethatcities,statesand the FederalGovernmenmtustexercisetheirpowersso as not to discriminatebetweentheirinhabitantsexceptupon somereasonabledifferentiatifoanirlyrelatedtotheobject ofregulationT. hisequalityis notmerelyabstractjustice. 
The framersof the Constitutionknew,and we should notforgetoday,thatthereis no moreeffectivperactical guarantyagainstarbitraryand unreasonablegovernment thanto requirethattheprinciplesoflaw whichofficials wouldimposeupona minoritmyustbe imposedgenerally. Converselyn,othingopensthedoorto arbitrarayctionso effectivelays to allow thoseofficialsto pickand choose onlya fewtowhomtheywillapplylegislationandthusto escapethepoliticalretributiotnhatmightbe visitedupon themiflargernumberswere affectedC.ourtscan take no bettermeasureto assurethatlawswillbe justthanto requirethatlawsbe equal inoperation. 
JusticJeacksonis makingtwopointshere.Thefirstis thatwhen thecourtrulesthatsomeconductcannotbe regulatedatall,itis interveningi,na majorway,intodemocratipcrocessesm,akingthatconduct essentially"unregulable.T"he secondis thatwhenthecourtstrikes Fear and Liberty 987 governmenatctiondoneon equalitygrounds,itrequiresthegovernmenttoincreasethebreadthofitsrestrictionth,ustriggerinpgolitical checksagainstunjustifiedburdensW.itha modesttwistonJackson's argumentw, ecanseea potentiaalpproachforcourtsfacedwithclaims aboutunlawfulinterferencweithcivillibertiesI.fthegovernmenits imposinga burdenon thecitizensas a whole,oron a randomdrawof citizens,thentheappropriatejudicialpostureis one ofdeferenceto thegovernmen(tatleastiffreespeechisnotinvolveda;n exceptionfor freespeechmakessensein lightofthefactthatdemocraticprocesses cannotworkwellwithoutit).Butifthegovernmenitmposesa burden onan identifiablseubclassofcitizensa, warningflagshouldgoup.The courtsshouldgivecarefuslcrutintyothatburden. 
Ofcourse,thesegeneralpropositionsdo not resolveconcrete cases;everythintgurnson theparticularnatureoftheconstitutional challenge.Butan appreciationoftherisksofselectivitysuggeststhe properorientationI.n Korematsvu.UniteSdtates(1944),challengingthe internmenotfJapanese-Americantsh,e courtshouldhave been far moreskepticalofthegovernmentj'sustifications,implybecausethe internmenwtas peculiarlyimmunefrompoliticalcheckson liberty. MostAmericanhsadnothingtofearfromit.Thesamepointholdsfor thecontemporarwyaron terrorismS.omeoftherelevantrestrictions havebeen limitedto noncitizensin a waythatcreatesa realriskof overreachingC.ourtsshouldtakea carefulookatthelegitimacyofthe governmentj'sustificationfsorimposingburdenson peoplewho are unableto protectthemselvesin thepoliticalprocess.Considerin this regardone ofPresidenGteorgeW.Bush'slesscircumspecrtemarksin defenseoftheidea thatenemycombatantsmightbe triedin special militarytribunalsP.residenBtushsuggestedthatwhateverprocedures areapplied,thedefendantws illreceivefairertreatmentthantheygave to murderedAmericanson 9/11T.heproblemwiththissuggestionis thatitbegsthequestionw,hichiswhetherthedefendantws ere,infact, involvedinthe9/11attackH.ereisanillustratioonftheextenttowhich feara,ndthethirsftorvengeancec,anleadtounjustifieidnfringements ofcivilliberties. 
988 social research C. Balancing and Second-Order Balancing ThusfarI haveoperateudndera simpleframeworsku,pposintghatin anysituationt,hereis somekindofbalancingbetweensecuritaynd civillibert-ysomethinlgikean optimatlradeofAf.sthemagnitude ofthethreatincreasest,heargumenftorintrudinogncivilliberties alsoincreasesI.ftheriskis greatg,overnmenmtightf,orexample, increasesearchesin airportse;nsurea constanptolicepresenceon publicplaces,withfrequenrtequestfsoridentificatiopne;rmimtilitarytribunatlsotrythosesuspecteodfterroriascttivityan;dallowthe policetoengageinpracticetshatwouldnotbepermitteudnderordinarycircumstances. 
Underthebalancingapproache,verythintgurnson whether publicfearisjustifiedW. hatistheextentoftherisk?If,inshortw,e believethatthereisanoptimatlradeofafmongtherelevanvtariables, excessivfeearwillinevitablpyroducea tradeoftfhatislessthanoptimal- thatundulysacrificelsibert yat theexpenseofsecurityT.his approachtotherelationshbipetweenlibertayndsecuritiys standard andintuitivaen,dsomethinlgikeitseemstomecorrectB.utitisnot withouctomplicationTsh.eremighbte,forexamplea,"core"ofrights intowhichgovernmenctannotintrudeandforwhichbalancingis inappropriatCeo.nsidertortureS.omepeoplebelievethatwhatever thecircumstancetso,rturceannotbe justifiede;venthemostwellgroundepdublicfearisinsufficietnotjustifiyt.Inoneformt,hisargumentturnsona beliefthatconsequentialijsutstificationarsenever enoughtoauthoriztehiskindofintrusionIb.elievethatinthisform, theargumenits a kindofmoralheurist-iconethatis fartoorigid, evenfanaticaIls. itsensibletobantorturwe hentorturies theonly meansofprotectinthgousandosfpeoplefromcertaindeath? 
Butanotherm, oreplausiblfeormoftheargumenistruleutilitarian:a flatprohibitioonntortureo,nethatforbidbsalancinginindividualcases,mighbtejustifieodnthebasisofa kindofsecond-order balancingIt.mighbteconcludendotthattorturiesneve rjustifieidn principlbe,utthatunlesstorturiesentireloyutlawedg,overnmewntill engageintorturiencasesinwhichitisnotjustifiedth,atthebenefits Fear and Liberty 989 oftorturearerarelysignificantan,d thatthepermissionto torturein extraordinarcyases will lead, on balance,to moreharmthangood. Undercertainassumptionst,hisviewis entirelyplausible.Andifitis, we mightadopta firmprohibitionontorturee,venwhenpublicfearis bothextremeandentirelyjustified. 
Can otherrightsbe understoodsimilarlyC?onsiderthearea of freespeechlawintheUnitedStates,andtherelationshibpetweenfear andrestrictionosn speech.In theColdWar,governmenatttemptedto regulatespeechthat,initsview,wouldincreasetheinfluencoefcommunism.TheSmithAct,enactedin1946,madeita crimeforanyperson"to knowinglyorwillingl yadvocate,abet,advise,orteachthedutyn,ecessityd,esirabilityor,proprietoyfoverthrowinogrdestroyinagnygovernmentintheUnitedStatesbyforceorviolence,orbytheassassination ofanyofficeorfsuchgovernmentI/n' Dennivs.UniteSdtates(1951),the governmenptrosecutedpeoplefororganizingtheCommunisPtartyof theUnitedStatesa,norganizatiotnhatwassaidtoteachandadvocatethe overthrowoftheUnitedStatesgovernmenbtyforceT.hecourtheldthat theconstitutionaliotfytheSmithActwouldstandorfallonwhetherthe speechin question"createda 'clearandpresentdanger'ofattempting oraccomplishintgheprohibitedcrime."In itsmostimportanatnalytic step,thecourtconcludedthatthistestdidnotmeanthatthedanger musttrulybe clearandpresenti;tdenied"thatbeforetheGovernment mayact,itmustwaituntiltheputschisabouttobe executedt,heplans havebeenlaidandthesignalisawaited."Whena groupwasattempting toindoctrinatietsmembersandtocommitthemtoa courseofaction, "actionbytheGovernmenitsrequired." 
FollowingthedistinguishecdourtofappealsJudgeLearnedHand, thecourtconceivedtheclearandpresentdangertest,inthesecircumstances,to involvea formofbalancing,so that"Ineach case [courts] mustaskwhetherthegravityofthe 'evil,'discountedbyitsimprobabilityj,ustifiessuchinvasionoffreespeechas isnecessarytoavoidthe danger.T"hecourtsaidthatitwould"adoptthisstatemenotftherule." Havingdoneso,thecourtupheldtheconvictionsI.trecognizedthat no uprisinghad occurredB.utthebalancingtestauthorizedcriminal 990 social research punishmenitn lightof"theinflammablneatureofworldconditions, similaruprisingisnothercountriesa,ndthetouch-and-gnoatureofour relationwsithcountriewsithwhom[defendantws]ereintheveryleast ideologicallyattuned." 
Dennissees theclearand presentdangertestas one ofad hoc balancinga,tleastincasesthatinvolvea potentiallycatastrophihcarm. Butmanypeople have been skepticalof such balancing,whichno longerreflecttshelaw.Instead,thecourtunderstandtsheideaofclear andpresentdangertorequirethatthedangerbe bothlikelyandimminent(Brandenbuvr.gOhio,1969).Thisapproachis quitedifferenftrom JudgeHand'sbalancingtest.Itdoesnotaskcourtstodiscounttheevil byitsprobabilit-yan approachthatwouldpermitspeechregulation ifan extremelyseriousevilhas (say)a 20 percentchanceofoccurring. Underthecourt'scurrentstandards,peechis protectedifharmis not "likely.A"ndevenifa riskhasa 70percentchanceofoccurringa,ndis thereforleikelyr,egulationis apparentlyunacceptableunlesstherisk is imminentH.ow shouldwe choosebetweena balancingapproach andonethatrequiresbothlikelihoodandimminenceA?tfirstglance, theDennisapproachseemsmuchbetter,at leaston consequentialist groundsI.fa riskis only10percentlikelytooccur,but100,000people willdie iftheriskcomesto fruitiong,overnmensthouldnotsimply standbyuntilitis too late.In theenvironmentaclontextb,alancing is surelypreferablteo a rulethatwouldrequirebothlikelihoodand imminence. 
What,then,can be saidin favortherequirementosflikelihood andimminenceP?erhapstherequirementhsaveinstitutionjaulstifications;perhapstheyarea responsetoa judgmentthatintherealworld, theDennisapproachwill produceexcessiveregulationofspeech.If balancingis entirelyaccuratew,e shouldbalance.Butwherespeechis unpopularo,rwhenpeoplearefrighteneodfit,governmenmt ightwell concludethat"thegravityofthe'evil,'discountedbyitsprobability," justifiesregulatione,venthoughitactuallydoesnot. 
In thecontextofspeech,thereare independentconsiderations. Publicdisapprovaolfthecontentofspeechmightresultina judgment Fear and Liberty 991 thatitislikelytocauseharmeveniftherealmotivationforcensorship isdisagreemenwtiththeunderlyinigdeas.Andiftheharmisnotimminent,disagreemenatnd dissentmightwellpreventitfromoccurring. Theimminencreequiremenctanthereforbee understoodas a recognitionoftheideathatmorespeech,ratherthancensorshipi,stheappropriateresponsetoanticipatedharm.Inthesecircumstancews,ecansee theclearand presentdangertestas reflectinagkindofsecond-order balancingo,nethatdistrustosfficiajludgmentsaboutrisksandharms andthatrequiresgovernmenttoprovidean unusuallyhighburdenof proof. 
As I have suggested,a generalprohibitionof torturecan be understoodin similartermsT.hejustificationneednotbe thattorture canneverbe defendedbyreferencteoconsequencesA.lesscontentious justificatiownouldbe thata governmentthatislicensedtotorturweill do sowhentorturies notwarrante-d andthatthesocialcostsofdisallowingtorturdeonot,intheend,comeclosetothesocialbenefitsI.am notsuggestintghatthisjudgmentisnecessarilycorrectB. utI dobelieve thataggressivperotectionofcivillibertiesandcivilrightsis oftenbest defendedon thesegroundsa,s a safeguardagainstmassfearorhysteriathatwouldlead to stepsthatcannotbe justifiedon balance.In a sense,libertieasre"overprotectedc,o"mparedtothelevelofprotection thattheywouldreceiveina systemof(optimalc)ase-by-casbealancing. Becauseoptimalbalancingisnotlikelytooccurintherealworld,rulebasedprotectionisa justifiablseecondbest. 
Aggressiveprotectionoffreespeechhas beenjustifiedon the groundthat courtsshould take a "pathologicalperspective,"one suitedforperiodsinwhichthepublic,andhencethejudiciaryw,illbe temptedto allowindefensiblreestrictionisn theheatofthemoment (Blasi,1985).The argumentis thatfreespeechlaw buildsup strong, rule-likeprotectionse,schewingbalancingand sometimesprotecting speechthatoughtnottobe protectedT. hereasonforthe"pathological perspectivei"s to createsafeguardtshatwillworkwhenlibertyis undersiege.Sucha perspectivcereatesan obviousproblemI:tmightbe thatwhenlibertyis undersiege,publicnecessityrequiresittobe.The 992 social research pathologicaplerspectivreunstheriskofoverprotectinligbertyB.utif theargumenhtereiscorrectt,hereisreasontobelievethatpublicfear, heightenedbyworst-cassecenariosw,illresultin selectiveburdenson thosewho are unableto protectthemselvesI.n suchcases,constitutionallaw operatesbestifitusesnotbalancingbutrulesorpresumptions,allowinggovernmenttocompromisleibertyonlyonthebasisof a compellingdemonstratioonfnecessity. 
CONCLUSION I haveattemptedto uncoversomemechanismsthatcan lead a fearfulpublicto supportunjustifiedrisk-reductiopnolicies,including unjustifiedintrusionosn civillibertiesT.heavailabilityheuristicand probabilityneglectoftenlead people to treatrisksas muchgreater thantheyin factare,and hence to acceptrisk-reductiosntrategies thatdo considerableharmandlittlegood.Civillibertiesmaybejeopardizedforpreciselythisreason.Andwhentheburdensofgovernmentrestrictionasre facedbyan identifiablmeinorityratherbythe majorityt,heriskofunjustifiedactionis significantliyncreased.The internmenotfJapanese-AmericandsuringWorldWarII is onlyone salientexample;someaspectsofthecurrentwaron terrorismmight be similarlyunderstood. 
Whatcan be donein response?I havesuggestedthreepossibilities.Firstc,ourtsshouldnotallowtheexecutivetointrudeoncivillibertieswithoutexplicitlegislativeauthorizationS.econd,courtsshould usuallybedeferentiatlointrusiontshatapplytoallormost;theyshould be moreskepticalwhengovernmenrtestricttshelibertyofa readily identifiablfeew.Third,courtsshouldavoidad hocbalancingofliberty againstsecurityt;heyshoulddevelopprinciplesthatreflecta kindof second-ordebralancinga,ttunedtoinstitutioncalonsiderationasndthe riskofexcessivefearT.hesethreestrategieasreunlikelytoprovideall oftheprotectionsoughtbycivillibertarianasgainsttheadverseeffects ofexcessivepublicfearB.utwhentheriskstonationalsecurityarereal, courtsareproperlyreluctantobe as aggressiveas in ordinarytimes. Thetaskis nottoauthorizecourtstoadopta roletowhichtheyareillFearand Liberty 993 suited,butto developapproachesthatcounteractheriskthatpublic fearwillleadtounjustifierdestrictions. 
NOTES 
Vermeul(eforthcomin2g004). aretriggeredv,ariationisnprobabilitmy atterrelativellyittle. spaces;theymightevenbe understooads heuristics(S!e)e Kahneman andFrederic(k2002).Thereis,howevers,omeevidencethatdifferent sectorsofthebraincanbe associatedwithSystemIsandII. See the discussionoffearin LeDoux(1996),andthemoregeneraltreatment inLieberman(2003). 994 social research JohnsonE,.J.,et al. "FramingP,robabilityDistortionsa,nd Insurance 
Decisions.J"ournoaflRiskandUncertain7t:1y(Augus1t993). 
JolisC,hristinee,t al. "ABehavioraAlpproachto Lawand Economics." 
StanforLdawReview50:5 (May1998). 
KahnemanD, aniel,andShaneFrederick".RepresentativeneRsesvisited: AttributSeubstitutioinn IntuitivJeudgmentH."euristiacnsdBiases: ThePsychologofyIntuitivJeudgmenEtd.s. ThomasGilovich,Dale Griffinan,d DanielKahnemanN.ewYork:CambridgUeniversity Press2,002. 
Kuran,Timur,and Cass R. Sunstein."AvailabilitCyascadesand Risk 
RegulationS."tanforLdawRevie w51:4(Apri1l999):683. 
LeDoux,Joseph.TheEmotionBalrain.NewYork:Simonand Schuster, 
LiebermanM,atthew".Reflexivaend ReflectivJeudgmenPtrocessesA: SocialCognitiveNeuroscienceApproach."SociaJludgmenEtsd.s. JosephP. Forgas,KiplingD. Williams,and Williamvon Hippel. 
NewYorkC:ambridgUe niversitPyress2,003. 
LoewensteinG,eorge".RiskAsFeelings.P"sychologBicuallleti1n27:2(March 2001). 
MargolisH, owardD.ealingWithRiskC.hicagoU:niversitoyfChicagoPress, 
MoscoviciS,.,andM.Zavalloni".TheGroupas a PolarizerofAttitudes." 
OfficeofManagementand Budget."InforminRgegulatoryDecisions: 2003 Reportto Congress"<http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/ inforeg/regpol-reports_congress.html>. 
Posner,Eric,and AdrianVermeule."AccommodatinEgmergencies." 
StanforLdawReview(forthcomin2g004). 
RehnquistW, illiamA.lltheLawsbutOneN.ewYorkK:nopf1,998. RottenstreicYhu,val,andChristopheHrsee."MoneyK, isses,andElectric Shocks:On theAffectivPesychologoyfRisk."PsychologiSccailence 12:3(May2001):185. 
ShermanS,tevenJ.e,tal."ImagininCganHeightenofLowerthePerceived LikelihoodofContractinagDisease:TheMediatingEffecotfEase Fearand Liberty 995 996 social research 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 219 (2D SERIES) Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information Markets 
Cass R. Sunstein 
T H E L A W S C H O O L T H E U N I V E R S I T Y O F C H I C A G O 
August 2004 (revised October 2004) Preliminary draft 9/30/04 All rights reserved 
Cass R. Sunstein* How can groups elicit and aggregate the information held by their individual members? There are three possibilities. Groups might use the statistical mean of individual judgments; they might encourage deliberation; or they might use information markets. In both private and public institutions, deliberation is the standard way of proceeding; but for two reasons, deliberating groups often fail to make good decisions. First, the statements and acts of some group members convey relevant information, and that information often leads other people not to disclose what they know. Second, social pressures, imposed by some group members, often lead other group members to silence themselves because of fear of disapproval and associated harms. As a result, deliberation often produces a series of unfortunate results: the amplification of errors, hidden profiles, cascade effects, and group polarization. A variety of steps should be taken to ensure that deliberating groups obtain the information held by their members; restructuring private incentives, in a way that increases disclosure, is the place to start. Information markets have substantial advantages over group deliberation; such markets count among the most intriguing institutional innovations of the last quarter-century and should be used far more than they now are. One advantage of information markets is that they tend to correct, rather than to amplify, the effects of individual errors. Another advantage is that they create powerful incentives to disclose, rather than to conceal, privately held information. Information markets thus provide the basis for a Hayekian critique of many current celebrations of political deliberation. They also provide a valuable heuristic for understanding how to make deliberation work better. These points bear on discussion of normative issues, in which deliberation might also fail to improve group thinking, and in which identifiable reforms could produce better outcomes. Applications include the behavior of juries, multimember judicial panels, administrative agencies, and congressional committees; analogies, also involving information aggregation, include open source software, Internet “wikis,” and weblogs. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. For valuable comments, I am grateful to Michael Abramowitz, Bruce Ackerman, Ian Ayres, Bernard Harcourt, Saul Levmore, Douglas Lichtman, Richard Posner, and Adam Samaha. I am also grateful to participants in workshops at Harvard Law School, the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, the University of Chicago Law School, and the Yale Law School. A version of this paper was presented as the keynote lecture at a conference on Whither Democracy? at Brandeis University, and I am grateful to participants for their suggestions and criticisms. Many thanks also to Robert Park for extraordinary research assistance. Thanks above all to Reid Hastie, for a great deal of patient help and tutoring. 
“Increased accuracy is a common justification for using groups, rather than individuals, to make judgments. However, the empirical literature shows that groups excel as judges only under limited conditions. . . . [G]roups performing tasks that involve solutions that are not easily demonstrable tend to perform at the level of their average members.”1 
“The presumption that Iraq had active WMD programs was so strong that formalized [Intelligence Community] mechanisms established to challenge assumptions and ‘group think,’ such as ‘red teams,’ ‘devil’s advocacy,’ and other types of alternative or competitive analysis, were not utilized.”2 
“Sometimes important forecasts are made in traditional group meetings. This . . . should be avoided because it does not use information efficiently. A structured approach for combining independent forecasts is invariably more accurate.”3 
How can groups obtain the information that their members have? There are three principal answers. First, groups might use the statistical mean (or median) of the independent judgments of their members. Second, groups might ensure deliberation, asking for the reasoned exchange of facts, ideas, and opinions. Third, groups might use information markets, through which group members, or those outside of the group, “bet” on their judgments about future events. Of course each of these methods can take diverse forms; one of my principal goals here is to explore which forms are most likely to produce good outcomes. The choice bears on the performance of many institutions involved in law and politics, including juries, administrative agencies, congressional committees, federal courts of appeals, and even the Supreme Court itself. 
Both private and public institutions usually prefer to make decisions through deliberation. Generalizing from this fact, many people have paid a great deal of attention to deliberative accounts of democracy itself. The theoretical foundations of deliberative 1 See Daniel Gigone and Reid Hastie, Proper Analysis of the Accuracy of Group Judgments, 121 Psych. Bulletin 149 (1997). 2 Select Committee on Intelligence, United States Senate, Report of the U.S. Intelligence Community’s Prewar Intelligence Assessments on Iraq, Conclusions, at 7. 3 J. Scott Armstrong, Combining Forecasts, in Principle of Forecasting 417, 433 (J. Scott Armstrong ed. 2001). democracy have been elaborated in some detail,4 and increasing attention is being devoted to methods for making democratic processes more deliberative. James Fishkin, for example, has pioneered the idea of the “deliberative opinion poll,” by which people are asked to deliberate together on public issues and to state their judgments only after the deliberative process.5 Fishkin and Bruce Ackerman have gone so far as to suggest a new national holiday, Deliberation Day, in which people are asked to congregate in groups in order to discuss and debate important issues of public policy.6 Perhaps the proposal is unrealistic; perhaps citizens as a whole should not be expected to deliberate much in a liberal society.7 But even if this is true, leaders in the public and private sphere might be urged to deliberate more than they now do, and many accounts of deliberative democracy emphasis the importance of deliberation by representatives.8 
Why, exactly, is deliberation important or even desirable? A central answer must be that deliberation will result in wiser judgments and better outcomes.9 But does deliberation actually have this effect? The answer is by no means clear.10 Group members may impose pressures on one another, leading to a consensus on falsehood rather than truth. The idea of “groupthink,” coined and elaborated by Irving Janis, suggests the possibility that groups will tend toward uniformity and censorship, thus failing to combine information and enlarge the range of arguments.11 
protections, both private and public groups are likely to err, not in spite of deliberation 4 See Jurgen Habermas, Between Facts and Norms (1998); Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson, Democracy and Disagreement (1999); Deliberative Democracy (Jon Elster ed. 1998). On the role of deliberative democracy in the American framing, see William Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason (1988). 5 See James Fishkin, The Voice of the People (2000). 6 See Bruce Ackerman and James Fishkin, Deliberation Day (2004). 7 See Richard A. Posner, Law, Pragmatism, and Democracy (2003). 8 See William Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason (1996). 9 There are other possibilities, of course. Perhaps deliberation has educative effects or contributes to individual self-development; perhaps it legitimates decisions or increases the likelihood that people will acquiesce in then. See Thomas Tyler, Why People Obey the Law (1999). I am mostly putting these arguments to one side here, and focusing on the possibility that deliberation will improve outcomes. As noted below, however, deliberation tends to increase confidence and to decrease variance, even when it does not increase accuracy; it follows that deliberation might be justified because of its legitimating effects even when it fails to produce better outcomes. See pp. XX below. 10 See Gigone and Hastie, supra note; Garold Stasser and William Titus, Hidden Profiles: A Brief History, 14 Psych Inquiry 304 (2003); Robert MacCoun, Comparing Micro and Macro Rationality, in Judgments, Decisions, and Public Policy (M.V. Rajeev Gowda and Jeffrey Fox eds. 2002). 11 See Irving Janis, Groupthink (2d ed. 1980). but because of it. The use of statistical means, or of information markets, will often lead to more accurate decisions. 
As an example of a failure of deliberation, consider the account in the 2004 report of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, which explicitly accused the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) of groupthink, in which the agency’s predisposition to find a serious threat from Iraq led it to fail to explore alternative possibilities or to obtain and use the information that it actually held.12 In the Committee’s view, the CIA “demonstrated several aspects of group think: examining few alternatives, selective gathering of information, pressure to conform within the group or withhold criticism, and collective rationalization.”13 Thus the agency showed a “tendency to reject information that contradicted the presumption” that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction.14 Because of that presumption, the agency failed to use its own formalized methods “to challenge assumptions and ‘group think,’ such as ‘red teams,’ ‘devil’s advocacy,’ and other types of alternative or competitive analysis.”15 Above all, the Committee’s conclusions emphasize the CIA’s failure to elicit and aggregate information. 
This claim is a remarkable and even uncanny echo of one that followed the 2003 investigation of failures at NASA, stressing that agency’s similar failure to elicit competing views, including those based on information held by agency employees.16 The Columbia Accident Investigation Board explicitly attributed the accident to NASA’s unfortunate culture, one that does too little to elicit information. In the Board’s words, NASA lacks “checks and balances.”17 It pressures people to follow a “party line.”18 At NASA, “it is difficult for minority and dissenting opinions to percolate up through the agency’s hierarchy”19—even though, the Board contended, effective safety programs require the encouragement of minority opinions and bad news. 12 Available at http://intelligence.senate.gov/. 13 Id., conclusions at 4. 14 Id. at 6. 15 Id. at 8. 16 Report of The Columbia Accident Investigation Board, available at http://www.nasa.gov/columbia/home/CAIB_Vol1.html 17 Id. at 12. 18 Id. at 102. 19 Id. at 183. 
As we shall see, statistical means sometimes do at least as well as deliberation. Information markets, which count among the most intriguing institutional innovations of the last quarter-century, often do far better. To explain why deliberation fails, I explore the consequences of two sets of influences on members of deliberating groups.20 The first consists of informational influences, by which group members fail to disclose what they know because of deference to the information publicly announced by others. The second involves social pressures, which lead people to silence themselves in order not to face reputational sanctions, such as the disapproval of relevant others. As a result of these problems, groups often do not correct but instead amplify individual errors; emphasize shared information at the expense of unshared information; fall victim to cascade effects; and tend to end up in a more extreme position in line with the predeliberation tendencies of their members.21 Even federal judges are vulnerable to the relevant pressures, as both Republican and Democratic appointees show especially ideological voting when they are sitting with other judges appointed by presidents of the same political party.22 Statistical groups and information markets are far less susceptible to the pressures that make deliberating groups err. 
Because of those pressures, deliberative processes often fail to achieve their minimal goal of aggregating the information that the relevant deliberators actually have. Indeed, such processes often fail to aggregate information even as they decrease variance, and increase confidence, among their members.23 A confident, cohesive, error-prone group is nothing to celebrate; on the contrary, it might be extremely dangerous both to itself and to others.24 As we shall see, information markets often outperform both statistical and deliberating groups, simply because they are so effective at pooling 20 I explore these mechanisms from a different direction in Cass R. Sunstein, Why Societies Need Dissent (2003), but without attention to statistical groups and information markets, and without focusing on amplification of errors, hidden profiles, and the common knowledge effect, which are major emphases here. 21 This last possibility is emphasized in Roger Brown, Social Psychology: The Second Edition (1985); Sunstein, supra note. 22 See Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation, 90 Va L Rev 301 (2004); Cass R. Sunstein and David Schkade, All the President’s Judges (unpublished manuscript 2004). 23 Chip Heath and Rich Gonzalez, Interaction With Others Increases Decision Confidence But Not Decision Quality: Evidence against Information Collection Views of Interactive Decision Making, 61 Org Behavior and Human Decision Processes 305 (1995). 24 See the comparison of democratic and nondemocratic regimes in Dominic Johnson, Overconfidence and War: The Havoc and Glory of Positive Illusions 180-83 (2004). information. Indeed, information markets realign private incentives in a way that makes them exceptionally well-designed to reduce the problems that infect deliberating groups. Such markets are worth investigating in part because they provide an illuminating route by which to explore some characteristic defects in deliberative processes. If such processes are to be improved, it might well be by building on the insights provided by the large successes of information markets. In addition, such markets are worth investigating in their own right, if only because they promise to provide a supplement to deliberation, one that should improve social decisions.25 My goal, in short, is to mend deliberative processes, not to end them. As we shall see, both social norms and institutional design can go a long way toward reducing the problems that lead to deliberative blunders. 
To keep the analysis simple, my principal focus is not on controversial judgments of value but on questions with demonstrably correct answers. An understanding of how deliberation finds, and fails to find, those answers should have implications for its potential and limitations with respect to normative questions as well. If, for example, deliberation often fails in producing good answers to simple questions of fact, then it is also likely to fail to produce good answers to disputed issues of value. The solution to many such questions depends at least in part on resolution of factual issues; it is difficult to take a stand on proposals to raise the minimum wage, to engage in preemptive war, or to overrule Roe v. Wade26 without resolving several issues of fact. And even when factual issues are not central, deliberation can, in principle, ensure more sensible judgments.27 Unfortunately, however, the problems posed by informational pressure and social influences apply in normative domains as well as elsewhere. I will therefore offer some suggestions for how groups can reduce those problems through structural reforms. 
This Article comes in six parts. Part II explores a nondeliberative method for aggregating privately-held information, one that simply takes the average of predeliberation judgments. The resulting judgments of these “statistical groups” are sometimes remarkably accurate, and they provide a useful benchmark for assessing 25 For an ambitious account, see Robin Hanson, Shall We Vote on Values, But Bet on Beliefs? (unpublished manuscript 2003). 26 410 US 113 (1973). 27 This is the thesis of Fishkin, The Voice of the People, supra note. deliberative judgments.28 An understanding of the judgments of statistical groups also provides several clues about the usefulness and limitations of relying on the judgments of groups in general. Part III explores the effects of informational pressures and social influences, with an emphasis on amplification of errors, hidden profiles, cascade effects, and group polarization. Part III also attempts to square some apparently conflicting evidence about the performance of deliberating groups; it investigates the possibility that some groups will do as well as or even better than their best members. 
Part IV investigates structural reforms that are intended to ensure that group members reveal what they know—for example, by requiring anonymous statements of beliefs before deliberation begins, by assigning specified roles to participants in deliberation, and by structuring incentives to produce disclosure of privately held information. Part V identifies and compares information markets, in which people bet on the outcomes of events. Information markets have performed remarkably well in many diverse domains. Because they restructure people’s incentives, overcome a collective action problem faced by individual group members, and allow informed traders to play a large role in setting “prices,” they have advantages over both statistical judgments and deliberative judgments. They might well be used as a supplement to or even a replacement for collective deliberation. Part VI briefly discusses how the analysis might apply to normative questions. 
Suppose that there is a question about some disputed issue of fact. How many home runs did Hank Aaron hit? When was Calvin Coolidge elected president? Will a district court decision be reversed on appeal? Does a foreign country pose a serious threat to national security? Is the United States likely to have difficulty in winning a particular war? A great deal of evidence suggests that under certain conditions, a promising way to answer such questions is this: Ask a large number of people and take the mean answer.29 When the relevant conditions are met, the mean answer, which we might describe as the 28 These are often described as the judgments of “statisticized groups.” See Irving Lorge et al., A Survey of Studies Contrasting the Quality of Group Performance and Individual Performance, 1920-1957, 55 Psych Bull 337, 344 (1958). 29 When groups are large, of course, the mean and the median will tend to converge. group’s “statistical answer,”30 is often accurate, where accuracy is measured by reference to objectively demonstrable fact. 
It is well-known that statistical answers from groups of sufficiently large sizes tend to match the views of population-wide samples.31 This finding bears on issues as diverse as the use of juries as a measure of community sentiment32 and the remarkable success of Google, the search engine; Google is good at finding what a particular searcher wants because it knows what most searchers want.33 But here the question is what is true, not what populations think. Let us therefore explore how statistical groups perform, partly because the answer is important and illuminating itself, and partly because it provides a useful foundation for the assessment of both deliberating groups and information markets. 
Many of the studies of statistical groups involve quantitative estimates. Consider a few examples: of a classroom.34 Individual judgments ranged from 60 degrees to eighty-five degrees; the statistical judgment of the group was 72.4 degrees, very close to the actual temperature of 72 degrees. That judgment was better than that of 80% of individual judgments. than that of the vast majority of individual members. In one such experiment, a group of fifty-six students was asked about a jar containing 850 beans; the group estimate was 871, a better guess than all but one of students.35 30 See Janis, supra note. 31 See H.J. Eysenck, The Validity of Judgments As A Function of Number of Judges, 25 J. Exp Psych. 650 (1939). 32 For evidence and comments, see Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages, 107 Yale L.J. 2071 (1998). 33 See Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page, The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search Engine, available at http://www-db.stanford.edu/ 34 Lorge et al., supra note, at 342. 35 See James Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds 5 (2004). individuals.36 group members.37 that the group’s estimate was 94 percent accurate—a figure excelled by only five others, the group’s guess was 94.5% accurate, far more so than that of almost all intelligence by examining a competition in which contestants attempted to judge the weight of a fat ox at a regional fair in England. The ox weighed 1,198 pounds; the average guess, from the 797 contestants, was 1,197 pounds.38 
If these findings can be generalized, many questions might plausibly be answered not deliberatively, but simply by asking a large group of people and selecting the average response. Imagine that a large company is attempting to project its sales for the following year. Might it do best to poll its salespeople and to choose the average number on the assumption that it is likely to be correct39? Or suppose that a company is deciding whether to hire a new employee. Should it ask relevant personnel, not to deliberate, but about their individual views on whether the employee’s performance is likely to meet a certain level? Or turn to the legal context and suppose that the question is whether a case should be settled. Ought a law firm to poll its lawyers about the expected outcome at trial? Or consider the political domain and suppose that the question is whether a war effort will go well by some identifiable standard. Should the President poll his advisers and take the median answer? To answer these questions, we have to know why, in the relevant studies, the median judgment is so accurate. 36 Kate Gordon, Group Judgments in the Field of Lifted Weights, 7 J Exp Psych 389 (1924); Kate Gordon, Further Observations on Group Judgments of Lifted Weights, 1 J Psych 105 (1935-1936). 37 R. S. Bruce, Group Judgments in the Field of Lifted Weights and Visual Discrimination, 1 J Psych 117 (1935-1936). 38 See James Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds (2004). 39 Some affirmative evidence can be found in J. Scott Armstrong, Combining Forecasts, in Principle of Forecasting 417, 433 (J. Scott Armstrong ed. 2001). 
The accuracy of judgments of statistical groups is best explained by reference to the Condorcet Jury Theorem.40 To see how the Jury Theorem works, suppose that people are answering a common question with two possible answers, one false and one true, and that the average probability that each voter will answer correctly exceeds 50 percent. The Jury Theorem holds that the probability of a correct answer, by a majority of the group, increases toward certainty as the size of the group increases.41 The importance of the Jury Theorem lies in the demonstration that groups are likely to do better than individuals, and large groups better than small ones, if majority rule is used and if each person is more likely than not to be correct. The last proviso is extremely important. Suppose that each individual in a group is more likely to be wrong than right. If so, the likelihood that the group will decide correctly falls to zero as the size of the group increases. 
In the context of statistical judgments, several of Condorcet’s stringent and somewhat unrealistic assumptions are met. Indeed, the likelihood that they will be met is higher with statistical groups than with deliberating ones. Condorcet assumed that people would be unaffected by whether their votes would be decisive42; that people would not be affected by one another’s votes; and that the probability that one group member would be right would be statistically unrelated to the probability that another group member would be right.43 The first two assumptions plainly hold for statistical groups. People do not know what others are saying and hence they cannot be influenced by a belief that their judgments will make the difference to that of the group. The third assumption may or may not be violated. Those who have similar training, or who work closely together, will be likely to see things in the same way,44 and those involved in statistical groups might 40 See William P. Bottom et al., Propagation of Individual Bias Through Group Judgment: Error in the Treatment of Asymmetrically Informative Signals, 25 J Risk and Uncertainty 147 (2002). 41 The theorem is based on some simple arithmetic. Suppose, for example, that there is a three-person group, in which each member has a 67% probability of bring right. The probability that a majority vote will produce the correct answer is 74%. 42 William P. Bottom et al., Propagation of Individual Bias Through Group Judgment: Error in the Treatment of Asymmetrically Informative Signals, 25 J Risk and Uncertainty 147, 153 (2002). 43 Id. 44 Id. well meet these conditions. On the other hand, the Condorcet Jury Theorem has been shown to be robust to violations of this third assumption.45 
To see why statistical groups perform well, consider the problems just described and note that even if everyone in the group is not more than 50% likely to be right, the Theorem’s predictions may well continue to hold. Suppose, for example, that 60% of people are 51% likely to be right and that 40% of people are 50% likely to be right; or that 45% of people are 40% likely to be right and that 55% of people are 65% likely to be right; or even that 51% of people are 51% likely to be right and that 49% of people are merely 50% likely to be right. Even under these conditions, the likelihood of a correct answer will move toward 100% as the size of the group increases. It will not move as quickly as it would if every group member were highly likely to be right, but it will nonetheless move. We could imagine endless variations on these numbers. The point is that even if a significant percentage of the group is not more likely to be right than wrong, or even if many group members are more likely to be wrong than right, an accurate result, from a sufficiently large group, can be expected. 
Of course most of the relevant judgments, in studies of statistical groups, do not involve a binary choice; consider the question how many beans are in a jar, how many pounds a given object weighs, or how well a certain product will sell in the following year. But the answers to such questions are not analytically different from those in binary choices. In answering the relevant questions, each person is effectively being asked to answer a long series of binary questions—ten beans or a thousand beans, twenty beans or five hundred beans, fifty beans or one hundred beans, and so on. If a sufficiently large group is asked to answer such questions, and if most individual answers will be better than random, the mean answer will be highly accurate. Of course the combination of probabilities, for a series of binary results, might mean that things will turn out poorly. If someone is 51% likely to answer each of two questions correctly, the probability that she will answer both questions correctly is only slightly higher than 25%. But with large groups, enough people are likely to make better-than-random guesses, on the questions 45 Id. involved in certain quantitative judgments, that the average estimate will have a high degree of accuracy.46 
But compare a situation in which if only 49% of the group is likely to be better than random. If so, the likelihood of a mistake will move toward 100% under the same condition. But for the number of beans in a jar, or the weight of an ox, most people are not wholly at sea. The accuracy of the median judgment, for large groups, is simply an application of the Condorcet Jury Theorem. And in certain circumstances, deliberating groups will act in roughly the same way, aggregating their information to produce remarkably accurate results.47 
In this light, we can identify two situations in which the judgment of a statistical group will be incorrect. The first are those in which group members show a systematic bias. The second are those in which their answers are worse than random. The failures of statistical judgments, in these circumstances, have strong implications for deliberation as well. 
for the group’s answers. If, for example, an experimenter “anchors” subjects on a misleading number, the median will almost certainly be wrong. Suppose, for example, that a jar contains 800 jelly beans, and the experimenter happens to say, quietly, “many jars of jelly beans, though not necessarily this one, have 500 jelly beans,” or even, “I’m asking this question to 250 people.”48 In either case, the low number will likely operate as an anchor,49 and people’s answers will be systematically biased toward understating the actual number, producing an unreliable mean. One study demonstrates more generally 46 On some of the technical complexities, see Christian List and Robert Goodin, Epistemic Democracy: Generalizing the Condorcet Jury Theorem, 9 Journal of Political Philosophy 9 (2001). For a popular illustration, consider the television show, Who Wants to be A Millionaire? In this show, contestants, when stumped, are permitted to ask a personally appointed “expert” (a friend who is known to know a great deal) or the studio audience. The studio audience significantly outperforms the expert. See Surowiecki, supra note. The reason is that most audience members are more accurate than they would be if they guessed randomly, and when this condition is met, large groups can be expected to do extremely well. 47 Bottom et al., supra note. 48 Even self-evidently arbitrary anchors have significant effects on people’s judgments. See Gretchen Chapman and Eric Johnson, Incorporating the Irrelevant: Anchors in Judgments of Belief and Value, in Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment 120 (Thomas Gilovich et al. eds. 2002). 49 See id. that a group’s statistical estimate is likely to be erroneous “when the material is unfamiliar, distorted in a way such that all individuals are prone to make similar errors of estimation.”50 The error-producing effects of anchors are simply a special case of this general point. Anchors are undoubtedly at work in deliberating groups as well, although in theory deliberation might reduce their effects. And anchors have significant effects within the legal system. For example, the plaintiff’s demand is likely to affect damage awards for harms that are difficult to monetize, and groups are no less subject to those effects than individuals.51 Even judges have been found to be subject to irrelevant anchors,52 and there is every reason to believe that multimember courts would be at least as vulnerable to them as individual judges are.53 
beans in a jar, but about the number of atoms in a jelly bean. On that question, people’s answers are hopelessly ill-informed, and there is no reason at all to trust their judgments. Consider a small-scale study at the University of Chicago Law School, one that strongly supports this conclusion. A number of faculty members were asked the weight, in pounds, of the fuel that powers space shuttles. The actual answer is 4 million pounds. The median response was 200,000; the mean was 55,790,555 (because of one outlier choice)—both wildly inaccurate. In a binary choice, of course, people’s answers will be worse than random only if they are unaware of how little they know; if they know that they are likely to be wrong, they should choose randomly, which gives them a 50% probability of being right. But sometimes people think they know more than they do, and many tasks do not involve binary choices at all. Statistical groups will err if confusion and ignorance are so widespread that individual’s answers are worse than random. Here too there are evident applications to many contexts in law and politics. 50 Lorge et al., supra note, at 346. 51 See Chapman and Johnson, supra note; Reid Hastie et al., Do Plaintiffs’ Requests and Plaintiffs’ Identities Matter?, in Cass R. Sunstein et al., Punitive Damages: How Juries Decide 62 (2002). 52 Chris Guthrie, Jeffrey Rachlinski, and Andrew Wistrich, Inside the Judicial Mind, 86 Corn L Rev 777 (2001). 53See Norbert Kerr et al., Bias in Judgment: Comparing Individuals and Groups, 103 Psych. Rev. 687 (1996). 
Should statistical means be used more than they now are? Do statistical means outperform experts? Everything depends on the competence of the experts. If we could find real experts on the weight of oxen or on how to count jelly beans, and if we understand expertise to be the ability to make accurate assessments, then experts would by stipulation do better than statistical means. Suppose, for example, that a deliberating group of lawyers is trying to decide how many Supreme Court decisions have invalidated a state or federal law, or the number of lines in Antigone, or the weight of the most recent winner of the Kentucky Derby. Would it make any sense to poll the lawyers individually and to assume that the mean response is accurate? The studies outlined above suggest that if the group is large enough, the mean answer will be at least good.54 But there are many ways to do far better. 
For many factual questions, of course, a little research would be sufficient to identify the correct answers. But for some factual issues, even significant research is inconclusive, and it is best to consult experts. And if experts are available, it would make sense to obtain a statistical answer from them, rather than to select one or a few. If experts are likely to be right, a statistical group of experts should have the same advantage over individual experts as a statistical group of ordinary people has over ordinary individuals. In fact a great deal of evidence supports this claim.55 In a series of thirty comparisons, statistical groups of experts had 12.5% fewer errors on forecasting tasks involving such diverse issues as company earnings, cattle and chicken prices, real and nominal GNP, survival of patients, and housing starts.56 For example, statistical groups of experts significantly outperformed individual experts in predicting the annual earnings of firms; changes in the American economy; and annual peek rainfall runoff in eight different countries.57 The implication is straightforward: “Organizations often call on the best expert they can find to make important forecasts. They should avoid this 54 I conducted such a poll with faculty at the University of Chicago Law School, who did fairly well in estimating the weight of the horse who won the Kentucky Derby, fairly badly in estimating the number of lines in Antigone—and horrendously with the number of Supreme Court invalidations of state and federal law! 55 See J. Scott Armstrong, Combining Forecasts, in Principles of Forecasting 416 (2001). 56 Id. at 428. 57 Id. at 430-31. practice, and instead combine forecasts from a number of experts.”58 For political polling, it has become standard practice to combine a set of poll results and to rely on the mean or median, rather than to select one or two.59 
Consider in this regard the Copenhagen Consensus, designed to inform policy judgments about global risks.60 The Copenhagen Consensus was obtained for a series of possible interventions, involving climate change, water and sanitation, hunger and malnutrition, free trade, and communicable diseases, among others. A number of experts were asked about the best way to promote global welfare, and particularly the welfare of developing countries, assuming that $50 billion were made available. The experts ranked the possible projects, producing an overall ranking (reflecting the mean rankings of the experts taken as a whole).61 I do not mean to suggest that the results of this particular exercise are correct; everything depends on whether the relevant experts were in a position to offer reliable answers on the questions at hand. But if statistical means are a good way to aggregate knowledge when ordinary people know something of relevance, then they are also a good way to aggregate knowledge from experts. 
Although the judgments of statistical groups can be quite accurate, it is easy to imagine that a deliberating group would be much better. In principle, a deliberating group should do well even when its members are error-prone. Deliberation, in the form of an exchange of information and reasons, might well bring them into line. If many group members give answers that are worse than random, perhaps other group members can show them how they have erred. If individuals have been manipulated in their private judgments, perhaps deliberation will undo the effects of the manipulation.62 If individual members have anchored on a misleading value, perhaps deliberation will expose the anchor as such. 58 Id. at 433. 59 See, e.g., Sam Wang, Electoral College Meta-Analysis (2004), available at http://synapse.princeton.edu/~sam/pollcalc.html 60 See http://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/. 61 See id. 62 See Ackerman and Fishkin, supra note. 
To make the analysis tractable, let us focus on how deliberating groups might be able to solve factual questions or cognitive puzzles that have correct solutions. The latter are often questions of instrumental rationality, posing a question about the right strategy for achieving agreed-upon goals. Results in these domains provide a good test of when and whether deliberating groups perform well. To the extent that such groups do badly in answering questions with objectively correct answers, we have reason to suspect that they will also do badly in answering questions for which there is no consensus on truth or validity. 
imagine three principal mechanisms by which the improvement occurs. 
Groups as equivalent to their best members. One or more group members will often know the right answer, and other group members might well become convinced of this fact. For this reason groups might perform toward or at the level of their best members. If some or many members suffer from ignorance, or from a form of bias that leads to error, other group members might correct them. Suppose, for example, that a panel of judges is trying to recall relevant Supreme Court decisions in a somewhat specialized area. If one of the judges is actually aware of those decisions, the group will be made aware of them too. Or suppose that a group of military officials is attempting to assess the strengths and weaknesses of a potential enemy in some part of the world. If one of them is a specialist, all of them can learn what the specialist knows. Many deliberating groups contain at least one expert on the question at hand; if group members listen to the expert, they will do at least as well as she does. For these reasons, deliberation might correct individual errors, rather than propagating them, in a way that allows convergence on the judgment of the most accurate group member. 
The whole as the sum of the parts: aggregating information. Deliberation could aggregate existing information, in a way that leads the group as a whole to know more than any individual member does. Suppose that the group contains no experts on the question at issue, but that relevant information is dispersed among group members, so that the group is potentially expert even if its members are not. Or suppose that the group contains a number of experts, but that each member is puzzled about how to solve a particular problem. Deliberation might elicit the relevant information and allow the group to make a sensible judgment. Almost everyone has had the experience of being a part of a group that ended up with a solution that went beyond what any individual member could have produced on her own. In this process, the whole is equal to the sum of the parts—and the sum of the parts is what is sought. 
Beyond the sum of the parts: synergy. The give-and-take of group discussion might sift information and perspectives in a way that leads the group to a good solution to a problem, one in which the whole is actually more than the sum of their parts. In such cases, deliberation is, at the very least, an ambitious form of information aggregation, one in which the exchange of views leads to a creative answer or solution. And in fact, groups sometimes do outperform their best members.63 work in practice? Two points are clear. First, deliberation usually reduces variance.64 After talking with together, group members tend to come into accord with one another.65 Statistical groups thus show far more diversity of opinion than deliberating groups. Second, group members tend to become far more confident of their judgments after they speak with one another. 66 A significant effect of group interactions is a greater sense that one’s post-deliberation conclusion is correct—whether or not it actually is. Corroboration by others increases confidence in one’s judgments.67 It follows that that members of deliberating groups will usually converge on a position on which group members have a great deal of confidence. This is not disturbing if that position is also likely to be 63 See Gigone and Hastie, supra note. 64 See Roger Brown, Social Psychology: The Second Edition 206-07 (1985). 65 Id. 66 See Chip Heath and Rich Gonzalez, Interaction With Others Increases Decision Confidence But Not Decision Quality: Evidence against Information Collection Views of Interactive Decision Making, 61 Org Behavior and Human Decision Processes 305 (1995). 67 See Robert Baron et al., Social Corroboration and Opinion Extremity, 32 J Experimental Soc. Psych. 537 (1996). correct—but if it is not, then many group members will end up sharing a view in which they firmly believe, but which turns out to be wrong (a most unfortunate and sometimes quite dangerous situation68). 
If the purpose of deliberation is not to produce accurate outcomes, then it might be especially important to know that deliberation ensures less variance and higher confidence. Suppose that a key goal of deliberation is to promote a sense of legitimacy— a belief, by group members, that they have been able to participate in the process and a belief, by all concerned, that the decision is acceptable on its merits. Because deliberation decreases variance and increases confidence in the outcome, it might be favored even if produces errors. There are complex tradeoffs among the relevant variables here. If deliberation significantly increases confidence and legitimacy, then it might be desirable even if the decision is slightly worse—at least if little turns on slight differences in the quality of the outcome. Perhaps what most matters is that group members accept the decision, not that the decision be correct. On the other hand, an increase in legitimacy might not be so important if the decision is leading the group into a serious blunder. For many decisions, a key goal of deliberation is to improve choices. And if deliberation has that effect while also increasing legitimacy, so much the better. 
groups will usually succeed in aggregating the information that their members have. With respect to questions with definite answers, deliberating groups tend to do about as well as or slightly better than their average member, but not as well as their best members.69 Hence it is false to say that group members usually end up deferring to their internal specialists. Truth does not win out; the most that can be said is that under some conditions, the group will converge on the truth if the truth begins with “at least some initial support” within the group when the task has “a demonstrably correct answer according to a broadly shared normative framework (e.g., deductive logic).”70 Note here that when groups outperform most of their individual members, it is generally because the issue is one on which a particular answer can be shown, to the satisfaction of all or 68 See Dominic Johnson, Overconfidence and War, supra note. 69 See Gigone and Hastie, supra note; Reid Hastie, Experimental Evidence of Group Accuracy, in Information Pooling and Group Decision Making 129 (Bernard Grofman and Guillermo Owen et al. eds. 1983). 70 MacCoun, supra note (manuscript at 5). orders rather than choosing their own prices, a small group of “marginal traders” trade frequently and post limit orders.249 As we shall see, it is these traders who have the greatest effect on prices. 
As a predictor, the Iowa Electronic Markets have produced extraordinarily accurate judgments. Almost all of the time, they have done better than professional polling organizations.250 In the week before the last four elections, the predictions in the Iowa market have shown an average absolute error of just 1.5 percentage points, a significant improvement over the 2.1 percentage point error in the final Gallop polls.251 The IEM have proved accurate not only on election eve but only in long forecasting horizons, both in absolute terms and also when compared to alternative forecasting systems.252 Nor are such markets limited to the United States. In other nations, universities are operating similar markets; examples include the University of British Columbia Election stock market, involving Canada,253 and Vienna University of Technology, operating the Austrian Electronic Market.254 Although the relevant districts are quite small, Australian bookmakers have shown a high degree of accuracy in predicting district-level races.255 
political context, consider the Hollywood Stock Exchange, in which people predict Oscar nominees and winners (as well as opening weekend box office successes). For the Hollywood Stock Exchange, the level of accuracy has been impressive. “HSX offers good predictions of a film’s gross receipts before release and, relatively speaking, even better predictions after opening weekend - when a large number of traders have some information in the form of (or at least the possibility of) observing the finished film on screen, along with audience reactions. Apparently, studios have begun relying on these estimates to structure the distribution of their films.”256 The market has proved at least 249 Id. at 99-100. 250 See Wolfers and Zitzewitz, supra note, at 112. 251 Id. 252 See Joyce Berg et al., Accuracy and Forecast Standard Error of Prediction Markets (July 2003 working paper). 253 http://esm.ubc.ca/ 254 http://ebweb.tuwien.ac.at/apsm/ 255 Justin Wolfers and Andrew Leigh, Three Tools for Forecasting Federal Elections: Lessons from 2001, 37 Australian Journal of Political Science 223 (2002). 256 Levmore, supra note. equal to expert panels in predicting Oscar winners, with (for example) correct predictions of thirty-five of forty Oscar nominees in 2002.257 
The futures market for oranges does a better job predicting weather in Florida than the National Weather Service.258 A large prediction market, producing a typical event turnover in the hundreds of millions of dollars and run by the Deutsche Bank and Goldman Sacks, involves the likelihood that economic data released later in the week will show specific values259; the market performs at least as well as the consensus forecasts of a survey of about fifty professional forecasters.260 Wagers at race tracks consistently outperform horse-racing experts in predicting winners.261 Companies have started to use internal prediction markets to answer relevant questions, including likely sales in specific periods.262 The level of accuracy here is also high—far better, in fact, than what would emerge from statistical means or deliberation, where excessive optimism can cause serious problems.263 
For example, Hewlett Packard (HP) and the California Institute of Technology initiated a project to study experimental markets as an information aggregation mechanism involving product sales.264 The experimenters chose twelve people who worked in different parts of HP’s business operation. Because of its small size, the market was a very “thin” one, meaning that there were few participants and that the market was far less liquid than the much “thicker” Iowa Electronic Markets. Participants were chosen with the thought that each could contribute information from his department in buying and selling the relevant futures, which were tied to sales and bonuses for executives (which, in turn, are closely tied to profits). The markets were organized so that that securities existed for intervals of sales. For example, one security would pay off if sales were between one and ten printers; another would pay off if sales were between 10 and 257 David Pennock et al., The Real Power of Artificial Markets, 291 Science 987 (2001). 258 R. Roll, Orange Juice and Weather, 74 Am. Econ. Rev. 861 (1984). 259 See www.economicderivatives.com 260 See Wolfers and Zitzewitz, supra note, at 114. 261 Id. 262 See Charles Plott, Markets as Information Gathering Tools, 67 Southern Economic J. 1 (2000). 263 Id. 264 K. Chen and C. Plott, Information Aggregation Mechanisms: Concept, Design, and Implementation for a Sales Forecasting Problem; working paper; available online at http://www.hpl.hp.com/personal/KayYut_Chen/paper/ms020408.pdf of equal size. On the basis the prices of each security, the experimenters could guess how many units HP would sell that month. Information markets were expected to have large potential advantages over internal projections. Those involved in sales have an incentive to understate projected outcomes, so as to ensure that they do not fall short of expectations; this bias, or a competing bias in favor of excessive optimism, might well be reduced through market incentives. 
The results showed that the markets’ predictions were a considerable improvement over HP’s official forecasts. In no fewer six of the eight markets for which official forecasts were available, the market prediction was significantly closer to the actual outcome than the official forecast265—and this was despite “anecdotal evidence” that the markets’ activities were included as inputs in generating the official forecast.266 
In fact information markets are springing up all over the Internet, allowing people to make bets on the likely outcomes of sports, entertainment, finance, and political events. In fact we can find actual or proposed prediction markets about any number of questions: Will gas prices reach $3 per gallon? Will cellular life be found on Mars? Will Osama Bin Laden be captured by a certain date? Will small pox return to the United States? 
Communications Commission be abolished? These and other questions are being asked on information markets. Consider the following list: 
Austrian Electronic Markets—http://ebweb.tuwien.ac.at/apsm/ University of British Columbia Election Stock Market--http://esm.ubc.ca/ Iowa Electronic Markets—http://www.biz.uiowa.edu/iem/ Foresight Exchange—http://www.ideosphere.com/fx/ Tradesports—http://www.tradesports.com Centrebet-- http://www.centrebet.com/ News Futures—http://us.newsfutures.com/home/home.html Probability Sports—http://www.probabilitysports.com Economic Derivatives—http://www.economicderivatives.com Wahlstreet—German political futures market; http://tagesspiegel.wahlstreet.de/share/home/home.html 265 Id. at 12. 266 Id. at 5. been spectacularly successful in terms of the aggregate accuracy of the resulting “prices.” Why is this? Note that they do not rely on the median or average judgment of a randomly selected group of people. They are genuine markets. Those who participate are selfselected. They must believe that they have relevant information; it is costly for them to “vote,” and they ought not to be expected to do so unless they have something to gain.267 In addition, votes are not weighted equally. If people want to invest a few dollars, they are permitted to do so, but they can invest a great deal more if they are confident of their answer.268 Intensity of belief is captured in prices.269 
There is a further point. People are permitted to buy and sell shares on a continuing basis. “Unlike polls or expert panels in which participants are asked for their independent opinions, each trader in the market sees the net effects of the beliefs of all other traders, and the time series changes in those beliefs. This makes the market more than a static, one-time prediction but rather a dynamic system that can respond instantaneously to the arrival of new information.”270 Moreover, a correct answer is rewarded and an incorrect one is punished. Hence investors have a strong incentive to be right. In these circumstances, accurate answers can emerge even if only a small percentage of participants have good information. In the Iowa Electronic Markets, for example, it turns out that 85% of the traders do not seem to be particularly wise.271 They hold onto their shares for a long period and then simply accept someone else’s prices. The predictions of the market are driven by the other 15%—frequent traders who post their offers rather than accepting those made by other people. To work well, prediction markets do not require accurate judgments by anything like the majority of 267 Note that some markets involve real rather than virtual money. Newsfutures, for example, uses virtual currency that can be redeemed for monthly prizes (such as appliances); Foresight Exchange and the Hollywood Stock Exchange use “virtual currency,” so that people do not earn real money, but instead attempt to enhance their reputation and their self-image. Note in this regard that Foreign Exchange lists publicly the “top ten investors by score,” see http://www.ideosphere.com/fx/ 268 Some markets, however, impose limits on permissible investments; the IEM is an example, with a ceiling of $500. Note also that some markets, like the Hollywood Stock Exchange, do not involve real dollars; it is noteworthy that successful predictions are found even in such markets. 269 See note supra. 270 Berg et al., supra note. 271 See id. participants.272 In this sense, information markets are very different from the ordinary judgments of deliberating groups. The resulting prices do not amplify or even perpetuate cognitive errors; on the contrary, they correct them, because shrewd traders are able to invest in a way that corrects for even widespread errors.273 
Of course information markets involve a measure of deliberation. Individual investors are likely to have deliberated with others before they invest. In some such markets, investors undoubtedly act as “teams,” pooling resources after deliberating together about what to do. The point is that ultimate decisions come not from asking group members to come up with a mutually agreeable conclusion, but by reference to the price signal, which will have aggregated a great deal of diverse information. It is for this reason that information markets outperform deliberative processes. 
How might institutions take advantage of information markets? It is possible to imagine both internal and public varieties. An internal market would be limited to people within the relevant organization. As we have seen, Hewlitt-Packard has used such a market to predict sales, and the Department of Defense proposed an internal Policy Analysis Market as part of its abandoned initiative on geopolitical events.274 An external market would permit public investment by people outside of the institution for which predictions are being made. In either case, the outcome of the market might well be more accurate than the outcome of deliberation, in which errors might arise and be propagated or even amplified as a result of discussion. (For companies, optimistic bias is an obvious risk,275 one that information markets should reduce.) An organization might rely on an internal market if it seeks to keep the results private or if it believes that an aggregation of information held within the organization will be sufficiently accurate. One risk of an internal market is that it might be too “thin,” simply because most institutions will have 272 The same is of course true of ordinary markets. For a good overview, see Andrei Shleifer, Inefficient Markets (2000). 273 As noted below, this is not inevitable. We could easily imagine a market in which cognitive problems are reflected in prices; indeed, this appears to happen with ordinary stock markets. See Robert Shiller, Irrational Exuberance (2001). In information markets, it is entirely possible to imagine booms or crashes, produced by cognitive errors in combination with social influences. My point is not that this is impossible, but that the track record of information markets, at least thus far, is exceptionally good. 274 See note supra. 275 See Daniel Kahneman and Dan Lovallo, Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive Perspective on Risk Taking, in Choices, Values and Frames 393 (Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky eds. 2000). For an application to group decisions, see Johnson, Overconfidence and War, supra note. few investors276; another is that members of the organization might suffer from a systematic bias. Alternatively, an institution might create a public market, available to all, believing that through this route it will obtain more accurate results. In either case, an organization might use an information market instead of group deliberation, or at the very least as an input into such deliberation. 
In what circumstances might information markets fail? To answer this question, ordinary stock markets are the place to start. A primary concern is that information markets, no less than ordinary ones, can be susceptible to manipulation by powerful speculators. The only known attempt to manipulate an information market occurred during the 2000 presidential election. A group of speculators attempted to manipulate the Iowa Electronic Market by buying large volumes of futures in presidential candidate Patrick Buchanan. The value of Buchanan shares did increase dramatically, but they fell almost immediately when “well-informed traders . . . seized the opportunity to profit off the manipulative traders.”277 Hence the Iowa market remained stable despite this attempted manipulation. Perhaps other, more plausible efforts at manipulation would succeed; but none has thus far. 
Another concern is that some of the cognitive biases that afflict individuals will manifest themselves in prediction markets. Just as in group deliberation, investors in a market might be subject to predictable heuristics and biases. The results here are unequivocal: they are. For example, psychologists have found that people overestimate the likelihood that their preferred candidate will win an election—a form of optimistic bias.278 At a certain point in the 1980 campaign, for example, 87% of Jimmy Carter’s supporters believed that he would win, while 80% of Ronald Reagan’s supporters 276 Note, however, that Hewlitt-Packard produced good predictions even in a thin market. On the successes of thin markets, see Levmore, supra note. 277 Klarreich, Best Guess, Science News (Oct 18, 2003); available online at http://www.sciencenews.org/articles/20031018/bob9.asp. 278 For an overview, see Christine Jolls, Behavioral Economics Analysis of Redistributive Legal Rules, 51 Vand. L. Rev. 1653 (1998) believed that their candidate would win.279 Obviously, at least one side had overestimated its candidate’s probability of victory at the relevant time. 
In the market context, IEM traders show the same bias. In 1988, for example, Dukakis supporters were more likely to hold futures in the Massachusetts governor’s illfated presidential bid than were supporters of George H.W. Bush.280 More strikingly still, Dukakis supporters were more likely to view the candidates’ debates as helpful to the Democratic candidate and accordingly bought significant additional futures in his campaign after each debate.281 Bush supporters precisely showed the same pattern. Traders thus exhibited the “assimilation-contrast” effect.282 People usually assimilate new information in a way that confirms their view of the world, and those who invest in information markets show the same bias. 
Nonetheless, the Iowa Electronic Markets were more accurate than polls in predicting the outcome of the 1988 presidential election. Even three weeks before the election, the market provided an almost-perfect guess about the candidates’ shares of the vote.283 How is such accuracy possible when many traders showed identifiable biases? The answer lies in the behavior of a small group of “marginal traders” who were far less susceptible to these biases—the “marginal trader” hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, a small group of active traders who are far less susceptible to the relevant biases have a disproportionately large effect on aggregate market behavior. In trading election futures, these traders did not show the same biases as their fellow traders and earned significant profits at the expense of their quasi-rational colleagues.284 Thus, the biased behavior of most traders did not affect the market price because the marginal traders were prepared to take advantage of their blunders. If marginal traders are active and able to profit from the 279 D. Granberg and E. Brent, When Prophesy Bends: The Preference-Expectation Link in U.S. Presidential Elections, 45 Journal of Social and Personality Psychology 477. 280 Forsythe, Rietz, and Ross at 94. 281 Id. 282 M. Sherif and C. Hovland, Social Judgment: Assimilation and Contrast Effects in Communication and Attitude Change (1962). 283 J. Berg, F. Nelson, and T. Rietz, Accuracy and Forecast Standard Error of Prediction Markets, Working draft; available online at: http://www.biz.uiowa.edu/faculty/trietz/papers/forecasting.pdf 284 Forsythe, Rietz, and Ross at 100. The term “quasi-rational” comes from Richard Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics (1987). bounded rationality of other participants, then there will be no effect on the aggregate market price.285 
Another bias that might be expected to affect information markets is the “favoritelongshot” bias often seen in horse races. In horse-racing, heavy favorites tend to give higher returns than other horses in the field, while longshots tend to offer lower than expected returns.286 If the point generalizes, prediction markets might not be accurate with respect to highly improbable events. The market should be expected to overestimate the likelihood that such events will come to fruition; for example, Pat Buchanan futures would be expected to be (and might well have been) overpriced even before the attempted manipulation of the market. By contrast, an information market might underestimate the probability of events that are highly likely to occur.287 But with respect to existing prediction markets, there is little evidence of systematic errors in this vein. 
“Prediction bubbles” are also easy to imagine, with investors moving in a certain direction with the belief that many other investors are doing the same. A temporary upsurge in investment in the nomination of Hillary Rodham Clinton as 2004 Democratic nominee might well have been a small bubble, with some investors thinking, not that she would in fact be the nominee, but that others would invest in that judgment, thus inflating the value of the investment. Crashes are possible as well. In any case informational influences can certainly lead individuals to make foolish investments in any market, including prediction markets.288 As information markets develop, significant individual errors should be expected, and undoubtedly they will produce some errors in the price signal.289 
In particular contexts, the imaginable problems take a different form. Consider the problem of “terrorism futures.” It would be extremely valuable to aggregate privately held information about the risk and location of any attack. But do likely investors actually 285 Compare the discussion in Schleifer, supra note. 286 See Richard Thaler and William Ziemba, Anomalies: Parimutual Betting Markets: Racetracks and Lotteries, 2 J Econ Persp 161 (1988); see also C. Manski, Interpreting the Predictions of Prediction Markets, unpublished; available online at http://faculty.econ.nwu.edu/faculty/manski/prediction_markets.pdf 287 C. Wolfers and E. Zitzewitz, Prediction Markets, preliminary draft; available online at http://facultygsb.stanford.edu/wolfers/Papers/Predictionmarkets.pdf 288 See Robert Schiller, Irrational Exuberance (2001). 289 Cf. id. (discussing such errors in the stock market). possible helpful information? Thomas Rietz, a director of the Iowa Electronic Markets, argued that terrorism and world events were fundamentally different from other contexts in which markets have successfully predicted future events.290 When betting on presidential elections, people can use ordinary information sources, along with their network of friends, family, and co-workers, to form an opinion; but for most investors, there are no such sources of information for terrorist activity. Another skeptic worried that the market would allow the wealthy to “hedge” against the possibility of terrorist activity, while ordinary Americans would remain vulnerable to this threat.291 In this view, “terrorism futures” could operate as an insurance market that would not serve its purpose of providing information. In any event government use of the resulting information could be self-defeating, at least if the information were made public. Terrorists would know the anticipated time and location of attacks, and also know that the government was aware of this—which would make it most unlikely that the prediction would turn out to be accurate. Where the event’s occurrence is endogenous to the outcome of the information market, there is reason for skepticism about its likely performance, certainly if relevant actors have much to lose if the market turns out to be correct.292 
But many policy issues, including those potentially involved in the now-defunct Policy Analysis Market, did not have this feature. Consider, for example, the question whether the Egyptian economy is likely to grow in the next year, or whether Yassir Arafat will lead the Palestinian Authority at the end of 2005. Perhaps many investors will lack a great deal of information on such questions, but it is most unlikely that the market prediction will turn out to be self-defeating. Of course the Policy Analysis Market itself raises many questions and doubts. The broader point is that in many domains, information markets are extremely promising, and likely to outperform both statistical means and the products of group deliberation. 
Of course it will not always be feasible to use information markets. A jury, for example, could not enlist such markets to decide on questions of guilt or innocence; and it is not easy to see how information markets could be used by judges. When the relevant 290 C. Biever and D. Carrington, Pentagon cancels futures market on terror, New Scientist Online, http://www.newscientist.com/news/news.jsp?id=ns99994007 291 J. Stiglitz, Terrorism: There’s No Futures in It, L.A. Times, July 31, 2003 at ??; available at http://www.commondreams.org/views03/0731-08.htm 292 See Richard Posner, Catastrophe: Risk and Response (forthcoming 2004). groups are small, effective markets may be impossible to create, simply because of the absence of significant numbers of investors.293 On the other hand, administrative agencies might well enlist such markets to resolve a number of questions,294 and ambitious efforts are underway to examine how government might enlist them to answer an array of disputed questions.295 Of course information markets might suffer from a legitimacy deficit, at least at the present time. Recall that deliberation increases confidence and decreases variance; in many contexts, reliance on information markets might well breed confusion and distrust.296 But at a minimum, such markets should be used, where feasible, as an adjunct to deliberative processes. 
Deliberating groups are often asked to answer questions that are not purely issues. Should cost-benefit analysis be the foundation of regulatory decisions? Should the minimum wage be increased? Should capital punishment be permitted? Can the President be impeached for lying under oath? Should Roe v. Wade be overruled? Should the Constitution be interpreted to require states to reconsider same-sex marriages? When, if ever, is theft morally acceptable? 
When people answer such questions, informational influences and social pressures are likely to play a major role. One study demonstrates group polarization with respect to outrage: When individuals are outraged about corporate misconduct, juries are systematically more outraged than their median member.297 And in fact group discussion often produces polarization on normative issues,298 in a way that strongly suggests the presence of hidden profiles. It is on normative questions, above all, the groups end up at a 293 Note, however, that “thin” markets have proved remarkably accurate, see Levmore, supra note, and that some small groups might encourage outsider investors. 294 See Michael Abramowicz, Information Markets, Administrative Decisionmaking, and Predictive CostBenefit Analysis, 71 U Chi L Rev 933 (2004) 295 See Robert Hahn and Paul Tetlock, Using Information Markets to Improve Policy (2004), available at http://aei-brookings.org/publications/abstract.php?pid=816 296 Recall the reaction to the Policy Analysis Market, outlined above. 297 See David Schkade et al., Deliberating About Dollars: The Severity Shift, 100 Colum L Rev 1139 (2000). 298 See Roger Brown, Social Psychology: The Second Edition (1985); Cass R. Sunstein, Why Societies Need Dissent (2003). more extreme point in line with their predeliberation tendencies. I have noted that in many domains, federal judges are subject to group polarization, with both Democratic and Republican appointees showing a tendency to extremism when they are sitting with like-minded others.299 
It might be controversial to suggest that groups amplify individual errors, because in the normative domain, we might not be able to say, with confidence, that one or another view counts as an “error.” Skeptics about morality and law, rejecting the view that moral and legal questions have correct answers, would insist that any shifts introduced by deliberation cannot be said to be right or wrong. But if they are correct, does deliberation have any point300? In any case skepticism is extremely hard to defend for law or morality. We may bracket the debate over whether legal problems have uniquely correct answers in hard cases301 while also agreeing that on multiple and diverse views about legal reasoning, some conclusions are right and others are wrong.302 If deliberation is often likely to lead people to err on questions of fact, it will also lead participants in law to blunder on questions of law. Suppose, for example, that the question is whether a regulatory agency has violated the statute that it is charged with administering, or whether a particular voting scheme violates the equal protection doctrine, or whether the impossibility doctrine relieves a contracting party of the duty to perform. In all of these cases, groups are likely to err if their deliberations are not structured in such a way as to overcome the risks of amplification of errors, hidden profiles, cascade effects, and group polarization. 
In the moral domain, skepticism also runs into serious problems.303 Without engaging the complex philosophical issues, we can simply note that many different views 299 See Cass R. Sunstein et al., Ideological Voting on Federal Courts of Appeals: A Preliminary Analysis, 90 Virginia Law Review301 (2004). 300 A possible answer would stress the legitimating functions of deliberation, see pp. X above, but for deliberation to work, and even to legitimate, deliberators must believe that they are trying to make progress on a disputed question, not simply to legitimate it. An effort to justify deliberation purely on the ground that it is legitimating will tend to be self-defeating for the participants. 301 See Ronald Dworkin, Is There Really No Right Answer In Hard Cases?, in Ronald Dworkin, A Matter of Principle 119 (1985). 302 This proposition follows, for example, from views as diverse as those expressed in Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation (1999); Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire (1986); and Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict (1996). 303 For various perspectives, see John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1971) (discussing the search for reflective equilibrium); Bernard Williams, Interlude: Relativism, in Morality: An Introduction to Ethics 1about the nature of morality acknowledge the possibility of individual error—and that if individual error does occur, group error will occur as well. As obvious examples, consider the persistence of slavery and racial segregation. As a less obvious example, consider the fact that people’s answers to many questions depend on how those questions are framed. The framing of options affects judgments not only on factual questions but on moral ones as well, including for example the disputed issue of moral obligations to members of future generations.304 As noted, groups do not show less susceptibility to framing effects than individuals,305 and hence groups will be vulnerable to framing for questions of morality and law as well as for questions of fact. 
No information market could be helpful in answering normative questions, simply because there is no way to establish whether a particular investor was correct; for normative questions, predictions are not being made at all.306 And for such questions, it might seem odd or perhaps even bizarre to rely on the judgments of statistical groups. To be sure, democratic processes might be seen as an effort to settle moral and political issues by seeking the mean view within the relevant population (views that are formed after deliberation, at least much of the time). But to say the least, it is controversial to claim that ordinarily moral and political questions are best answered by simply finding the mean views of a population-wide sample. Is the morality of abortion, or capital punishment, properly settled by asking for the average view of a group of, say, 1000 people? Is a legal question to be resolved by taking the median view of a large set of people trained in the law? Ordinarily moral and legal answers are found by reference to the reasons offered on behalf of competing positions, not by taking a poll. 
Note, however, that empirical questions are often a central component of good answers to normative problems; many such problems cannot be resolved without knowing something about the facts. The analysis of mistakes by deliberating groups should apply in full force to the factual components of normative questions. Consider, for example, the suggestion that the minimum wage should be increased. If minimum wage 37 (1972); David Brink, Moral Realism and the Foundations of Ethics (1989); Gilbert Harmon and Judith Jarvis Thompson, Moral Relativism and Moral Objectivity (1996). 304 See Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics and Moral Framing, 88 Minn L Rev 1556 (2004). 305 See Kerr et al., supra note. 306 It might be tempting to say that the moral views of posterity provide the relevant test, but then the bet would be on the moral views of posterity, not on what morality requires. increases would significantly decrease employment, surely that is relevant to the decision whether to support such increases; and it matters too whether minimum wage increases would benefit poor people or mostly people who are not poor.307 To be sure, these are empirical questions on which experts are almost certainly far better than deliberating groups of ordinary people. The point is only that many normative questions cannot sensibly be resolved without information about the actual effects of one or another answer. When this is so, an understanding of the hazards of deliberation, and of how to minimize those hazards, can be used constructively by groups that are attempting to resolve normative questions. 
Of course consequences may not be the central part of some normative disputes. Some people believe, for example, that capital punishment is morally unacceptable even if it has a strong effect in deterring murders, and evaluative judgments of various kinds can separate people even if they agree on the facts.308 But the more general point nonetheless holds: Sometimes a certain view of the facts can bring diverse people into line on normative issues, producing a single position despite disagreements on those issues. To this extent, the analysis here applies to normative questions as well. Group judgments on such questions will be distorted by the amplification of errors, hidden profiles, cascade effects, and polarization. It is important to take steps, of the kind that I have catalogued, to reduce those distortions. 
What about for purely normative issues, lacking any factual component? Here the argument on behalf of group deliberation is not fundamentally different from what it is elsewhere.309 Unless we are relativists or skeptics, we will agree that one point of deliberation is to ensure that normative questions are correctly answered, that is, are answered by reference to good reasons, even if we disagree about what they are. And if this is so, then there is strong reason to be concerned, for normative questions no less than empirical ones, that group judgments will be impaired by the mechanisms traced here. The structural reforms have an equivalent role in the normative domain. We may therefore take the simple cases I have emphasized, in which deliberation leads to palpable 307 For evidence, see Daniel Shaviro, The Minimum Wage, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and Optimal Subsidy Policy, 64 U. Chi. L. Rev. 405, 450-51 (1997). 308 See Dan Kahan and Donald Braman, More Statistics, Less Persuasion: A Cultural Theory of Gun Risk Perceptions, 151 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1052 (2003). 309 See Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson, Democracy and Disagreement (1999), and demonstrable errors, to provide clear evidence of deliberative pathologies that are likely to occur even when errors are neither palpable nor demonstrable. If a central goal is to ensure that normative questions—in law, politics, and morality—are answered well, then the prescriptions I have outlined deserve a place for numerous deliberating groups, including those not centrally concerned with facts at all. 
Groups often contain a great deal of information, and an important task is to elicit and use the information that members actually have. Deliberation is generally thought to be the best way of carrying out that task. But deliberative bodies are subject to serious problems. Much of the time, informational influences and social pressures lead members not to say what they know. As a result, groups tend to propagate and even to amplify cognitive errors. They also emphasize shared information at the expense of unshared information; hidden profiles are a result. Cascade effects and group polarization are common. 
What can be done by way of response? At the very least, it should be possible to structure deliberation so as to increase the likelihood that relevant information will emerge. A norm in favor of critical thinking, and incentives to reward individuals for good decisions by groups, can overcome some of the relevant pressures. Leaders should take steps to encourage a wide range of views; to do this, leaders might be cautious about expressing their own views at the outset and encourage reasons, rather than conclusions, before the views of group members start to harden. Institutions might ensure anonymity and private polling before deliberation; they might permit anonymous statements of final conclusions; they might create strong incentives, economic and otherwise, to encourage people to disclose what they know. 
Information markets have significant advantages over deliberative processes, and in many contexts they might supplement or even replace those processes. Such markets tend to correct rather than to amplify individual errors, above all because they allow shrewd investors to take advantage of the mistakes made by others.310 Because 310 Note that this is an empirical claim, not a conceptual one. It is certainly possible for markets to propagate individual errors. See Shiller, supra note. information markets provide economic rewards for correct individual answers, they realign incentives in a way that promotes disclosure. As a result, they are often more accurate than the judgments of deliberating groups. To the extent feasible, many groups would often do well to enlist information markets in arriving at their judgments, above all because of the accuracy of the price signal. 
My emphasis throughout has been on the aggregation of information and the risk that deliberating groups will err on instrumental questions and on issues of fact. But the same risks arise in the normative domain, where informational influences and social pressures also produce forms of self-silencing that are highly damaging to good deliberation. In that domain as elsewhere, incentives make all the difference; wellfunctioning groups take steps to ensure that on normative questions as on factual ones, people feel free to disclose what they believe to be true. 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
In its stunning decision in Lawrence v. Texas,l the Supreme Court appeared to rule that the Due Process Clause grants a general right to engage in consensual sexual activity. In its critical passage, the Court wrote: 
The petitioners are entitled to respect for their private lives. The State cannot demean their existence or control their destiny by making their private sexual conduct a crime. Their right to liberty under the Due Process Clause gives them the full right to engage in their conduct without intervention of the government. "It isa promise of the Constitution that there is a realm of personal liberty which the government may not enter." The Texas statute furthers no legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into the personal and private life of the individual. 2 
Appalled by this passage, Justice Scalia urged that the Court had embraced a general liberty principle, one that would have extremely large implications. "State laws against bigamy, same-sex marriage, adult incest, prostitution, masturbation, adultery, fornication, bestiality, and obscenity" can be upheld "only in light of Bowers' validation of laws based on moral choices. Every single one of these laws is called into question by today's decision." 3 
Before Lawrence, there was no general right to engage inconsensual sexual activity. The Court's cases involving sexuality and reproduction 4 could be read quite narrowly to say only that the state may not punish or discourage sexual activity through the particular means of reducing people's ability to avoid unwanted children. And before Lawrence, the Court had given strong signals that constitutional protection would be defined by reference to tradition, an idea that * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This Article is a revised version of the opening keynote address, delivered at a conference on Lawrence v. Texas at The Ohio State University; readers are asked to make allowances for an essay based originally on oral remarks. I am grateful to participants in the conference for their questions, comments, and occasional skepticism. The treatment here is a sibling to Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold?. Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, andMarriage,2003 Sup.CT.REv. 27. While there is overlap between the two papers, the issue of desuetude isdeveloped in more detail there, whereas this Article devotes more sustained attention to the question of implications. 
I Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003). 
2 d at 578 (quoting Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 847 (1992)) (internal citation omitted). 
3Id.at 590 (Scalia, J., dissenting). would refuse to give protection for much sexual activity.5 With the abandonment of tradition, does Lawrence have the implications that Justice Scalia prophecies? After all, the Court's opinion is opaque, with many different strands. 6 But the Court has now made it clear that the reach of the liberty interest extends well beyond what tradition supports, and at a minimum, Lawrence raises new questions about laws regulating prostitution, incest, sexual harassment, and adultery. In addition, the Court's extension of substantive due process beyond the domain of tradition makes it harder to defend, as against due process attack, the government's refusal to recognize same-sex marriages. The Lawrence decision also throws into doubt state practices that do not involve the criminal law but that base employment decisions, in whole or in part, on disfavored activities of employees, including not only homosexual behavior, but also fornication and adultery. 
This Article comes in four parts. Part II explores two possible readings of Lawrence. The first is based on autonomy, whereas the second emphasizes a distinctively American version of the idea of desuetude. I suggest that the second reading is quite plausible and has considerable appeal. Part III discusses sexual freedom in general. My conclusion here is that commercial and coercive sexual practices are regulable, but that where third party interests are not at stake, legal restrictions are drawn into sharp doubt by Lawrence. In making this claim, I attempt to sort out the role of the autonomy and desuetude rationales for the Court's decision. Part IV explores the right to marry. I suggest that despite appearances, the Court's due process ruling does not jeopardize restrictions on that right, which, I argue, covers marriages between one woman and one man. If gays and lesbians are to obtain the right to marry, the Equal Protection Clause is the proper route; but federal courts should greatly hesitate in this domain. Part V investigates employment practices. I conclude that in general, Lawrence forbids employers to discriminate against people because they have engaged in constitutionally protected activity. 
A final note before we begin: I do not attempt to evaluate Lawrence here. I am not comfortable with the Lawrence opinion, partly because of its opacity, partly because of its breadth and ambition, and partly because of its use of the idea of substantive due process. In my view, a quite different line of argument, focusing on the equal protection question, would have been better.7 There can be no doubt that the Court was motivated, at least in part, by an understanding of the palpable injustice of criminal prosecution of gays and lesbians. But it is possible to understand Lawrence in a way that does not greatly stretch the Court beyond its appropriate role and that does not lead to implausible or peculiar results. My central goal here is to see how this task might be accomplished. 
There is no question that Lawrence revives the idea of substantive due process. Previous cases had suggested that the Court would be extremely reluctant to invoke that idea to strike down legislation. 8 In fact, the Court had gone so far as to suggest that legislation would not be invalidated unless it ran afoul of longstanding traditions-as bans on same-sex sodomy certainly do not. But in Lawrence, such traditions were no barrier at all. After exploring the nation's complex history, the Court said, "we think that our laws and traditions in the past half century are of most relevance here." 9 Hence the Court stressed an "emerging awareness that liberty gives substantial protection to adult persons in deciding how to conduct their private lives in matters pertaining to sex." 10 
The most obvious reading of Lawrence, rooted in the sentence just quoted, would be that the Constitution gives presumptive protection to consensual sexual conduct, at least so long as it is noncommercial. Call this the autonomy reading of the opinion, which might well be taken as its dominant strand."1 But the Court did not simply announce that the Constitution protects sexual conduct as such; it did not make the implausible suggestion that from its inception, the Due Process Clause was properly read to provide such protection. Instead the Court stressed an "emerging recognition," which it located in a number of places. First, the Model Penal Code did not endorse criminal penalties on consensual sexual activities conducted in private, and several states specifically changed their laws in response to the Model Penal Code. 12 Second, fewer than half the states, twentyfour, outlawed sodomy even in 1986, and the statutory prohibition went largely unenforced even in those states.13 Third, the practices of Western nations have been increasingly opposed to the criminal punishment of homosexual conduct. Britain repealed its law forbidding homosexual conduct in 1967,14 and the European Court of Human Rights concluded that laws banning consensual homosexual conduct are invalid under the European Convention on Human 8 See Glucksburg, 521 U.S. at 720-22, 728 (holding that there is no fundamental right to assistance in committing suicide). 
9 Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 571-72 (2003). 0 Id. at 572. 
11 On desuetude and autonomy in Lawrence, more details might be found in Sunstein, supranote 6, at 48-60. 
12 Lawrence, 539 U.S. at 572. 13 Id.(citing Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186, 192-93 (1986)). 14 d at 572-73 (citing Sexual Offences Act, 1967, c. 60, § 1 (Eng.)). Rights.' 5 Fourth, only thirteen states now forbid such conduct, and of these just four have laws that discriminate only against homosexual conduct. 16 "In those [s]tates where sodomy is still proscribed, whether for same-sex or heterosexual conduct, there is a pattern of nonenforcement with respect to consenting adults acting in private."'17 
By pointing to changing social values and the "pattern of nonenforcement," the Court offered an important signal. It suggested that it was not issuing a simple autonomy ruling, but was also pointing to a distinctive American-style version of the old idea of desuetude. According to that idea, certain laws lapse, and no longer can be invoked, if they have fallen into near-complete nonenforcement. It would be possible to understand Griswold v. Connecticut18 in just this way. 19 Connecticut's prohibition on the use of contraceptives within marriage was hopelessly anachronistic, as measured by the beliefs and practices of Connecticut itself. The Court's decision could be understood as influenced by the fact that the prohibition was rarely used against married couples who used contraceptivessimply because the people of Connecticut would not stand for prosecutions. On this view, Griswoldwas not a simple "substantive due process" case; it was based on a recognition that the Connecticut law was out of step with existing public convictions, as measured by the actual use of the criminal law. In fact, many of the defining privacy cases can be understood in just these terms; Lawrence is their jurisprudential sibling. 
A desuetude reading of the Court's opinion has several advantages. First, it roots the Lawrence outcome in a form of procedural rather than substantive due process. This is an advantage because the idea of "substantive due process" has uncertain constitutional legitimacy; indeed, it seems like a contradiction in terms. The Due Process Clause is not naturally taken as a license to federal judges to strike down legislation that intrudes on liberty with insufficient justification. To be sure, substantive due process has become an entrenched part of constitutional law. But its questionable constitutional basis imposes a continuing shadow over its use by the Supreme Court. By contrast, the problem of desuetude is genuinely procedural in character. If a law is enforced rarely or not at all, then people lack fair notice that they may be subject to the criminal law. In Texas, gay people engaged in sexual relations were hardly on notice that they might be arrested. Whatever the law on the books, enforcement practices suggested that the citizens of Texas were not going to be prosecuted for consensual homosexual activity. 
15 Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 573 (2003) (citing Dudgeon v. United Kingdom, 45 Eur. Ct. H.R. (1981)). The use of materials from other nations, for the interpretation of the United States Constitution, raises many complexities, which I cannot explore here. 16 Id. 17 Id. 18 Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479 (1965). 19 See ALEXANDER BICKEL, THE LEAST DANGEROUS BRANCH 155 (1962). And when a law is infrequently enforced, there is a serious risk of arbitrary or invidious exercise of discretion. 
An objection to use of a law showing a "pattern of nonenforcement" therefore invokes values conventionally associated with the Rule of Law.20 In fact, a law that has fallen into desuetude belongs in the same family as a law that is unconstitutionally vague, where fair notice and arbitrary exercise of discretion are the central problems. I suggest that Lawrence belongs in the same category as the Court's leading vagueness cases, Papachristouv. City of Jacksonville2' and Chicagov. Morales,22 where invalidation followed from an emphasis on the risks that come from laws at whose meaning citizens can only guess. 
There is a further point. A simple substantive due process holding is legitimately challenged on democratic grounds. It overrules the views of citizens and their elected representatives, carving out a domain of liberty into which government may not enter. By contrast, a desuetude ruling strikes down prosecutions in the name of democratic judgments. The core problem is that prosecutions are so palpably inconsistent with such judgments that they may be brought rarely if at all. When the Lawrence Court referred to the pattern of nonenforcement, it was pointing to the fact that actual practice suggested that the citizens of Texas would not tolerate active use of the prohibition on same-sex sodomy.23 
I do not deny that ideas about autonomy played a central role in the Lawrence opinion. The Court did not embrace a general prohibition on the use of laws that are rarely enforced-a prohibition that would be hard to justify. 24 And it would hardly be implausible to read the Court as holding that the state may not, as a general rule, interfere with consensual sexual activity. But I suggest that what made Lawrence possible was the growing social consensus that the criminal law is not properly invoked to prevent same-sex sodomy-a consensus reflected not only in the mounting reluctance of states to criminalize that activity, but also in the infrequency of enforcement of the relevant laws in those very states that do have prohibitions on the books. A desuetude reading fits with much of what the Court said in Lawrence; it makes far better sense than a reading that stresses autonomy alone. 
Let us turn, in this light, to what Lawrence actually means. 
2 0 See LON FULLER, THE MORALITY OF LAW 49-91 (1964); CAss R. SUNsTE N, LEGAL REASONING AND POLrTICAL CONFLICr 102-06 (1996). 
21 Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville, 405 U.S. 156, 162 (1972). 22 Chicago v. Morales, 527 U.S. 41, 55-58 (1999). 23 Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 569-70, 572 (2003). 24 On some ofthe complexities here, see Sunstein, supranote 6, at 51-52. 
III. SEX 
Justice Scalia urged that Lawrence decrees an end to all "morals" legislation, 25 and in the aftermath of the decision, it is natural to wonder about the constitutionality of laws forbidding sexual harassment, prostitution, adultery, fornication, obscenity, polygamy, and incest. Before Lawrence, such laws seemed quite secure. But after Lawrence, it would be possible to contend that many statutory restrictions impose unconstitutional barriers to consensual sexual activity. 
Does Lawrence raise questions about laws forbidding incest and sexual harassment? The simplest answer points to coercion. In such cases, the predicate for Lawrence on any reading of the case--consent-is absent. The Court had no occasion to draw careful lines between coercive and consensual sex. Often the line is clear. And if consensual sex is not involved, there is no fundamental right that would require the state to provide a compelling justification. For the same reason, the state has a perfectly legitimate, even compelling, reason to impose a restriction. In cases of sexual harassment, coercion of one or another sort is generally involved,26 and hence a legal ban is perfectly acceptable. The same is true for the vast majority of cases involving incest, which involve minors unable to give legal consent.2 7 The interest in preventing coerced sex is sufficient. We can understand this conclusion under either an autonomy or desuetude rationale. Autonomy finds its limits where the relevant acts are not consensual. And current social attitudes, as reflected in the use of the criminal and civil law, do not accept coercive sex. 
But harder cases are imaginable. Suppose, for example, that under a public university's sexual harassment policy, a teacher and a graduate student are banned from having a consensual relationship, even though the teacher is not, and will not be, in a supervisory position over the student. Or let us even suppose that the teacher has, or might have, a supervisory role, but that both of those involved claim that the relationship is fully consensual. Here the distinction between coercive and consensual sex is not so transparent. In a sense, the relationship is indeed consensual; but the existence of a potential supervisory role, and in any case the disparity in power between those involved, could give rise to a plausible claim of coercion. Or suppose that the incestuous relations are between adultsfirst cousins, let us say. Here a claim of coercion may or may not be plausible; 25 Lawrence, 539 U.S. at 599 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 26 See, e.g., Franklin v. Gwinnett County Pub. Schs., 503 U.S. 60,63 (1992). 
27 See, e.g., Richardson v. State, 353 S.E.2d 342, 343-44 (Ga. 1987); Commonwealth v. Arnold, 514 A.2d 890, 891-92 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1986). everything depends on the nature of the relationship. If an "as applied" challenge were made, these cases would be genuinely difficult after Lawrence. If real consent is found in either case, a fundamental right might well be involved. At the very least, an autonomy reading of Lawrence seems to raise serious questions about the prohibitions; and it is not clear that existing social convictions disapprove of incestuous relations between adults. What could be said in defense of the restriction? 
Begin with sexual harassment. A possible defense of a broad sexual harassment prohibition is that it provides a way of reducing risks of coercion and introducing clarity for all. Coercion is always a possibility in relations between students and teachers or employees and employers. In establishing a policy, the question is whether to adopt a rule that will forbid all cases of coercion while also forbidding a few relationships that are arguably or certainly not coercive---or instead to adopt a narrower rule that will make it possible for some coercion to occur. In my view, educational institutions and employers have a strong justification for choosing the former route. At the very least, it is reasonable for them to adopt flat bans on apparently consensual relations; this option is among those that sensible institutions might select. It would be implausible to say that existing social attitudes condemn a rule-bound option, or that views toward sexual harassment, in the close cases, have now become substantially accepting. 
In the case of the ban on incest among adults, the strongest grounds would be to eliminate certain psychological pressures and protect any children who might result from medical risk.28 But in imaginable applications, this argument would be weak, simply because adults are involved, children are not contemplated, and all relevant risks are low. Even if a ban on incest is generally acceptable, it might be questionable in cases involving, say, criminal prohibitions on relationships between first cousins. This is certainly so under the autonomy rationale and perhaps under a desuetude rationale as well: Prosecutions are rarely brought in cases of this kind. The general points are the simplest. Coercive relationships are not protected. But in some cases, reasonable people can dispute whether coercion is present. 
Under Lawrence, commercial sex is to be treated less protectively than noncommercial sex.29 It follows that in the case of prostitution, the defining 28 See, e.g., In re Tiffany Nicole M., 571 N.W.2d 872, 876-79 (Wis. Ct. App. 1997). But see In re Tennination of Parental Rights to Zachary B., 662 N.W.2d 360 (Wis. Ct. App. 2003). 29 Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 578 (2003). example of commercial sex, a fundamental right is not involved.30 To this extent, Justice Scalia's complaint seems to overreach. As Lawrence was written, the outcome is easy, but the analysis is not. Why the sharp distinction between commercial and noncommercial sex? Why are sexual relations unprotected, or less protected, if dollars are exchanged? Books, after all, are protected, whether they are given away or sold. If sexual activity receives special constitutional protection under Lawrence, such activity might well qualify for protection even if commercial, so long as it is consensual. 
Part of the analysis here might be rooted in desuetude: There is no pattern of nonenforcement with respect to prostitution. On the contrary, arrests and prosecutions are common. As a constitutional matter, perhaps commercial sex should not be treated more protectively than any other kind of commercial interaction, now subject to rational basis review. 3 1 But if sexual relationships have a special constitutional status, this distinction is far from obvious; return to the First Amendment analogy, where commercial sales of books receive full protection. Under the autonomy rationale, the more basic claim might be that special constitutional status attaches to sexual intimacy, not to sexual relationships, and that intimacy in the relevant sense is not involved when sex is exchanged for cash.32 Hence no fundamental right is involved. But this argument has many problems. Countless sexual relationships, including many that fall within the category protected by Lawrence, do not involve emotional intimacy. Undoubtedly some commercial relationships involve such intimacy. In any case, the Lawrence Court does not make intimacy a precondition for constitutional protection. But perhaps the Court can be said to be suggesting that noncommercial sex involves intimacy frequently enough to justify protection of the overall class, whereas the opposite is true of sex-for-money. 
But what justification does the state have for forbidding prostitution? It is probably sufficient here to point to the adverse effects of prostitution on the lives of prostitutes; the risk of exploitation and worse is real and serious. 33 Of course some of the risk stems from the very fact that prostitution is unlawful. Perhaps the extent of exploitation would be decreased if prostitution were lawful. But this is an issue on which reasonable people can differ, and so long as rational basis review is involved, the state has sufficient justifications. Nor does Lawrence disallow moral justifications for regulating prostitution, justifications pointing to the potentially corrosive effects of prostitution on sexuality and sex equality.34 It is not easy to cabin the social effects of prostitution; if it were widespread and legitimate, it might well contribute to the sexual subordination of women. 
I am not taking a position on the complex and disputed question whether and how prostitution should be outlawed. My suggestion is only that under rational basis review, restrictions on prostitution are easily defensible. The ban on the sale of obscenity should be understood in similar terms;35 the use of obscenity raises different issues. 36 The simplest point is that to the extent that Lawrence rested on the absence of enforcement of laws forbidding sodomy, that point is wholly inapplicable to the case of commercial sex. 
For government, the most serious problems, post-Lawrence, come in cases challenging restrictions on genuinely consensual and noncommercial practices. Begin with what might seem an intermediate case: bans on sexual devices. 37 Following the previous discussion, we should distinguish here between sale on the one hand and use on the other. Perhaps the state could ban the sale itself, urging that it is attempting to regulate a commercial enterprise, and that it is permitted to do so in light of the commercial-noncommercial distinction just made. But even this is not entirely clear. The constitutional protection given to the use of contraceptives was rapidly extended to the sale of contraceptives. 38 And if a ban on the sale of contraceptives cannot be justified, it is not clear, after Lawrence, how the state can justify a ban on the sale of sexual devices. Before Lawrence, it might have been said that the privacy cases did not protect sexual activity as such, but merely banned the state from punishing that activity through the indirect and discriminatory means of risking unwanted pregnancy. But Lawrence forbids this narrow reading of the cases. 
Could the state make it a crime for people to use such devices? The right to do so might well fall within the category of fundamental interests. If we are speaking of autonomy as such, that conclusion seems clearly correct. If desuetude is the proper analysis, the issue is more complex. It is not clear that social attitudes have dramatically shifted, as they have in the context of sexual orientation; but prosecutions for use are at least rare, and sales are generally permitted. In any case, what is the state's justification for banning either sale or use? It is easy to imagine an as-applied challenge, in which a married couple attacks a ban on either the sale or the use of sexual devices with reference to Griswolditself.39 The difference is that in Griswold,the ban on use of contraceptives was an effort to prevent non-procreative sex, whereas in the hypothetical case, the state is banning devices that are designed to increase sexual pleasure. But why, exactly, would it seek to do that? Is there something wrong with certain sources of sexual pleasure within constitutionally protected relationships? Perhaps the answer would be affirmative if real harms were involved, as for example through some sadomasochistic practices. Almost certainly the state could justify a prohibition on the public display of such devices. But we are not now speaking of these questions. At first glance, individuals have a fundamental interest here, and the state seems to lack a legitimate basis for intruding on that interest. 
If there were laws forbidding masturbation, Lawrence would indeed raise extremely serious questions about them on grounds of either autonomy or desuetude. But there are no such laws.40 What about laws forbidding fornication, understood to mean non-adulterous sex outside of marriage? 4 1 On autonomy grounds, Lawrence creates serious doubts, simply because coercion and commerce are not present. In any case, there seems to be an emerging social belief that fornication is not a proper basis for criminal punishment.42 And with respect to consenting adults, it is not easy to produce a legitimate ground for interfering with non-adulterous sex.43 39 See Williams, 240 F.3d at 952-53 (suggesting that an as-applied challenge is plausible). 40 Lawrence raises no questions about laws forbidding public masturbation. The most plausible objection would be that mere offense is not a legitimate basis for regulating noncoercive sex; and indeed Justice Scalia seems to read the Court's opinion to have that implication. Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 590 (Scalia, J., dissenting). But the Court's rejection of the moral basis of the ban on sodomy should not be taken to forbid governments from protecting people from unwanted viewing of other people's sex lives. 
41 See, e.g., Jarrett v. Jarrett, 449 U.S. 927, 929 n.2 (Brennan, J., dissenting) (citing I11. Rev. Stat. ch. 38, § 11-8 (1977)) (noting that denial of child custody based on divorced mother's apparent violation of fornication statute through cohabitation with a single man likely violated the Fourteenth Amendment). 
42 See, e.g., id; In re J.M., 575 S.E.2d 441,444 (Ga. 2003) (holding Georgia's interest in protecting minors was not applicable to fornication of two minors past the age of consent); State v. Saunders, 381 A.2d 333, 339 (N.J. 1977) (overturning fornication statute as a violation of constitutionally protected right to privacy). 
43 Admittedly, rational basis review might be satisfied if, for example, the state urged that it was attempting to reduce the risks of unwanted pregnancy and venereal disease. But after Lawrence, rational basis review is unlikely to be applied here. 
The most difficult cases involve laws forbidding adultery.44 We could imagine actual adultery prosecutions; 45 we could also imagine cases in which government takes adverse employment action against those involved in adulterous relationships. 46 Here, as in other contexts, it would be possible to urge that a consensual relationship is involved, one with which the state may not interfere on purely moral grounds. On the other hand, it is possible to justify prohibitions on adultery by reference to harms to third parties: children, in many cases, and the betrayed spouse, in many more cases. The adultery laws can be seen as an effort to protect the marital relationship, involving persons and interests, including those of children, that are harmed if adultery OCCurs. 4 7 Marriage can be and often is understood as an exchange of commitments, which have individual and social value; and a prohibition on adultery, moral and legal, operates in the service of those commitments. For these reasons, adultery cases might be seen as outside of the domain of Lawrence altogether. If rational basis review is involved, prohibitions on adultery should certainly be acceptableexcept, perhaps, in cases in which the married couple has agreed to nonexclusivity (in which case criminal prosecution would be especially surprising). 
One difficulty here is that in the context of adultery, criminal prosecutions are extremely unusual, at least as rare as criminal prosecutions for sodomy. There is a good argument that criminal prosecutions, in this context, are inconsistent with emerging social values-a point that Lawrence takes seriously. 48 This is not because adultery is thought to be morally acceptable; it is not. (Here there is a difference with same-sex relations, which are increasingly believed to be acceptable.) It is because adultery is not thought to be a proper basis for the use of the criminal law. Perhaps it could be said that Lawrence turned at least in part on the Court's evident desire to ensure against practices that would "demean[] the lives of homosexual persons." 49 It is much less plausible to say that the Court should take special steps to ensure against practices that would "demean the lives of' adulterers. But in the end, it is not so easy to distinguish an adultery prosecution from the sodomy prosecution forbidden in Lawrence.50 On desuetude 44 See Marcum v. McWhorter, 308 F.3d 635, 642 (6th Cir. 2002). 45 See Commonwealth v. Stowell, 449 N.E.2d 357, 358 (Mass. 1983). 
4 6 See Oliverson v. West Valley City, 875 F. Supp. 1465, 1469 (D. Utah 1995); City of Sherman v. Henry, 928 S.W.2d 464,465-66 (Tex. 1996). 
4 7 See Oliverson,875 F. Supp. at 1484. 48 See Sunstein, supranote 6. 49 Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 575 (2003). 
50 Employment discrimination by the state against adulterers raises further complexities. On a standard analysis, protection against criminal prosecution, if it exists, is conclusive on the issue of public employment, forbidding discrimination against people who have engaged in constitutionally protected activity. One exception would apply when the government can invoke distinctive employment-related grounds for the discrimination. A public university's admissions office need not hire, as director ofadmissions, people who speak out in favor ofrace grounds, the two problems are very close. On grounds of autonomy, the only distinction is that third-party interests are at stake in adultery cases. 
IV. MARRIAGE 
Under Lawrence, must states recognize same-sex marriages? This is undoubtedly the most controversial issue raised by the Court's decision. Most Americans do not want gays and lesbians to be prosecuted for sexual activity. But most also do not want to allow marriages between people of the same sex. 
At first glance, Lawrence has nothing at all to do with same-sex marriage. It involved sodomy prosecutions, brought under anachronistic laws, and the due process challenge to those prosecutions need not draw into doubt the longstanding practice of defining marriage to involve one man and one woman. In any case, the most natural challenge to laws rejecting such marriages is rooted in the Equal Protection Clause; and Lawrence said nothing about the Equal Protection Clause. Indeed, the Court might well have issued a due process ruling, and avoided the Equal Protection Clause, precisely because it sought to avoid the marriage issue. To the extent that the Court was emphasizing an emerging social judgment against the practice under attack, its decision does not touch prohibitions on samesex marriage-and will not do so unless and until such prohibitions seem as outmoded as bans on homosexual sodomy do today. Existing legal practice suggests strong opposition to same-sex marriage,5 1 and polling evidence suggests that most Americans support existing practice. 52 
But under current constitutional law, the issue cannot be disposed of so readily. Hence the Court's effort to avoid the same-sex marriage issue was not entirely successful. Because the Court made it clear that a successful due process challenge need not be rooted in tradition, such a challenge might well be made to prohibitions on same-sex marriage under existing law. Several cases have indicated that there is a constitutional "right to marry" under the Due Process discrimination; perhaps discrimination against adulterers can, in some contexts, be similarly justified. In any case, everything turns on the reason for a due process ruling. If adultery prosecutions were banned on the basis of a rationale tied to the illegitimacy of using the criminal law, perhaps civil disabilities, as through employment discrimination, would be permissible. I explore related issues below. 
51 As of this writing, the only decision to require official recognition of same-sex marriages is Goodridge v. Dept. of Pub. Health, 798 N.E.2d 941, 969 (Mass. 2003), a decision that rested on the state constitution. Most state courts have ruled otherwise. See, e.g., Standhardt v. Superior Court, 77 P.3d 451 (Ariz. 2003). Civil unions are a different matter, but they hardly can claim even strong minority support. 
52 See the summary, Baptist Press, New Poll Shows Generation Gap in Opposition to Same Sex Marriage (July 22, 2003) at http://www.bpnews.org/bpnews.asp?IDI=16337 (last visited Sept. 1, 2004). Clause. In Loving v. Virginia53 (probably the best-named case in all of constitutional law), the Court struck down a ban on racial intermarriage on two grounds. The first is the familiar equal protection ground, seeing that ban as a form of racial discrimination. But in a separate ruling, the Court also held that the ban violated the Due Process Clause. In the Court's words, "[t]he freedom to marry has long been recognized as one of the vital personal rights essential to the orderly pursuit of happiness by free men."'54 It added that "[m]arriage is one of the 'basic civil rights of man,' fundamental to our very existence and survival. 55 The Loving Court's due process ruling was not free from ambiguity; the problem of racial discrimination played a large role. But subsequent cases confirm that the right to marry counts as fundamental for due process purposes-and is sufficient by itself to take the analysis into the domain of heightened scrutiny. 
In Zablocki v. Redhail,56 the Court struck down a Wisconsin law forbidding people under child support obligations to remarry unless they had obtained a judicial determination that they had met those obligations and that their children were not likely to become public charges.57 The Court insisted that "the right to marry is of fundamental importance for all individuals," 58 and that "the decision to marry has been placed on the same level of importance as decisions relating to procreation, childbirth, child rearing, and family relationships." 59 The Court said that it would uphold "reasonable regulations that do not significantly interfere with decisions to enter into the marital relationship." 60 But any direct and substantial interference with the right to marry would be strictly scrutinized. In a concurring opinion, Justice Stevens underlined the point, urging that the Constitution would cast serious doubt on any "classification which determines who may lawfully enter into the marriage relationship." 6 1 In Turner v. Safley,62 the Court followed and extended Zablocki, striking down a prison regulation that prohibited inmates from marrying unless there were "compelling reasons" for them to do so. 63 
In this light, a prohibition on same-sex marriage is not entirely easy to defend in the aftermath of Lawrence. Under the Court's decisions, a fundamental right might well seem to be involved, at least if the autonomy rationale is emphasized 53 Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1(1968). 54 1d. at 12. 55 Id.(quoting Skinner v. Oklahoma ex rel. Williamson, 316 U.S. 535, 541 (1942)). 56 Zablocki v. Redhail, 434 U.S. 374 (1978). 57 Id. at 377. 5 8 1d. at 384. 59 1d. at 386. 60 Id.at 386-87 (citing Califano v. Jobst, 434 U.S. 47,48 n.12 (1977)). 61 Id. at 404 (Stevens, J., concurring). 62 Turner v. Safley, 482 U.S. 78 (1987). 63 Id.at 96-99. (as the marriage cases themselves seem to do). The important point here is that Lawrence cuts the ground out from under the simplest constitutional defense of the prohibition on same-sex marriage, to the effect that the prohibition is justified simply by reference to tradition. And if a fundamental right is involved, it is one with which the state can interfere only by pointing to a countervailing interest that is not merely legitimate but also compelling. 
In the context of same-sex marriage, what might that interest be? What sorts of social harms would follow from recognizing marriages between people of the same sex? It is conventional to argue that the refusal to recognize same-sex marriage is a way of protecting the marital institution itself. If same-sex marriages were permitted, perhaps marriage itself would be endangered, at least in its traditional form. But aside from simple semantic arguments, this is very puzzling; how do same-sex marriages threaten the institution of marriage? Extending the right to enter into marriage would not seem to endanger traditional marriagesunless it were thought that significant numbers of heterosexuals would forego traditional marriages if gay and lesbian marriages were permitted. This is a difficult causal argument, to say the least. 
Perhaps the state can legitimately reserve the idea of marriage to men and women for expressive reasons. Perhaps the state can urge that it does not want to give the same expressive support to same-sex unions as to opposite-sex unions. Perhaps it does not want to "endorse" such unions or to suggest that they are appropriate or legitimate or have a standing similar to that of traditional marriage. But why not? Why should states refuse to endorse such unions? Compare the case of adultery, where defense of traditional marriage and expressive condemnation are far easier to understand. As compared to a ban on same-sex marriages, a prohibition on adultery seems simple to justify. Such a prohibition is likely, in numerous cases, to protect one or even both spouses, and to protect children besides. If, as I have suggested, Lawrence draws prohibitions on adultery into some doubt, it would seem to raise serious questions about prohibitions on samesex marriage, which have a far weaker foundation in the goal of protecting traditional marriage. 
But Lawrence involved criminal punishment, as a denial of the benefits of marriage does not, and perhaps criminal punishment is special. Perhaps such punishment is quite different from, and to be assessed far more skeptically than, a statute that confers the benefits of marriage to some but not to all. Perhaps Lawrence forbids the state from using the heavy artillery of the criminal law-but without raising questions about civil rights and civil duties. It would not be at all implausible to say that the Lawrence Court was responsive to the assortment of disabilities associated with criminal punishment-a set of disabilities that might be thought unique. In fact, both the autonomy and desuetude rationales can be invoked in support of this position. Perhaps the desuetude argument is limited to criminal prosecution, applying only to efforts to use the criminal law against people notwithstanding a general pattern of nonenforcement. And perhaps the autonomy rationale applies only, or most strongly, when the government attempts to invoke the criminal law against those who have engaged in consensual sex. 
These arguments are coherent as readings ofLawrence itself The problem is that Loving, Zablocki, and Turner themselves raise questions for this kind of distinction. None involved a criminal prohibition. All applied careful judicial scrutiny to laws saying that certain people could not enter into the marital relationship. The problem for those who want to defend the ban on same-sex marriage is not Lawrence by itself, but the trilogy of marriage cases, understood in light of Lawrence's refusal to understand tradition as the basis for due process rights. 
Perhaps we could read the three cases more narrowly. 64 Notwithstanding the Court's rhetoric, it is quite doubtful that the Court really meant to raise serious questions about all state laws dictating who may enter into a marital relationship. People are not permitted to marry dogs or cats or cars or sunny days. They are banned from marrying their parents or their aunts. They cannot marry two people, or three, or twenty. Must these restrictions be justified by showing that they are the least restrictive means of achieving a compelling state interest? If so, at least some of them would be in serious trouble. Perhaps the ban on incestuous marriages could be defended by pointing to the risk of coercion and the danger to any children who would result. But as we have seen, it is easy to imagine some cases in which any such defense would be weak-as, for example, where the would-be spouses are both adults and do not plan to have children. Perhaps bans on polygamy could be defended by pointing to the risk of exploitation, especially of the women involved. It is easy to imagine a claim that if polygamy is permitted, women will be subordinated as a result. But we might doubt whether Loving and Zablocki should be read to require a careful judicial inquiry into that question. 
A possible opinion would urge that by deeming the right to marry fundamental, the Court did not mean to suggest that it would strictly scrutinize any law that departed from the traditional idea that a marriage is between (one) woman and (one) man. It meant only to say that when a man and a woman, not members of the same family, seek to marry, the state must have exceedingly good reasons for putting significant barriers in their path. This rationale has the advantage of fitting with the results in Loving, Zablocki, and Turner. It has the further advantage of not drawing into question bans on polygamous or incestuous marriages, or marriages between people and cats. But it does have a problem: it seems somewhat arbitrary. Why, exactly, should the right to marry be limited in 64 See Cass R. Sunstein, The Right to Marry,26 CARDOZO L. REV. (forthcoming 2005). It would also be possible to deny that the right to marry has a constitutional status-to urge that Loving, Zablocki, and Turner were really equal protection cases. This view would have some appeal, especially to skeptics about substantive due process, but it does not fit with current law. this way? Why, in any case, should the definition be such as to allow the state not to recognize same-sex marriages? 
These are not easy questions to answer. The best response would combine institutional considerations, involving the limitations of the federal courts, with an appreciation of the difference between the Due Process Clause and the Equal Protection Clause. Above all, the institutional considerations involve the need for judicial humility. Strict scrutiny would put courts in an exceedingly difficult position, for it is not so easy to produce compelling justifications for forbidding consensual relations that one or more people would like to call "marriage." If three people would like to marry, it is not simple to produce strong justifications for forbidding them to do so, at least if we are in the domain of heightened scrutiny. Of course one or another person might be exploited; of course children might be harmed. But in the abstract, these are somewhat speculative concerns, and they might be addressed through means short of a ban. And it is simply implausible to think that courts would or should say that the state must allow marriages among small groups or for that matter large ones. The slippery slope problem here is serious. And if desuetude is at least a part of the explanation for Lawrence, then we can add that the ban on same-sex marriages has not, yet, fallen into desuetude, and hence the federal courts should be reluctant to invoke Lawrence in order to invalidate them. 
In any event, the cases involving sex and reproduction, now broadened by Lawrence, involve the imposition of particular kinds of disabilities on those who have engaged in certain kinds of private conduct. Read in terms of autonomy, those cases embrace a narrow form of John Stuart Mill's position in On Liberty,6 5 requiring "harm to others" before permitting government to ban consensual sexual conduct. 66 And the state could not punish the relevant conduct by saying, for example, that those who have engaged in certain sexual acts are not permitted to marry one another. In fact, the protection of marriage, at least in Zablocki, seems to rest partly on the understanding that before Lawrence, marriage was the only status in which certain sex acts could lawfully occur: If the acts themselves can lawfully take place only within the marital form, then there is particular reason to protect the marital form. But now that those acts are protected by Lawrence, it seems most sensible to treat the relevant cases as protecting them from intrusion by the state and as having little or nothing to do with a right of access to the institution of marriage. Here the Due Process Clause seems beside the point. 
If certain people are told that they cannot marry, the real objection lies not in due process, but in a possible violation of the Equal Protection Clause. The concern, in short, is that the state is discriminating against people not permitted 65 JoHN STUART MILL, ON LIBERTY (Currin V. Shields ed., Liberal Arts Press 1956) 
LIBERTYAFT7ER LAWRENCE access to the marital relationship--not in the suggestion that there is a right to marry as such. I am suggesting that except for the defining cases of one woman and one man, there is no such right; outside of those cases, the objection, if there is one, is in a constitutionally unacceptable form of discrimination. And usually that objection will be weak. When people are forbidden from marrying their cats, or from marrying two or three people, the equal protection objection is weak. A rational basis is all that the state is required to show and a rational basis is something that the state has. 
Do bans on same-sex marriage violate the Equal Protection Clause? I cannot discuss that issue in detail here.6 7 In principle, I believe that it is very hard to defend this form of discrimination against gays and lesbians in constitutionally acceptable terms. For federal courts, the real problem is institutional, though it has nothing to do with slippery slopes. It involves instead appropriate judicial modesty in the face of strong public convictions, and in particular, the distinctive judicial virtue of prudence. As Alexander Bickel has emphasized, the point is highly relevant to constitutional law, especially in the area of social reform. 68 As it operates in the courts, constitutional law is a peculiar mixture of substantive theory and institutional constraint. Constitutional rights might therefore be systematically "underenforced" by the judiciary for good institutional reasons.69 Those reasons have to do with the courts' limited fact-finding capacity, their weak democratic pedigree, their limited legitimacy, and their likely ineffectiveness as frequent instigators of social reform. There are good prudential reasons for courts to hesitate in this context, in part because the issue of same-sex marriage is under intense discussion at the local, state, and national levels, and there are many possibilities, ranging from diverse forms of civil unions to ordinary marriage. As in the context of abortion, it would be most unfortunate if the Supreme Court were to settle the issue at this early stage. 
Some platitudes are worth repeating: A central advantage of a federal system is that it permits a wide range of experiments; a central disadvantage of centralized rules is that they foreclose such experiments. In the context of criminal punishments for consensual activity, experiments are best avoided. But in the context of marriage, a degree of judicial caution and democratic flexibility is highly desirable. This point connects nicely with the suggestion that the Lawrence decision was rooted in a kind of American-style version of desuetude. When a law has lost support in public convictions, judicial invalidation is least damaging to democratic goals and to the Court's own institutional position. At least at this stage, the ban on same-sex marriage stands on much firmer footing. I emphasize my belief that in principle, such a ban raises serious equal protection concerns; 67 See CASS R. SUNsTEiN, DESIGNING DEMOCRACY 192-93 (2001). 68 See BICKEL, supranote 19, at 111-98. 
69 Cf Lawrence Gene Sager, Fair Measure: The Legal Status of Underenforced ConstitutionalNorms, 91 HARV. L. REV. 1212, 1220 (1978). my objection to a ruling from the federal judiciary has everything to do with its properly limited role in the constitutional structure. 
V. EMPLOYMENT 
May a public employer discharge or punish an employee because of his sexual activities or his sexual orientation? Before Lawrence, the lower courts were divided on the issue.70 The logic of Bowers supported the decisions upholding such discharges, at least against due process challenges. It was possible to urge that because homosexual activity is not protected by the Constitution, government employees are permitted to discriminate against those who engage in that activity. At first glance, however, Lawrence resolves that question the other way. A public employer is not permitted to discharge an employee because she has exercised a constitutional right (an oversimplification to which I shall return). If an employee has converted to Catholicism, or voted for a Republican, she may not be adversely affected for that reason. So too if an employee has exercised a right protected by the Due Process Clause. A state may not refuse to hire a secretary who has used contraception or had an abortion. Under Lawrence, government may not refuse to hire people who have engaged in same-sex relations. It could be argued that a criminal punishment is worse than a civil disability and hence that the prohibition on criminal prosecution does not entail an equivalent prohibition on adverse employment actions. But the examples just described should be sufficient response to that argument. 
Most cases of adverse employment action, prompted by homosexual activity, are easy after Lawrence. But there are some possible responses. One would emphasize the reading I have emphasized here: Lawrence can be seen to have turned not simply on a finding of a fundamental right, but also and perhaps more importantly on the Court's conclusion that the Texas law was no longer supported by public convictions. If desuetude is involved, then perhaps employment discrimination is permitted even if criminal prosecution is not. This argument is not at all implausible or incoherent. If we emphasize the idea of desuetude, then a moral judgment might be permissible in the employment context even if it cannot be invoked as a basis for criminal prosecution. But for the particular purpose of employment action, this approach reads Lawrence a bit too finely. The Court did find a fundamental interest, whatever its precise reason for doing so; and if so, states may not refuse to hire people who have engaged in the relevant behavior. In 70 See DeSantis v. Pacific Tel. & Tel. Co., Inc., 608 F.2d 327, 329-30 (9th Cir. 1979) (holding that homosexuals are not a protected class under Title VII); Childers v. Dallas Police Dep't, 513 F. Supp. 134, 145-48 (N.D. Tex. 1981) (holding that a police department could refuse to hire a gay activist because of doubts about his character). Compare Glover v. Williamsburg Local Sch. Dist. Bd. of Educ., 20 F. Supp. 2d 1160, 1174 (S.D. Ohio 1998) (finding no rational basis for a decision not to renew the contract of a homosexual teacher); Weaver v. Nebo Sch. Dist., 29 F. Supp. 2d 1279, 1289 (D. Utah 1998) (to the same effect). fact, the notion of desuetude might even be enlisted on behalf of this conclusion. The commitments that underlie sanctions against same-sex relations no longer command enough support to justify use of the criminal law. If so, significant civil burdens might well be unacceptable too. 
Another response would emphasize that the government sometimes may indeed refuse to hire people for engaging in constitutionally protected activity. The President is permitted to discharge or to fail to employ, as Secretary of State, someone who has publicly criticized his policies; so too, a public university is allowed not to hire, or even to fire, an admissions officer who has said that women should not go to college, or that it is best for African-Americans to attend vocational school. In such cases, the university can claim, plausibly, that it is not trying to censor anyone, or to punish them for exercising constitutional right, but instead to accomplish the substantive task that it has set for itself 71 Might discrimination against gays and lesbians be similarly justified? This is not entirely unimaginable, but it is hard to see. Unless the state is to capitulate to private prejudice, as it is generally forbidden from doing,72 it cannot easily invoke a distinct, employment-related reason to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation. Why, exactly, would employment-related justifications argue against employment of a gay police officer, secretary, or town official? The analogy to the legitimate cases discussed above is very weak. 
It also follows that the "don't ask, don't tell" policy, in the military setting, is under new pressure. It is no longer possible to defend that policy simply by citing Bowers. If the policy is to be upheld, it is because courts should give great deference to military judgments, applying a form of rational basis review to them. I believe that federal courts are not likely to interfere with military judgments here, and that there is exceedingly good reason for a general posture of deference to such judgments. In principle, however, it is extremely difficult to defend "don't ask, don't tell" against constitutional challenge, and this appears to be one of the exceedingly rare settings in which judicial interference with military judgments would be justified. 73 
What is the reach of Lawrence? The discussion has gone briskly over a considerable amount of territory. For those who find tabular summaries useful, consider the following: 71 See Pickering v. Bd. ofEduc., 391 U.S. 563 (1968), for the basic framework. 72 See Palmore v. Sidoti, 466 U.S. 429,433 (1984). 
73 For an argument to this effect before Lawrence was decided, see CASS R. SUNsTEIN, supranote 67, at 189-92. 
X (coercive) 
X (commercial) 
_________ 
___________ Sexual harassment Prostitution 
Fornication Use of sexual devices 
Polygamy Employment discrimination against gays and lesbians Bans on samesex marriageIII X X 
X (except for military) mlitary) 
X (coercive; but some hard issues in imaginable applications) 
X (military) 
invalid 
X (but perhaps defensible by reference to harms to third parties) 
Whether we emphasize autonomy or desuetude, restrictions on sex that is nonconsensual or commercial are surely valid. By contrast, laws forbidding fornication, defined as extramarital but non-adulterous sex, are surely invalid. The Constitution probably forbids government from punishing, either criminally or civilly, those who have used sexual devices. The state is almost certainly banned from discriminating against those who have engaged in homosexual conduct, at least outside of certain specialized contexts (most notably the military). In some applications, bans on incest and adultery could be subject to serious constitutional challenge. The idea of autonomy supports such challenges in imaginable applications; so too with the idea of desuetude. 
The hardest cases involve the failure to recognize same-sex marriages. If Lawrence is put together with Loving and Zablocki, it might seem clear that the government would have to produce a compelling justification for refusing to recognize such marriages, and compelling justifications are not easy to find. Lawrence makes it impossible to justify current practice merely by reference to tradition. I have argued, however, that there is no general right to marry, and that the Court's due process decisions are best read to apply only to cases in which the state forbids marriages between one man and a woman. 
A ban on same-sex marriages raises serious equal protection issues. I believe that outside the courtroom, the equal protection objection is convincing, but that federal courts should hesitate to rule to that effect. The reason has to do with the properly limited role of the Supreme Court in American government. The ban on same-sex sodomy could legitimately be said to be out-of-touch with existing public convictions, as reflected in a pattern of nonenforcement; the same cannot now be said of a ban on same-sex marriage. 
More generally, I have suggested that Lawrence rested on a mixture of ideas about autonomy and ideas about desuetude. I have also suggested that a desuetude reading has significant advantages. It suggests that the Court's ruling can claim a basis in procedural commitments associated with the rule of law, including predictability, fair notice, and the avoidance of arbitrary or invidious behavior by the police. It suggests that the Court's decision does not go in the face of public convictions; on the contrary, it draws strength from them. I have not contended that desuetude provides all of the story. But it is clear that Lawrence was made possible only by changes in public values. The Court's members live in society, and they are inevitably affected by what society thinks-a fact to which Lawrence itself attests. The fate of liberty after Lawrence will depend not mostly on the commitments ofjudges, but more fundamentally on the evolving beliefs of the nation's citizenry. 
HeinOnline -- 65 Ohio St. L.J. 1079 2004 
MONEYBALL: THE ART OF WINNING AN UNFAIR GAME. By Michael Lewis. New York: W. W. Norton. 2003. Pp. ix, 288. $24.95. 
In this lively book, Michael Lewis' explores a topic that would seem of interest only to sports fans: how Billy Beane, the charismatic general manager of the Oakland Athletics, turned his baseball team around using, of all things, statistics. What next - an inspirational tale about superior database management? But there are some general lessons in Lewis's book that make it worth the attention of people who do not know the difference between a slider and a screwball (a group that, unfortunately, includes many lawyers and law professors). Those lessons have to do, above all, with the limits of human rationality and the efficiency of labor markets. If Lewis is right about the blunders and the confusions of those who run baseball teams, then his tale has a lot to tell us about blunders and confusions in many other domains. In that sense, the tale bears directly on continuing debates about behavior, cognition, and law.' 
I. MEASURING PERFORMANCE 
Lewis focuses on the extraordinary success of Beane, who has produced a terrific baseball team despite one of the lower payrolls in baseball. Since 1999, when Beane took over, the Athletics have f This review is a significantly revised and expanded version of Who's On First, originally published in The New Republic; the relevant parts are reprinted by permission. 
* Robert P. Gwinn Professor of Economics and Behavioral Science, University of Chicago Graduate School of Business. B.A. 1967, Case Western Reserve; Ph.D. 1974, University of Rochester. - Ed. 
** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard. Ed. 
Liar's Pokerand articles in numerous national periodicals. 
critical discussion, see RICHARD A. EPSTEIN, SKEPTICISM AND FREEDOM (William M. Landes & J. Mark Ramseyer eds., 2003), and RICHARD A. POSNER, FRONTIERS OF LEGAL THEORY (2001). 
1390 compiled an amazing record. In 1999, the Athletics ranked eleventh (out of fourteen teams) in the American League in payroll and fifth in wins. In 2000, the Athletics ranked twelfth in payroll and second in wins, a feat that they duplicated in 2001. In 2002, the last year covered in the book, they ranked twelfth in payroll again - and first in wins. This past season, 2003, was yet another division-winning season with a cheap payroll. 
How did Beane pull this off? He did it largely by ignoring or defying baseball's conventional wisdom, otherwise known in baseball lingo as The Book. (As in, "The Book says that you should bunt in this situation.") It turns out that many chapters of The Book are simply wrong. Sacrifice bunts are rarely a good strategy, and steals are vastly overrated. (Unless a base stealer succeeds at least two-thirds of the time, his running efforts reduce runs scored rather than increase them.') The portion of The Book that was most in need of revision, and the most important edge that Beane was able to exploit, involved player evaluation. Here he tried to figure out, statistically, how much a player was likely to contribute to his team's chances of winning. If he couldn't measure a factor or its impact, he dismissed it as subjective. 
Beane found that, as a statistical regularity, players drafted out of high school are much less likely to succeed than players drafted out of college (p. 16). And so he drafted no high school players, regardless of how highly they were touted. He hired a young assistant named Paul DePodesta, a Harvard economics graduate, who relied on his computer to project players' performances, without so much as ever seeing a player swing a bat. Much of the tension, and the comedy, of Lewis's book comes from the conflict between Beane's and DePodesta's statistical methods of evaluation and the well-established strategies of experts who have scouted, played, and breathed baseball for decades. The verdict? Statistical methods outperform experts.4 It's not even close. 
As Lewis tells the tale, Beane's particular approach has intensely personal foundations. Beane himself was a top high-school prospect, one of the most sought after in the nation. He was fast; he was tall; he was strong; he could hit the ball a mile. The baseball scouts loved him. As one of them admitted, "I never looked at a single statistic of Billy's. It couldn't have crossed my mind... He had it all" (p. 9). According to those who watched him, "The boy had a body you could dream on. Ramrod-straight and lean but not so lean you couldn't imagine him filling out. And that face!" (p. 7). Beane was selected in the first round Clinical Versus Actuarial Judgment, in HEURISTICS AND BIASES: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF INTUMVE JUDGMENT 730 (Thomas Gilovich et al. eds., 2002); William Meadow & Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics,Not Experts, 51 DUKE L.J. 629 (2001). of the draft, with the highest of expectations. He was destined to be a star. 
There was just one problem: Beane did not play professional baseball very well. He thought too much. He was too emotional. His failures notwithstanding, baseball people saw his body, and his face, and his raw talent, and concluded that he was bound to succeed. "Teammates would look at Billy and see the future of the New York Mets. Scouts would look at him and see what they had always seen... The body. The Good Face" (p. 47). He certainly had talent, and once in a while he would do something truly sensational. But after several years in major league baseball, his performance was woefully bad. With only 301 at-bats, he hit .219; more embarrassingly, he had 80 strikeouts and only 11 walks. Abruptly, he quit the game. While playing for Oakland, he told the team's general manager that he no longer wanted to be a player, and would prefer the job of advance scout, an employee who travels ahead of the team to analyze future opponents. The team's general manager was stunned: "Nobody does that. Nobody says, I quit as a player. I want to be an advance scout" (p. 55). 
Beane was a much better baseball analyst than baseball player, and he quickly moved up the Oakland club's hierarchy. He became interested in a simple question: What is the most efficient way to spend money on baseball players? The origins of Beane's iconoclastic answers can be found in the writings of Bill James, a once-obscure but now-legendary baseball writer/statistician. While working as a night watchman for a pork-and-beans factory, James decided that he wanted to write about baseball in a way that would illuminate what really happened and why. In his view, conventional statistics were insufficiently helpful and sometimes downright misleading. Consider the area of defensive play. When a player mishandles a ball or makes a bad throw, he can be assigned an "error." A player who accumulates a lot of errors seems like a bad fielder, whereas one with few errors seems really good. The problem is that a player may accumulate errors in part because he is unusually good at getting to the ball. If you do not get to the ball, you are most unlikely to get an error (according to the chapter on scoring in The Book). So errors are a crude measure of fielding ability. 
Or consider walks. Since the late nineteenth century, walks have been treated, in official statistics, as neutral - neither good nor bad. According to a nineteenth-century expert whose advice is followed to the present day, "There is but one true criterion of skill at the bat, and that is the number of times bases are made on clean hits" (p. 70). Of JAMES HISTORICAL BASEBALL ABSTRACT (2001). course, many people realized that a walk is a positive event for the hitting team and a negative event for the team in the field, but this commonsense notion was not incorporated into baseball's most common measure of batting skill, the batting average, which leaves walks out. James found this preposterous, and he pushed for the use of the "on-base percentage" as an improvement. 
James also criticized the use of "runs batted in" as a standard measure of a hitter's value. James pointed out that some players are in a position to bat in a lot of runs because they either are lucky or play on good teams. Other players bat in fewer runs, but only because they do not have the opportunities of their apparent superiors: "There is a huge element of luck in even having the opportunity, and what wasn't luck was, partly, the achievement of others" (p. 71). 
Eventually James punctured countless myths about what was important to winning in baseball. And he had a positive agenda, too. He devised a formula to measure "runs created" - a formula that predicted, from just a few aspects of a player's performance, how many runs he would produce for an average team (p. 77). James's formula had explosive implications. It suggested that professional baseball experts, those who ran the teams, were placing far too much emphasis on batting averages and stolen bases, and far too little on walks and extra base hits. Statistical measures were moving actual decisions in a way that resulted in inferior team performance. After a slow start, James was widely read; his books became bestsellers, and he became a kind of cult figure among certain baseball fans. But for many years, baseball's experts and executives treated James's work as irrelevant. He had no effect on what they did. And with a few exceptions, the tried-but-not-so-true baseball statistics such as batting average and RBIs remained the only ones reported. 
So Billy Beane, the "can't-miss" prospect who missed, became an avid Bill James reader. As Lewis writes, 
James had something to say specifically to Billy: you were on the receiving end of a false idea of what makes a successful baseball player. James also had something general to say to Billy, or any other general manager of a baseball team who had the guts, or the need, to listen: if you challenge the conventional wisdom, you will find ways to do things much better than they are currently done. (pp. 97-98) 
Wanting to ensure that statistical analyses were done, and done right, Beane hired DePodesta to study player performances with the aid of a computer. Some of Lewis's most hilarious passages illustrate the debate between old baseball wisdom and statistical knowledge: "The guy's an athlete, Billy," the old scout says. "There's a lot of upside there." "He can't hit," says Billy. "He's not that bad a hitter," says the old scout. "Yeah, what happens when he doesn't know a fastball is coming?" says Billy. "He's a tools guy," says the old scout... "But can he hit?" asks Billy. "He can hit," says the old scout, unconvincingly. 
Paul reads the player's college batting statistics. They contain a conspicuous lack of extra base hits and walks. "My only question is," says Billy, "if he's that good a hitter why doesn't he hit better?"... 
Over and over the old scouts will say, "The guy has a great body," or, "This guy may be the best body in the draft." And every time they do, Billy will say, "We're not selling jeans here," and deposit yet another highly touted player, beloved by the scouts, onto his shit list. (p. 30) 
Beane ends up seeking, and getting, young players that other teams simply do not want. These were people largely ignored by the professional scouts, typically because they had something wrong with them - they did not match up with the scouts' mental prototype of a successful ballplayer. Consider, for example, the star pitcher Barry Zito, passed over by other teams because of his slow fastball, but chosen by Beane on the basis of statistics: "Billy made us take Zito," the oldest of the scouts confessed (p. 39). While scouts on other teams were still searching for young players who looked like Beane did in high school, DePodesta was busy surfing the Internet. "The evaluation of young baseball players," Lewis writes, "had been taken out of the hands of old baseball men and placed in the hands of people who had what Billy valued most (and what Billy didn't have), a degree in something other than baseball" (p. 41). 
The statistical method was the only way for Beane to solve a serious problem: obtaining first-rate talent without a lot of money. After all, the New York Yankees had three times the budget of the Oakland Athletics. And if Beane did find good players, and they performed well, they would be bid away by richer teams. Owing to his low payroll, he would be forced to replace his own greatest successes. In 2001, Oakland won 102 games in the regular season, the secondhighest total in baseball. They lost three players widely regarded as their best, and they were expected by many to have a catastrophic fall. Instead they used statistical methods to try to replace the lost players with new ones who would provide statistical equivalents - and they ended up winning 103 games, the most in baseball that year. Their payroll for the year was $34 million, less than half that of their division rivals the Seattle Mariners. In Lewis's account, Beane was able to succeed because "the market for baseball players was so inefficient, and the general grasp of sound baseball strategy so weak, that superior management could still run circles around taller piles of cash" (p. 122). 
II. RATIONALITY AND COMPETITION 
Lewis has a wonderful story to tell, and he tells it wonderfully. His account of Beane's success is punctuated by descriptions of numerous colorful characters, among them a promising fat catcher dumbfounded by Beane's interest in him, an excellent pitcher whose fastball is extremely slow, and of course Beane himself. Lewis also raises some serious puzzles that he does not resolve, and his account has some large and perhaps profound implications that he does not much explore. Baseball is an extremely competitive market, and teams have a great deal to gain from winning more games. Beane's success, and the blunders of many of his colleagues, suggests the persistence of boundedly rational behavior in a domain in which market pressures might well have been expected to eliminate them. 
Why do professional baseball executives, many of whom have spent their lives in the game, make so many colossal mistakes? They are paid well, and they are specialists. They have every incentive to evaluate talent correctly. So why do they blunder? In an intriguing passage, Lewis offers three clues. First, those who played the game seem to overgeneralize from personal experience: "People always thought their own experience was typical when it wasn't." Second, the professionals were unduly affected by how a player had performed most recently, even though recent performance is not always a good guide. Third, people were biased by what they saw, or thought they saw, with their own eyes. This is a real problem, because the human mind plays tricks, and because there is "a lot you couldn't see when you watched a baseball game" (p. 18). 
Several findings in cognitive psychology help explain Lewis's clues. In making judgments, people tend to use the "availability heuristic."6 As Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky have shown, people often assess the probability of an event by asking whether relevant examples are cognitively "available" - the sense that they come readily to mind.7 Thus, people are likely to think that more words, on a random page, end with the letters "ing" than have "n" as their next to last letter - even though a moment's reflection will show that this could Biases, in JUDGMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY: HEURISTICS AND BIASES 11-14 (Daniel Kahneman et al. eds., 1982). 
not possibly be the case.' It follows, from the availability heuristic, that recent events will have more salience than less recent ones - one of Beane's explicit claims. Now, it is not dumb to use the availability heuristic. Heuristics are used because they are, on average, helpful. Yet reliable statistical evidence will outperform the availability heuristic every time. In using data rather than professional intuitions, Beane confirmed this point. 
Consider next Lewis's suggestion that people believed, falsely, that their own experience "was typical." This is also a prominent finding in studies of human judgment: People systematically exaggerate the extent to which others are like they are.9 To illustrate this in class one year, one of us asked students whether they owned a cell phone, and also to guess what percentage of their classmates owned cell phones. As expected, cell-phone owners guessed a higher percentage of cellphone ownership than nonowners. This bias in judgment is undoubtedly connected with the availability heuristic, because one's own behavior is always available and salient (and, like the availability heuristic, often useful). But the belief in the typicality of one's own behavior is not simply about availability; it is a distinctive kind of bias. 
Above all, perhaps, Lewis's tale demonstrates the use (and vices) of the representativeness heuristic.1" Baseball scouts use that heuristic by relying on a prototypical picture of a promising prospect - one that has a certain physique, a set of "tools," even the Good Face - in a way that leads to systematic errors. Perhaps the most famous example of the representativeness heuristic involves the likely career of a hypothetical woman named Linda, described as follows:" "Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken, and very bright. She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice and also participated in antinuclear demonstrations." Researchers asked people to rank, in order of probability, eight possible futures for Linda. Six of these futures were fillers (e.g., psychiatric social worker, elementary school teacher); the two crucial ones were "bank teller" and "bank teller and active in the feminist movement." Most people said that Linda was less likely to be a bank teller than to be a bank teller and active in the feminist movement. This is an obvious logical mistake, a conjunction error, in Conjunction Fallacy in ProbabilityJudgment, in HEURISTICS AND BIASES, supra note 4, at 19,21. 
Perceptionand Attribution Processes,J. PERSONALITY & SOC. PSYCHOL. 279-301 (1977). 
VALUES, AND FRAMES (2003). 
Effects?, 12 PSYCHOL. SCI. 269 (2001). which characteristics A and B are thought to be more likely than characteristic A alone. The error stems from the representativeness heuristic: Linda's description seems to match "bank teller and active in the feminist movement" far better than "bank teller." In an illuminating reflection on the example, one that bears on baseball and many personnel decisions, Stephen Jay Gould observed that "I know [the right answer], yet a little homunculus in my head continues to jump up and down, shouting at me - 'but she can't just be a bank teller; read the description.' ",12 
In Lewis's account, baseball scouts rely on a prototype of a good player, and they ask, too often, whether a prospect fits the prototype, instead of asking whether he is likely to produce runs (pp. 24-34). Beane himself was a prototype of the prototype: "Great body, plus wheels, plus arm, good instincts, and the ability to hit the ball over light towers" (p. 41). The problem was that Beane, like many who fit the mold, couldn't succeed at the major-league level. Instead of emphasizing what players look like, Beane endorsed "performance scouting" (p. 38), based not on "what you can see" the player "doing in your mind's eye" (p. 38), but on the player's statistics. 
Beane's preference for performance scouting, as opposed to prototype-based scouting, fits quite neatly with a recent discussion of the representativeness heuristic by Kahneman and Frederick, who emphasize the relevance of dual-process theories of cognition.1 3 Those theories distinguish between two families of cognitive operations, sometimes labeled System I and System II. System I is intuitive; it is rapid, automatic, and effortless (and it features Gould's homunculus). System II, by contrast, is reflective; it is slower, self-aware, calculative, and deductive. Kahneman and Frederick suggest that System I proposes quick answers to problems of judgment, and that System II operates as a monitor, confirming or overriding those judgments. Oldfashioned scouts, stressing the "mind's eye," use System I. Beane insists on a System II override, based on one thing: "Paul's computer" (p. 37). 
But the evident usefulness of Paul's computer raises an even larger puzzle. Why didn't someone like Beane come along sooner? Why didn't baseball executives start using statistics a decade, or two decades, or three decades, earlier? Why have falsehoods and mistakes persisted? The economic stakes are extremely high, after all, and if HISTORY 469 (1991). 
THEORIES IN SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY (Shelly Chaiken & Yaacov Trope eds., 1999). Lewis is correct, the management of most baseball teams could have saved many millions of dollars simply by making more rational personnel decisions. Here, then, is a situation in which boundedly rational behavior persisted even though the economic stakes were significant. Market pressures did not drive out that behavior. Nor was the important information hard to find. James's arguments have been around for nearly two decades. In a market as competitive as majorleague baseball, surely the information should have been used, and fast. What went wrong? The question has general importance: Will markets usually ensure rational behavior, or can a form of quasirationality 4 last in some situations even with strong economic incentives? 
The initial problem is not that baseball professionals are stupid; it is that they are human. Like most people, including experts, they tend to rely on simple rules of thumb, on traditions, on habits, on what other experts seem to believe. Even when the stakes are high, rational behavior does not always emerge. Researchers who have studied expert decisionmaking have often replicated the same biases that psychologists had earlier illustrated with laboratory studies of college students. For example, physicians have been shown to display overconfidence, and security analysts issue biased forecasts.1'5 It takes time and effort to switch from simple intuitions to careful assessments of evidence. This point helps to explain why baseball owners have been slow to copy Beane's approach. But at least they are starting. The Toronto Blue Jays and the Boston Red Sox have hired general managers who follow Beane's general approach. And, in one of the longest-overdue moves in baseball, the general manager of the Red Sox, appointed when just twenty-eight years old, hired James as a consultant. 
Many of the lessons in this book apply in domains far from baseball. One involves the harmful repercussions of using bad statistics or performance measures. We have already seen that batting average and RBIs can lead teams in unfortunate directions. Consider also the case of the "save" statistic. A save is awarded to a relief pitcher who comes in near the end of a close game with his team ahead and "saves" the win for his team. Most thoughtful observers realized long ago that this is a really dumb statistic. Why should 
BIASES, supra note 4, at 678; Derek J. Koehler et al., The Calibrationof ExpertJudgment, in HEURISTICS AND BIASES, supranote 4, at 686. pitching the last inning of a game have any special significance? A pitcher who comes in to pitch the sixth inning of a tied game and pitches three scoreless innings has done something much more important than one who just pitches the ninth inning, protecting a three-run lead. Now, a dumb statistic could be harmless, but in this case, as is often true, the very fact that the number is collected and tabulated ends up influencing behavior. The existence of the "save" statistic (and the muddled thinking that goes along with it, namely, the idea that runs scored at the end of the game count more) seems to have altered the way teams use their relief pitchers. In the past twenty years, most teams have settled on using their best relief pitcher in a specific role that has acquired a name: the closer. The closer typically comes in just to pitch the ninth inning in close games with his team ahead. Though this strategy is nearly universally used, it is clearly stupid. A team that is ahead by three runs going into the ninth inning has a 97 percent chance of winning the game (a percentage that has not changed since the advent of the closer).16 It makes more sense to use your best relief pitcher in more crucial situations, such as a tied game. Saving a three-run lead is much easier than protecting a tie, since you can give up two runs and still win the game. 
What should a team do if it figures this out? One strategy would be to take your best reliever and use him more strategically, sometimes in the seventh inning of a close game with the best players of the other team due to bat, other times with a one-run lead in the ninth. This strategy would win more games, but it would not create many "saves" for the ace. Beane did this, but he also did something deviously clever: he created closers in order to sell them. As Lewis puts it: 
Established closers were systematically overpriced, in large part because of the statistic by which closers were judged in the marketplace: 'saves.' The very word made the guy who achieved them seem vitally important.... You could take a slightly above average pitcher and drop him into the closer's role, let him accumulate some gaudy number of saves, and then sell him off. You could, in essence, buy a stock, pump it up with false publicity, and sell it off for much more than you paid for it. (p. 125) 
It is interesting to speculate about the possibility that similar phenomena occur in other domains. Consider the role of citation counts in the academic labor market. While the hard copy edition of the Social Science Citation Index has existed for years, citations have become more salient in recent years because of the advent of webbased citation search engines, including LEXIS and WESTLAW. We speculate, partly on the basis of the experience of one of us (Sunstein), that legal scholars are now reacting to this rise in the prominence of citation counts. In law, another example is placements in top law reviews. This is a flawed proxy for quality, to say the least, but lateral appointments are often affected by them. 
Beane's use of relief pitchers, and his success in general, bear on a more general problem. To what extent are the top managers in an organization - here the owners and the general managers - able to push a rational but radical change down through an organization? Beane has an owner who is sympathetic to his philosophy, but if he wants to try something new, such as using the relief-ace flexibly, he has to convince the field manager to implement his strategy. He also has to avoid a rebellion by the players. To get his manager to use the player Beane thinks is his most effective pitcher in tight situations, Beane tells the manager to think of him as the closer before the ninth inning. A relief ace would likely complain about being used in the optimal manner, because he would accumulate fewer saves and thus would be worth less on the open market. Similarly, suppose a player takes more pitches in an attempt to draw more walks and as a result increases his on-base percentage at the cost of lowering his batting average. His team might like this trade-off, but if it lowered his value to other teams, then the player might suffer in the free-agent market. 
Finally, there is the impact of the media and the fans. When James was hired by the Red Sox last winter, there was great anticipation about how the team would deal with relief pitchers. The rational strategy of using pitchers to maximize the chance of winning the game was quickly dubbed "bullpen by committee" by Boston sportswriters, who knew (from The Book, naturally) that this was a terrible idea. When Red Sox relievers lost the opening-day game to the woeful Tampa Bay Devil Rays and suffered through an awful opening month, James was viewed as the villain. Of course, James does not advocate bad pitching, and, presumably with his help, the team has acquired three new relief pitchers. But, interestingly, they designated one as their closer, perhaps deciding to let this particular battle wait for another day. 
The difficulty of achieving sensible change in organizations is hardly special to baseball. If a new CEO comes in and wants to change how things are done, a selling job must be performed all the way down the organizational ladder. Every institution has organizational norms, ways of doing things (the in-house version of The Book) that are hard to overcome. The new guy is told, well, we don't do things that way here. If the CEO forces his views down the organizational ladder and his methods are unconventional, then lower-level workers may face the same dilemma as the player trying to get more walks. Do they maximize their value to the current CEO or to the outside world? 
E. Bad Equilibrium 
As we have emphasized, Lewis's account bears more generally on the performance of markets. He often refers to the inefficiency of the market for player talent, as the example of the closer illustrates. If it were not for this inefficiency, Beane would not be able to procure a winning team while spending one-third as much as the Yankees and one-half as much as his division rivals. How can this market be so inefficient? Simply put, the baseball owners seem to have evolved into a "bad equilibrium." Cascade effects might well be involved: People rely on the apparent judgments of others, believing that they carry information, even if those other judgments are themselves a product, much of the time, of the apparent judgments of others.17 Teams have thought the same way for years; The Book has never been revised; and so there are massive inefficiencies that have been relatively easy for Beane to exploit. You do not need a Harvard economics graduate to realize that "a walk is as good as a hit," an expression that was around well before James started writing. Beane's key insight was that this market was inefficient and could therefore be exploited. Now that Beane has succeeded, it is likely that the market for baseball-player talent will get more competitive. Still, it is embarrassing that it took so long for this to happen, especially for those who think that competitive markets always lead to a rational allocation of resources. 
What does this tell us about other markets? Lewis poses this question: "If professional baseball players could be over- or undervalued, who couldn't? Bad as they may have been, the statistics used to evaluate baseball players were probably far more accurate than anything used to measure the value of people who didn't play baseball for a living" (p. 72). Right! On the basis of first principles, the market for baseball players should be one of the most efficient labor markets on earth. It is hard to think of any high-paid profession in which performance is measured so precisely - and is publicly available to every other potential employer. 
Compare the market for baseball players with the market for corporate executives. A company looking for a new director of human-resource management would be hard-pressed to get any objective data on the past performance of job candidates. Instead, such a company would be forced to make choices based on interviews with the candidates - a process that is even less accurate than the one the old scouts use to size up a high-school player. Interviews are notoriously imperfect predictors of future job performance.18 In many contexts their predictive value is essentially zero. 
The biases caused by labor markets using subjective evaluations instead of objective measures of output are potentially huge. We can glimpse the scope of the problem by studying one subjective variable that most people would say should be irrelevant to accurate job evaluations in most positions: physical beauty. Away from places such as the back lots of Hollywood and the runways of Milan, most of us who do not look like Ben Affleck or Jennifer Lopez would like to think that successful people get where they do because of their accomplishments, not their attractiveness. Alas, it ain't so. To take one simple example, height matters: in the United States, the taller presidential candidate has usually won. And beauty matters in domains where we might not expect it to matter: law and business.19 In both fields, and for both sexes, career success and earnings are correlated with good looks. 
And consider another problem. We have said that interviews, especially unstructured interviews, are not very useful predictors of job performance - except that once you have conducted an interview, it is almost impossible to avoid the conclusion that you have learned a lot. But the facts are clear: unstructured interviews are nearly useless at predicting anything except whether the interviewer will subsequently like the interviewee." So a rational Beane-like strategy would be to interview only employees who will work directly with you and otherwise make all decisions based on objective criteria and statistical models. Rather than conduct interviews, firms should give tests and pay more attention to grades in school (a good predictor of both intelligence and diligence, admirable traits in nearly any job). Numerous law firms and law faculties place great weight on relatively unstructured interviews, thinking that as a result of such interviews, they learn a great deal about likely performance. But this is probably a Hunter & Ronda F. Hunter, Validity and Utility of Alternative Predictors of Job Performance, 96 PSYCHOL. BULL. 72, 90 (1984). Others find that if the interview is "structured" it can provide some limited value. See Michael McDaniel et al., The Validity of Employment Interviews: A Comprehensive Review and Meta-Analysis, 79 J. APPLIED PSYCHOL. 599 (1994). 
Hammermesh, Beauty Papers, http://www.eco.utexas.edu/faculty/Hamermesh/Beautystuff.htm (last visited June 1, 2004). For published versions, see Daniel Hamermesh et al., Dress for Success: Does Primping Pay?, 9 LAB. ECON. 361 (2002); Daniel Hamermesh & Jeff E. Biddle, Beauty, Productivity and Discrimination: Lawyers' Looks and Lucre, 16 J. LAB. ECON. 172 (1998); Daniel Hamermesh & Jeff E. Biddle, Beauty and the Labor Market, 84 AM. ECON. REV. 1174 (1994). 
blunder. In fact the representativeness heuristic undoubtedly affects evaluations, leading firms and law schools to rely, much of the time, on a prototype of the successful lawyer or teacher. Their own homunculus boldly announces that the interviewee is or is not "right" for the job. Most of the time, they would do better to ignore the homunculus and to place greater weight on actual performance measures. 
Emboldened by Lewis and Beane, both of us have tried to encourage our respective divisions at the University of Chicago to reduce the time and weight devoted to the interview process and to rely instead on other measures. To date, the effort has been repudiated by numerous highly articulate homunculi (otherwise known as colleagues and admissions officers). But in many contexts, more objective procedures would not only improve accuracy; they would also reduce discrimination, inadvertent or otherwise, based on factors such as race, gender, or beauty."' Symphony orchestras have found that if they conduct auditions with the candidates hidden behind a screen, more women are hired.22 And when employees are hired, firms should seek objective measures of performance, which distinguish luck from skill. 
CONCLUSION 
Some enlightened organizations, like the Boston Red Sox and the Toronto Blue Jays, are undoubtedly taking steps along these lines. Many more should be doing so. One of the noteworthy features of Lewis's book is his clear demonstration of the pervasiveness of boundedly rational behavior even when the stakes are high and even when market pressures might be expected to supply a corrective. We suspect that countless areas of enterprise, both private and governmental, would benefit from their own Billy Beanes and Paul DePodestas, challenging widespread intuitions, or what "everyone knows," with statistical information about what works and what does not, and with performance measures that more accurately reflect the true contribution to organizational success. Baseball is not the only realm for which The Book is in need of revision. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Minimalism at War" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 231, 2004). 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 231 (2D SERIES) Minimalism at War 
Cass R. Sunstein Preliminary draft 12/03/04 All rights reserved “The Founders intended that the President have primary responsibility—along with the necessary power—to protect the national security and to conduct the Nation’s foreign relations. . . . This Court has . . . held that the President has constitutional authority to protect the national security and that this authority carries with it broad discretion. . . . [I]t is crucial to recognize that judicial interference in these domains destroys the purpose of vesting primary responsibility in a unitary Executive.”1 “The Constitution has never greatly bothered any wartime President.”2 “More importantly, the search for alternatives helps avoid two extreme positions. The first says that, insofar as war is concerned, the Constitution does not really matter. That is wrong. The Constitution always matters, perhaps particularly so in times of emergency. The second says that, insofar as the Constitution is concerned, war or security emergencies do not really matter. That is wrong too. Security needs may well matter, playing a major role in determining just where the proper constitutional balance lies.”3 
I. 
Many judges are minimalists; they want to say and do no more than necessary to resolve cases.4 Judicial minimalism leads in two different directions. First, minimalists favor shallowness over depth, in the sense they seek to avoid taking stands on the most deeply contested questions of constitutional law. They attempt to reach incompletely theorized agreements, in which the most fundamental questions are left undecided. They prefer outcomes and opinions that can attract support from people with a wide range of theoretical positions, or with uncertainty about which theoretical positions are best. In these ways, minimalist judges avoid the largest questions about the meaning of the free * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Jack Goldsmith, Richard Posner, Adam Samaha, Geoffrey Stone, David Strauss, and Adrian Vermeule for extremely helpful comments on a previous draft. 1 Hamdi v Rumsfeld, 124 S Ct 2633, 2675-76 (2004) (Thomas dissenting) 2 Francis Biddle, In Brief Authority 219 (Doubleday 1962). 3 Stephen Breyer, Liberty, Security, and the Courts (April 14, 2003), online at http://www.supremecourtus.gov/publicinfo/speeches/sp_04-15-03.html (visited Dec 1, 2004) 4 Minimalism is discussed in general terms in Cass R. Sunstein, One Case at a Time: Judicial Minimalism on the Supreme Court (Harvard 1999). speech guarantee, or the extent of the Constitution’s protection of “liberty,” or the precise scope of the President’s authority as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces. 
Second, minimalists favor narrowness over width. Proceeding one case at a time, they seek decisions that resolve the problem at hand without also resolving a series of other problems that might have relevant differences. In the fashion of common law courts, minimalist judges prefer to focus on the particular question at issue, refusing to venture broader judgments that might turn out, on reflection, to be unwarranted.5 With their emphasis on shallowness and narrowness, some minimalists have a particular preference for democracy-promoting decisions, certainly as compared to decisions that simply invalidate what government proposes to do. Democracy-promoting decisions are those that lead to explicit judgments by democratically accountable actors, above all 
Maximalists reject shallowness in favor of depth. They are committed to a large-scale theory about the foundations of constitutional law. They might believe that “originalism” is the best theory of constitutional meaning, or they might think that the document should be interpreted to ensure the appropriate operation of democracy itself.8 Typically they believe that their own theory is correct and that it reflects the right kind of judicial modesty (or, as the case may be, aggressiveness). What matters is that maximalists want to adopt a foundational account of one or another kind. 
In the same vein, maximalists reject narrowness in favor of width. They believe that narrow rulings leave a great deal of unpredictability and also promote judicial discretion.9 They think that firm, clear rules, laid down in advance, are the best way of 5 See Richard A. Posner, Law, Pragmatism, and Democracy 80 (Harvard 2003): “The pragmatic judge tends to favor narrow over broad grounds of decision in the early stages in the development of a legal doctrine. . . . What the judge has before him is the facts of the particular case, not the facts of future cases. He can try to imagine what those cases will be like, but the likelihood of error in such an imaginative projection is great. Working outward, in stages, from the facts before him to future cases with new facts that may suggest the desirability of altering the contours of the applicable rules, the judge avoids premature generalization.” 6 This point is elaborated in Sunstein at pp. 26-39 (cited in note 4). 7 See Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation (Princeton 1997). 8 See John Hart Ely, Democracy and Distrust (Harvard 1983). 9 For an argument in favor of width, see Antonin Scalia, The Rule of Law is a Law of Rules, 56 U Chi L Rev 115 (1989); the best general treatment is Adrian Vermeule, Interpretive Choice, 75 NYU L Rev 74 (2000) ensuring clarity for the future—and also of simultaneously constraining and emboldening judges, encouraging them to protect liberty when the stakes are highest.10 They add that such rules provide a highly visible background against which other branches of government can do their work.11 
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 have raised fresh questions about the places of minimalism and maximalism in American constitutional law. Those questions are especially pressing in the face of conflicts between national security and claimed violations of constitutional rights. Perhaps a form of minimalism makes particular sense for the resolution of such conflicts; perhaps some kind of maximalism is much better. In fact we can readily imagine two stylized positions: National Security Maximalism and Liberty Maximalism.12 National Security Maximalists understand the Constitution to call for a highly deferential role for the judiciary, above all on the ground that when national security is threatened, the President must be permitted to do what needs to be done to protect the country. If he cannot provide that protection, who will? By contrast, Liberty Maximalists insist that in times of war, at least as much as in times of peace, federal judges must protect constitutional liberty.13 Indeed, Liberty Maximalists believe that under circumstances of war, it is all the more important that federal judges take a strong stand on behalf of liberty.14 If they do not, who will? 10 Scalia, at 119 (cited in note 9). 11 See id. 12 For excellent and related discussions from which I have learned a great deal, see Eric A. Posner and Adrian Vermeule, Accommodating Emergencies, 56 Stan L Rev 605 (2003); Richard Pildes and Samuel Issacharoff, Between Civil Libertarianism and Executive Unilateralism: An Institutional Process Approach to Right During Wartime, 5 Theoretical Inquiries in Law (Online Edition) No 1, Article 1 (Jan 2004), online at http://www.bepress.com/til/default/vol5/iss1/art1 (visited Dec 1, 2004). National Security Maximalism is an extreme version of what Posner and Vermeule call the accommodationist view; Liberty Maximalism is akin to what they deem the strict enforcement view. Their target is the civil libertarian concern that accommodationist rulings will weaken liberty during peacetime and that during emergencies, the government will respond to unjustified public panic. Like Posner and Vermeule, I reject the strict enforcement view, and for reasons that overlap with theirs. National Security Maximalists are what Pildes and Issacharoff call Executive Unilateralists; Liberty Maximalists are what Pildes and Issacharoff call Civil Libertarians. Like Pildes and Issacharoff, and borrowing from their discussion, I stress the use of clear statement principles. 13 See generally David Cole, Enemy Aliens: Double Standards and Constitutional Freedoms in the War on Terrorism (WW Norton 2003). 14 This is one reading of Geoffrey R. Stone, Perilous Times: Free Speech in Wartime from the Sedition Act of 1798 to the War on Terrorism (WW Norton 2004). 
Of course some people reject both maximalism and minimalism in favor of an intermediate approach. They might, for example, err in the direction of presidential power without accepting National Security Maximalism, or err in the direction of freedom without accepting Liberty Maximalism. But an emphasis on the two forms of maximalism is helpful for analytic purposes; by exploring the poles, we can have a clearer sense of what might be wrong with more cautious versions as well. In addition, the poles have considerable appeal—National Security Maximalism to many federal judges as well as to the executive branch, Liberty Maximalism to many academic commentators as well as mission-oriented organizations focussed on the protection of freedom. As we shall see, unmistakable forms of National Security Maximalism, rather than an intermediate approach, can be found in several places in recent years. 
This Article has two central purposes. The first is to reject both forms of maximalism and to specify and support a minimalist approach to intrusions on freedom amidst war. The second is to suggest that to a remarkable degree, an identifiable form of minimalism captures the practices of the American courts when national security is threatened.15 Prominent uses of minimalism can be found during the Civil War, World War I, World War II, the Cold War, and the contemporary war on terrorism. In general, the Supreme Court has adopted a form of minimalism having three central components: a requirement of clear congressional authorization for executive action intruding on interests with a claim to constitutional protection16; an insistence on fair hearings, including access to courts, for those deprived of liberty; and judicial decisions that are themselves shallow and narrow and that therefore impose modest constraints on the future. The minimalist pattern unifies an extraordinary number of seemingly disparate decisions, including those in the recent past.17 Indeed, the Court’s notorious decisions involving the exclusion and detention of Japanese-Americans during World War II should be seen not as blind deference to executive power, but as a tribute to 15 An important aspect of minimalism, requiring congressional authorization, is traced in some detail in Pildes and Issacharoff, Civil Libertarianism (cited in note xx). 16 The notion of authorization raises a number of complexities, on which see Curtis Bradley and Jack Goldsmith, Congressional Authorization and the War on Terrorism, Harv L Rev (forthcoming 2005); I deal with some of those complexities below, see TAN infra. 17 See Rasul v Bush, 124 S Ct 2686 (2004); Hamdi v Rumsfeld, 124 S Ct 2633 (2004). minimalism—requiring clear congressional support for deprivations of liberty by the executive, and permitting those deprivations only if that support can be found.18 
The Court’s own practices help to identify serious problems with both forms of maximalism. If the nation is genuinely threatened, Liberty Maximalism runs into two difficulties. First, it is unrealistic, certainly in its most ambitious forms; judges simply will not protect liberty with the same aggressiveness when a country faces a serious threat to its survival.19 By itself this is a large objection to Liberty Maximalism. “Ought implies can,” and it is unhelpful to urge courts to adopt a role that they will predictably refuse to assume.20 Second, Liberty Maximalism is undesirable. The government’s power to intrude on liberty depends on the strength of the justifications it can muster on behalf of the intrusion.21 When security is at risk, government has greater justifications than when it is not. Hence it is correct to say, with Chief Justice Rehnquist, that it “is neither desirable nor is it remotely likely that civil liberty will occupy as favored a position in wartime as it does in peacetime.”22 
None of this means that in times of war, the government may proceed however it wishes or act in blatant violation of constitutional commands. Interferences with freedom of speech, for example, should be regarded with great skepticism, simply because they eliminate the principal method by which democracies correct themselves.23 As we shall see, courts do, and should, take steps to ensure against arbitrary detentions. In American 18 See below. 19 See Lee Epstein et al., The Supreme Silence During War (unpublished manuscript 2003) (offering quantitative study of judicial deference during war); William Rehnquist, All the Laws But One (Knopf 1998). 20 Of course I am using the term “can” to suggest willingness, rather than feasibility. There is nothing in the structure of the universe that would prevent courts from adopting Liberty Maximalism, and hence “can” operates, in this context, in a relatively weak sense. There is no point in asking courts to assume a posture that they will predictably refuse. 21 See Breyer, Liberty at 3 (cited in note xx): “The value does not change; the circumstances change, thereby shifting the point at which a proper balance is struck. That is what happens in wartime when more severe restrictions may be required.” 22 Id at 224-25. 23 See Stone, Perilous Times, (cited in note 14); see also Aharon Barak, A Judge on Judging: The Role of a Supreme Court in a Democracy, 116 Harv L Rev 16, 149 (2002): “[M]atters of daily life constantly test judges’ ability to protect democracy, but judges meet their supreme test in situations of war and terrorism. The protection of every individual’s human rights is a much more formidable duty in times of war and terrorism than in times of peace and security. . . . As a Justice of the Israeli Supreme Court, how should I view my role in protecting human rights given this situation? I must take human rights seriously during times of both peace and conflict.” law, it cannot be said that “inter arma silent leges” (amidst war laws are silent).24 But as a general approach for courts in wartime, Liberty Maximalism is a nonstarter. It is too broad, and too neglectful of legitimate government interests, to have a serious claim to our attention. 
But its principal competitor, National Security Maximalism, runs into serious problems as well. First, its reading of the Constitution, typically emphasizing the President’s role as Commander in Chief, is tendentious; some of the document’s provisions can be taken to support National Security Maximalism, but they need not be read in that fashion. In fact they are more plausibly seen to ensure a shared division of authority between the President and Congress, above all because they retain the role of Congress as the nation’s lawmaker. Second, National Security Maximalism neglects the fact that under many circumstances, the executive branch is most unlikely to strike the right balance between security and liberty.25 A primary task of the President is to keep the citizenry safe, and any error on that count is likely to produce extremely high political sanctions. For this reason, the President has a strong incentive to take precautions even if they are excessive and even unconstitutional. Internal deliberations within the executive branch are more likely than not to aggravate the problem, leading not to sensible checks and balances, but to a tendency toward a degree of extremism. 
Of course unjustified intrusions on liberty can and do produce political retribution as well. But whether they do so depends on their incidence; and here is a further problem for National Security Maximalism. Political safeguards are most reliable if the intrusions severely burden many people at once. Such general intrusions are unlikely to be tolerated unless citizens can be convinced that they are necessary. But if the intrusions are faced by an identifiable few, political checks will not ensure that they are justified. On the contrary, political pressures might well favor them even if they are not. 
In some circumstances, then, the executive is likely to adopt steps that sacrifice liberty for no adequate reason.26 But judicial intervention is no panacea, for courts have institutional weaknesses of their own. Worst of all, they lack relevant information and 24 Cicero, Oratio Pro Annio Milone IV; see Rehnquist, All the Laws at 224 (cited in note xx). 25 For countless examples, see Stone, Perlious Times (cited in note 14). 26 See id; Epstein et al., Supreme Silence (cited in note xx); and Rehnquist, All the Laws (cited in note xx), for many illustrations. hence they may not know whether an interference with liberty is actually justified. Because their historic mission is to protect individual liberty, they may give insufficient attention to the variables on the other side.27 But none of this means that courts cannot play a productive role. I investigate here three ingredients of a minimalist approach that seems to me to have significant promise, and to represent a distillation of much of the practice of American courts over the last century and more: 
authorization before the executive intrudes on interests that have a strong claim to constitutional protection.28 As a general rule, the executive should not be permitted to act on its own.29 The underlying ideas here are twofold: a requirement of congressional authorization provides a check on unjustified intrusions on liberty, and such authorization is likely to be forthcoming when there is a good argument for it. A requirement of clear authorization therefore promotes liberty 
without compromising legitimate security interests.30 
of the due process clause: Before anyone is deprived of liberty, some kind of procedure must be put in place to ensure against erroneous deprivations. This requirement protects 27 Notably, however, there appears to be no evidence of judicial overprotection of civil liberties in the nation’s long history. See Stone, Perilous Times (cited in note 14). Compare the use of the Precautionary Principle in environmental regulation, which calls for margins of safety to protect against harmful outcomes. See Cass R. Sunstein, Laws of Fear: Beyond the Precautionary Principle (forthcoming 2005), for general discussion. When national security is in danger, governments officials are engaging in a form of risk management, and it should not be surprising to find that they often adopt a kind of Precautionary Principle. Stone, Perilous Times (cited in note xx), may be seen as a catalogue of instances in which something akin to that principle was employed to produce many unjustifiable intrusions on liberty; in this sense, it is a cousin to Aaron Wildavsky, But Is It True: A Citizen’s Guide to Environmental, Health, and Safety Issues (Harvard 1995), which catalogues a number of cases in which unjustifiable steps were taken in response to imagined environmental concerns. 28 An early version of this idea can be found in Masses Publishing Co v Patten, 244 F 535 (SDNY 1917), discussed below. 29 Complexities emerge when the President’s inherent authority is plausibly involved. See Loving v United States, 517 US 748 (1996). 30 I discuss below the complex question whether clear authorization is sufficient as well as necessary; the short version is that outside of the egregious cases, courts should ordinarily respect the shared views of Congress and the President. heard. against unjustified imprisonment, which counts as the most serious infringement of civil liberty.31 
incompletely theorized decisions. Such decisions tend to ensure against dual risks: judicial overreaching, in the form of limits on executive power that will ultimately prove unjustified; and excessive judicial modesty, in the form of decisions that, in the heat of the moment, lead to large-scale intrusions on liberty.32 When vindicating minimalist principle (2), for example, judges can refuse to specify the precise procedure that must be used, allowing the executive (for example) to use military tribunals or otherwise to depart from ordinary adjudicative procedures, so long as the rudiments of due process are 
These three ideas can be unified under the general rubric of Due Process Writ Large. The requirement of congressional authorization provides a degree of procedural protection at the structural level. By mandating action from an institution that is both diverse and deliberative, that requirement offers a procedural safeguard against illconsidered intrusions into the domain of liberty. The requirement of a minimal hearing reflects the most familiar aspect of the due process guarantee. The requirement of narrow and shallow rulings from the courts applies due process principles to judges themselves, by ensuring that those not before the court will be provided with an opportunity to be 
All of these principles make sense not only for courts, but also for constitutional judgments within the executive branch and Congress in times of war. Judges are hardly the only people involved in constitutional interpretation. The executive branch, for example, would do well to seek congressional authorization for intrusions on constitutionally sensitive interests, to ensure hearings for those deprived of liberty, and to rely on narrow and incompletely theorized judgments about issues at the frontiers of constitutional law. 31 The hearing right is a modest one, because as I am understanding it here, it requires a proceeding only to determine whether the executive has deprived someone of liberty on the basis of facts that under relevant as a matter of existing law. 32 See Epstein et al., Supreme Silence (cited in note xx), for details. 
Of course minimalism is not always the appropriate course for federal judges or for anyone else.33 Predictability can be extremely important, and in some contexts minimalism cannot be tolerated, simply because it sacrifices rule of law values for no sufficient reason. And of course general principles cannot resolve concrete cases; everything turns on the particular intrusion and its underlying justification. Sometimes the President is constitutionally permitted to act on his own34; sometimes hearings need not be held35; sometimes judges should rule broadly. A committed minimalist will insist on these very points, contending that it is too ambitious to insist, all of the time, on congressional authorization, hearings, and narrow and incompletely theorized rulings. But when national security and liberty are in tension, the three principles provide the best general orientation. 
This remainder of this Article comes in three parts. Part II sketches the role of National Security Maximalism in the war on terror. It shows that in recent years, this way of proceeding has had a prominent place in the Department of Justice, the Supreme Court, and federal courts of appeals. Part III outlines the problems with National Security Maximalism, including its tendentious reading of the Constitution and its failure to appreciate the relevant incentives on the part of the executive branch. Part IV sketches the minimalist alternative, with its emphasis on clear statement principles, hearing rights, and narrow, shallow judicial judgments. “We are now confronted by a profoundly disturbing trend in our national political life: the growing tendency of the judicial branch to inject itself into areas of executive action originally assigned to the discretion of the president. These encroachments include some of the most fundamental aspects of the president’s conduct of the war on terrorism.”36 
“But the ‘law’ which this prisoner is convicted of disregarding is not found in an act of Congress, but in a military order. Neither the Act of Congress nor the Executive Order, nor both together, would afford a basis for this conviction. It rests on the orders of General Dewitt.”37 33 See Vermeule, 75 NYU L Rev 74 (cited in note xx). 34 See, for example, Johnson v Eisentrager, 339 US 763 (1950). 35 See id. 36 Attorney General John Ascroft, quoted in Terry Frieden, Ashcroft: “Activist” Judges Can Put Nation’s Security At Risk (Nov 12, 2004), available at http://www.cnn.com/2004/ALLPOLITICS/11/12/ashcroft.judges/index.html (visited Dec 1, 2004). 37 Korematsu v United States, 323 US 214, 243 (1944) (Jackson dissenting). National Security Maximalism has obtained a great deal of support. To be sure, the Supreme Court has refused to accept it, at least thus far.38 But the basic approach can be found in many places. 
In recent years, the most visible moment for National Security Maximalism came from the Office of Legal Counsel of the Department of Justice, with its 2002 memorandum on the legality of coerced interrogation.39 The most remarkable aspect of the memorandum is its suggestion that as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, the President of the United States has the inherent authority to torture suspected terrorists, so as to make it constitutionally unacceptable for Congress to ban the practice of torture.40 The Office of Legal Counsel emphasized that “the President enjoys complete discretion in the exercise of his Commander-in-Chief authority and in conducting operations against hostile forces.”41 In addition, the Office of Legal Counsel insisted that a core function of the Commander in Chief includes interrogation of the enemy.42 Because of “the President’s inherent constitutional authority to manage a military campaign against al Qaeda and its allies,” congressional enactments “must be construed as not applying to” interrogations undertaken as part of the President’s Commander in Chief authority.43 “Any effort by Congress to regulate the interrogation of battlefield combatants would violate the Constitution’s sole vesting of the Commander in Chief authority in the 38 See, for example, Hamdi v Rumsfeld, 124 S Ct 2633, 2674 (2004); Rasul v Bush, 124 S Ct 2686 (2004). 39 See Office of Legal Counsel, Memorandum for Alberto Gonzales, Counsel to the President, Re: Standards of Conduct for Interrogation under 18 USC 2340-2340A (August 1, 2002) (copy on file with author). This was the most visible moment for National Security Maximalism, but perhaps not the most extreme one. In the Padilla case, the President claimed that, as Commander in Chief, he had the inherent power to order military authorities to seize an American citizen in the United States without any judicial approval and to hold him indefinitely, incommunicado, with no access to a lawyer, a court, family, or friends, and without even informing his family or friends what they had done with him. I discuss Padilla below. 40 Id at 31. 41 Id at 33. 42 Id at 38. 43 Id at 34. To be sure, the position of the Department of Justice was stated with a degree of tentativeness, with the suggestion that the congressional ban on torture “might” be unconstitutional in the context of battlefield interrogations. So phrased, the suggestion is a form of minimalism, asking for avoidance of the constitutional issue by reading the statute so as not to intrude on the President’s authority as Commander in Chief. But the general impression is that the ban probably should be regarded as unconstitutional. President.”44 Hence coercive interrogation, including torture, must be permitted if the President wants to engage in it. 
The Office of Legal Counsel is part of the executive branch, and one of its major functions is to protect the constitutional prerogatives of the President, especially those prerogatives that are associated with the Commander in Chief power. Generous interpretations of the President’s prerogatives should be expected from any office within the Department of Justice, above all when national security is at risk. But in its endorsement of presidential power, the memorandum on coerced interrogation went well beyond ordinary practice. To be sure, the President has inherent authority to oversee battlefield operations, and Congress has limited power to control such operations. The President also has the inherent authority to conduct interrogations amidst war. But to say the least, it is unusual to say that this authority includes the power to torture people when Congress has expressly said otherwise. The power to command the armed forces is not easily taken to include “inherent” power to torture enemy combatants. Even if it does include that power, it is hard to contend that Congress cannot provide protection against torture.45 
Whatever one’s ultimate judgment on the merits, the memorandum of the Office of Legal Counsel provides a dramatic example of National Security Maximalism—one that may be taken to presage future understandings if that approach ultimately prevails. 
In recent Supreme Court decisions involving the war on terrorism, National Security Maximalism failed to attract a majority opinion.46 But it made a conspicuous appearance in a remarkable dissenting opinion by Justice Clarence Thomas in the Hamdi case.47 I will turn to the particular facts of the case in due course. For the moment, note 44 Id at 39. 45 See the discussion of Justice Jackson’s views in Youngstown Sheet and Tube Co v Sawyer, 343 US 579 (1952) (“The Steel Seizure Case”), explored below. Note that in some applications, the Commander in Chief power is more plausibly read to include the power to torture – when, for example, torture is deemed necessary to prevent an imminent attack on American troops. But even here, Congress almost certainly has the authority to forbid the practice of torture. 46 See Rasul, 124 S Ct 2686 (2004); Rumsfeld v Padilla, 124 S Ct 2711 (2004); Hamdi, 124 S Ct 2633 (2004). 47 Hamdi, 124 S Ct 2633, 2674 (2004). that Justice Thomas emphasized, very broadly, that any constitutional judgment in this domain should consider “basic principles of the constitutional structure as it relates to national security and foreign affairs.”48 In his view, the Constitution accords to the President the “primary responsibility . . . to protect the national security and to conduct the nation’s foreign relations.”49 Hence judicial judgments should be made against the backdrop set by the President’s inherent and broadly discretionary power to protect national security.50 
With respect to the courts, Justice Thomas contended, “it is crucial to recognize that judicial interference in these domains destroys the purpose of vesting primary responsibility in a unitary Executive.”51 Judges “lack the relevant information and expertise to second-guess determinations made by the President . . . .”52 In fact congressional grants of power should be construed generously on the President’s behalf, rather than narrowly, so as to fit with institutional limits on the power of the judiciary.53 Because the executive branch of the federal government “has an overriding interest in protecting the Nation,” it can invoke that interest to justify depriving people of liberty.54 In fact Justice Thomas argued in favor of broad constructions of congressional grants of authority partly to avoid constitutional difficulties: “Although the President very well may have inherent authority to detain those arrayed against our troops, I agree with the plurality that we need not decide that question because Congress has authorized the President to do so.”55 
Justice Thomas’ opinion is a form of National Security Maximalism because of its breadth and ambition. There is no effort here to offer a cautious ruling tailored to the facts of the particular case. On the contrary, Justice Thomas speaks generally about the “primary responsibility” of the President in the domain of “national security.” In addition, he adopts a kind of clear statement principle in favor of presidential authority, suggesting, 48 Id at 2675. 49 Id. 50 Id. 51 Id at 2676. 52 Id. 53 Id at 2677. 54 Id at 2685. 55 Id at 2679. at least implicitly, that statutes should be read in a way that does not conflict with the President’s inherent authority. But from a reading of the Constitution alone, it would not be entirely clear whether the President or the Congress has primary responsibility in the domain of national security—an issue to which I will return. The important point is that Justice Thomas offers a distinctive vision of the constitutional structure, one that accords principal authority to the President and thus exemplifies National Security Maximalism. 
C. National Security Maximalism on the United States Court of Appeals: The President and “The War Power” 
In the years since the September 11 attacks, National Security Maximalism has played a large role on the lower federal courts.56 Two circuits have decided most of the cases involving a conflict between national security and individual liberty: the United States Courts of Appeals for the District of Columbia and for the Fourth Circuit. Both have shown a remarkable tendency toward National Security Maximalism. In nearly every case in which a serious challenge was mounted to the power of the President, the President has prevailed in the courts of appeals.57 Let us investigate the details. 
Circuit is Al Odah v United States,58 reversed by the Supreme Court.59 In its exceedingly ambitious ruling, the court held that aliens captured outside of the United States have no rights under the due process clause. The Court said that the Guantanamo Bay detainees were, in law, analogous to German prisoners captured on the battlefield in World War II. The court acknowledged that Guantanamo Bay is controlled by the United States military, but it insisted on the irrelevance of this fact because Cuba has sovereignty over 56 The principal exception is Padilla v Rumsfeld, 352 F3d 695 (2d Cir 2003), in which the Court held that the President could not detain Padilla because he lacked the inherent authority to do so and because Congress had not authorized the detention of American citizens on American soil. Id at 712-18, 722-23. This is an example of minimalism in action, as discussed below. 57 The only significant exception is id. The evident influence of National Security Maximalism on the lower courts may attest to the reluctance of judges on those courts to reject security-related decisions by the President of the United States; perhaps the Supreme Court, by virtue of its unique position, is bound to be more cautious about embracing National Security Maximalism. 58 321 F3d 1134 (DC Cir 2003). 59 Rasul, 124 S Ct 2686 (2004). the area.60 Broadly reading Supreme Court precedents, the Court ruled in favor of executive discretion.61 
A concurring opinion by Judge Randolph (who wrote the majority opinion as well) went further still, resolving several issues that it was not necessary for him to discuss. Consider his confessedly maximalist opening sentence: “I write separately to add two other grounds for rejecting the detainee’s non-habeas claims.”62 The fundamental motivation for his separate opinion seemed to be captured by his final sentence: “The level of threat a detainee poses to United States interests, the amount of intelligence a detainee might be able to provide, the conditions under which the detainee may be willing to cooperate, the disruption visits from family members and lawyers might cause—these types of judgments have traditionally been left to the exclusive discretion of the Executive Branch, and there they should remain.”63 Here is an explicit endorsement of National Security Maximalism. 
Other rulings within the D.C. Circuit fall in the same category. In Center for National Security Studies v Department of Justice,64 a divided court of appeals permitted an extraordinary level of secrecy from the executive branch. A number of public interest groups invoked the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), the common law, and the First Amendment to require the government to release information about those who had been detained in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks. The requested information included names, dates of arrest and release, and reasons for detention. The disclosure request had a strong democratic justification: Evaluation of the executive’s behavior could not easily come from a public not provided with this information. In ruling that disclosure was not required, the court relied on a broad interpretation of exemption 7(A) of FOIA, which exempts “records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes . . . to the extent that the production could reasonably be expected to interfere with enforcement proceedings.”65 60 321 F3d at 1143. 61 Id. 62 Id at 1145. 63 Id at 1150. 64 331 F3d 918 (DC Cir 2003). 65 5 USC § 552 (2000). 
As Judge Tatel emphasized in dissent, the court’s interpretation of this exemption was exceptionally deferential to the government’s vague statements about potential harms.66 The court was entirely aware of this point. In language that is closely linked to Justice Thomas’ dissenting opinion in Hamdi, the court emphasized that “the judiciary owes some measure of deference to the executive in cases implicating national security, a uniquely executive purview. . . . We have consistently reiterated the principle of deference to the executive in the FOIA context when national security concerns are implicated. . . . [W]e have consistently deferred to executive affidavits predicting harm to the national security, and have found it unwise to undertake searching judicial review.”67 Indeed, the court went so far as to comment on the distinctive nature of the current threat: “America faces an enemy just as real as its former Cold War foes, with capabilities far beyond the capacity of the judiciary to explore.”68 In fact the court insisted that deference was “mandated by the separation of powers,”69 suggesting that disclosure under FOIA would raise constitutional problems. The court left no doubt about the motivation for its action: “We are in accord with several federal courts that have wisely respected the executive’s judgment in prosecuting the national response to terrorism.”70 What is most noteworthy about the decision, then, is not the outcome, but the broad pronouncements about the need to defer to the executive. 
Within the District of Columbia, the district courts have shown a similar tendency to National Security Maximalism. Consider, for example, ACLU v Department of Justice,71 in which organizations sought information involving the government’s use of § 215 of the Patriot Act. Section 215 gives the FBI broad power to “make an application for an order requiring production of any tangible things . . . for an investigation to obtain foreign intelligence information . . . or to protect against international terrorism.”72 In particular, the plaintiffs sought to use FOIA to find out (1) the total number of § 215 requests received by the National Security Law Unit of the FBI and (2) any and all records relating to § 215. Notwithstanding the fact that the Department of Justice had 66 331 F3d at 924. 67 Id at 926. 68 Id. 69 Id. 70 Id at 932. 71 321 F Supp 2d 24 (DDC 2004). 72 50 USC § 1681 (2000). previously made several disclosures of its behavior under the Patriot Act, the court ruled broadly that the national security exemption of FOIA justified the failure to disclose the information. It acknowledged that the “issue is hardly free from doubt,” but ruled for the government “because it [was] mindful of the ‘long-recognized deference to the executive on national security issues.’”73 Thus the court deferred, not to specific explanations by the executive, but to the vague claims that release of the number of § 215 field requests “poses the continuing potential to harm our national security by enabling our adversaries to conduct their intelligence or international terrorist activities more securely.”74 The court’s willingness to embrace National Security Maximalism is best understand in light of a background principle in favor of executive power in the domain of national security. 
A similar approach can be found in Edmonds v Department of Justice.75 There the court gave an exceedingly broad reading to the “state secrets privilege” so as to dismiss a Privacy Act claim brought by a self-styled whistleblower at the Federal Bureau of Investigation. One of the most striking parts of the court’s opinion came in a footnote, in which it addressed the possibility of staying the case rather than dismissing it: “This is due not only to the nature of the information, but also because the imminent threat of terrorism will not be eliminated anytime in the foreseeable future, but is an endeavor that will consume out nation’s attention indefinitely.”76 Under FOIA, then, National Security Maximalism has been explicitly endorsed within the D.C. Circuit, in holdings that fit well with the general approach in Al Odah. 
come from the Fourth Circuit.77 The most prominent of these is Hamdi v Rumsfeld.78 There the Court held that enemy combatants, captured on the battlefield, could be detained indefinitely and without trial, even if they were American citizens. In so ruling, the Court relied largely on the President’s power as Commander in Chief, contending that this power includes “the authority to detain those captured in armed struggle” and also 73 321 F Supp 2d at 26. 74 Id. 75 323 F Supp 2d 65 (DDC 2004). 76 Id at 82 n 7. 77 See, for example, United States v Moussaoui, 382 F3d 453 (4th Cir 2004). 78 316 F3d 450 (4th Cir 2003), revd, Hamdi v Rumsfeld, 124 US 2633 (2004). “to deport or detain alien enemies during the duration of hostilities” and “to confiscate or destroy enemy property.”79 
The central question in the case involved the procedural protection, if any, that would accompany the exercise of the Commander in Chief power. The Court emphasized the need to defer to the President: “The Constitution’s allocation of the warmaking powers reflects not only the expertise and experience lodged within the executive, but also the more fundamental truth that those branches most accountable to the people should be the ones to undertake the ultimate protection and to ask the ultimate sacrifice from them.”80 Hence deference to the executive would be the basic rule.81 The court was aware that in denying fair procedure, the President was doing something unusual. But changed circumstances justified this step. “As the nature of threats to America evolves, along with the means of carrying those threats out, the nature of enemy combatants may change also. In the face of such change, separation of powers does not deny the executive branch the essential tool of adaptability.”82 
Indeed the Court said that the source of the detention was not a statute, but “Article II, Section 2, of the Constitution, wherein the President is given the war power.”83 (I will return to this important statement in due course.) Deference to the President stems from this explicit grant of authority. So long as a detention “is one legitimately made pursuant to the war powers,” it must be respected.84 A general statement on the part of the executive, supporting the claim that a citizen was detained in the course of war and qualified as an enemy combatant, would be sufficient.85 The court left no doubt that this conclusion stemmed from National Security Maximalism: “The constitutional allocation of war powers affords the President extraordinarily broad authority as Commander in Chief and compels courts to assume a deferential posture.”86 79 Id at 463. 80 Id. 81 Id at 464. Notably, however, the court was careful to limit the reach of its ruling, in a way that suggest a form of minimalism described below. See id at 465. 82 Id at 466. 83 Id at 471. 84 Id. 85 Id at 472-73. 86 Id at 474. 
That deference required the conclusion that Hamdi could be held indefinitely, even after the end of the relevant hostilities.87 In reaching this conclusion, the court referred to the judgments of the executive branch, without even pausing to consider what kind of authorization Congress had given it.88 
Three Problems with National Security Maximalism “In a government of separated powers, deciding finally on what is a reasonable degree of guaranteed liberty whether in peace or war (or some condition in between) is not well entrusted to the Executive Branch of Government, whose particular responsibility is to maintain security. For reasons of inescapable human nature, the branch of Government asked to counter a serious threat is not the branch on which to rests the Nation’s entire reliance in striking the balance between the will to win and the cost in liberty on the way to victory. . . . A reasonable balance is more likely to be reached on the judgment of a different branch. . . . Hence the need for an assessment by Congress before citizens are subject to lockup, likewise the need for a clearly expressed congressional resolution of the competing claims.”89 
“Judges are sometimes called upon to be courageous, because they must sometimes stand up to what is generally supreme in a democracy: the popular will. Their most significant roles in our system are to protect the individual criminal defendant against the occasional excesses of that popular will, and to preserve the checks and balances within our constitutional system that are precisely designed to inhibit swift and complete accomplishment of that popular will.”90 
In the abstract, National Security Maximalism has a great deal of appeal. Far more than Congress, the President is in a position to act quickly and decisively to protect the citizenry. He is also likely to be able to acquire relevant information about what must be done and about when to do it. Because the President is Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, Congress cannot override the President’s judgments about how to carry out a lawful war. Justice Thomas correctly emphasizes that Alexander Hamilton defended the creation of a “unitary executive” as a means of ensuring energy, coordination, and dispatch in the presidency.91 These qualities are relevant above all in time of war. By contrast, courts lack good tools for assessing the President’s claims of military necessity. 87 Id at 476. 88 Id. This is a striking contrast with the minimalist approach of the Supreme Court, explored below. 89 Hamdi v Rumsfeld, 124 US 2633, 2655 (2004) (Souter, joined by Ginsburg, concurring in part, dissenting in part, and concurring in the judgment). 90 Antonin Scalia, The Rule of Law is a Law of Rules, 56 U Chi L Rev 1175, 1180 (1989). 91 See Hamdi, 124 S Ct at 2675-2676. For general discussion, see Lawrence Lessig and Cass R. Sunstein, The President and the Administration, 94 Colum L Rev 1 (1994). which I will return. Second, the President claimed inherent authority to detain those captured on the battlefield—a claim that was at least plausible under the Commander in Chief clause. For this reason, the plurality’s conclusion—that Congress had authorized the detention—actually helped to avoid the resolution of a serious constitutional question. 
This latter point raises some real complexities for minimalism and the use of clear statement principles to limit presidential power. Such principles are justified, as in Kent v Dulles, as a means of avoiding constitutional questions by requiring a judgment by two branches, rather than simply one, that an invasion of liberty is justified. But in some (narrow) contexts, the President will be able to make a plausible argument that he has inherent authority to proceed with some course of action. If so, there is reason for an opposing clear statement principle, one that reads ambiguous statutory provisions as authorizing, rather than forbidding, presidential action. In fact this is an important form of judicial minimalism, and it is one reading of the Court’s opinion in Ex Parte Quirin.228 When the President has a strong claim of inherent power, the clear statement approach does not argue in favor of limiting his authority. But for the reasons sketched by Justice Jackson, broad claims of inherent power, made by reference to the Commander in Chief Clause, are usually not strong. On the contrary, they are usually implausible. When they are strong, the Hamdi plurality’s approach is the right form of minimalism. When they lack plausibility, Justice Souter provides the best path for the future. 
Indeed, an important aspect of the Hamdi plurality’s own approach reflects an endorsement of Justice Souter’s central idea. The government had argued that as a result of Congress’ authorization of the use of force, it was permitted to detain Hamdi indefinitely.229 The plurality rejected this argument, invoking a kind of clear statement principle, one that read the authorization to allow detention only during active prosecution of the war in Afghanistan. The Court noted that “the national security underpinnings of the ‘war on terror,’ although crucially important, are broad and malleable.”230 A longstanding war on terror might mean that “Hamdi’s detention could 228 This is because in that case, the asserted statutory authorization for the President’s creation of military tribunals was ambiguous; a clear statement principle would not have found it sufficient. See Jack L. Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, What A Difference Fifty Years Makes, 19 Const Commentary 621 (2002). 229 Hamdi, 124 S Ct at 2641. 230 Id. last for the rest of his life.”231 Congress had said nothing to allow the President to reach this conclusion. The Court insisted, in this light, that “indefinite detention for the purpose of interrogation is not authorized.”232 It went on to conclude that detention could occur only for the duration of the hostilities in Afghanistan.233 This conclusion, based on a narrow reading of the authorization of the use of force, is a more modest version of Justice Souter’s plea for a clear statement principle in Hamdi. 
b. Padilla. Minimalism of the same sort played the central role in the powerful decision of the court of appeals in the Padilla case.234 At issue was the legality of the detention of Jose Padilla, an American citizen held as an enemy combatant after having been seized on American soil. The court squarely rejected the claim, urged by the executive and rooted in National Security Maximalism, to the effect that the “President has the inherent authority to detain those who take up arms against this country.”235 The court of appeals correctly emphasized that Articles I and II divide the war powers, rather than conferring them on the executive alone.236 The courtt added that the grant of numerous war-related powers “to Congress is a powerful indication that, absent express congressional authorization, the President’s Commander in Chief powers do not support” the confinement of an American citizen captured on American soil. It stressed that Quirin, the government’s best precedent, rested on congressional authorization rather than on inherent presidential authority.237 
Thus the key issue was whether such authorization could be found here. In the court’s view, Congress’ authorization to use “all necessary and appropriate force” to respond to the September 11 attacks should be understood in light of Endo. There the Court emphasized that “in interpreting a war-time measure we must assume that [the purpose of Congress and the Executive] was to allow for the greatest possible accommodation between those liberties and the exigencies of war.”238 Here no clear and 231 Id. 232 Id at 2641. 233 Id at 2642, 234 Padilla v Rumsfeld, 352 F3d 695 (2d Cir 2003), reversed on other grounds, Rumsfeld v Padilla, 124 S Ct 2711 (2004). 235 352 F3d at 712. 236 Id at 713-14. 237 Id at 716. 238 Id at 722-23. unmistakable statement could be found; and that was what was required.239 This decision is an unambiguous exercise in minimalism at war. 
authorization hardly answers all questions about the relationship between statutory provisions and presidential power.240 We can group the cases discussed thus far into three categories. Sometimes Congress is required to authorize; the President cannot act without some grant of power from the national legislature. Sometimes Congress is required to authorize clearly; in the face of ambiguity, the President is not permitted to engage in a certain course of conduct. Sometimes Congress is required to authorize both clearly and specifically; without an express grant of authority to act in a specific way, the President is powerless. My emphasis has been on the need for clear authorization, which dominates the cases on liberty amidst war. But as the discussion thus far should suggest, the other categories are relevant as well. 
When the President has inherent authority to act, legislative authorization is by hypothesis irrelevant. If, for example, prompt presidential warmaking is needed to repel a sudden attack on the United States, the best reading of the Constitution is that the President can take action whether or not Congress has authorized him to do so.241 But suppose that the President merely has a plausible claim of inherent authority to act—and that there is a reasonable dispute about whether that authority actually exists. In such cases, the minimalist route is to require congressional authorization, and to find such authorization both necessary and sufficient whether or not it is clear. Because a constitutional question would be presented if such authorization were absent, minimalist judges reasonably rule that the authorization need not be clear. Indeed, such judges might aggressively construe the existing statutory materials to enable the President to do what (he plausibly claims) the Constitution enables him to do on his own. Ex Parte Quirin, finding authorization that cannot fairly be described as clear,242 is the most important example of this kind of minimalism. 239 Id at 723. 240 See Bradley and Goldsmith, Harv L Rev (cited in note xx). 241 See sources cited in note xx. 242 See Goldsmith and Sunstein, Fifty Years (cited in note xx). 
But compare a case in which the President lacks a strong claim of constitutional power and in which some kind of liberty-based objection is mounted against his action. Here the proper course is to require a high degree of clarity. Hamdi, Kahanamoku, Masses, and Yates comfortably fall in this category. And where the liberty-based objection is especially strong, both clarity and specificity should be required. The difference between the two is usually unimportant, because clarity is usually absent without specificity. But we can see the relevance of the distinction in the disagreement between the plurality and Justice Souter in Hamdi. Justice Souter would have required specificity in the form of an express grant of authority to detain. By contrast, the plurality was satisfied with the general authorization for the use of force, which seemed relatively clear in light of historical understandings.243 I will return to this dispute shortly. Note in this regard that Kent v Dulles is the strongest precedent for the view that congressional authorization must be both clear and specific; and Ex Parte Endo speaks in similar terms. The most sensible orienting point here is that the demand for specificity grows with the magnitude of the intrusion on liberty—a claim that will shortly bring us to the second component of minimalism at war. 
as I have reconstructed it here, congressional authorization is ordinarily both a necessary and a sufficient condition for presidential intrusions into the domain of constitutionally sensitive interests. I have also noted that in some areas, such authorization is not necessary. And many civil libertarians will argue that in many areas, such authorization is not sufficient. They will fear that in times of genuine crisis, Congress is likely to do whatever the President wants; and if the stakes are high enough, it will do so fairly automatically, capitulating to his will. Isn’t it better, and in a sense more minimalist, to say that while congressional authorization is often sufficient, it should not always be, and that question must be resolved on a case-by-case basis rather than categorically? 
A committed minimalist would be tempted to answer this question with an enthusiastic “Yes.” In fact I have already suggested that congressional authorization is sometimes insufficient. Even if Congress and the President agree to silence political 243 See Bradley and Goldsmith, Harv L Rev (cited in note xx), for detailed discussion of the history and interpretation of such authorizations. dissent during war, the first amendment should stand in their way; and for reasons to be discussed shortly, fair hearings should generally be required even if the democratic branches want to dispense with them. But committed minimalists should also agree that outside of the egregious cases, and when Congress and the President have settled on a certain course of action, courts should be reluctant to rule against them. At the very least, American history attests to the likelihood that courts will follow this path when the stakes are high. Of course we can imagine clear constitutional violations, even outrages, in which we might expect, and certainly hope for, a degree of judicial courage.244 Unfortunately, national experience testifies to the existence and future likelihood of such violations. The jury remains out, so to speak, on the likelihood of future judicial courage. What I am emphasizing here is that congressional authorization should be seen as the first line of defense against intrusions into the domain of constitutionally sensitive interests. 
In one of the wisest and most important pronouncements in the history of American law, Justice Felix Frankfurter wrote, “The history of liberty has largely been the history of the observance of procedural safeguards.”245 A primary component of the minimalist program is to take this pronouncement extremely seriously, by requiring, where the legal materials are ambiguous, some kind of hearing for those who are deprived of their liberty. 
Indeed, many of the cases explored thus far are centrally concerned with procedural safeguards. The clearest statement along these lines is found in Duncan v Kahanamoku, the martial law case from Hawaii, in which the Court narrowly construed the Hawaiian Organic Act so as to ensure that civilians would receive access to ordinary courts.246 There the Court offered a ringing endorsement of “procedural safeguards,” describing them as “indispensable to our system of government” and as ensuring checks on executive absolutism.247 Ex Parte Endo is best read in this general spirit. So too, Chief 244 See Stone, Perilous Times (cited in note 14). 245 McNabb v United States, 318 US 332, 347 (1943). 246 327 US 304 (1945). 247 Id at 322. Justice Taney’s rejection of President Lincoln’s claim of authority to suspend the writ of habeas corpus endorses this aspect of minimalism at war. 
The requirement of a hearing before people can lose their liberty deserves firm judicial support even when national security is at risk. Of course a general proposition of this kind does not resolve all cases; if people have been captured on the battlefield and are held beyond the territorial jurisdiction of American courts, then judges are powerless to intervene.248 But if the legal materials can fairly be interpreted to require procedural protection, they should be so interpreted. And indeed this idea has received ringing endorsement in recent Supreme Court decisions involving the war on terrorism. Of these the more elaborately reasoned was the plurality opinion in Hamdi v Rumsfeld,249 mentioned above; it is now time to explore that ruling in more detail. 
Yaser Esam Hamdi, an American citizen born in Louisiana, was seized by members of the Northern Alliance in Afghanistan. From there he was transferred to Guantanamo Bay, then to a naval brig in Norfolk Virginia, and then to a brig in Charleston, South Carolina. According to the United States government, Hamdi qualified as an “enemy combatant” and hence could be held indefinitely without formal proceedings of any kind. The government urged that Hamdi had become affiliated with a Taliban military unit, received weapons training, and had an assault rifle with him at the time that he surrendered to the Northern Alliance. 
The initial question was whether the executive had been authorized to detain citizens who qualify as “enemy combatants.” This was an unusually complex question, for the government argued that even if Congress had not so authorized the executive, the executive “possesses plenary power to detain pursuant to Article II of the Constitution.”250 As I have noted, the plurality avoided the constitutional question by holding that Congress had authorized presidential detentions. The plurality pointed to the language of the authorization for the use of military force, which gives the President the authority to use “all necessary and appropriate force” against “nations, organizations, or persons” associated with the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. The plurality concluded that the detention of “enemy combatants,” at least for the duration of the 248 See Johnson v Eisentrager, 339 US 763 (1950). 249 124 S Ct 2633 (2004). 250 Id at 2639. conflict in which the capture occurred, “is so fundamental and accepted an incident to war as to be” an authorized exercise of “necessary and appropriate force.”251 
This was not an inevitable conclusion. As I have noted, Justice Souter contended that an explicit legislative statement should be required and that no such statement could be found. The plurality responded, plausibly, that detention to prevent return to the battlefield “is a fundamental incident of war.” But we have also seen that the plurality rejected the government’s claim that Congress had authorized indefinite detention by the executive. In its view, the “detention may last no longer than active hostilities.”252 As a matter of statutory interpretation, the plurality said that Congress’ grant of authority to use force included the power to detain only for the duration of the relevant conflict. In good minimalist fashion, the plurality acknowledged that this “understanding may unravel” if “the practical circumstances of a given conflict are entirely unlike those of the conflicts that informed the development of the law of war.”253 But this “is not the situation we face as of this date.”254 
Having found that the detention of Hamdi was authorized, at least for the duration of the conflict, the plurality turned to the question of due process. The government contended that because Hamdi was seized in a combat zone, no factfinding was necessary. The plurality disagreed. For Hamdi to be lawfully detained, he would have to have been part of armed forces engaged in conflict against the United States. This question was disputed and the conclusion of the executive would not be enough. The government also argued that no individual procedure was justified “in light of the extraordinary constitutional interests at stake”—or at most, that the court should ask whether “some evidence” supported the executive’s determination that a citizen is an enemy combatant.255 The plurality disagreed here as well. In the key passage, the plurality said that an enemy combatant must be supplied with “notice of the factual basis 251 Id at 2640. 252 Id at 2642. 253 Id at 2641. 254 Id at 2642. 255 Id at 2645. for his classification, and a fair opportunity to rebut the Government’s factual assertions before a neutral decisionmaker.”256 
The plurality acknowledged the possibility that the constitutional requirements could be met before a military tribunal.257 What was necessary was not any particular set of procedures, but a process that offers both notice and a chance to be heard. “We anticipate that a District Court would proceed with the caution that we have indicated is necessary in this setting, engaging in a factfinding process that is both prudent and 
What is noteworthy about the plurality’s reasoning is its insistence on the right to a fair hearing before a deprivation of freedom, which is called one of the “essential liberties that remain vibrant even in times of security concerns.”259 Minimalists emphasize that right above all others. Of all the opinions in the Court’s terrorism cases, the clearest endorsement of this point can be found in Justice Stevens’ dissenting opinion in Padilla, where he wrote that “[u]nconstrained Executive detention for the purpose of investigating and preventing subversive activity is the hallmark of the Star Chamber,” and added that the ability to retain “counsel for the purpose of protecting the citizen from official mistakes and mistreatment is the hallmark of due process,” even when the nation is attempting “to resist an assault by the forces of tyranny.”260 In so saying, Justice Stevens was writing in the same spirit as the Court’s majority, which has yet to question the general requirement of fair hearings.261 
Of course that requirement has exceptions. Good minimalists cannot claim that hearings are always required; the very endorsement of hearing rights is, in its way, a departure from the minimalist reluctance to rule widely. As the Court said in Rasul, “there is a realm of political authority over military affairs where the judicial power may not enter.”262 If an enemy combatant is being held for a specific period in an area outside 256 Id at 2651 (“There remains the possibility that the standards we have articulated could be met by an appropriately authorized and properly constituted military tribunal”). 257 Id at 2651. 258 Id at 2652. 259 Id at 2652. 260 Rumsfeld v Padilla, 124 S Ct 2711, 2735 (2004) (Stevens dissenting). 261 Padilla itself was decided not on the merits, but on jurisdictional grounds. See id at 2727 (ruling that Padilla was required to bring his habeas petition in South Carolina, not the Southern District of New York). 262 Rasul v Bush, 124 S Ct at 2700. the territorial control of the United States, federal courts may not intervene.263 It is clear that as Commander in Chief, the President can authorize the capture and detention of enemy combatants for specified periods of time, free from federal judicial oversight. But even in such situations, American courts have been careful to reject indefinite detention without trial, and have looked to ensure that some kind of procedure was available to reduce the risk of error.264 In times of war, minimalist judges are reluctant to impose sharp constraints on the executive. But they are less reluctant to intervene when they are being asked to ensure against arbitrary or mistaken deprivations of liberty. 
Thus far my emphasis has been on the need to restrain executive power. But there is also a need for courts to restrain themselves. In the context of war, minimalists endorse narrow, incompletely theorized rulings in order to promote two goals. First, judges ought to avoid excessive intrusions into the executive domain. Minimalist rulings help to ensure against judicial overreaching. Second, judges ought to avoid setting precedents that will, in retrospect, appear to give excessive authority to the President.265 Minimalist rulings help to ensure against that risk as well. 
Justice Frankfurter’s concurring opinion in The Steel Seizure Case offers the most elaborate discussion of the basic point.266 He emphasized that “[r]igorous adherence to the narrow scope of the judicial function” is especially important in constitutional cases when national security is at risk, notwithstanding the national “eagerness to settle— preferably forever—a specific problem on the basis of the broadest possible constitutional pronouncement.”267 In his view, the Court’s duty “lies in the opposite direction,” through judgments that make it unnecessary to consider “delicate problems of power under the Constitution.”268 Thus the Court has an obligation “to avoid putting fetters upon the future by needless pronouncements today.”269 Thus he would have ruled, very narrowly, that the President had been deprived, by Congress, of the authority to 263 See id, relying on Johnson v Eisentrager, 339 US 763 (1950). 264 124 S Ct at 2700; 339 US at 777-78. 265 On this risk, see Lee Epstein et al., Supreme Silence (cited in note xx). 266 343 US at 594-597. 267 Id at 594. 268 Id at 595. 269 Id at 596. engage in the seizure of the steel mills—a ruling that would have said exceedingly little about the hardest constitutional questions.270 
We have already encountered a number of illustrations of analogous forms of judicial self-discipline. The ruling in Kent v Dulles left the largest constitutional questions for another day. So too, the concurring justices in Ex Parte Milligan argued against a broad ruling on individual rights. In the same vein, Ex Parte Quirin, emphasizing congressional authorization, was a narrow ruling, simply because it left so much in legislative hands. In Masses, Judge Hand did not hold that Congress lacked the constitutional power to punish the relevant speech; he ruled more modestly that Congress had not seen fit to exercise whatever power it might have. The Supreme Court followed precisely the same approach in Yates. 
The same tendency toward minimalist rulings was on fine display in 2004. In Rasul v Bush,271 the Court was asked to say whether federal courts have jurisdiction to consider the detentions of foreign nationals captured and incarcerated at Guantanamo Bay. The Court chose to restrict itself to two exceedingly narrow questions. It held only that the federal habeas statute granted jurisdiction to federal courts to hear challenges by foreign nationals to their detentions, and that the Alien Tort Statute did not bar federal jurisdiction.272 Having reached these conclusions, the Court said almost nothing else: “Whether and what proceedings may become necessary after respondents make their response to the merits of petitioners’ claims are matters that we need not address now. What is presently at stake is only whether the federal courts have jurisdiction to determine the legality of the Executive’s potentially indefinite detention of individuals who claim to be wholly innocent of wrongdoing.”273 
We might compare the majority’s approach here with the maximalist approaches of Justices Scalia and Thomas. Characteristically, Justice Scalia produced two opinions that were both deep and wide. In Hamdi, he argued that unless Congress has suspended the writ of habeas corpus, an American citizen is entitled to challenge his imprisonment 270 Id at 602. 271 124 S Ct 2686 (2004). 272 Id at 2698-99. 273 Id at 2699. and to obtain release unless and until criminal proceedings are brought.274 The implication here is large: The President of the United States may not detain American citizens indefinitely, even if they are captured on the battlefield, unless the writ of habeas corpus has been suspended. “Many think it not only inevitable but entirely proper that liberty give way to security in times of national crisis . . . Whatever the general merits of the view that war silences law or modulates its voice, that view has no place in the interpretation and application of a Constitution designed precisely to confront war and, in a manner that accords with democratic principles, to accommodate it.”275 Suspension of habeas corpus, or an ordinary trial-type hearing, is the rule for American citizens. 
Justice Scalia’s preference for a maximalist ruling fits well with one of his strongest argument on behalf of wide rather than narrow decisions: Width works not only to constrain judges but also to embolden them. “The chances that frail men and women will stand up to their unpleasant duty are greatly increased if they can stand behind the solid shield of a firm, clear principle enunciated in earlier cases.”276 
Justice Scalia urges a different but similarly wide rule for foreign nationals detained overseas by the United States military.277 Here his rule is also clear: The federal habeas corpus statute does not apply at all, and the President can detain people free from judicial oversight. Thus Justice Scalia rejects the Court’s conclusion that some kind of hearing is necessary to support detention. “For this Court to create such a monstrous scheme in time of war, and in frustration of our military commanders’ reliance upon clearly stated prior law, is judicial adventurism of the worst sort.”278 Justice Thomas joined Justice Scalia on the point; and as we have seen, he also favors a broad rule for American citizens, permitting the President to detain enemy combatants indefinitely. For present purposes, what is noteworthy about the Scalia and Thomas opinions is that they favor both width and depth. Justice Thomas is quite explicit on this point, objecting specifically to the Court’s use of a “balancing scheme” and responding, “I do not think that the Federal Government’s war powers can be balanced away by this Court.”279 274 124 S Ct 2633, 2671 (Scalia dissenting). 275 Id at 2674. 276 See Scalia, Rule of Law at 1181 (cited in note xx). 277 Rasul v Bush, 124 S Ct 2686 (2004). 278 Id at 2711. 279 Id at 2674. Hamdi and to reject that of Justices Scalia and Thomas in Rasul. But as Justice Thomas points out, Justice Scalia’s liberty-protecting position in Hamdi creates risks simply because of its breadth.280 If Justice Scalia or Justice Thomas were clearly right on the law, then no one could object to their plea for depth and width. But suppose that the law is not clear and that a deep or wide ruling might be confounded by unanticipated circumstances. If so, there is every reason for federal judges to issue shallow and narrow opinions, refusing to freeze the future and allowing decisions to turn on particular circumstances. Indeed, the Court’s very refusal to decide the Padilla case on the merits, relying instead on a jurisdictional objection, can be understood as an extreme example of an insistence on shallowness and narrowness281; and if the underlying issues are extremely complex, then it is not hard to understand the Court’s reluctance to resolve them.282 
At this point it would be possible to object that narrow decisions, stressing particular facts, are in a sense more intrusive than those that offer greater width and depth. The reason is that narrow decisions leave the executive, and other institutions, so unclear about what they are supposed to do. This is a significant and legitimate concern about Rasul in particular. I have emphasized that that decision is highly minimalist, holding only that on these particular facts, these detainees are entitled to hearings. But this ruling leaves the government with very little guidance. Are those held at an air force base in Afghanistan or Iraq entitled to hearings? Does it matter if they are only being held for a few weeks, while the government explores the relevant facts, obtains a translator, and so forth? Justice Kennedy’s concurring opinion appears responsive to the 280 The difficulty is that it is easy to imagine cases of emergency in which the writ may not be suspended, because “Cases of Rebellion or Invasion” are not involved. 124 S Ct 2682-83. If the writ may not be suspended, then the President must hold formal trials and may not detain people – perhaps a plausible conclusion, but not what Justice Scalia intended. 281 Rumsfeld v Padilla, 124 S Ct 2711 (2004). The extreme case may, of course, conflict with the second feature of minimalism if it results in a failure to require a minimally fair hearing. Note, however, that there is a difference between a refusal to decide whether such a hearing is required and a ruling that such a hearing is not required; the Supreme Court’s ruling in Padilla does not foreclose a future decision that the court of appeals was correct on the merits, as I believe that it was. See supra. 282 See the discussion of the passive virtues in Alexander Bickel, The Least Dangerous Branch: The Supreme Court at the Bar of Politics (1962). government’s need for a measure of clarity.283 If the Court leaves too much undecided, the government will have to proceed in the dark, in a way that might lead to a range of problems. 
As evidence, consider here the distinctive problems that have emerged in the aftermath of Rasul. In December 2004, a federal district court “served as the stage for the beginning of what [was] expected to be a long and bruising second phase of the legal battle” over the fate of prisoners at Guantanamo Bay.284 The adnministration argued for a narrow reading of Rasul, one that would be satisfied by a hearing at the naval base in which detainees were permitted to argue that they were not properly characterized as enemy combatants.285 By contrast, the detainees contended that they were entitled to a lawyer and to an opportunity to see the evidence against them.286 Because the Supreme Court did not resolve this dispute, protracted litigation was inevitable. In this light, it is reasonable to worry whether narrowness might not create unnecessary and even damaging uncertainty. 
The concern is justified, and for some problems, it offers a good reason for a degree of width; but that reason is only one of a set of relevant considerations, many of them pointing toward narrow rulings in the context of war. If judges can be confident about a wider ruling, then they should issue it. By doing so, they reduce uncertainty, and they do so (by hypothesis) without compromising other important values. But if judges lack confidence in a wider ruling, the costs of uncertainty may be worth incurring. The argument in Rasul involved the narrow questions the Court decided, not the broader ones that have arisen in the aftermath of its decision. The most that can be said is that government’s need for planning provides a cautionary note about narrow and shallow rulings -- suggesting the need to be minimalist, so to speak, about minimalism itself. But I hope that I have said enough to show that during war, a minimalist posture, of the sort defined by the three principles, provides the best general orientation. 283 124 S Ct at 2699-2670 (Kennedy concurring in the judgment). 284 See Neil Lewis, Fate of Guantanamo Detainees is Debated in Federal Court, New York Times, December 2, 2004, at p. 36. 285 Id. 286 Id. 
I have attempted to outline and to evaluate three general approaches to conflicts among civil liberty and national security: Liberty Maximalism, National Security Maximalism, and minimalism. Courts are most unlikely to adopt Liberty Maximalism, and for good reason. The extent of liberty depends, in large part, on the strength and the legitimacy of the reasons for intruding on it, and when national security is genuinely at risk, the legitimate reasons for intruding on liberty are stronger. Of course courts should strike down indefensible restrictions on constitutional rights, above all freedom of speech.287 But where the founding document leaves gaps and ambiguities, judicial caution is entirely appropriate amidst war. 
By contrast, National Security Maximalism might seem highly attractive to reviewing courts, and there are strong arguments on its behalf. More than anyone else, the President is in a strong position to protect the country, because he is uniquely wellequipped to acquire relevant information, and because he can act both in a coordinated way and with dispatch. These points are closing connected with central ideas about the executive branch in the founding era.288 For their part, judges lack the information that would permit them to make sensible judgments about when an intrusion on liberty is justified, and the costs of judicial errors in the direction of liberty may turn out to be catastrophic. Notably, National Security Maximalism has received some strong endorsements on federal courts of appeals amidst the war on terrorism. 
Notwithstanding its attractions, National Security Maximalism cannot claim much support in the Constitution itself. The founding document carefully divides authority between the President and Congress. It does not give a general “war power” to the President. With respect to war, the Constitution is easily read to give the national legislation the primary role. In addition, National Security Maximalism neglects institutional factors that create a grave risk that the executive branch will support unjustified intrusions on civil liberties. Group polarization is a significant danger, particularly for a branch specifically designed to consist of like-minded people. As a 287 See Stone, Perilious Times (cited in note 14). 288 See Lessig and Sunstein, 94 Colum L Rev 1 (1994) (cited in note xx). result, the executive might well support interferences with freedom that are not adequately justified by security concerns. This is especially likely if those interferences affect identifiable groups rather than the public as a whole. 
In the face of the relevant risks, the best general orientation is a particular form of minimalism, with its three principal requirements, representing a kind of Due Process Writ Large. First, Congress should be required to provide clear authorization for executive intrusions on interests that have a strong claim to constitutional protection. Second, some kind of hearing should be required before the executive deprives people of their freedom. Third, courts should discipline themselves through narrow, incompletely theorized rulings. To a remarkable degree, these three ideas capture the practices of the Supreme Court in dealing with claimed violations of constitutional rights when national security has been threatened. Minimalism can find prominent endorsement during the Civil War, World War I, World War II, the Cold War, and the contemporary war on terrorism. 
In numerous cases, the Court, and its most celebrated members, have adopted a form of minimalism in war. To be sure, minimalist decisions are unlikely to do all that should be done to prevent unjustified intrusions into the domain of liberty. But such decisions have the significant advantage of carving out a role that is admirably wellsuited to the institutional strengths and weaknesses of the federal judiciary. 
University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 csunstei@uchicago.edu 
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit," 73 George Washington Law Review 693 (2004). 
Circuit 
When the country faces a genuine threat, how should judges approach conflicts between national security and freedom? In the aftermath of September 11, this question has become one of the most pressing in all of American law. 
It is easy to imagine two extreme positions that federal courts might adopt: National Security Fundamentalism and Liberty Perfectionism.' National Security Fundamentalists understand the Constitution to call for a highly deferential role for the judiciary, above all on the ground that when national security is threatened, the president must be permitted to do what needs to be done to protect the country. For National Security Fundamentalists, courts should adopt a strong presumption in favor of allowing the president to do as he wishes. If the president cannot safeguard the nation's security, who will? By contrast, Liberty Perfectionists insist that in times of war, at least as much as in times of peace, federal judges must protect constitutional liberty.2 Indeed, Liberty Perfectionists believe that under circumstances of war it is all the more important that federal judges take a strong stand on behalf of liberty.3 Liberty Perfectionists emphasize that when national security is at risk, unjustified public panics are likely, even inevitable. If federal judges do not protect liberty in the face of panic, who will? 
We can also imagine a third approach: minimalism. 4 Minimalists believe that, in the most controversial areas, judges should refuse to endorse any large-scale approach and should be reluctant to adopt wide rulings that will * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This Essay is a sibling to the discussion in Cass R. Sunstein, Minimalism at War, 2004 Sup. CT. REV. 47; there is significant overlap between the two essays. My focus here, however, is on the particular practices of the D.C. Circuit and other lower federal courts, whereas my focus there is on the general practice of minimalism. 
1 See, e.g., Eric A. Posner & Adrian Vermeule, Accommodating Emergencies, 56 STAN. L. REV. 605, 606-10 (2003); Samuel Issacharoff & Richard H. Pildes, Between Civil Libertarianism and Executive Unilateralism:An Institutional Process Approach to Rights During Wartime, 5 THEORETICAL INQUIRIES L. 1, 1-2 (2004), at http://www.bepress.com/til/default/vol5/issl/artl. National Security Fundamentalism is an extreme version of what Posner and Vermeule call the accommodationist view; Liberty Perfectionism is akin to what they deem the strict enforcement view. See Posner & Vermeule, supra, at 605-10. Their target is the civil libertarian concern that accommodationist rulings will weaken liberty during peacetime and that during emergencies the government will respond to unjustified public panic. See id. 
2 See generally DAVID COLE, ENEMY ALIENS: DOUBLE STANDARDS AND CONSTrruTIONAL FREEDOMS IN THE WAR ON TERRORISM (2003). 
3 This is one reading of GEOFFREY R. STONE, PERILOUS TIMES: FREE SPEECH IN WARTIME FROM THE SEDITION AcT OF 1798 TO THE WAR ON TERRORISM (2004). 
4 On minimalism in general, see CAss R. SUNSTEIN, ONE CASE AT A TIME: JUDICIAL MINIMALISM ON THE SUPREME COURT (1999). 
June 2005 Vol. 73 No. 4 bind the country in unforeseen circumstances. Instead, minimalists want judges to rule narrowly and cautiously. In the context of war, minimalists would like courts to avoid constitutional issues by, for example, holding that Congress has not authorized the executive to intrude into the domain of constitutionally protected interests. Minimalists also like to avoid broad judicial pronouncements about either presidential power or liberty, preferring instead close consideration of particular measures. In the aftermath of September 11, minimalists want courts to proceed in small steps, leaving the largest issues undecided as long as possible. 
This Essay has three goals. The first is to sketch the rise of National Security Fundamentalism in various places, above all the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. Notably, the Supreme Court has not yet embraced National Security Fundamentalism; on the contrary, the Court appears to have repudiated it.5 But National Security Fundamentalism has played a prominent role in the Department of Justice, in a remarkable opinion by Justice Clarence Thomas, and in a number of lower-court decisions. If the risk of terrorism increases, and if the nation is hit with additional serious terrorist attacks, the temptation to embrace National Security Fundamentalism might well prove overwhelming. 
My second goal is to provide a brief outline of the tension between National Security Fundamentalism and the Constitution. I suggest that the latter provides no room for the former and that a number of loose statements in the recent past are based on a mistaken understanding of the founding document. My third and final goal is to understand the appeal of a constitutionally mischievous approach to liberty amidst war. I suggest that National Security Fundamentalism is especially tempting for lower courts consisting of judges appointed by a Republican president and asked to assess actions, by a Republican president, that are designed to protect national security. When national security is threatened, Republican appointees are exceedingly likely to defer to Republican presidents. This is especially so on the lower courts, which are likely to be most reluctant to invalidate acts of the commander in chief of the armed forces. Some of the more disturbing rhetoric in recent decisions by the D.C. Circuit, and by trial courts within that circuit, is best understood in this light. 
I. 
It should be unsurprising to find that, in the aftermath of the attacks of September 11, National Security Fundamentalism has obtained a great deal of support. As I have noted, the Supreme Court has refused to accept it, at least thus far. 6 But the basic approach can be found in many places, most prominently in Washington, D.C. 
In recent Supreme Court decisions involving the war on terrorism, National Security Fundamentalism failed to attract a majority opinion.7 But it made a conspicuous appearance in a remarkable dissenting opinion by Justice Clarence Thomas in Hamdi v. Rumsfeld.8 In Justice Thomas's view, the Constitution accords to the president the "primary responsibility ... to protect the national security and to conduct the Nation's foreign relations."9 And Justice Thomas emphasized, very broadly, that any constitutional judgment in this domain should consider "basic principles of the constitutional structure as it relates to national security and foreign affairs."10 Hence, judicial judgments should be made against the backdrop set by the president's inherent and broadly discretionary power to protect national security." 
With respect to the courts, Justice Thomas contended that "it is crucial to recognize that judicialinterference in these domains destroys the purpose of vesting primary responsibility in a unitary Executive."'1 2 Judges "lack the relevant information and expertise to second-guess determinations made by the President. ' 13 In fact, congressional grants of power should be construed generously on the president's behalf, rather than narrowly, so as to fit with institutional limits on the power of the judiciary.1 4 Because the executive branch of the federal government has an "overriding interest in protecting the Nation," it can invoke that interest to justify depriving people of liberty.1 5 In fact, Justice Thomas argued in favor of broad constructions of congressional grants of authority partly to avoid constitutional difficulties: "Although the President very well may have inherent authority to detain those arrayed against our troops, I agree with the plurality that we need not decide that question because Congress has authorized the President to do so."16 
Justice Thomas's opinion is a form of National Security Fundamentalism because of its breadth and ambition. There is no effort here to offer a cautious ruling tailored to the facts of the particular case. On the contrary, Justice Thomas speaks generally about the "primary responsibility" of the president in the domain of "national security. ' 17 In addition, he adopts a kind of interpretive principle in favor of presidential authority-suggesting, at least implicitly, that statutes should be read in a way that does not conflict with the president's inherent authority.' 8 But from a reading of the Constitution alone, it would not be entirely clear whether the president or the Congress has primary responsibility in the domain of national security-an issue to which I will return. The important point is that Justice Thomas offers a distinctive vision of the constitutional structure, one that accords principal authority to the president and a small or even nearly nonexistent role for courts, and thus exemplifies National Security Fundamentalism. B. 
In recent years, the most visible moment for National Security Fundamentalism came from the Office of Legal Counsel of the Department of Justice, with its 2002 memorandum on the legality of coerced interrogation.1 9 The most remarkable aspect of the memorandum is its suggestion that, as commander in chief of the armed forces, the president of the United States has the inherent authority to torture suspected terrorists so as to make it constitutionally unacceptable for Congress to ban the practice of torture.20 The Office of Legal Counsel emphasized that "the President enjoys complete discretion in the exercise of his Commander-in-Chief authority and in conducting operations against hostile forces. '21 In addition, the Office of Legal Counsel insisted that a core function of the commander in chief includes interrogation of the enemy. 22 Because of "the President's inherent constitutional authority to manage a military campaign against al Qaeda and its allies," congressional enactments "must be construed as not applying to" interrogations undertaken as part of the president's commander-in-chief authority.23 "Any effort by Congress to regulate the interrogation of battlefield combatants would violate the Constitution's sole vesting of the Commanderin-Chief authority in the President. '24 Hence, coercive interrogation, including torture, must be permitted if the president wants to engage in it. 
Constitutional interpretation is, of course, very much a function of institutional role. Those who work for the House of Representatives or the Senate might well be expected to aggrandize the powers of Congress; those who 19 See Memorandum from the Office of Legal Counsel, United States Department of Justice, to Alberto R. Gonzales, Counsel to the President (Aug. 1, 2002) [hereinafter OLC Memorandum] (regarding "Standards of Conduct for Interrogation under 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A"), available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/nation/documents/dojinterrogationmemo 20020801.pdf. This was the most visible moment for National Security Fundamentalism, but perhaps not the most extreme one. In Rumsfeld v. Padilla,the president claimed that, as commander in chief, he had the inherent power to order military authorities to seize an American citizen in the United States without any judicial approval and to hold him indefinitely, incommunicado, with no access to a lawyer, a court, family, or friends, and without even informing his family or friends what they had done with him. See Brief for the Petitioner at 35-38, Rumsfeld v. Padilla, 124 S. Ct. 2711 (2004) (No. 03-1027). I discuss Padillabelow. 
20 See OLC Memorandum, supra note 19, at 31. 21 Id. at 33. 22 See id. at 38. 
23 Id. at 34. To be sure, the position of the Department of Justice was stated with a degree of tentativeness. It announced that it "will not read" the congressional ban on torture as applying in the context of battlefield interrogations. Id. at 34. So phrased, the suggestion is a form of minimalism, asking for avoidance of the constitutional issue by reading the statute so as not to intrude on the president's authority as commander in chief. See id. But the general impression is that the ban probably should be regarded as unconstitutional. 
24 Id. at 39. work for the Department of State might well be expected to exaggerate the authority of the president. The Office of Legal Counsel is part of the executive branch, operating directly under the attorney general, and one of its major functions is to protect the constitutional prerogatives of the president, especially those prerogatives that are associated with the commander-in-chief power. Generous interpretations of the president's prerogatives should be expected from any office within the Department of Justice, above all when national security is at risk. But in its endorsement of presidential power, the memorandum on coerced interrogation went well beyond ordinary practice. To be sure, the president has inherent authority to oversee battlefield operations, and Congress has limited power to control such operations. The president also has the inherent authority to conduct interrogations amidst war. But, to say the least, it is unusual to say that this authority includes the power to torture people when Congress has expressly said otherwise. The power to command the armed forces is not easily taken to include "inherent" power to torture enemy combatants. Even if it does include that power, it is hard to contend that Congress cannot provide protection against torture.25 
Whatever one's ultimate judgment on the merits, the memorandum of the Office of Legal Counsel provides a dramatic example of National Security Fundamentalism. 
and "the War Power" 
In the years since the September 11 attacks, National Security Fundamentalism has played a large role on the lower federal courts.26 A single circuit has decided most of the key cases involving a conflict between national security and individual liberty: the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. That court has shown a remarkable tendency toward National Security Fundamentalism. In every case in which a serious challenge was mounted to the power of the president, the president has prevailed in the D.C. Circuit. Let us investigate a few examples. 
One of the most striking decisions from the D.C. Circuit is Center for National Security Studies v. Department of Justice.27 In that case, a divided court of appeals permitted an extraordinary level of secrecy from the executive branch. Its reasoning is far more important than its (plausible) conclu25 See Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, 343 U.S. 579, 644 (1952) (Jackson, J., concurring). Note that in some applications, the commander-in-chief power is more plausibly read to include the power to torture-when, for example, torture is deemed necessary to prevent an imminent attack on American troops. But even here, Congress almost certainly has the authority to forbid the practice of torture. 
26 The principal exception is Padilla v. Rumsfeld, 352 F.3d 695 (2d Cir. 2003), rev'd on other grounds, 124 S. Ct. 2711 (2004), in which the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit held that the president could not detain Padilla because he lacked the inherent authority to do so and because Congress had not authorized the detention of American citizens on American soil. See id. at 712-18, 722-23. This is an example of minimalism in action, as discussed in Part IV infra. 
27 Ctr. for Nat'l Sec. Studies v. Dep't of Justice, 331 F.3d 918 (D.C. Cit. 2003), cert. denied, 540 U.S. 1104 (2004). sion, simply because of its broad pronouncements about presidential authority. 
A number of public interest groups invoked the Freedom of Information Act ("FOIA"),2 8 the common law, and the First Amendment to require the government to release information about those who had been detained in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks. 29 The requested information included names, dates of arrest and release, and reasons for detention. 30 The disclosure request had a strong democratic justification: evaluation of the executive's behavior could not easily come from a public not provided with this information. In ruling that disclosure was not required, the court relied on a broad interpretation of exemption 7(A) of FOIA, which exempts "records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes.., to the extent that the production ...31 could reasonably be expected to interfere with enforcement proceedings." 
As Judge Tatel emphasized in dissent, the court's interpretation of this exemption was contestable; the court could easily have gone the other way.32 What is most important is that the court was exceptionally deferential to the government's vague statements about potential harms.33 The court was entirely aware of this point. In language that is closely linked to Justice Thomas's dissenting opinion in Hamdi, the court emphasized: [T]he judiciary owes some measure of deference to the executive in cases implicating national security, a uniquely executive purview .... We have consistently reiterated the principle of deference to the executive in the FOIA context when national security concerns are implicated.... [W]e have consistently deferred to executive affidavits predicting harm to the national security, and have found it unwise to undertake searching judicial review.34 
Indeed, the court went so far as to comment specifically on the distinctive nature and legal relevance of the current threat to national security: "America faces an enemy just as real as its former Cold War foes, with capabilities beyond the capacity of the judiciary to explore. '35 In fact, the court insisted that deference was "mandated by the separation of powers, '36 suggesting that disclosure under FOIA would raise constitutional problems. The court left no doubt about the motivation for its action: "[W]e are in accord with several federal courts that have wisely respected the executive's judgment in prosecuting the national response to terrorism." 37 What is most noteworthy about the decision, then, is not the outcome, but the court's broad pronouncements about the need to defer to the executive and its interpretation of FOIA with clear and specific reference to separation of powers principles. 
Another strikingly fundamentalist decision by the D.C. Circuit is Al 
In its ambitious ruling, the D.C. Circuit held that aliens captured outside of the United States have no rights under the Due Process Clause.39 The court said that the Guantinamo Bay detainees were, in law, analogous to German prisoners captured on the battlefield during World War 11.40 The court acknowledged that Guantdnamo Bay is controlled by the United States military, but it insisted on the irrelevance of this fact because Cuba has sovereignty over the area.41 The court's conclusion was hardly unreasonable. But there can be no doubt that the conclusion in favor of executive discretion stemmed from a broad and hardly mandatory reading of Supreme Court precedents. 42 
A concurring opinion by Judge Randolph (who wrote the majority opinion as well) was, in a sense, even more revealing. Judge Randolph went well beyond what was necessary to resolve the case. Consider his confessedly aggressive opening sentence: "I write separately to add two other grounds for rejecting the detainees' non-habeas claims. '4 3 The fundamental motivation for his separate opinion seemed to be captured by his final sentence: The level of threat a detainee poses to United States interests, the amount of intelligence a detainee might be able to provide, the conditions under which the detainee may be willing to cooperate, the disruption visits from family members and lawyers might causethese types of judgments have traditionally been left to the exclusive discretion of the Executive Branch, and there they should remain. 4 Here is an explicit endorsement of National Security Fundamentalism. 
Within the D.C. Circuit, the trial courts have followed the lead of the court of appeals, showing a similar tendency toward National Security Fundamentalism. Consider, for example, ACLU v. Department of Justice,45 in which organizations sought information involving the government's use of section 215 of the USA PATRIOT Act.46 Section 215 gives the FBI broad power to "make an application for an order requiring the production of any tangible things.., for an investigation to obtain foreign intelligence informa38 Al Odah v. United States, 321 F.3d 1134 (D.C. Cir. 2003), rev'd sub nom. Rasul v. Bush, 124 S. Ct. 2686 (2004). 
39 See id. at 1145. 40 See id. at 1140. 41 See id. at 1143. 42 See id. 43 Id. at 1145 (Randolph, J., concurring). 44 Id. at 1150 (Randolph, J., concurring). 45 ACLU v. Dep't of Justice, 321 F. Supp. 2d 24 (D.D.C. 2004). 
46 See id. at 26; Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT Act) Act of 2001 § 215, 50 U.S.C. § 1861 (Supp. I 2003). tion ...or to protect against international terrorism. '47 In particular, the plaintiffs sought to use FOIA to find out (1) the total number of section 215 requests received by the National Security Law Unit of the FBI and (2) any and all records relating to section 215.48 Notwithstanding the fact that the Department of Justice had previously made several disclosures of its behavior under the USA PATRIOT Act, the court ruled broadly that the national security exemption of FOIA justified the failure to disclose the information. 49 
The court knew that it was dealing with a hard question, candidly acknowledging that the "issue is hardly free from doubt. ' 50 But it ruled for the government "because it [was] mindful of the 'long-recognized deference to the executive on national security issues."' 51 Ultimately the court deferred, not to specific explanations by the executive, but to the exceedingly vague claims that release of the number of section 215 field requests "poses the continuing potential to harm our national security by enabling our adversaries to conduct their intelligence or international terrorist activities more securely. ' 52 The court's willingness to embrace National Security Fundamentalism is best understood in light of a background principle in favor of executive power in the domain of national security. 
There the court gave an exceedingly broad reading to the "state secrets privilege" so as to dismiss a Privacy Act 54 claim brought by a self-styled whistleblower at the FBI.55 One of the most striking parts of the court's opinion came in a footnote, in which it addressed the possibility of staying the case rather than dismissing it: "This is due not only to the nature of the information, but also because the imminent threat of terrorism will not be eliminated anytime in the foreseeable future, but is an endeavor that will consume our nation's attention indefinitely. '56 Under FOIA, then, National Security Fundamentalism has been explicitly endorsed within the D.C. Circuit, in holdings that fit well with the general approach in Al Odah. D. 
Next to the D.C. Circuit, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit has been the most prominent court of appeals in cases involving the war on terror, and it has taken an approach strikingly similar to that of the D.C. Circuit.57 The most prominent of its decisions is Hamdi v. Rumsfeld.5 8 There the court held that enemy combatants, captured on the battlefield, could be detained indefinitely and without trial, even if they were American citizens. 59 In so ruling, the court relied largely on a constitutional source-the president's power as commander in chief of the armed forces. 60 The court contended that this power includes "the authority to detain those captured in armed struggle" and also "to deport or detain alien enemies during the duration of hostilities and to confiscate or destroy enemy property. 61 
The central question in the case involved the procedural protection, if any, that would accompany the exercise of the commander-in-chief power. The court emphasized the need to defer to the president: "The Constitution's allocation of the warmaking powers reflects not only the expertise and experience lodged within the executive, but also the more fundamental truth that those branches most accountable to the people should be the ones to undertake the ultimate protection and to ask the ultimate sacrifice from them. 62 Hence, deference to the executive would be the basic rule. 63 The court was aware that, in denying fair procedure, the president was doing something unusual, but changed circumstances justified this step: "As the nature of threats to America evolves, along with the means of carrying those threats out, the nature of enemy combatants may change also. In the face of such change, separation of powers doctrine does not deny the executive branch the essential tool of adaptability."' 64 
Indeed, the court said that the source of the detention was not a statute, but "Article II, Section 2, of the Constitution, wherein the President is given the war power. '65 (I will return to this important statement, which seems to lie behind the D.C. Circuit opinions as well, in due course.) Deference to the president stems from this explicit grant of authority. So long as a detention "is one legitimately made pursuant to the war powers," it must be respected. 66 A general statement on the part of the executive supporting the claim that a citizen was detained in the course of war and qualified as an enemy combatant would be sufficient. 67 The court left no doubt that this conclusion stemmed from National Security Fundamentalism: "The constitutional allocation of war powers affords the President extraordinarily broad authority as Commander in Chief and compels courts to assume a deferential posture."68 59 See id. at 473. 60 See id. at 463. 61 Id. (citation omitted). 62 Id. 
63 See id. at 464. Notably, however, the court was careful to limit the reach of its ruling in a way that suggests a form of minimalism described below. See id. at 465 ("We shall, in fact, go no further in this case than the specific context before us-that of the undisputed detention of a citizen during a combat operation undertaken in a foreign country and a determination by the executive that the citizen was allied with enemy forces."). 
64 Id. at 466. 65 Id. at 471. 66 Id. at 472. 67 See id. at 472-73. 68 Id. at 474. 
That deference required the conclusion that Hamdi could be held indefinitely, even after the end of the relevant hostilities. 69 In reaching this conclusion, the court referred to the judgments of the executive branch without even pausing to consider what kind of authorization Congress had given it.70 Because the D.C. Circuit and the Fourth Circuit have been the most important sources of lower-court decisions involving liberty and the war on terrorism, it is fair to say that National Security Fundamentalism has played the dominant role on the federal courts in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks. 
Why have lower courts been drawn to National Security Fundamentalism? In the abstract, National Security Fundamentalism has a great deal of appeal. Far more than Congress, the president is in a position to act quickly and decisively to protect the citizenry. He is also likely to be able to acquire relevant information about what must be done and about when to do it. Because the president is commander in chief of the armed forces, Congress cannot override the president's judgments about how to carry out a lawful war. Justice Thomas correctly emphasizes that Alexander Hamilton defended the creation of a "unitary executive" as a means of ensuring energy, coordination, and dispatch in the presidency.71 These qualities are relevant above all in times of war. By contrast, courts lack good tools for assessing the president's claims of military necessity. 
At least equally important, judicial errors may turn out to be disastrous rather than merely harmful. To be sure, American practice suggests that judges are most unlikely to err by protecting civil liberties; 72 in our history, it is hard to find even a single case in which judicial protection of freedom seriously damaged national security. But if Liberty Perfectionism were accepted, some such errors would become far more probable. In ordinary contexts, even those that involve criminal justice, the stakes are not nearly so high. There is every reason for courts to avoid a decision that leads to freedom for terrorists or to disclosure of information that helps those who want to kill Americans. Structural concerns, along with simple prudence, argue in favor of considerable judicial deference to presidential choices when national security is at risk. These points provide important cautionary notes; they help to explain why Liberty Perfectionism is senseless. But these considerations should not be read for more than they are worth. Far from requiring National Security Fundamentalism, the Constitution is best read to forbid it. 
No one doubts that the president has considerable power in the domain of national security. I have emphasized that under Article II he is explicitly authorized to be "Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United 69 See id. at 476. 70 See id. 
71 See Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 124 S. Ct. 2633, 2675-76 (2004) (Thomas, J., dissenting). See generallyLawrence Lessig & Cass R. Sunstein, The Presidentand the Administration,94 COLUM. L. REV. 1 (1994). 
72 See generally STONE, supra note 3. States. '73 He is allowed "to make Treaties," at least when two-thirds of the senators concur. 74 He is authorized to "appoint Ambassadors" and "other public Ministers and Consuls. '75 He "shall receive Ambassadors and other public Ministers.' ' 76 But none of this supports Justice Thomas's suggestion that the president has "primary responsibility-along with the necessary power-to protect the national security and to conduct the Nation's foreign relations. '77 Nor does anything in the document support the Fourth Circuit's suggestion that under Article II "the President is given the war power. 78 Nor does the Constitution support the view, at least implicit in the rulings of the D.C. Circuit, that the domain of war is the domain of largely unbounded presidential discretion. 79 On the contrary, that view is a tendentious reading of the legal materials. To see why, let us turn to Article I. 
Perhaps most notably, Congress, rather than the president, has the power "[t]o declare War. ''80 The Constitution also grants Congress, not the president, the power "[t]o raise and support Armies." ' It authorizes Congress "[t]o provide and maintain a Navy."'8 2 In a formulation that bears on the president's supposedly inherent power to torture and that much complicates any claims about the broad power of the commander in chief, the founding document permits Congress to "make Rules for the Government and Regulation of the land and naval Forces. ' 83 It is Congress that is authorized to raise funds to "provide for the Common Defence and general Welfare of the United States."84 Congress, rather than the president, is empowered to "regulate Commerce with foreign Nations."85 Congress is also authorized to "define and punish Piracies and Felonies committed on the high Seas, and Offences against the Law of Nations, ' 86 and also to "make Rules concerning Captures on Land and Water." 87 It is under Article I, not Article II, that the Constitution allows suspension of habeas corpus "when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may require it."88 The fact that the Suspension Clause can be found in Article I tends to suggest that Congress, not the president, is entitled to suspend the writ. 
74 Id. art. II, § 2, cl. 2. 75 Id. 76 Id. art. II, § 3. 77 Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 124 S. Ct. 2633, 267 78 Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 316 F.3d 450, 471 (4th Cir. 2003), rev'd, 124 S. Ct. 2633 (2004). 79 See, e.g., Ctr. for Nat'l Sec. Studies v. Dep't of Justice, 331 F.3d 918, 926-27 (D.C. Cir. 2003) (noting that "the judiciary owes some measure of deference to the executive in cases implicating national security, a uniquely executive purview"), cert. denied, 540 U.S. 1104 (2004). 
80 U.S. CoNsT. art. I, § 8, cl. 11. For treatment of some of the complexities here, with reference to the literature, see Curtis Bradley & Jack Goldsmith, CongressionalAuthorization and the War on Terrorism, 118 HARV. L. REV. (forthcoming 2005). 
81 U.S. CONsT. art. 1, § 8, cl. 12. 82 Id. art. I, § 8, cl. 13. 83 Id. art. I, § 8, cl. 14. 84 Id. art. I, § 8, cl. 1. 85 Id. art. I, § 8, cl. 3. 86 Id. art. I, § 8, cl. 10. 87 Id. art. I, § 8, cl. 11. 88 Id. art. I, § 9, cl. 2. 
In this light, the Constitution does not repose in the president anything like the general authority "to protect the national security. '89 On the contrary, the more natural reading of the document is that protection of national security is parceled out between Congress and the president-and that if either has the dominant role, it is the national lawmaker. To be sure, the Commander in Chief Clause does give the president the authority to direct the armed forces, an expansive authority;90 but even that authority is subject to legislative constraints because Congress controls the budget and because Congress can choose not to declare war. And if Congress refuses either to authorize the use of force or to declare war, the president is generally noton the best reading of the document-entitled to commence hostilities. 91 The Commander in Chief Clause allows the president to manage wars; but it does not give him "the war power." All of this means that National Security Fundamentalism cannot claim a strong constitutional pedigree. 
Of course, the constitutional text is hardly all there is to our constitutional tradition.92 In the domain of separation of powers, historical practices and changes over time are highly relevant. As Justice Frankfurter contended, "[i]t is an inadmissibly narrow conception of American constitutional law to confine it to the words of the Constitution and to disregard the gloss which life has written upon them. '93 In this context, an understanding of that "gloss" greatly favors the president. There can be no doubt that for questions of national security the president has assumed authority that the text alone might not sanction. The power to make war is a leading example; the president has long engaged in military actions without the kind of legislative authorization that Article I appears to require. 94 
Historical "glosses" on constitutional text might well be taken to argue in the direction of National Security Fundamentalism. They make it plausible to contend that the president has more authority in the domain of national security than the document alone appears to contemplate. Undoubtedly, the lower courts have been responding in part to that fact. Equally undoubtedly, the increasing power of the president is largely a product of functional considerations having to do with the rise of the United States as an international power and the growing need for energy and dispatch. But even when the document is thus glossed, it remains tendentious to contend that when the nation is at risk, the president must be in charge of the apparatus of government. To say this is to reject a constitutional accommodation that, by text and tradition as well, unambiguously retains Congress's role as the nation's lawmaker. 
If National Security Fundamentalism is to be rejected, what should be put in its place? What should courts do instead? 
I cannot answer that question in this space.95 It is surely relevant that, in a number of decisions, the Supreme Court has rejected unlimited presidential authority and insisted on the relevance of a congressional grant of power.96 For a recent illustration, let us explore the leading alternative to the approach of the D.C. Circuit and the Fourth Circuit-one that offers a very different understanding both of the constitutional foundations and the appropriate judicial role. In the relevant decision, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit endorsed a form of minimalism in Padilla v. Rumsfeld. 97 
At issue was the legality of the detention of Jose Padilla, an American citizen held as an enemy combatant after having been seized on American soil.98 The court squarely rejected the claim, urged by the executive and rooted in National Security Fundamentalism, that the "President has the inherent authority to detain those who take up arms against this country." 99 The court of appeals correctly emphasized that Articles I and II divide the war powers, rather than confer them on the executive alone. °° The court added that the grant of numerous war-related powers "to Congress is a powerful indication that, absent express congressional authorization, the President's Commander-in-Chief powers do not support" the confinement of an American citizen captured on American soil.10 1 It stressed that Ex parte Quirin,102 the government's best precedent, rested on congressional authorization rather than on inherent presidential authority. 10 3 
The key issue thus was whether such authorization could be found here. In the court's view, Congress's authorization to use "all necessary and appropriate force" to respond to the September 11 attacks' 4 should be understood in light of the Supreme Court's several efforts to ensure that both Congress and the president, rather than the president alone, authorize interferences 95 See Cass R. Sunstein, Minimalism at War, 2004 Sup. CT. REv. 47, for detailed discussion. 
96 See, e.g., Duncan v. Kahanamoku, 327 U.S. 304, 322 (1946); Ex parte Endo, 323 U.S. 283, 300-02 (1944); Hirabayashi v. United States, 320 U.S. 81, 90-93 (1943). For further discussion, see Issacharoff & Pildes, supra note 1, at 7-9. 
97 Padilla v. Rumsfeld, 352 F.3d 695 (2d Cir. 2003), rev'd on othergrounds, 124 S.Ct. 2711 (2004). 
98 See id. at 698. 99 Id. at 712. 100 See id. at 713-14. 101 Id. at 715. 102 Ex parte Quirin, 317 U.S. 1 (1942). 103 See Padilla,352 F.3d at 715-16. 
104 Authorization for Use of Military Force, Pub. L. No. 107-40, § 2(a), 115 Stat. 224, 224 (2001). with constitutionally sensitive interests. 10 5 The Supreme Court thus had emphasized that "'[i]n interpreting a war-time measure we must assume that [the purpose of Congress and the Executive] was to allow for the greatest possible accommodation between those liberties and the exigencies of war." 10 6 In Padilla the court of appeals said, correctly, that no clear and unmistakable statement could be found. 10 7 Such a statement was required, and hence the indefinite detention of Padilla was beyond the President's power.'08 
This decision is an unambiguous exercise in minimalism at war. It stands in sharp contrast with the National Security Fundamentalism that has dominated the D.C. Circuit. I am not sure that on the particular issue the Second Circuit was correct; the authorization for the use of force is not implausibly interpreted to provide a basis for what the executive did in Padilla1.0 9 
I have suggested that much of the appeal of National Security Fundamentalism lies in functional and structural considerations. Federal judges, no less than ordinary citizens, want to support the president when the nation is at risk. Moreover, it is not implausible to suggest that aspects of the constitutional structure argue in favor of National Security Fundamentalism. But I have suggested that this approach fits poorly with the founding document, all things considered. When judges adopt it, why are they doing so? At least in the recent past, I believe that two factors have, regrettably, been playing a significant role. 
The first factor has to do with the likely posture of Republican judicial appointees confronted with the efforts of a Republican president to protect the nation in the aftermath of an attack. No one can doubt that Democratic appointees and Republican appointees differ with one another on many crucial questions. 10 With respect to national security, there is reason to speculate that Republican appointees would be somewhat more likely to rule in favor of presidential authority than Democratic appointees. (Nothing I have said demonstrates that they are wrong to be inclined in this direction.) But their tendency, I suggest, is likely to be heightened when the president in question is also Republican. In other contexts, this effect has been powerfully documented; Republican-appointed judges are distinctly willing to defer to Republican presidents in the general domain of administrative law-and much less willing to defer to Democratic presidents.111 I have not done an empirical analysis of lower-court decisions when national security collides with liberty, but there is every reason to believe that the tendency I am describing would hold. 
Here is a more concrete way to put the point. It is possible to imagine the following combinations of interactions: Democratic president, Democratic-appointed judges; Democratic president, Republican-appointed judges; Republican president, Democratic-appointed judges; Republican president, Republican-appointed judges. My speculation is that when presidents are taking steps to protect security at the possible expense of liberty, the likelihood of a judicial victory is highest, and probably by far the highest, when Republican judges are assessing the decisions of a Republican president. For the other three possible combinations, federal judges are more likely to invalidate presidential actions that raise serious legal difficulties. 
I am suggesting, then, that in general Democratic-appointed judges would look more skeptically at liberty-infringing acts by the chief executive, whether Republican or Democratic, and that Republican-appointed judges would look more skeptically at intrusions on liberty by (say) President Clinton than at intrusions on liberty by (say) President George W. Bush. It is revealing in this regard that the primary illustrations of National Security Fundamentalism in the recent past have come from Republican appointees speaking approvingly of exercises of authority of President Bush. Recall that Judge Ray Randolph wrote both the majority and the concurring opinion in Al Odah; in addition, Judge Harvey Wilkinson wrote the majority opinion in Hamdi. These are mere examples, and nothing I am saying here demonstrates that these judges were wrong in their particular conclusions. I am making a simple descriptive (and predictive) point: National Security Fundamentalism will have most appeal to Republican appointees on the lower courts when the president whose acts are at issue is also Republican. 
The final point has to do with the institutional position of lower courts as compared with the institutional position of the Supreme Court of the United States. To say the least, it is uncomfortable for federal judges to invalidate a decision of the president. Invalidation of presidential acts is particularly uncomfortable when national security is at risk. Our history attests to this point. 112 If federal judges are going to reject a presidential decision in the name of liberty, they will have to demonstrate a great deal of courage. Lower courts, precisely because they are lower, are less likely to show that courage. Because of its unique place in American government and because of its national prestige, the Supreme Court is in a far better position to do so. 113 This is not to say that the Supreme Court will reliably protect liberty, l1l See, e.g., Linda R. Cohen & Matthew L. Spitzer, Solving the Chevron Puzzle, 57 LAW & CONTEMP. PROBS. 65 (1994) (Finding that justices are far more likely to defer to an agency's statutory construction when the agency is controlled by a president of the same political party as the justice). 
112 See supra text accompanying note 72. 113 See STONE, supra note 3, passim, for a catalogue of cases in which the Supreme Court even when the legal materials call for it to do so. Judges are merely judges, and when national security is at risk, an aggressive judicial role is neither likely nor desirable. It is for this reason that Liberty Perfectionism is a nonstarter. But to the extent that federal judges need a great deal of courage to protect constitutional rights when the stakes are high, the Supreme Court is more reliable than other judicial institutions, at least as a general tendency. 
The best guess, then, is that lower courts, including the D.C. Circuit, will be inclined to follow the constitutionally mischievous path of National Security Fundamentalism. I hope that I am proved wrong. has been reluctant to protect liberty amidst a public panic; see SUNSTEIN, supra note 4, at 61-72, for a suggestion that the Court has often protected liberty through minimalist rulings. 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
University of Chicago Press and University of Chicago are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Supreme Court Economic Review. http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions On thePsychologoyfPunishment Cass R. Sunstein* 
damageawards,jurydecisionssuffefrromseriousproblems. Jurorasreintuitiveretributivistisn, a waythatproducesdeparturesfromeconomictheoriesofpunishmentT.heirdecisionsarerootedin outragew,hichtheycannoteasilytranslateintodollartermsT.heresultis a degreeofunpredictability and incoherenceA.n understandinogfthispointcastslight on severalproblemswithexistinginstitutionasnd offers somecluesabouthowthoseproblemsmightbe solved. I. INTRODUCTION Judgmentasboutpunishmenatretypicallya productofoutrageabout theunderlyingacts.' Insideas well as outsideoflaw,punitiveacts are undertakenwhenpeoplehavebeen wrongedW.henlegislators penalize misconduct,theyare typicallyresponsiveto theoutrage oftheirconstituentsA. ndwhenjuriespunishunlawfulacts,either throughsentencingorthroughpunitivedamageawards,theyareoftenmotivatedbyoutrage.2 
In thisessayI defendthesepoints,anduse themtomaketwoma* KarlN. LlewellynDistinguishedServiceProfessorU,niversityofChicago,Law SchoolandDepartmenotfPoliticalScience.Thisessayis a revisedversionofa paper presentedata conferencoenTheLawandEconomicsofIrrationaBlehavioratGeorge MasonUniversityLaw Schoolon Nov. 1,2002.I am mostgratefutloparticipantisn the conferencefortheirhelpfulreactions,and to Daniel Kahnemanand David Schkade,mycoauthorsontheworkdiscussedhere. 
theContextofTortLaw,7JRisk& Uncertainty1 
2 SeeCass R.Sunsteinetal,AssessingPunitiveDamages,107YaleL J2071(1998). 171 jorclaimsabouttherelationshipbetweenoutrageandlegalpunishments.The firstis thatit is extremelydifficultto translateoutrage intothetermsthatthelegalsystemmakesrelevantB.ecauseofthe difficultoyfthistask,thelegalsystemrisksincoherencienthesense oferraticandunpredictablpeatternsP. reciselybecauseoftheunpredictabilityofparticularawards,thesepatternsshowa kindofirrationalityT.he secondclaimis thatwhenpeoplemakeone-shotjudgments,as juriestypicallydo,theyarelikelytoproducepatternsthat theythemselveswouldrepudiateT.heresultis anotherkindofincoherence-incoherencenotinthesenseofunpredictabilitbyu,tinthe senseofpatternsthatareextremelyhardtojustifyT.o thatextentthe patternsareirrational. 
Takentogethert,hesepointshelpto supporttheSupremeCourt's extraordinardyecisioninStateFarmMutualInsuranceCo. v.Campbell,3inwhichtheCourtattemptedtodisciplinepunitiveawardsby juries,inpartbysuggestintghatthepunitiveawardshouldordinarily notbe morethanninetimeshigherthanthecompensatoryaward.4 The same concernsaboutunpredictabilitaynd incoherenceclarify theargumenftora numberoflegalinstitutionsin,cludingtheUnited StatesSentencingCommissionand variousinstitutionsentrusted withproducingworkersc'ompensationawards.T5hesamepointsalso raisequestionsaboutexistingpracticein manydomains,including theawardingofpunitivedamagesbyjuries,thesystemofcivilpenaltiesbyadministrativaegencies,andcompensatoryawardsin several areas oflaw,involvingf,orexample,libel,intentionalinflictionof emotionaldistressp,ainandsufferingan, dsexualharassmentI.will urgethatan understandinogfthedynamicsofoutragecastslighton problemsandpotentialreformisn a varietyofareasoflaw. 
In makingtheseclaims,I willdrawon,andattempttogeneralize, a seriesofexperimentasltudiesofpunitivedamageawards.6The resultingwork,much of it highlytechnical,seems to me to have broaderimplicationsfora rangeofissuesinbothlaw andpolitics.If punishmentjudgmentasretypicallya functionofoutraget,heproblems foundin jurybehaviormightwell haveanalogiesin criminal sentencingandadministrativfeinesI.foutrageis difficulttotranslate intodollarsoryears,we mightbe able to understandseeminglyunjustifieddisparitiesfrombothagenciesand courts,and also to see whatmightbe doneaboutthosedisparitiesI.fpeople'soutragew,hen facedwithan individualcase,producespatternsthatpeoplecannot accept,we mightbe abletoidentifyseriousproblemswithbothcivil and criminalpunishmentI.n investigatinsgome oftheseissues,I drawthroughouotnourempiricaflindingsb,utina waythatinvolves myownextrapolationss,omeofthemadmittedlyspeculativeO.ne of myhopesis thatthewholeis largerthanthesum oftheparts.For purposesofthepresentdiscussion,I will speakbroadlyandin qualitativeterms.Readersintereste din numbersand statisticalanalysis mightconsultthepapersfromwhichI draw. 
II. RETRIBUTION PUNISHMENT 
AND OUTRAGE: STARTS 
WHERE Let us beginwiththequestionofappropriatpeunishmentO.n the economicaccount,thestate'sgoal,whenimposingpenaltiesi,s toensureoptimaldeterrence.T7o increasedeterrencet,helaw mightincreasetheseverityofpunishmento,rinsteadincreasethelikelihood ofpunishmentA. governmentthatlackssubstantiaelnforcemenrtesourcesmightimposehighpenalties,thinkingthatit will produce therightdeterrenstignalinlightofthefactthatmanypeoplewillescape punishmentaltogetherA. governmentthathas sufficienrtesourcesmightimposea lowerpenaltyb,utenforcethelawagainstall oralmostall violators. 
In thecontextofpunitivedamages,all thisleadstoa simpletheory: themajorpurposeofsuchdamagesis tomakeup fortheshortfaliln enforcementI.f8injuredpeopleare100% likelytoreceivecompensation,thereis noneedforpunitivedamages.Ifinjuredpeopleare50% likelytoreceivecompensationt,hosewhobringsuitshouldreceivea punitiveawardthatis twicetheamountofthecompensatoryaward. The simple exercisein multiplicationwill ensureoptimaldeterrence.Butdo peopleactuallywantoptimaldeterrenceD?o theyacceptorrejecttheeconomictheoryofpunishment? 
Threesimpleexperimentcsast lighton thesequestions.9In the firstp,eopleweregivencasesofwrongdoingar,guablycallingforpunitivedamages,andtheywerealso providedwithexplicitinformation about the probabilityofdetection.Differenpteople saw the same case,withonlyone differencve:aryingprobabilityofdetection(bya factorof20). Peoplewereaskedabouttheamountofpunitivedamagesthattheywouldchooseto award.The goal was to see ifpeople wouldimposehigherpunishmentwshentheprobabilityofdetection waslow. 
The basicfindingwas clear.oVaryingtheprobabilityofdetection had no effecton punitiveawards.Evenwhenpeople'sattentionwas explicitlydirectedto the probabilityof detection,peoplewereindifferentto it.In fact,therewas a modestincreasein awardswhen theprobabilityofdetectionwashigh,thoughthedifferencweasnot statisticallysignificantH. ence people'sdecisionsaboutappropriate punishmenwterelargelyunaffectebdyseeinga highorlowprobabilityofdetectionT.heevidentreasonforthisresultis thatpeoplefocus on theoutrageousnesosfthedefendant'asctions,noton thelikelihoodthattheywillbe detected."Now itis possiblethatalteringthe likelihoodofdetectioncouldincreaseordecreaseoutrageI.fa corporatedefendanwtascertaintobecaught,butnonethelessdumpedpollutantsintodrinkingwateri,tmightseemtobe brazen,incorrigible, a kindofsadist,entirelydeservingofseriouspunishmentA.ndifa corporatedefendantengagedin some act in an especiallystealthy ways,howinga realskillatevadingthelaw,peoplemightwanttopunish it especiallyseverelyo,n the groundthatstealthand skill are groundsforheightenedoutrageB.utineithercase,a highorlowlikelihoodofdetectionis operatingnotin theeconomicfashiona,s part ofa deterrenccealculus,butinsteadas a partofan inquiryintothe egregiousnesosftheacts. 
TherewassomethingindirecatboutthefirsetxperimentIt:showed peopletheprobabilityofdetectionb,utitdidnotask themto evaluatejudgmenttshattookprobabilityintoaccount.The secondexperimentfilledthatgap.'2Itaskedpeopletoevaluatejudicialandexecutivedecisionsto reducepenaltieswhentheprobabilityofdetection washigh,andtoincreasepenaltieswhentheprobabilityofdetection was low.Peoplewereaskedto saywhethertheyapprovedor disapprovedofofficiadlecisionstovarythepenaltywiththeprobabilityof detectionS.trikinglyst,rongmajoritiesofrespondentrsejectedjudicial decisionsto reducepenaltiesbecause ofhighprobabilityofdetectiona,ndalsorejectedexecutivedecisionstoincreasepenaltiesbe0oSee Sunstein2,9JLegalStud237(citedinnote6). 11WewillseefurtheervidenceofthisinPartIl below. 12 See Sunstein2,9JLegalStud237(citedinnote6). causeoflowprobabilitoyfdetectionIn.otherwordsp,eopledidnot approvoefanapproachtopunishmentthatwouldmakethelevelof punishmenvtarywiththeprobabilitoyfdetectionW. hatapparently concernetdhemwastheextentofthewrongdoinagn,dtherighdtegreeofmoraolutragreathetrhanoptimadleterrence. 
A thirdstudywasthemostdirecotfall.'1T3hisstudyaskedpeople toundertakaedeterrenccaelculusb,asedsquarelyonthecompensatoryawardandtheprobabilitoyfdetectionA.llthenecessariynformationwasplacedbeforjeurorsT. heresultwasthatpeopledidnot successfulplyerformtheelementarcyalculationEs.rrorws erepervasive.Fromthisexperimenitt,is notentirelyclearwhethepreople erredbecausetheywereunabletodowhattheywereasked,orbecausetheyrefusetdodoit,onthegroundthatitranafouloftheir moralconvictionBs.utin eithercase,itis clearthatpeopledonot spontaneoustlyhinkintermosfoptimadleterrencaen,dindeedt,hey willfailtodosoevenifspecificallryequestetdoengageinthattask. 
Themostgeneraclonclusio nis thatpeopleareintuitivreetributivistsT. heirmoralintuitionasreinconsistenwtiththeeconomic theoryofdeterrencTeh.oseintuitionasregroundeidnoutrage. 
OtherstudiessupportthesefindingFs.orexampleB, aronandRitov studiedpeople'sjudgmentasboutpenaltiesin tortcasesinvolving harmsresultinfgromtheuseofvaccinesandbirthcontroplills.'4In onecase,subjectwseretoldthattheresultofa higheprenaltywould betomakecompanietsryhardetromakesaferproductsIn.anadjacentcase,subjectwseretoldthattheconsequencoefahigheprenalty wouldbetomakethecompanymorelikelytostopmakingtheproduct,withtheresultthatlesssafeproductws ouldbeonthemarket. Mostsubjectsi,ncludinaggroupofjudgesg,avethesamepenaltieisn bothcases. 
A relatedstudyfoundnoreductioinnpenaltyevenwhensubjects weretoldthattheamountofthepenaltywouldhavenoeffecotnfuturebehavior-becaustehepenaltywassecrett,hecompanyhadinsurancea,ndthecompanywasaboutto gooutofbusiness.1T5his studystronglsyuggesttshatpunishme njutdgmentasreretributiivne charactenro,ttailoredtoconsequentialigsotals. 
Anothetrestofpunishmenjutdgmentasskedsubjectsi,ncluding bothjudgeasndlegislatortso,choosepenaltiefsordumpinhgazardous waste.1I6nonecase,thepenaltywouldmakecompaniestryharderto avoidwaste.In anothert,hepenaltywouldlead companiesto cease makinga beneficiaplroductM.ostpeopledidnotpenalizecompanies differentilnythetwocases.Perhapsmoststrikinglpye,oplepreferred to requirecompaniesto cleanup theirownwaste,evenifthewaste did not threatenanyone,insteadofspendingthe same amountto cleanupfarmoredangerouwsasteproducedbyanothern, ow-defunct companyT.hese studiesindicatethatwhenassessingpunishment, people'sjudgmentasrerootedinoutraget;heydonotfocussolelyon social consequences,atleastnotinanysimpleway. 
A relatedtestofpunitiveintuitionsattemptedtoexplorewhetherjurorswouldpunishorrewardcompaniesthatconducteda competent cost-benefiatnalysisbeforeproceeding."T7hetestaskedpeopletoassessdifferensctenariosinvolvingsafetyprecautionsI.nsomeofthem, the companydidno explicitcost-benefiatnalysis,but simplyconcludedthatthe company"thoughtthattheremightbe some risk fromthecurrentdesign,butdidnotbelieveitwouldbe significant." In otherscenarios,companiesengagedin cost-benefiatnalysis,with varyingamountsusedtovaluelife(from$800,000to$4million).The keyquestionis this:Willpeoplerewardorpunishcompaniesthat haveexplicitlyweighedcostsagainstbenefits? 
The answeris thatpeople do not reactfavorablyto thiskindof weighing.'A" companythatengagesin cost-benefbitalancingis very likelytofacea punitivaewarda,ndtheawardthatitfacesislikelytobe high.Infact,companiesthatplacea highmonetaryvalueonhuman lifearelikelytofaceespeciallyhighawardsB.ycontrastp,eopledonot muchpunishcompaniesthatarewillingtoimposea riskonpeople.'9 
Thereis a realoddityhere:Ifthecostsofprecautionosutweighthe benefitst,hencompaniesshouldnot,underordinaryunderstandings, be deemednegligenattall. Ifjurorsarepunishingcompaniesin such circumstancesi,tmustbebecauseofa kindofmoraloutragethathas littleto do witheitherefficiencoyrlaw.20Andwhyareawardsespe16JonathaBnaron,R.Gowda,andHowardKunreutheAr,ttitudestowardManaging HazardousWaste:WhatShouldbe Cleaned Up and WhoShouldPayforIt,13Risk Analysis183(1993); 
17See W.KipViscusi,CorporateRiskAnalysis:A RecklessAct?,52 StanL Rev 547(2000). 
18See id. 
19See id; see also PhilipTetlock,CopingWithTradeoffisn, ElementsofReason: CognitionC,hoice,and theBoundsofRationality239(Cambridge2,000). 
20 WhatunderliesthesejudgmentsI?cannotfullyanswerthatquestionhere.Buta carefulookraisesthepossibilitythatpeopleareoutragedbyanyexplicitdecisionto ciallyhighwhencompaniepslacea highvalueonhumanlife?The mostlikelyanswe ris thatjurorhsavea difficutltimeincomingup withdollaramounttsopunishmisconducatndthata highvalueoperatesas ananchorl,eadingtohighpunitivjeudgments.2T1hispoint directlbyearson theproblemoftranslatinmgoraljudgmentisnto monetartyermst,owhichI willshortltyurn. 
Is itirrationtalorootpunishmenjutdgmentinsoutrageT?hereis nosimpleanswerM. anydistinguishoebdserverhsavearguedinfavor ofretributicvoenceptionosfpunishmenatn,dthereis a clearconnectionbetweenretributioandoutrage.T2o2theextenthatpeople areusinga kindof"outraghe euristict,"heycannotbe showntobe makingthesortsoferrortsowhichordinarhyeuristicssometimes leadthem.2O3n theotherhand,itis possibletoworr yaboutthepotentiallyharmfuslocialconsequenceosfa systemofpunishment thatisroote dinoutrageI.sharethatworryb;uttothosewhobelieve intherationalitoyfoutrageo,rinretributigoneneralltyh,eissuecannotberesolvewdithouatcomplexnormativaergumenItf.wehaveirtrademoneyforrisks.Whentheyaregeneralizinfgroma setofmoralprincipletshat aregenerallysound,andevenusefulb,utthatworkpoorlyinsomecases.Considerthe followingmoralprincipleD: o notknowinglycausea humandeath.Peopledisapprove ofcompaniesthatfailtoimprovesafetywhentheyarefullyawarethatdeathswillresult-whereaspeopledonotdisapprovoefthosewhofailtoimprovesafetywhileappearingnotto knowf,orcertaint,hatdeathswillensue.Whenpeopleobjecttorisky actiontakenaftercost-benefaitnalysisi,tseemstobepartlybecausethatveryanalysis putsthenumberofexpecteddeathssquarely"on screen."Companiesthatfailto do suchanalysisb,utthatareawarethata riskexists,donotmakeclear,tothemselveosr tojurorst,hattheycauseddeathswithfullknowledgtehatthiswaswhattheyweregoingtodo.Peopledisapprovea,boveall,ofcompaniesthatcausedeathknowinglyIs.uggest,then,thata genuineheuristicis atwork,onethatimposesmoralcondemnation onthosewhoknowingleyngageinactsthatwillresultinhumandeaths.Theproblem is thatitis notalwaysunacceptabletocausedeathknowinglyat,leastifthedeathsare relativelyfewandan unintendedbyproducotfgenerallydesirableactivityIf.governmentallowsnewhighwaytsobebuilt,itwillknowthatpeoplewilldieonthosehighways;ifgovernmenatllowsnewpowerplantstobebuilt,itwillknowthatsomepeople will diefromtheresultingpollution;ifcompaniesproducetobaccoproductsa,ndif governmendtoesnotbanthoseproductsh,undredosfthousandsofpeoplewilldie;the sameis trueforalcohol.Muchofwhatis done,bybothindustr yandgovernmenits, likelytoresultinoneormoredeaths.Ofcourse,itwouldmakesenseinmostorall of thesedomains,totakeextrastepstoreducerisks.Butthatpropositiondoesnotsupporttheimplausibleclaimthatweshoulddisapprovef,romthemoralpointofview,of anyactiontakenwhendeathsareforeseeable. 
21 See Cass R. SunsteinH,azardousHeuristicsU, Chi L Rev(forthcomin2g002). 22 SeeDavidOwen,TheMoralFoundationsofPunitiveDamages,40AlaL Rev705 (1989);MarcGalanterandDavidLuban,PoeticJustice4,2 AmU L Rev 1393(1993); JeanHamptonT,heRetributivIedea,inJeanHamptonandJeffrMieurphyF,orgiveness and Mercy111(Cambridge1988). 
3The keypaperscanbe foundinDaniel KahnemanP,aulSlovic,andAmosTversky,eds,JudgmenUtnderUncertaintyH:euristicsandBiases(Cambridge1982). rationalityhere,itis notirrationalitiynanysimplesense.Butforthe legalsystemt,heuse ofoutragedoeslead toseriousproblemsa,s we shallnowsee. 
III. 
THE TRANSLATION 
PROBLEM Punitivejudgmentsarerootedin outrageb;utdo peopleagreeabout theappropriatleevelofoutrage?ImaginethatdiverseAmericansare confrontewditha caseofclearwrongdoingS.houldweexpecta sharp divergencieftheyareaskedtoanswero,na boundednumericalscale, "how bad was theunderlyingconduct?"I now offerevidencesuggestingthatpeople'soutrageis widelysharedb,utthattheconsensus breaksdownwhenpeopleareaskedto translatetheiroutrageinto dollars.The SupremeCourt'sevidentconcernaboutarbitrarpyunitiveawards24has a soundbasis in thepsychologyofpunishmenta,s we shallnowsee. 
A seriesofstudiesofcitizenjudgmentdsemonstratetshatatleastin some domains,peopleagreeaboutthedegreeofoutragethatappropriatelyfitssocial misconduct.2A5t least ifpeople use a bounded scale (of,say,0 to6 or0 to 8) withaccompanyinvgerbaldescriptions ("notat all outrageous"for0 and"extremelyoutrageous"for6 or8), a highdegreeofsocial agreementis likely.In personalinjurycases, thejudgmentofanyparticulargroupofsixis likelytoprovidea good predictionofthejudgmentofanyothergroupofsix.In thissense,a "moraljudgment"juryis indeedable to serveas theconscienceof thecommunity. 
Inonestudyp,eoplewereaskedtoassesstheoutrageousnesosfthe defendant'csonducton a boundedscale,and separatelyto sayhow muchthedefendansthouldbe punishedon thatscale. Twostriking factsemergedT. hefirswtasanextraordinardyegreeofcorrelationbetweenjudgmentosfoutrageousnesasndjudgmentasboutappropriate punishment-a findingthatconfirmsthesuggestionin PartI that punishmenjtudgmentasrerootedinoutrage.2T6hesecondwasa high degreeofregularitiynbothsetsofjudgmentss,o thatpeopletendto rankandtoratediversecasesin essentiallythesameway.Atleastin a set ofhighlyvaryingpersonalinjurycases, people'spunishment judgmentsdo not significantldyivergea,nd theassessmentofone juryis a goodpredictoorftheassessmentofanother. 
Cass R. Sunstein 179 
IndeedwecangofurtheMr.embersofdifferendtemographigcroups showconsiderablaegreemenatbouthowtorankandratepersonalinjuriescases.27Thousandsofpeoplewereaskedtorankandratecases. Informatiownaselicitedaboutthedemographiccharacteristicosfall ofthosepeople.As a result,itis possible,withthehelpofthecomputert,oputindividualtsogethers,oas toassembleall-malejuries,allfemalejuries,all-whitejuries,all-African-Americjaunries,all-poor juries,all-richjuries,all-educatedjuries,all less-educatedjuries,and so forthC.reating"statisticaljuries"in thisway,therewereno substantiadlisagreementisn,termsofratingorrankingw, ithinanygroup. Inpersonalinjurycases,peoplelargelyagreewithoneanother. 
Subsequentworkhasbroadenedthisfindings,howingthatpeople agreeon how to ranktaxviolations,environmentavliolations,and occupationalsafetyand healthviolations.2F8romthisevidence,it seems reasonableto hypothesizethatin a wide rangeofdomains, peoplewillagreehowtorankandratecases.Themoralnormswithin a heterogeneoucsultureare,tothatextentw,idelyshared,andstrikinglyso. Now thisdoes notmeanthatpeoplewill agreeon how to rankcases fromdifferenctategories(a pointtowhichI will return). Nordoesitmeanthatsmallgroupswillalwaysagreeonhowtodothe rankingN.or doesitmeanthatdemographicalldyiversegroupswill agreeabouthowto ratecases in contentiousareasofthelaw-considersexualharassmentorracialdiscriminationB.utthefindingdso suggestthatwithincategoryd,isagreemenatboutbothoutrageand punishmentis theexceptionn,ottherule. 
B. ErraticDollarAwards Thereis a consensusabouttheappropriatleevelofoutrageB.uteven whenthatconsensusexists,thereis no consensusaboutappropriate punishmentin termsofdollars.As we shall see,thereasonforthe lackofconsensuslaysinparticularpropertieosfthedollarscale.The scaleofyearsinjail,usedforcriminaplunishments,ufferfsromsimilarproblems. 
Withrespectto dollars,bothindividualsand jury-sizegroupsare all overthemap.9 Evenwhenmoralrankingsare shared-as they generallyare-dollar awardsare extremelyvariable.A groupthat awardsa "5,"fordefendantm's isconductm,ightgivea dollarawardof $500,000,or $2 million,or$10 million.A groupthatawardsa "7" mightaward$1 million,or$10million,or$100million.Infact,there 27Id. 
28 SeeCass R.Sunsteinetal.,LegalCoherenceandIncoherenc(eunpublishemdanuscript2,001). 
29 See Sunstein1,07YaleL Jat2071(citedinnote2);Schkade,100ColumL Revat 1139(citedinnote6). is so muchnoise,inthedollarawardst,hatdifferencecsannotbeconnectedwithdemographiccharacteristicIst. is notas ifone groupwhitesforexample-givepredictabldyifferenawtardsfromanothersayAfrican-AmericaonrsHispanics.Wecannotshowsystematidcifferencesbetweenyoungand old, men and women,well-educated and less well-educatedT.he realproblemis thatdollarawardsare quiteunrulyf,romoneindividuatloanotherandfromonesmallgroup toanother. 
These findingsraise an obvious question:why are erraticdollar awardsfoundamidstsharedmoraljudgments?The bestanswerinvolvestheproblemoftranslatinogutrageintodollars.Moreparticularly,theansweris thattheefforto "map" moraljudgmentsonto dollarsis anexercisein"scalingwithouta modulus."3I0npsychology, itis wellknownthatseriousproblemswillemergewhenpeopleare askedtoengageina ratingexerciseon a scale thatis boundedat the bottombutnotatthetop,andwhentheyarenotgivena "modulus" bywhichto make sense ofvariouspointsalongthe scale. Forexample,whenpeopleareaskedtoratethebrightnesosflights,orthe loudnessofnoises,theywillnotbeabletoagreeifnomodulusis suppliedand ifthescale lacks an upperbound.Butonce a modulusis supplied,agreemenits substantiallyimprovedO. rifthescaleis given an upperbound,and ifverbaldescriptionasccompanysome ofthe relevantpoints,peoplewillcomeintoaccordwithoneanother. 
The upshotis thatmuchoftheobservedvariabilitywithpunitive damageawards-andinalllikelihoodwithotherdamageawardstoodoes not come fromdifferenceisn levelsofoutrage.It comesfrom variablea,ndinevitablysomewhatarbitrar"ym,oduli"selectedbyindividualjurorsand judges.Ifthelegal systemwantsto reducethe problemofdifferenttreatmenotfthesimilarlysituated,itwoulddo welltobeginbyappreciatintghisaspectoftheproblemT.hepointappliestomanylegalproblemsi,ncludingcriminalsentencesp,ainand sufferinagwardsa,dministrativpeenaltiesa,nddamagesforlibel,sexual harassmenta,nd intentionailnflictionofemotionaldistressI.n theseareasas well,thoseentrustedwiththetaskof"mapping"lack a moduluswithwhichto disciplinetheirdecisions.An empirical studyofpainand sufferinagwardsfindsthatno less thanfortypercentofthevariancecannotbe explainedbydifferenceins case characteristics.31A legal system that does not give guidance for"map 
Cass R. Sunstein 181 ping"is boundto createsimilarproblemsin otherareas.Indeed,the riseofguidelinesforcriminalsentencingcan be understoodas responsive,atleastinpart,toexactlythisproblem. 
D. The EffectosfDeliberation The studyjustdescribedinvolvedindividualjudgmentsa,ggregated, withtheaidofthecomputers,o as toproducestatisticajlurorsA. subsequentstudytestedtheeffectosfdeliberationon bothpunitiveintentionsanddollarjudgments.3T2he studyinvolvedabout3000juryeligiblecitizens;itsmajorpurposewastodeterminheowindividuals wouldbe influencedbyseeinganddiscussingthepunitiveintentions ofothers.To testtheeffectosfdeliberationon punitiveintentions, peoplewereaskedtorecordtheirindividuajludgmentpsrivatelyo,na boundedscale,andthentojoinsix-membegrroupstogenerateunanimous"punishmenvterdicts.H"ence,subjectswereaskedtorecord, in advanceofdeliberationa, "punishmentjudgment"on a scale of0 to 8,where0 indicatedthatthedefendansthouldnotbe punishedat all,and8 indicatedthatthedefendansthouldbe punishedextremely severelyA.ftertheindividualjudgmentswererecordedj,urorswere askedtodeliberatetoa unanimous"punishmenvterdict." 
TwofindingasreespeciallyimportantF.irstd,eliberationmadethe lowerpunishmenrtatingsdecrease,whencomparedtothemedianof pre-deliberatiojnudgmentosfindividuals-whiledeliberationmade thehigherpunishmentrsatingisncreasew,hencomparedtothatsame median.Whentheindividualjurorsfavoredlittlepunishmentt,he groupshoweda "leniencyshift,m"eaninga ratingthatwas systematicallylowerthanthemedianpredeliberationratingofindividual members.3B3utwhenindividuajlurorsfavoresdtrongpunishmentt,he groupas a wholeproduceda "severityshift,m"eaninga ratingthatwas systematicallhyigherthanthemedianpredeliberatiornatingofindividualmembers.3W4henthemedianjurorjudgmentwas less than fourt,hejury'vserdicwtasbelowthemedianjudgmenotfindividuals.35 
The secondimportanftindingis thatdollarawardsofgroupswere systematicallyhigherthan the medianof individualgroupmembers-so muchso thatin 27% ofthecases,thedollarverdictwas as highas,orhigherthan,thatofthehighestindividualjudgmentp,redeliberationT.hebasicresultis thatdeliberationcausesawardstoincrease,anditcauseshighawardstoincreasea greatdeal.Theeffecotf deliberationi,nincreasingdollarawardsw,asmostpronouncedinthe 32 Schkade,100ColumL Rev1139(citedinnote6). 33 Id.at 1152,1154-55. 34Id. 35 Id. case ofhighawardsF.orexample,themedianindividuajludgmenti,n a caseinvolvinga defectivyeachtw,as$450,000,whereasthemedian juryjudgment,in that same case, was $1,000,000.36 But awards shiftedupwardsforlowawardsas well.37 
Thesefindingcsreatemanypuzzles.Forpresentpurposest,hekey pointis thatthetranslationproblemisnotcuredbydeliberatinbgodies. On thecontraryth,eproblemofunpredictabilitisyincreasedn,ot decreased,bytheexistenceofdeliberationI.fwe areseekingan explanationforthemovementsthatareobservedt,hebestanswerlies a surpriseA.nunderstandinogfgrouppolarizationmightsuggestthat lowawardswoulddropandhighawardswouldbe raised,withthedifferencepivotingaroundsome neutralpoint,say,$60,000.But this is notwhatwas observedW.hydiddollarawardssystematicallyincrease?A possibleexplanationc,onsistentwithgrouppolarizationi,s thatanypositivemedianawardsuggestsa predeliberatiotnendency to punish,and deliberationaggravatetshattendencybyincreasing awardsB.utevenifcorrectt,hisexplanationseemsinsufficientslypecific.The strikingfactis thatthosearguingforhigherawardsseem to havean automatic"rhetoricaaldvantage"overthosearguingfor lowerawardsA. subsequentstudyofsupportedthisfindings,uggestingthatgivenprevailingsocial norms,peoplefinditmucheasierto defendhigherawardsagainstcorporatedefendanttshanthe opposite.40Ifthisis so, thenprocessesofdeliberationwill naturallylead in thephenomenonofgrouppolarization.38Thisis thepervasiveprocess bywhichgroupmembersendup in a moreextremepositionin linewiththepredeliberatiotnendenciesofgroupmembersI.tis predicted,accordingto grouppolarization,thathighlevelsofoutrage willbe increasedbydeliberationa,ndthatlow levelsofoutragewill be decreasedbydeliberationN.or do such movementspresentany realpuzzlesforrationalityA.centralreasonforgrouppolarizationinvolvestheexchangeofinformatiownithinthegroup.Ina groupthat favorsa highpunishmenrtatingg, roupmemberswillmakemanyargumentsin thatdirectiona,ndrelativelyfewtheotherway.Speaking purelydescriptivelyth, egroup's"argumentpool" will be skewedin thedirectionofseverityG.roupmembersl,isteningtothevariousargumentsw,illnaturallymovein thatdirection. 
Inthecontextofactualdollarawardsbyjuries,a particularfinding deservesemphasis.39As I havenoted,thehighestawardsincreasedby thelargestamount,butall awardsincreasedT.hismightappeartobe 36Id.at 1152. 37Id. 38SeeRogerBrownS,ocialPsychologyT:heSecondEdition(Simon& Schuster1990). 39 SeeSchkade,100ColumL Rev1139at 1149-1151(citedinnote6). 40Idat 1161-62. 
CassR. Sunstein 183 to juryawardsthataresystematicallyhigherthantheawardofthe medianindividualmemberinadvanceofdeliberation. 
My majorgoalhere,howeveri,s notto investigattehesourcesof movementisnawardsb,uttosuggestthatgroupdeliberationdoesnot solvethetranslationproblem.Deliberatingjuries,no less thanstatisticaljuries,show a highdegreeofconsensusabout appropriate punishment(andhenceoutrage)D.eliberatin gjuries,evenmorethan statisticajluries,showa highdegreeofvariabilityin termsofappropriatedollarawards. 
PUNISHMENT, 
AND CONTEXT I nowturnto thelargestpuzzles ofall. Thus far,ithas seemedas if people'smoraljudgmentsarequitestable.Butthatpropositionwas establishedonlybylookingata setofpersonalinjurycases.Herethe relevantlevelofoutrageisbothpredictablaendcoherenti,nthesense thatpeople'sjudgmentsarenotmuchaffectedbywhethertheyare seeingcases in isolationor simultaneouslyand in the contextof othercasesfromthesamecategoryB.utis thiscoherencemaintained whenpeoplelookatcasesfromdifferenctategories?Suppose,forexample,thatpeopleareevaluatingpersonalinjurycases andcases involvingcommerciaflrauda,ndthatsimilarpeopleareevaluatingpersonal injurycases and cases involvingrapeand murderW.ouldthe judgmentasboutpersonalinjurycasesremainstableacrossthesevarious contexts?Are judgmentsaboutcases differendt,ependingon whetherthosecases areseen in isolationor in thecontextofcases fromothercategories? 
Wedonothavefullanswerstothesequestions;butsuggestiveevidencehas startedtoemerge.4I1tappearsthatpeopleagreeonhowto rankcaseswithincategoriesandthattheirjudgmentasboutparticularcasesarenotaffectebdyseeingtheminisolationoralongsideother caseswithinthesamecategories.4It2also appearsthatpeoplehavea kindofimplicitrankingofcategoriesthemselves;theythinkthat murderis worsethanrape,thatrapeis worsethanassault,andthat assaultis worsethanlibel.Butwhenpeoplearetryingtorankcases fromdifferenctategoriest,heyhavefarmoredifficultiyn,thesense thattheyareunsureexactlywhattodo.Theyarenotcertainf,orexample,whethera relativelybadincometaxviolationis worsethana relativelynot-so-badoccupationalsafetyandhealthviolation.4T3his lack ofcertaintytranslatesinto a lack ofconsensus.People agree 41 See Sunstein5,4 StanL Rev1153(citedinnote6). 42 See Sunstein,107YaleL Jat2071(citedinnote2). 43 See SunsteinL,egalCoherenceandIncoherenc(ecitedinnote25). muchmoreonhowtorankcaseswithina categorythanhowtorank cases acrosscategoriesN.ote thatI am puttingasidetheevidentdifficultiesin decidingwhatcountsas a "category.I"tis easyto design experimentisn whichpeople will simplydisagreeaboutwhether, forexample,a comparativelyserioustaxviolationis worse,orless bad,thana lawlessact thatharmstheenvironmentH.ence,thesocial normsthatgoverncross-categorcyomparisonsarenotas widely sharedas thesocialnormsthatgovernwithin-categorcyomparisons. It followsthatjudgmentsaboutoutragea,ndaboutappropriatpeunishment,aremorevariableacrosscategoriesthanwithincategories. 
Perhapsthisisnotbignews.A morestrikinfgindinigsthatpeople's judgmentsaboutcases,takenone at a time,areverydifferenftrom theirjudgmentasboutthesamecases,takeninthecontextofa problemfromanothercategory.F4o4rexample,peoplewereaskedtoassess a caseinvolvingapersonalinjuryo,na boundedpunishmenstcaleand also on a dollarscale.Peoplewerealso askedtoassessa case involvingfinancialinjuryo,n a boundedpunishmentscale and also on a dollarscale. The financialinjuryinvolvedrelativelyegregiousmisconduct,suchas a violationoftrustbya trusteef,orthebenefitofa favoredclient;the personalinjurieswererelativelyless egregious, suchas aninjurycausedtoa drivewrhena steeringsystemfailed.The basicgoalwas to ask peopleto assess,in isolationbutthenin comparison,a financialinjurycase thatwouldseem outrageousforits type,anda personalinjurycase thatwouldseemless outrageousfor itstype. 
Hereis whatemerged.4W5 heneach ofthetwocases is judgedin isolation,thefinanciailnjurycasereceivesa moreseverepunishment ratinganda higherdollaraward.Butwhenthetwocasesareseentogethert,hereis a significanjtudgmentshifti,nwhichpeopletrytoensurethatthefinancialawardis notmuchhighera,nd formanyrespondentsislowert,hanthepersonalinjuryawardT.heupshotis that people'sdecisionsaboutthetwocases areverydifferendt,epending onwhethertheyseethecasealoneorinthecontextofa casefromanothercategory.46 
Exactlythesame kindofshiftwas observedforjudgmentsabout twoproblemscallingforgovernmenrtegulationandexpenditurers:esearchon bonemarrowcanceramongtheelderlyandprotectionof coralreefsbybanningofcyanidefishing.4L7ookingat thetwocases in isolation,peoplearewillingtopayaboutthesametoprotectcoral reefsa,ndregistermoresatisfactiono,n a boundedscale,fromdoing "44See Sunstein5,4 StanL Revat 1173-1178(citedinnote6). 46Id. 47Idat 1176-1177. 
Cass R.Sunstein 185 thatB.utlookingatthetwocasestogethepre,oplewillbequitedisturbedatthispatterna,ndwillwanttopaysignificantmlyoretoprotectelderlypeoplefromcancerandwillalsoregistemr oresatisfactionfromdoingthatH.eretootheriesa significanshtifitnjudgment. 
Inthesefindingtsh,etranslatiopnroblemisnotthesourceofthe difficultPye.ople'sevaluationsshiftdependinognwhethetrheysee casesin isolationorin thecontextofcasesfromothercategories. WhataccountsfortheseshiftsL?etmeoffearpreliminarayccount. Whenpeopleseea caseinisolationt,heynaturallnyormalizietby comparinigttoa setofcomparisocnasesthatitreadilycallsup.If peopleareaskedwhethearGermanShepheridsbigorsmall,theyare likelytorespondthatitisbig;iftheyareaskedwhethearVolkswagenBugisbigorsmall,theyarelikelytorespontdhatitissmall.But peoplearewellawarethata GermanShepheridssmallerthataVolkswagenbug.Peopleansweras theydobecausea GermanShepherids comparedwithdogs,whereasa VolkswageBnugis comparedwith cars.So fars,ogood;inthesecases,everyonkenowswhateveryone elsemeansW.eeasilynormalizjeudgmentasboutsize,andthenormalizationismutuallyunderstooAd.notheerxampleisJohnStockton,whois aboutsixfeettall,andhencea smallbasketbalpllayer. Whathappensi,nordinarcyommunicatioinsi,nnocuousIt.doesnot breederroorrconfusion. 
Inthecontexotflegallyrelevanmt orajludgmentsso,methinsgimilarhappensb,utitisfarfrominnocuousW.henevaluatinagcaseinvolvingfinanciainljuryp,eopleapparentlnyormaliztehedefendant's conducbtycomparinigtwithconducitnothercasesfromthesame categoryT.heydonoteasilyornaturallycomparethatdefendant's conductwithconductfromothercategorieBs.ecauseofthenatural comparisosnet,peoplearelikelytobequiteoutragebdythemisconducti,fitisfarworsethanwhatspringnsaturalltyomindT.hesame kindofthinghappenwsiththeproblemofbonemarrowcanceramong theelderlyP.eoplecomparethatproblemwithothersimilarproblems,andconcludethatitis notso seriousw,ithinthecategoroyf health-relatoerdcancer-relatperdoblemTs.hesameistruewithpersonalinjurycases(normalizeadgainstotherpersonailnjurycases) andproblemisnvolvindgamageto coralreefs(normalizeadgainst othercasesofecologicahl arm). 
Whena casefromanothecrategoriysintroducetdh,isnaturaplrocessofcomparisoinsdisrupteRd.athetrhancomparinagcancercase involvintgheelderlywithothercancerso,rotherhumanhealthrisks, peopleseethatitmustbecomparewdithecologicaplroblemws,hich (inmostpeople'sview)havea lesserclaimtopublicresourcesR.ather thancomparinga financiailnjurycasetoothercasesofbusinessmisconduct,peoplenowcompareittoa personalinjurycase,which(in mostpeople'sview)involvesmoreseriouswrongdoingA.s a resultof thewiderviewscreenj,udgmentshifto,ftendramaticallyIt. follows thatifpeople'sinformedjudgmentsare takento be the criterion, punitivedamageawardsarelikelyto be toohighin financialinjury cases and too low in personalinjurycases. Some datasupportsthis suggestion.4S8imilarshiftscouldbe producedwithmanyotherpairs ofcategoriesF.orexample,punitivedamagesawardsinvolvinglibel mightwell be higheri,n isolation,thanpunitivedamageawardsinvolvingracialdiscriminationb;utthereis likelytobe a reversailfthe twocasesareputtogether. 
Itis reasonabletohypothesiztehatthecomparativseituationmay alterjudgmentisn anotherway,byreducingtheanchoringeffectosf compensatorydamagesonpunitiveawardsI.ntherealworldofpunitivedamages,unlikeourexperimentc,ompensatoryawardsaregenerallymuchlargerinfinanciaclasesthanincasesofphysicalinjury.49 As a consequence,a case offinancialdamagewitha largecompensatoryanchor(say$10,000,000i)s expectedtoreceivea higherpunitive damageawardthana case ofphysicalinjurywitha smalleranchor (say$500,000),whenthetwoarejudgedin isolation.Whencases of the two kindsare directlycompared,manypeople will be more stronglyinfluencedbytherelativeprominenceoftheharmsthanby therelativesize oftheanchors.Preliminaryevidencess5u0pportsthis hypothesisw, hichsuggeststhattwodistinctmechanismsmaycause punitiveawardsforfinancialcasestobe higherinthecurrentsystem thantheywouldbeifjurorsweregivena richercontexta:nchoringon highdollarnumbersa,ndmaskingofthelowprominenceofthecategorythroughtheeffecotfnormalization. 
I believethatthisuncoversa seriousproblemwithcurrenptractice in manydomainsoflaw.The problemis thatwhenpeople assess cases in isolation,theirviewscreenis usuallynarrowi,ndeedoften limitedtothecategorytowhichthecasebelongs,andthatas a result, peopleproducea patternofoutcomesthatmakesno sensebytheir own lights.In otherwords,theoverallset ofoutcomesis one that peoplewouldnotendorsei,ftheywereonlytosee itas a whole.Their consideredjudgmentrsejecttheverypatternthattheyhaveproduced, becauseofa predictablefeatureofhumancognitionT.he resultis a formofincoherence. 
Wecan findthatincoherencenotonlyin juryverdictsb,utalso in administrativfeinesand in criminalsentencingw,hereno serious efforhtasbeenmadetoensurethattheoveralplatternofoutcomes makestheslightesstense.5I'ndeedthereisreasontobelievethatthe patternin,manydomainsi,s quitesenselessA.nditmaynotbetoo muchofa stretcthosuggestthatthesameistrueofreactionss,ome ofthetime,bybothindividualasndinstitutions-thapteopleare quiteoutrageadboutbehaviotrhati,na broadeorrdifferecnotmparisonset,wouldoutragtehemlittleornotatall. 
WhatshouldbedonebywayoflegalreformI?cannotanswerthat questionhere.Ifoutrageis theappropriatbeasisforpunishment, thenstepsshouldbe takento ensurethatoutragereflectaswide viewscreernathetrhana narrowone,soas toreducetheriskthatthe legalsystemwillproducepunishmenptatterntshatpeoplereject. PerhapstheUnitedStatesSentencinCgommissioncanbe understoodpartl yinthislighta;ndperhapasn emphasiosnincoherence suggestdsirectioninswhichtheCommissiomnighgtointhefuture. Todate,theCommissiohnasmadelittleefforttoensurethatpenaltiescohereacrosscategories. 
Inthecontexotfpunitivdeamagest,heclaimsI havemadesuggest thatjudgesmighttakea strongerroleinoverseeinjguryawardsi,n parttoensurethatthoseawardcsoherewithwhathasbeendonein otherareasofthelaw.Thenaturailmplicatioins thatjudgesshould decreaseunjustifiabhlyighawardsandincreaseunjustifiablloyw ones;andindeedtheSupremCeourt'usnexpectedalymbitioursuling intheStateFarmcaseisa clearstepinthedirectioonfimposindgisciplineonjuryawards.5I2tmighbtetemptintgorejectthissuggestion byemphasizintghepopulisctredentiaolsfthejuryandbyfearinjgudicialusurpatioonfthejury'fsunctionBs.utthetranslatiopnroblem, andtheriskofincoherencferomone-shojtudgmentds,emonstrates thatthisconcer nismisplacedb,ecausethedecisionosfanyparticularjurydonotproducceommunitsyentimenatboutwhatpatternosf punishmenmtakesense. 
Outsideofthedomainofpunitivaewardsi,twouldmakesenseto trytosystematiczeivilfineisngenerasl,oastoensurtehatthepenaltiesimposedbyf,orexamplet,heEnvironmentParlotectioAngency fitwellwiththepenaltieismposedbysaytheInternaRl evenueService,theFishandWildlifSeervicea,ndtheOccupationaSlafetyand HealthAdministratioTnh.ediscussionthusfarsuggesttshatanyeffortatsystematizatiwonouldpresenat dauntintgask.Butincoherentjudgmentasreextremellyikelyin theadministratiavreenaas well,andatleastitwouldbeworthwhitleoattempttocorrectthe mostegregiouasnomalies. 
51 SeeSunstein5,4StanL Revat 1189-1196(citedinnote6). 52 StateFarmMutInsCo v.Campbell,123S. Ct. 1513(2002). V. CONCLUSION In thispaperI haveurgedthatpunishmentjudgmentsarerootedin outrageandthatpeopledonotnaturallythinkintermsofoptimaldeterrenceW.ithrespectto punishmentp, eopleareintuitiveretributivists.I havealso suggestedthatpunishmentjudgmentsarerooted in outragew,hichis,in an importanrtespects,tableacrossindividuals orat leastsmallgroups.Butforpurposesofoperatinga legalsystem,punishmentsthatarebased on outragepresenttwokeyproblems.The firstis thatthelegalsystemdoesnotattemptto measure outragedirectlyb,utinsteadrequirespeopleto translatetheirmoral opprobriumintotheunboundedscale ofdollars.This act oftranslationproducesunpredictablaend arbitraraywards.The secondproblemis thatoutrageis category-specifPice.ople'slevelofoutrageis a functionofcomparisoncases.Whentheyconfronatcaseinisolation, theyevaluateitbycomparin gitnottothefulluniverseofcases,but toa naturalsetofsimilarcases.Whencasesfromothercategoriesare introducedt,heiroutrageis shiftedT.he resultis thatwhenmaking decisionsinisolation,peopleproducepatternosfoutcomesthatthey themselvesrepudiateoncethosedecisionsareseentogether. 
Thesefindingrsaisea numberofproblemsE.conomicallyoriented observersrejecttheidea thatpunishmentshouldbe rootedin outrage,whichcouldeasilyresultintoomuchandtoolittledeterrence. Forthosewhobelievethatpunishmentsshouldnotbe an outgrowth ofoutragei,tis wrongtobase civilandcriminalpunishmentosn ordinaryintuitionsI.nadditiont,hetranslationproblemensuresa high itsown,aboveall becauseitsuggeststhatone-shotjudgmentbsyjurieswill not reflectthe levelsofoutragethatwould come froma widerviewscreen. numberofclues about how those problemsmightbe solved. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross-Cultural Risk Perceptions" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 220, 2004). 
Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross-Cultural Risk Perceptions 
Cass R. Sunstein 
August 2004 Preliminary draft 8/09/04 All rights reserved 
Because risks are all on sides of social situations, it is not possible to be globally "precautionary." Hence the Precautionary Principle runs into serious conceptual difficulties; any precautions will themselves create hazards of one or another kind. When the principle gives guidance, it is often because of the availability heuristic, which can make some risks stand out as particularly salient, whatever their actual magnitude. The same heuristic helps to explain differences across groups, cultures, and even nations in the perception of risks, especially when linked with such social processes as cascades and group polarization. One difficulty here is that what is available is sometimes a result of predispositions, cultural and otherwise. There are complex links among availability, social processes for the spreading of information, and predispositions. 
“Many Germans believe that drinking water after eating cherries is deadly; they also believe that putting ice in soft drinks is unhealthy. The English, however, rather enjoy a cold drink of water after some cherries; and Americans love icy refreshments.”1 
“The most important factor contributing to the increased stringency of health, safety and environmental regulation in Europe has been a series of regulatory failures and crises that placed new regulatory issues on the political agenda and pressured policy makers to adopt more risk averse or precautionary policies. . . . The regulatory failure associated with BSE significantly affected the attitude of the European public toward GM foods. . . . Consumer and environmental regulations are likely to become more innovative, comprehensive and risk averse as a response to a widespread public perception of regulatory failures.”2 
It has become standard to say that with respect to risks, Europe and the United States can be distinguished along a single axis: Europe accepts the Precautionary * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. 1 See Joseph Henrich et al., Group Report: What is the Role of Culture in Bounded Rationality?, in Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox 353-54, Gerd Gigerenzer & Reinhard Selten, eds. (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001), for an entertaining outline in connection with food choice decisions. 2 David Vogel, The Hare and the Tortoise Revisited: The New Politics of Consumer and Environmental regulation in Europe, 33 B. J. Pol. S. 557, 568-69, 580 (2003). 
Principle, and the United States does not.3 On this view, Europeans attempt to build a “margin of safety” into public decisions, taking care to protect citizens against risks that cannot be established with certainty. By contrast, Americans are reluctant to take precautions, requiring clear evidence of harm in order to justify regulation. These claims seem plausible in light of the fact that the United States appears comparatively unconcerned about the risks associated with global warming and genetic modification of food; in those contexts, Europeans favor precautions, whereas Americans seem to require something akin of proof of danger. To be sure, the matter is quite different in the context of threats to national security. For the war in Iraq, the United States (and England) followed a kind of Precautionary Principle, whereas other nations (most notably France and Germany) wanted clearer proof of danger. But for most threats to safety and health, many people believe that Europe is precautionary and the United States is not. 
But as others have demonstrated,4 this opposition between Europe and America is false, even illusory. It is simply wrong to say that Europeans are more precautionary than Americans. As an empirical matter, neither is “more precautionary.” Europeans are not more averse to risks than Americans. They are more averse to particular risks,5 such as the risks associated with global warming; but Americans have their own preoccupations as well. My larger point, a central claim of this chapter, is conceptual. No nation can, even in principle, commit itself to precaution as such.6 The real problem with the Precautionary Principle, at least in its strongest forms, is that it is incoherent; it purports to give guidance, but it fails to do so, because it condemns the very steps that it requires. Was the war in Iraq precautionary? Is it precautionary to ban cellular telephones, nuclear power plants, genetically modified food, and airplanes? These questions should be enough to suggest that precautions always give rise to risks of their own—and that the 3 On some of the complexities here, see John S. Applegate, The Precautionary Preference: An American Perspective on the Precautionary Principle, 6 Hum. & Ecol. Risk Assess. 413 (2000); Peter H. Sand, The Precautionary Principle: A European Perspective, 6 Hum. & Ecol. Risk Assess. 445 (2000). 4 See the illuminating discussions in Jonathan B. Wiener, Precaution, Risk, and Multiplicity (unpublished manuscript 2004); Jonathan B. Wiener & Michael D. Rogers, Comparing Precaution in the United States and Europe, 5 J Risk Research 317 (2002). 5 See Vogel, supra note, for many examples in the context of health, safety, and the environment. 6 I draw here from Cass R. Sunstein, Laws of Fear: Beyond the Precautionary Principle (Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 2005) and Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle, 151 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1003 (2003). operation of the Precautionary Principle is inextricably intertwined with social risk perceptions. 
Nations can regard themselves as “precautionary” only if they blind ourselves to many aspects of risk-related situations and focus on a narrow subset of what is at stake. That kind of self-blinding is what makes the Precautionary Principle seem to give guidance; and I shall have a fair bit to say about why people and societies are selective in their fears. My major hypothesis is that the availability heuristic is often the source of people’s fears about certain risks.7 If a particular incident is cognitively “available”— both vivid and salient—then people will have a heightened fear of the risk in question. If people in one nation fear the risks associated with terrorism, and people in another nation fear the risks associated with mad cow disease, the availability heuristic is likely to be the reason. Hence cultural differences, with respect to application of the precautionary principle, are often rooted in availability. But this point misses some complexities, about both social influences and cultural predispositions; I shall turn to these in due course. The availability heuristic does not operate in a social or cultural vacuum. 
In short, I aim here both to show that the Precautionary Principle is not quite what it seems and that its operation is underwritten by an identifiable heuristic with social and cultural foundations. The result is a hypothesis, to the effect that cross-cultural differences in both risk perception and in precautions are produced, in large part, by availability. I shall not be able to prove that hypothesis in this space, but I hope to be able to say enough to prove that the hypothesis is plausible, illuminating, and worth further exploration. 
Begin with the Precautionary Principle.8 There are twenty or more definitions, and they are not compatible with one another.9 We can imagine a continuum of 7 Undoubtedly a great deal can be learned from use of the psychometric paradigm, stressed in Bernd Rorhmann and Ortwin Renn, Risk Perception Research: An Introduction, in Cross-Cultural Risk Perception: A Survey of Empirical Studies 11, 17-18 (Ortwin Renn and Bernd Rorhmann eds. 2000). I stress the availability heuristic here because of its comparative simplicity, but the heuristic interacts in complex ways with psychometrics and with culture; I try at least to scratch some of the surfaces here. 8 This and the following sections draw extensively from Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle, supra note. 9 See Julian Morris, Defining the Precautionary Principle, in Rethinking Risk and the Precautionary Principle, supra note 13, at 1-19; Wiener, supra note. understandings. At one extreme are weak versions to which no reasonable person could object. At the other extreme are strong versions that would require a fundamental rethinking of regulatory policy. 
The most cautious and weak versions suggest, quite sensibly, that a lack of decisive evidence of harm should not be a ground for refusing to regulate. Controls might be justified even if we cannot establish a definite connection between, for example, lowlevel exposures to certain carcinogens and adverse effects on human health. Thus the 1992 Rio Declaration states, “Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.”10 The Ministerial Declaration of the Second International Conference on the Protection of the North Sea, held in London in 1987, is in the same vein: “Accepting that in order to protect the North Sea from possibly damaging effects of the most dangerous substances, a Precautionary Principle is necessary which may require action to control inputs of such substances even before a causal link has been established by absolutely clear scientific evidence.”11 Similarly, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change offers cautious language: “Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing [regulatory] measures, taking into account that policies and measures to deal with climate change should be cost-effective so as to ensure global benefits at the lowest possible cost.”12 
The widely publicized 
Declaration, from a meeting of environmentalists in 1998, goes somewhat further: “When an activity raises threats of harm to human health or the environment, precautionary measures should be taken even if some cause and effect relationships are not established scientifically. In this context the proponent of the activity, rather than the public, should bear the burden of proof.”13 The first sentence just quoted is more aggressive than the Rio Declaration because it is not limited to threats of serious or irreversible damage. And in reversing the burden of proof, 10 Quoted in Bjorn Lomborg, The Skeptical Environmentalist 347 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001). 11 Quoted in Rethinking Risk and the Precautionary Principle 3, Julian Morris, ed. (Oxford: ButterworthHeinemann, 2000). 12 See Indur Goklany, The Precautionary Principle 6 (2001). 13 Id. A strong version is defended in Carolyn Raffensperger & Peter L. deFur, Implementing the Precautionary Principle: Rigorous Science and Solid Ethics, 5 Hum. & Ecol. Risk Assess. 933, 934 (1999). the second sentence goes further still. Of course everything depends on what those with the burden of proof must show in particular. 
In Europe, the Precautionary Principle is sometimes understood in a still stronger way, suggesting that it is important to build “a margin of safety into all decision making.”14 According to one definition, the Precautionary Principle means “that action should be taken to correct a problem as soon as there is evidence that harm may occur, not after the harm has already occurred.”15 The word “may” is the crucial one here. In a comparably strong version, it is said that “the Precautionary Principle mandates that when there is a risk of significant health or environmental damage to others or to future generations, and when there is scientific uncertainty as to the nature of that damage or the likelihood of the risk, then decisions should be made so as to prevent such activities from being conducted unless and until scientific evidence shows that the damage will not occur.”16 The words “will not occur” seem to require proponents of an activity to demonstrate that there is no risk at all—often an impossible burden to meet. The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity, adopted in 2000, appears to adopt a strong version as well.17 The Final Declaration of the First European “Seas At Risk” conference says that if “the ‘worst case scenario’ for a certain activity is serious enough then even a small amount of doubt as to the safety of that activity is sufficient to stop it taking place.”18 
The weak versions of the Precautionary Principle are unobjectionable and important. Every day, individuals and nations take steps to avoid hazards that are far from certain. We do not walk in moderately dangerous areas at night; we exercise; we buy smoke detectors; we buckle our seatbelts; we might even avoid fatty foods (or carbohydrates). Sensible governments regulate risks that, in individual cases or even in the aggregate, have a well under 100% chance of coming to fruition. An individual might 14 See Bjorn Lomborg, The Skeptical Environmentalist 348 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001). 15 http://www.logophilia.com/WordSpy/precautionaryprinciple.asp 16 Testimony of Dr. Brent Blackwelder, President, Friends of the Earth, before the Senate Appropriations Committee, Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, (Jan. 24, 2002). 17 See Goklany, supra note, at 6. 18 Final Declaration of the First European “Seas At Risk” Conference, Annex 1, Copenhagen, 1994. ignore a mortality risk of 1/500,000, because that risk is quite small, but if 100 million citizens face that risk, the nation had better take it seriously. With respect to the weak version of the Precautionary Principle, there are significant cross-cultural variations; but no serious person rejects that version. 
For the moment let us understand the principle in a strong way, to suggest that regulation is required whenever there is a possible risk to health, safety, or the environment, even if the supporting evidence remains speculative and even if the economic costs of regulation are high. To avoid absurdity, the idea of “possible risk” will be understood to require a certain threshold of scientific plausibility. To support regulation, no one thinks that it is enough if someone, somewhere, urges that a risk is worth taking seriously. But under the Precautionary Principle as I shall understand it, the threshold burden is minimal, and once it is met, there is something like a presumption in favor of regulatory controls. This version, as we shall see, helps to clarify a significant problem with the idea of precaution, and also to illuminate the existence of cross-national differences. 
Why might the Precautionary Principle, understood in its strong sense, have such widespread appeal? At first glance, the answer is simple, for the principle contains some important truth. Certainly we should acknowledge that a small probability (say, 1 in 25,000) of a serious harm (say, 1,000,000 deaths) deserves extremely serious attention. It is worthwhile to spend a lot of money to eliminate that risk. An economically oriented critic might observe that our resources are limited and that if we spend large amounts of resources on highly speculative harms, we will not be allocating those resources wisely. In fact this is the simplest criticism of the Precautionary Principle.19 If we take costly steps to address all risks, however improbable they are, we will quickly impoverish ourselves. On this view, the Precautionary Principle “would make for a dim future.”20 It would also eliminate technologies and strategies that make human lives easier, more convenient, healthier, and longer. 19 See John D. Graham, Decision-Analytic Refinements of the Precautionary Principle, 4 J. Risk Research 127 (2001). 20 See Julian Morris, Defining the Precautionary Principle, in Rethinking Risk and the Precautionary Principle, supra note, at 1, 17. 
But there is something both odd and revealing about these claims. The Precautionary Principle is designed to decrease morbidity and mortality; how could it possibly make the future “dim”? I suggest that the real problem with the principle is that it offers no guidance—not that it is wrong, but that it forbids all courses of action, including regulation. Taken seriously, it bans the very steps that it requires. To understand the difficulty, it will be useful to anchor the discussion in some concrete problems: practice are not known with any precision. Some people fear that genetic modification will result in serious ecological harm and large risks to human health; others believe that genetic modification will result in more nutritious food and significant improvements in human health. but there is general agreement that global warming is in fact occurring. It is possible that global warming will produce, by 2100, a mean temperature increase of 4.5 degrees C (the high-end estimate of the International Panel on Climate Change); that it will result in $5 trillion or more in monetized costs; and that it will also produce a significant number of deaths from malaria. The Kyoto Protocol would require most industrialized nations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 92%-94% of 1990 levels. A great deal of work suggests that significant decreases in such emissions would have large benefits; but skeptics contend that the costs of such decreases would reduce the well-being of millions of people, especially the poorest members of society. various health and safety risks, including some possibility of catastrophe. But if a nation does not rely on nuclear power, it might well rely instead on fossil fuels, and in particular on coal-fired power plants. Such plants create risks of their own, 21 Alan McHughen, Pandora’s Picnic Basket (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000). 22 For discussion, see Richard A. Posner, Catastrophe: Risk and Response (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004); Bjorn Lomborg, The Skeptical Environmentalist (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001); William D. Nordhaus & Joseph Boyer, Warming the World: Economic Models of Global Warming 168 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000). including risks associated with global warming. China, for example, has relied on nuclear energy, in a way that reduces greenhouse gases and a range of air pollution problems.23 environmental issues in the United States involved the regulation of arsenic in drinking water. There is a serious dispute over the precise level of risks posed by low levels of arsenic in water, but on the “worst case” scenario, over one hundred lives might be lost each year as a result of the 50 part per billion standard that the Clinton Administration sought to revise. At the same time, the proposed 10 part per billion standard would cost over $200 million each year, and it is possible that it would save as few as six lives annually. 
In these cases, what kind of guidance is provided by the Precautionary Principle? It is tempting to say, as is in fact standard, that the principle calls for strong controls on genetic engineering of food, on greenhouse gases, on arsenic, and on nuclear power. In all of these cases, there is a possibility of serious harms, and no authoritative scientific evidence demonstrates that the possibility is close to zero. If the burden of proof is on the proponent of the activity or processes in question, the Precautionary Principle would seem to impose a burden of proof that cannot be met. Put to one side the question whether the Precautionary Principle, understood to compel stringent regulation in these cases, is sensible. Let us ask a more fundamental question: Is that more stringent regulation therefore compelled by the Precautionary Principle? 
The answer is that it is not. In some of these cases, it should be easy to see that in its own way, stringent regulation would actually run afoul of the Precautionary Principle. The simplest reason is that such regulation might well deprive society of significant benefits, and hence produce serious harms that would otherwise not occur. In some cases, 23 See Ling Zhong, Note: Nuclear Energy: China's Approach Towards Addressing Global Warming, 12 Geo. Int'l Envtl. L. Rev. 493 (2000). Of course it is possible to urge that nations should reduce reliance on either coal-fired power plants or nuclear power, and move instead toward environmentally preferred alternatives, such as solar power. For general discussion, see Renewable Energy: Power for a Sustainable Future, Godfrey Boyle, ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press in association with the Open University, 1996); Allan Collinson, Renewable Energy (Austin, Tex.: Steck-Vaughn Library, 1991); Dan E. Arvizu, Advanced Energy Technology and Climate Change Policy Implications, 2 Fl. Coastal L.J. 435 (2001). But these alternatives pose problems of their own, involving feasibility and expense. See Lomborg, supra note, at 118-48. regulation eliminates the “opportunity benefits” of a process or activity, and thus causes preventable deaths. If this is so, regulation is hardly precautionary. Consider the “drug lag,” produced whenever the government takes a highly precautionary approach to the introduction of new medicines and drugs onto the market. If a government insists on such an approach, it will protect people against harms from inadequately tested drugs; but it will also prevent people from receiving potential benefits from those very drugs. Is it “precautionary” to require extensive premarketing testing, or to do the opposite? 
In the context of medicines to prevent AIDS, those who favor “precautions” have asked governments to reduce the level of premarketing testing, precisely in the interest of health. The United States, by the way, is more precautionary about new medicines than are most European nations. But by failing to allow such medicines on the market, the United States fails to take precautions against the illnesses that could be reduced by speedier procedures. 
Or consider the continuing debate over whether certain antidepressants impose a (small) risk of breast cancer.24 A precautionary approach might seem to caution against use of such antidepressants because of their carcinogenic potential. But the failure to use those depressants might well impose risks of its own, certainly psychological and possibly even physical (because psychological ailments are sometimes associated with physical ones as well). Or consider the decision, by the Soviet Union, to evacuate and relocate more than 270,000 people in response to the risk of adverse effects from the Chernobyl fallout. It is not clear that on balance, this massive relocation project was justified on health grounds: “A comparison ought to have been made between the psychological and medical burdens of this measure (anxiety, psychosomatic diseases, depression and suicides) and the harm that may have been prevented.”25 More generally, a sensible government might want to ignore the small risks associated with low levels of 24 See Judith P. Kelly et al., Risk of Breast Cancer According to Use of Antidepressants, Phenothiazines, and Antihistamines, 150 Am. J. Epidemiology 861 (1999); C.R. Sharpe et al., The Effects of Tricyclic Antidepressants on Breast Cancer Risk, 86 Brit. J. of Cancer 92 (2002). 25 Maurice Tubiana, Radiation Risks in Perspective: Radiation-Induced Cancer Among Cancer Risks, 39(1) Radiat. Environ. Biophy. 3, 8-10 (2000). radiation, on the ground that precautionary responses are likely to cause fear that outweighs any health benefits from those responses.26 
Or consider a more general question about how to handle low-level toxic agents, including carcinogens. Do such agents cause adverse effects? If we lack clear evidence, it might seem “precautionary” to assume that they do, and hence to assume, in the face of uncertainty, that the dose-response curve is linear and without safe thresholds.27 In the United States, this is the default assumption of the Environmental Protection Agency. But is this approach unambiguously precautionary? Considerable evidence suggests that many toxic agents that are harmful at high levels are actually beneficial at low levels.28 Thus “hormesis” is a dose-response relationship in which low doses stimulate desirable effects and high doses inhibit them. When hormesis is involved, government use of a linear dose-response curve, assuming no safe thresholds, will actually cause mortality and morbidity effects. Which default approach to the dose-response curve is precautionary? To raise this question is not to take any stand on whether some, many, or all toxic agents are beneficial or instead harmful at very low doses. It is only to say that the simultaneous possibility of benefits at low levels and of harms at low levels makes the Precautionary Principle paralyzing. The principle requires use of a linear, non-threshold model; but it simultaneously condemns use of that very model. For this and other reasons, unreflective use of the Precautionary Principle, it has been argued, threatens to increase rather than decrease the risks associated with food.29 
Or consider the case of genetic modification of food. Many people believe that a failure to allow genetic modification might well result in numerous deaths, and a small probability of many more. The reason is that genetic modification holds out the promise of producing food that is both cheaper and healthier—resulting, for example, in “golden 26 Id. For some counterevidence in an important context, see Lennart Hardell et al., Further Aspects on Cellular and Cordless Telephones and Brain Tumours, 22 Intl. J. Oncology 399 (2003) (discussing evidence of an association between cellular telephones and cancer). 27 For criticism of the linearity assumption, see Maurice Tubiana, Radiation Risks in Perspective: Radiation-Induced Cancer Among Cancer Risks, 39(1) Radiat. Environ. Biophy. 3, 8-9 (2000). 28 See Edward J. Calabrese and Linda A. Baldwin, Hormesis: The Dose Response Revolution, 43 Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 175 (2003); Edward J. Calabrese and Linda A. Baldwin, The Hormetic DoseResponse Model Is More Common Than the Threshold Model in Toxicology, 71 Toxcol. Sciences 246 (2003). 29 J.C. Hanekamp et al., Chloramphenicol, Food Safety, and Precautionary Thinking in Europe, 6 Env. Liability 209 (2003). rice,” which might have large benefits in developing countries. My point is not that genetic modification will likely have those benefits, or that the benefits of genetic modification outweigh the risks. The claim is only that if the Precautionary Principle is taken literally, it is offended by regulation as well as by nonregulation. 
The example suggests that regulation sometimes violates the Precautionary Principle because it gives rise to substitute risks, in the form of hazards that materialize, or are increased, as a result of regulation.30 Consider the case of DDT, often banned or regulated in the interest of reducing risks to birds and human beings. The problem with such bans is that in poor nations, they eliminate what appears to be the most effective way of combating malaria—and thus significantly undermine public health.31 Or consider the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s effort to ban asbestos,32 a ban that might well seem justified or even compelled by the Precautionary Principle. The difficulty, from the standpoint of that very principle, is that substitutes for asbestos also carry risks. The problem is pervasive. In the case of arsenic, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency expressed concern that aggressive regulation, by virtue of its cost, will lead people to cease using local water systems and to rely on private wells, which have high levels of contamination.33 If this is so, stringent arsenic regulation violates the Precautionary Principle no less than less stringent regulation does. This is a common situation, for opportunity benefits and substitute risks are the rule, not the exception.34 30 See the discussion of risk-related tradeoffs in John Graham & Jonathan Wiener, Risk vs. Risk (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1995); Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs, in Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason, 133-52 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). 31 See Goklany, supra note, at 13-27. 32 See Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir., 1991). 33 “But we have seen instances, particularly in the West and Midwest, where arsenic is naturally occurring at up to 700 and more parts per billion, where the cost of remediation has forced water companies to close, leaving people with no way to get their water, save dig wells. And then they are getting water that’s even worse than what they were getting through the water company.” Christine Todd Whitman, Administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, in interview by Robert Novak & Al Hunt, CNN Evans, Novak, Hunt & Shields, Cable News Network, (April 21, 2001). 34 Note also that some regulation will have ancillary benefits, by reducing risks other than those that are specifically targeted. For a valuable discussion, see Samuel J. Rascoff & Richard L. Revesz, The Biases of Risk Tradeoff Analysis, 69 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1763 (2002). 
It is possible to go much further. A great deal of evidence suggests the possibility that an expensive regulation can have adverse effects on life and health. 35 It has been urged that a statistical life can be lost for every expenditure of $7 million36; one study suggests that an expenditure of $15 million produces a loss of life.37 Another suggests that poor people are especially vulnerable to this effect—that a regulation that reduces wealth for the poorest 20% of the population will have twice as large a mortality effect as a regulation that reduces wealth for the wealthiest 20%.38 To be sure, both the phenomenon and the underlying mechanisms are disputed.39 I do not mean to accept any particular amount here, or even to suggest that there has been an unambiguous demonstration of an association between mortality and regulatory expenditures. The only point is that reasonable people believe in that association. It follow that a multimillion dollar expenditure for “precaution” has—as a worst case scenario—significant adverse health effects, with an expenditure of $200 million as leading to perhaps as many as twenty to thirty lives lost. 
This point makes the Precautionary Principle hard to implement not merely where regulation removes “opportunity benefits,” or introduces or increases substitute risks, but in any case in which the regulation costs a significant amount. If this is so, the Precautionary Principle, for that very reason, raises doubts about many regulations. If the principle argues against any action that carries a small risk of imposing significant harm, then we should be reluctant to spend a lot of money to reduce risks, simply because those expenditures themselves carry risks. Here is the sense in which, the Precautionary Principle, taken for all that it is worth, is paralyzing: It stands as an obstacle to regulation and nonregulation, and to everything in between.40 35Ralph Keeney, Mortality Risks Induced by Economic Expenditures, 10 Risk Anal. 147 (1990); Randall Lutter & John F. Morrall, III, Health-Health Analysis: A New Way to Evaluate Health and Safety Regulation, 8(1) J. Risk & Uncertainty 43, 49 table 1 (1994). 36 See Keeney, supra note 72. 37 See Robert W. Hahn et al., Do Federal Regulations Reduce Mortality? (Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 2000). 38 See Kenneth S. Chapman & Govind Hariharan, Do Poor People Have a Stronger Relationship Between Income and Mortality Than the Rich? Implications of Panel Data for Health-Health Analysis, 12 J. Risk & Uncertainty 51, 58-63 (1996). 39See Randall Lutter & John F. Morrall, III, Health-Health Analysis: A New Way to Evaluate Health and Safety Regulation, 8 J. Risk & Uncertainty 43, 49 table 1 (1994). 40 It is possible, however, to understand the Precautionary Principle in a narrower way, one that focuses on catastrophic risks under conditions of uncertainty; on irreversible harm; and on margins of safety for 
It should now be easier to understand my earlier suggestion that despite its formal enthusiasm for the 
nations are not “more precautionary” than the United States. Simply as a logical matter, societies, like individuals, cannot be highly precautionary with respect to all risks. Each society and each person must select certain risks for special attention. In these respects, the selectivity of precautions is not merely an empirical fact; it is a conceptual inevitability. Comparing Europe to the United States, Jonathan Wiener and Michael Rogers have demonstrated this point empirically.41 In the early twenty-first century, for example, the United States appears to take a highly precautionary approach to the risks associated with abandoned hazardous waste dumps and terrorism, but not to take a highly precautionary approach to the risks associated with global warming, indoor air pollution, poverty, poor diet, and obesity. It would be most valuable to attempt to see which nations are especially precautionary with respect to which risks, and also to explore changes over time. 
A nation-by-nation study commissioned by the German Federal Environmental Agency goes so far as to conclude that there are two separate camps in the industrialized world: “precaution countries” (Germany, Sweden, the Netherlands, and the United States) and “protection countries” (Japan, France, and the United Kingdom).42 But this conclusion seems to me ludicrously implausible. The universe of risks is far too large to permit categorizations of this kind. The most general point is that no nation is precautionary in general and costly precautions are inevitably taken against only those hazards that seem especially salient or insistent.43 The problem with the Precautionary Principle is that it wrongly suggests that nations can and should adopt a general form of risk aversion. 
I suggest that the Precautionary Principle becomes operational if and only if those who apply it wear blinders—only, that is, if they focus on some aspects of the regulatory situation but downplay or disregard others. But this suggestion simply raises an particular kinds of risk. I do not explore these narrower versions here. For discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, Laws of Fear: Beyond the Precautionary Principle (Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 2005). 41 See Wiener and Rogers, supra note. 42 See Sand, supra note, at 448. 43 See Vogel, supra note, at 570-71, for a demonstration of this point for Europe. additional question: What accounts for the particular blinders that underlie applications of the Precautionary Principle? What people’s attention is selective, why is it selective in the way that it is? What might different nations, with quite different policies, all believe that they are being precautionary? Much of the answer, I contend, lies in an understanding of behavioral economics and cognitive psychology, which provide important clues to crosscultural differences in risk perception. The availability heuristic is the place to start. 
It is well-established that in thinking about risks, people rely on certain heuristics, or rules of thumb, which serve to simplify their inquiry.44 Heuristics typically work through a process of “attribute substitution,” in which people answer a hard question by substituting an easier one.45 Should we be fearful of nuclear power, terrorism, abduction of young children, mad cow disease, contaminated blood, or pesticides? When people use the availability heuristic, they assess the magnitude of risks by asking whether examples can readily come to mind.46 If people can easily think of such examples, they are far more likely to be frightened than if they cannot. The availability heuristic illuminates the operation of the Precautionary Principle, by showing why some hazards will be on-screen and why others will be neglected. The availability heuristic also tells us a great deal about differences in risk perceptions across groups, cultures, and even nations. 
For example, “a class whose instances are easily retrieved will appear more numerous than a class of equal frequency whose instances are less retrievable.”47 Consider a simple study showing people a list of well-known people of both sexes, and asking them whether the list contains more names of women or more names of men. In lists in which the men were especially famous, people thought that they were more names of men, whereas in lists in which the women were the more famous, people thought that there were more names of women.48 44 See Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, & Amos Tversky, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases (Cambridge; New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1982). 45 See Daniel Kahneman & Shane Frederick, Representativeness Revisited: Attribute Substitution in Intuitive Judgment 49, 53 in Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, & Daniel Kahneman, eds. (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2002). 46 See Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, in id. at 3, 11-14. 47 Id. at 11. 48 Id. 
This is a point about how familiarity can affect the availability of instances. A risk that is familiar, like that associated with terrorism, will be seen as more serious than a risk that is less familiar, like that associated with sun-bathing. But salience is important as well. “For example, the impact of seeing a house burning on the subjective probability of such accidents is probably greater than the impact of reading about a fire in the local paper.”49 So too, recent events will have a greater impact than earlier ones. The point helps explain differences across time and space in much risk-related behavior, including decisions to take precautions. Whether people will buy insurance for natural disasters is greatly affected by recent experiences.50 If floods have not occurred in the immediate past, people who live on flood plains are far less likely to purchase insurance. In the aftermath of an earthquake, insurance for earthquakes rises sharply—but it declines steadily from that point, as vivid memories recede. Note that the use of the availability heuristic, in these contexts, is hardly irrational.51 Both insurance and precautionary measures can be expensive, and what has happened before seems, much of the time, to be the best available guide to what will happen again. The problem is that the availability heuristic can lead to serious errors, in terms of both excessive fear and neglect. 
What, in particular, produces availability? An intriguing essay attempts to test the effects of ease of imagery on perceived judgments of risk.52 The study asked subjects to read about an illness (Hyposcenia-B) that “was becoming increasingly prevalent” on the local campus. In one condition, the symptoms were concrete and easy to imagine— involving muscle aches, low energy, and frequent severe headaches. In another condition, the symptoms were vague and hard to imagine, involving an inflamed liver, a 49 Id. 50 Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk 40 (London; Sterling, Va.: Earthscan Publications, 2000). 51 Kahneman and Tversky emphasize that the heuristics they identify “are highly economical and usually effective,” but also that they “lead to systematic and predictable errors.” See Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, in Judgment and Decision Making: An Interdisciplinary Reader 38, 55, Hal R. Arkes & Kenneth R. Hammond, eds. (Cambridge; New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1986). Gerd Gigenzer, among others, has emphasized that some heuristics can work extremely well, see Gerd Gigerenzer et al., Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart (New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1999); Gerd Gigerenzer, Adaptive Thinking: Rationality in the Real World (New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 2000), and used this point as a rejoinder to those who stress the errors introduced by heuristics and biases. I do not mean to take a stand on the resulting debates. Even if many heuristics mostly work well in daily life, a sensible government can do much better than to rely on them. 52 In Steven J. Sherman et al., Imagining Can Heighten or Lower the Perceived Likelihood of Contracting a Disease: The Mediating Effect of Ease of Imagery, in Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment 82, Thomas Gilovich et al., eds. (Cambridge; New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2002). malfunctioning nervous system, and a general sense of disorientation. Subjects in both conditions were asked to imagine a three-week period in which they had the disease and to write a detailed description of what they imagined. After doing so, subjects were asked to assess, on a ten-point scale, their likelihood of contracting the disease. The basic finding was that likelihood judgments were very different in the two conditions, with easily-imagined symptoms making people far more inclined to believe that they were likely to get the disease. 
The availability heuristic helps to explains the operation of the Precautionary Principle and cross-national differences for a simple reason: Sometimes a certain risk, said to call for precautions, is cognitively available, whereas other risks, including those associated with regulation itself, are not. In many cases where the Precautionary Principle seems to offer guidance, the reason is that some of the relevant risks are available while others are barely visible. And if one nation is concerned with the risk of sunbathing and another is not, availability is likely to provide a large part of the reason. This, then, is my central hypothesis: Differences across nations, in the perception of risks, have a great deal to do with the operation of the availability heuristic. 
To be sure, those differences are also motivated in large part by actual differences in risk levels. Fortunately, reality matters. Nations suffering from high levels of malaria are likely to perceive malaria risks as far greater than nations in which malaria is not a problem. Countries that face serious risks from contaminated blood will probably show greater fear of contaminated blood than countries in which contaminated blood is not a problem. But availability produces differences in perceptions that do not track differences in reality. 
The study of cross-cultural risk perceptions remains in its infancy,53 and hence my claim must remain only a hypothesis, one that I cannot establish to be true. What is necessary, and what is lacking, is anything like comprehensive information about crosscultural risk perceptions, allowing us to test the role of availability. And we shall shortly see some complexities that bear on the adequacy of the availability hypothesis. But for now, consider some supportive evidence: 53 See Cross-Cultural Risk Perception: A Survey of Empirical Studies (Ortwin Renn and Bernd Rorhmann eds. 2000). the actual fluctuations in those risks. But public concern outruns actual fluctuations in the important case of “panics,” bred by vivid illustrations that do not reflect changes in levels of danger.54 At certain points in the 1970s and 1980s, there were extreme leaps in concern about teenage suicides, herpes, illegitimacy, and AIDS—leaps that did not correspond to changes in the size of the problem. Availability, produced by “a particularly vivid case or new finding that receives considerable media attention,” played a major role in those leaps in public concern.55 Sometimes the concern led to unjustified precautions, as in the behavior of some parents who refused to allow their children to attend classes having students with signs of herpes. of risk associated with terrorism and SARS.56 In that study, Americans perceived terrorism to be a far greater threat, to themselves and to others, than SARS; Canadians perceived SARS to be a greater threat, to themselves and to others, than terrorism. Americans estimated their chance of serious harm from terrorism as 8.27%, about four times as high as their estimate of their chance of serious harm from SARS (2.18%). Canadians estimated their chance of serious harm from SARS as 7.43%, significantly higher than their estimate for terrorism (6.04%). Notably, the figures for SARS were unrealistically high, especially for Canadians; the best estimate of the risk of contracting SARS, based on Canadian figures, was .0008% (and the chance of dying as a result less than .0002%). For obvious reasons, the objective risks from terrorism are much harder to calculate, but if it is estimated that the United States will suffer at least one terrorist attack each year with the same number of deaths as on September 11, the risk of death from terrorism is about .001%—a speculative number under the circumstances, but not an implausible place to start. 54 See George Loewenstein and Jane Mather, Dynamic Processes in Risk Perception, 3 J. Risk and Uncertainty 155 (1990). 55 Id. at 172. 56 See Neal Feigenson et al., Perceptions of Terrorism and Disease Risks: A Cross-National Comparison, U. Cin. L. Rev. (forthcoming 2005). 
The availability heuristic helps to account for these cross-national differences and for the generally exaggerated risk perceptions. In the United States, risks of terrorism have (to say the least) received a great deal of attention, producing a continuing sense of threat. But there have been no incidents of SARS, and the media coverage has been limited to events elsewhere—producing a degree of salience, but far lower than that associated with terrorism. In Canada, the opposite is the case. The high degree of public discussion of SARS cases, accompanied by readily available instances, produced an inflated sense of the numbers— sufficiently inflated to exceed the same numbers from terrorism (certainly a salient risk in Canada, as in most nations post 9/11). Why are some people and some groups largely unconcerned about that risk, while other people and groups are highly focused on with it? A study of rural Kenya and Malawi suggests that availability plays a critical role.57 The authors find that risk perception is a product of discussions that “are often provoked by observing or hearing about an illness or death.”58 People “know in the abstract how HIV is transmitted and how it can be prevented,” but they are unclear “about the advisability and effectiveness of the changes in sexual behavior that are recommended by experts.59 Perceptions of the risk of HIV transition are very much a function of social networks, with pronounced changes in belief and behavior resulting from interactions with other people expressing a high level of concern. The effects of social networks are thus asymmetric, with substantial effects from having “at least one network partner who is perceived to have a great deal of concern about AIDS.” The authors do not refer explicitly to the availability heuristic, but their findings are compatible with the suggestion that with respect to AIDS, risk perceptions are produced by availability. 57 See Jere R. Behrman et al., Social Networks, HIV/AIDS, and Risk Perceptions (Feb, 18, 2003), available at ssrn.com. 58 Id. at 10. 59 Id. at 18. risk “cannot be explained by differences in levels of real risk.”60 Indeed, the content of media are “a more potent determinant of perceived risk than real risk.”61 Cultural variables were not found to be crucial. In general, “perceived risk is a function of real risk and perhaps media risk rather than culturally contingent values and belief.”62 those of citizens of France.63 But such differences as there are have a great deal to do with availability. Hence there is far more concern in France with genetically engineered bacteria, a risk with a high degree of publicity.64 By contrast, Americans show far more concern in the United States with coal-fired power plants, with radon in home, and with sun-tanning—three much-publicized sources of risk.65 certain environmental and health risk achieved so much salience in England, France, and the European Union generally? A comprehensive study suggests that a few readily available incidents played a large role.66 In the 1990s, a “wave of crises” involving food safety, above all mad cow disease, led to the deaths of about one hundred people, with especially large effects on public attitudes.67 In a tribute to the operation of availability, the “regulatory failure associated with BSE significantly affected the attitude of the European public toward GM foods.”68 An additional “scandal was the apparent failure of French government officials and doctors to protect haemopholiacs from blood contaminated with AIDS” virus, in a way that had large repercussions for public opinion in France.69 The conclusion is 60 See Lennart Sjoberg et al., Risk Perception in Bulgaria and Romania, in id. at 147. 61 Id. 62 Id. at 178. 63 Paul Slovic et al., Nuclear Power and the Public: A Comparative Study of Risk Perception in France and the United States, in Cross-Cultural Risk Perception 55 (Ortwin Renn and Bernd Rohrmann eds. 2000). 64 Id. at 74. 65 Id. 66 See Vogel, supra note. 67 Id. at 568-69. 68 ID. at 569. 69 Id. at 570-71. that differences between European and American policies are not a product of deep-rooted cultural differences, but instead have a great deal to do with “widespread public perception of regulatory failures,” often based on particular, vivid, and widely salient events.70 
Thus far my emphasis has been on individual cognition. But to say the least, the availability heuristic does not operate in a social vacuum. What is readily “available” to some individuals, groups, cultures, and nations will not be available to all. Within the United States, many of those who favor gun control legislation have “available” a set of incidents in which such legislation would have avoided unnecessary deaths; many of those who reject such legislation are alert to incidents in which private gun ownership allowed people to fend off criminal violence.71 Obviously both government and the media make some risks appear particularly salient. Consider President George W. Bush’s plea: “Imagine those 19 hijackers [involved in the 9/11 attacks] with other weapons and plans, this time armed by Saddam Hussein. It would take one vial, one canister, one crate slipped into this country to bring a day of horror like none we have ever known.” Environmentalists, in and out of government, operate in the same way, focusing public attention on potentially catastrophic harms. Well-organized private groups play a central role in activating public concern. 
The question suggests the need to attend to the social and cultural dimensions of fear and risk perception. In many cases of high-visibility, low-probability dangers, such as sniper attacks, shark attacks, contaminated blood, and the kidnapping of young girls, the sources of availability are not obscure. The mass media focus on those risks; people communicate their fear and concern to one another; the widespread fact of fear and concern increases media attention; and the spiral continues until people move on. Hence the “risk of the month” syndrome, familiar in many societies, stems from the interaction between availability and social influences. Much of the time, however, what is available and salient to some is not available and salient to all. For example, many of those who 70 Id. at 580. 71 See Dan M. Kahan & Donald Braman, More Statistics, Less Persuasion: A Cultural Theory of Gun-Risk Perceptions, 151 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1291 (2003). endorse the Precautionary Principle focus on cases in which the government failed to regulate some environmental harm, demanding irrefutable proof, with the consequence being widespread illness and death. To such people, the available incidents require strong precautions in the face of uncertainty. But many other people, skeptical of the Precautionary Principle, focus on cases in which the government overreacted to weak science, causing large expenditures for little gain in terms of health or safety. To such people, the available incidents justify a measure of restraint in the face of uncertainty. Which cases will be available and to whom? 
In any case people and cultures have different predispositions. These predispositions play a large role in determining which, of the numerous possibilities, is salient. If you are predisposed to be fearful of genetic modification of food, you are more likely to seek out, and to recall, incidents in which genetic modification was said to cause harm. If you are predisposed to fear electromagnetic fields, you will pay attention to apparent incidents in which electromagnetic fields have produced an elevated incidence of cancer. If you are predisposed to believe that most media scares are false or trumpedup, you will find cases in which public fears have been proved baseless. These are examples of individual predispositions, but undoubtedly cultural forces, some deep and some less so, help account for differences across nations. 
Availability helps to determine beliefs, to be sure; but beliefs help to determine availability as well. Both beliefs and availability are endogenous to one another. When social and cultural forces interact with salience, to produce concern about one set of problems but not another, predispositions are crucial. It is in this sense that availability can be a product of forces that must be explained independently. But let us now turn to how availability spreads. 
Sometimes availability and salience are produced through social bandwagons or cascades, in which apparently representative anecdotes and gripping examples move rapidly from one person to another.72 Consider a stylized example. Andrew hears of a 72 Chip Heath et al., Emotional Selection in Memes: The Case of Urban Legends, 81 Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 1028 (2001); Chip Heath, Do People Prefer to Pass Along Good or Bad News? Valence and Relevance as Predictors of Transmission Propensity, 68 Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes 79 (1996). dangerous event, which he finds to be revealing or illustrative. (The event might involve crime, terrorism, pesticides, environmental hazards, or threats to national security.) Andrew tells Barry, who would be inclined to see the event as not terribly informative, but who, learning Andrew’s reaction, comes to believe that the event does indeed reveal a great deal, and that a serious threat exists. Carol would tend to discount the risk, but once she hears the shared opinion of Andrew and Barry, she is frightened as well. Deborah will have to have a great deal of private information to reject what has become the shared opinion of Andrew, Barry, and Carol.73 Stylized though it is, the example shows that once several people start to take an example as probative, many people may come to be influenced by their opinion, giving rise to cascade effects. Cultural and even national differences can be explained partly in this way. 
Among doctors dealing with risks and precautions, cascades are common. “Most doctors are not at the cutting edge of research; their inevitable reliance upon what colleagues have done and are doing leads to numerous surgical fads and treatment-caused illnesses.”74 Thus an article in the prestigious New England Journal of Medicine explores “bandwagon diseases” in which doctors act like “lemmings, episodically and with a blind infectious enthusiasm pushing certain diseases and treatments primarily because everyone else is doing the same.”75 Some medical practices, including tonsillectomy, “seem to have been adopted initially based on weak information,” and extreme differences in tonsillectomy frequencies (and other procedures) provide good evidence that cascades are at work.76 Cross-cultural differences in medical practices can be explained in significant part through this route. 
A distinctive feature of social cascades is that the people who participate in them are simultaneously amplifying the very social signal by which they are being influenced. By their very participation, those who join the cascade increase its size, making it more likely that others will join too. Unfortunately, cascades can lead people in mistaken 73 See David Hirschleifer, The Blind Leading the Blind: Social Influence, Fads, and Informational Cascades, in The New Economics of Human Behavior 188, 193-4, Mariano Tommasi & Kathryn Ierulli, eds. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995). 74 Hirshleifer, supra note, at 204. 75 John F. Burnham, Medical Practice a la Mode: How Medical Fashions Determine Medical Care, 317 New England Journal of Medicine 1220, 1201 (1987). 76 See Sushil Bikhchandani et al., Learning from the Behavior of Others: Conformity, Fads, and Informational Cascades, 12(3) J. Econ. Perspect. 151, 167 (1998). directions, with a few “early movers” spurring social fear that does not match reality. In the example I have given, Andrew is having a large influence on the judgments of our little group, even though he may not, in fact, have accurate information about the relevant event. Barry, Carol, and Deborah might have some information of their own, perhaps enough to show that there is little reason for concern. But unless they have a great deal of confidence in what they do, they are likely to follow those who preceded them. The irony is that if most people are following others, then little information is provided by the fact that some or many seem to share a certain fear. Most are responding to the signals provided by others, unaware that those others are doing exactly the same thing. Of course corrections might well come eventually, but sometimes they are late. 
In the domain of risks and precautions, “availability cascades” are responsible for many social beliefs.77 A salient event, affecting people because it is available, tends to be repeated, leading to cascade effects, as the event becomes available to increasingly large numbers of people. The point is amplified by the fact that fear-inducing accounts, with high emotional valence, are especially likely to spread.78 There is a general implication here. Because different social influences can be found in different communities, local variations are inevitable, with different examples becoming salient in each. Hence such variations—between say New York and Ohio, or England and the United States, or between Germany and France—might involve coincidence or small or random factors, rather than large-scale cultural differences. Different judgments within different social groups, with different “available” examples, owe their origin to social processes of this sort. Indeed the different reactions to nuclear power in France and the United States can be explained in large part in this way. And when some groups concentrate on cases in which guns increased violence, and others on cases in which guns decreased violence, availability cascades are a large part of the reason. Return to my epigraph: “Many Germans believe that drinking water after eating cherries is deadly; they also believe that 77 See Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan. L. Rev. 683 (1999). 78 See Heath et al., supra note 215. water after some cherries; and Americans love icy refreshments.”79 
There is a closely related phenomenon. When like-minded people deliberate with one another, they typically end up accepting a more extreme version of the views with which they began.80 This is the process known as group polarization. Consider a few examples: 
After discussion, citizens of France become more critical of the United States and its intentions with respect to economic aid.81 A group of moderately profeminist women becomes more strongly profeminist after discussion.82 After discussion, whites predisposed to show racial prejudice offer more negative responses to the question whether white racism is responsible for conditions faced by African-Americans in American cities.83 After discussion, whites predisposed not to show racial prejudice offer more positive responses to the same question, that is, they are more likely to find white prejudice to be the source of conditions faced by African-Americans in American cities.84 member.85 Juries inclined to award punitive damages typically produce awards that are significantly higher than the awards chosen, before deliberation, by their median Group polarization will inevitably occur in the context of perceptions of risk; and hence group polarization helps to account for cultural and even national differences. If 79 See Joseph Henrich et al., Group Report: What is the Role of Culture in Bounded Rationality?, in Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox 353-54, Gerd Gigerenzer & Reinhard Selten, eds. (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001), for an entertaining outline in connection with food choice decisions. 80 See Cass R. Sunstein, Why Societies Need Dissent (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2003). 81 Roger Brown, Social Psychology: The Second Edition 224 (New York: Free Press, 1985). 82 See David G. Myers, Discussion-Induced Attitude Polarization, 28 Human Relations 699 (1975). 83 David G. Myers & George D. Bishop, The Enhancement of Dominant Attitudes in Group Discussion, 20 J. Personality & Soc. Psych. 386 (1971), 84 See id. 85 See Cass R. Sunstein et al., Punitive Damages: How Juries Decide (Chicago: The Univ. of Chicago Press, 2002). several people fear global warming or terrorism, and speak to one another, their fear is likely to increase as a result of internal discussions. If other people believe that nuclear power is probably safe, their belief to that effect will be fortified after they speak with one another, to the point where they will believe that nuclear power is no reason for concern. If some groups seem hysterical about certain risks, and other groups treat those risks as nonexistent, group polarization is likely to be a reason. Hence group polarization provides another explanation for the different fears of groups, localities, and even nations. Internal discussions can make Berliners fearful of risks than do not bother New Yorkers, and vice-versa; so too, the citizens of London may fear a supposed danger that does not much bother the citizens of Paris—even if the danger is not greater in the former than in the latter. 
Group polarization undoubtedly occurs in connection with the availability heuristic. Suppose, for example, that several people are discussing mad cow disease, or a recent wave of sniper attacks, or cases involving the kidnapping of young girls, or situations in which the government has wrongly ignored a serious foreign threat. If the particular examples are mentioned, they are likely to prove memorable. And if the group has a predisposition to think that one or another risk is serious, social dynamics will lead the group to believe that the example is highly revealing. An initial predisposition toward fear is likely to be aggravated after collective deliberations. Within groups, a tendency toward fear breeds its own amplification. 
Consider in this light the 2004 report of the United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, which contended the Central Intelligence Agency’s predisposition to find a serious threat from Iraq led it to fail to explore alternative possibilities or to obtain and use the information that it actually held.86 Falling victim to group polarization in the particular context of fear. the agency showed a “tendency to reject information that contradicted the presumption” that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction.87 This claim is a remarkable echo of one that followed the 2003 investigation of failures at NASA, in which the Columbia Accident Investigation Board explicitly attributed the accident to NASA's unfortunate culture, one that does too little to elicit 86 Available at http://intelligence.senate.gov/. 87 Id. at 6. information. In the Board's words, NASA lacks "checks and balances"88 and pressures people to follow a "party line."89 The result was a process of polarization that led to a dismissal of serious risks. 
It should be clear that in the real world, some voices are more important than others, especially when availability and salience are involved. In particular, the behavior and preoccupations of the media play a large role. Many perceived “epidemics” are in reality no such thing, but instead a product of media coverage of gripping, unrepresentative incidents. Attention to those incidents is likely to ensure availability and salience, promoting an inaccurately high estimate of probability and at the same time some degree of probability neglect. And in the face of close media attention, the demand for legal responses will be significantly affected. Changes within and even across nations are a natural result. 
Knowing the importance of media coverage, well-organized private groups work extremely hard to promote public attention to particular risks. Some of these groups are altruistic; others are entirely self-interested. The common tactic is to publicize an incident that might trigger both availability and salience. Terrorists themselves are the most extreme and vicious example, using high-visibility attacks to convince people that “they cannot be safe anywhere.” But many illustrations are less objectionable and sometimes even benign. In the United States, consider the abandoned hazardous waste at Love Canal, used to promote hazardous waste cleanup, or the Exxon Valdez disaster, used by the Sierra Club and other environmental organizations to promote more stringent safeguards against oil spills. Showing at least a working knowledge of the availability heuristic, private groups seize on selected incidents and publicize them to make them generally salient to the public. In all of these examples, the use of particular instances might be necessary to move the public, and legislatures, in the right directions. Certainly the social processes that interact with salience and availability can promote reform where 88 Report of The Columbia Accident Investigation Board, available at http://www.nasa.gov/columbia/home/CAIB_Vol1.html, at 12. 89 Id. at 102. it is needed. But there is no assurance here, particularly if social influences are leading people to exaggerate a problem, or to ignore the question of probability altogether. 
Politicians engage in the same basic project. By its very nature, the voice of an influential politician comes with amplifiers. When public officials bring an incident before the public, a seemingly illustrative example is likely to spread far and wide. A legal enactment can itself promote availability; if the law responds to the problems associated with hazardous waste dumps, or “hate crimes,” people might well come to see those problems as readily available. The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 would inevitably loom large no matter what President George W. Bush chose to emphasize. But the President, and his White House generally, referred to the attacks on countless occasions, frequently as a way of emphasizing the reality of seemingly distant threats and the need to incur significant costs to counteract them (including the 2003 Iraq war, itself fueled by presidential speeches including vivid narratives of catastrophic harm). And there is no doubt that the salience of these attacks played a large role in affecting political behavior—and that this role cannot be understood without reference to social influences. The implications for cultural differences should be clear. If leaders in different nations draw attention to different risks, there will be large-scale differences in risk perceptions. 
But all this does not provide the full picture. Beliefs and orientations are a product of availability, and social influences ensure both availability and salience. But as I have suggested, what is available is also a product of antecedent beliefs and orientations, both individual and social. In other words, availability is endogenous to, or a product of, predispositions, individual, cultural, and national. A great deal of further work remains to be done on this topic.90 
Why do some people recall and emphasize incidents in which a failure to take precautions led to serious environmental harm? A likely reason is that they are predisposed to favor environmental protection. And why do some people recall and emphasize incidents in which environmental protection led to huge costs for little gain? A 90 On culture, an influential treatment is Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky, Risk and Culture (1984); a natural reading of work by, and inspired by, Douglas and Wildavsky is that availability is a product of cultural orientations, rather than vice versa. But see Vogel, supra note, for a contrasting view. likely reason is that they are predisposed to oppose environmental controls. Here is an interaction between the availability heuristic and confirmation bias—“the tendency to seek information to confirm our original hypotheses and beliefs,”91 a tendency that reviewers have found in the judgments, referred to above, of both the Central Intelligence Agency and NASA. Confirmation bias plays a large role in different risk perceptions across individuals and groups. If members of a culturally distinct group are predisposed to believe that new technologies are risky, or that genetically modified organisms are hazardous, or that cell phones produce cancer, apparently supportive illustrations will be memorable, and contrary ones will be discounted. 
Of course predispositions are not a black box, and they do not come from the sky. They have sources. Among their sources are availability and salience. After incidents of mad cow disease in England, many Europeans lost trust in the relevant authorities and acquired a predisposition to fear, and to take and urge precautions against, associated and analogous threats. In Europe, the growth of precautionary thinking, across certain domains, had a great deal to do with particular salient incidents.92 Hence there is complex set of interactions, with heuristics helping to constitute predispositions, which are in turn responsible for the real-world operation of heuristics. All this happens socially, not merely individually; and predispositions are not static. When people are in a group that is predisposed in a particular direction, the salient examples will be quite different from those that are salient in a group with an opposite predisposition. Here group polarization is especially important. What is sometimes described as “culture,” or as “deep-rooted cultural differences,” may be no such thing. Cascade effects and polarization, interacting with availability, can be responsible for inclinations and variations that might well have taken another form. 
On the other hand, different cultural orientations can play a large role in determining what turns out to be available. For example, the United States is highly diverse, and for some purposes, it is plausible to think of different regions and groups as having different cultures. Within African-American communities, the available instances are sometimes quite different from those that can be found within all-white communities. 91 See Elliott Aronson, The Social Animal 150 (New York: W.H. Freeman, 7th ed., 1995). 92 See Vogel, supra note. Across nations, the differences are even more striking, in part because different worldviews play such a dominant role. And what is true for individuals is true for nations as well. Just as predispositions are, in part, a function of availability, so too availability is, in part, a function of predispositions. Social influences operate at both levels, affecting what is available and also moving predispositions in one or another direction. The problem is that both individuals and societies may be fearful of nonexistent or trivial risks—and simultaneously neglect real dangers. 
In this chapter I have ventured a conceptual claim and a psychological hypothesis. The conceptual claim is that it is not possible to be “precautionary” in general. An individual or a nation can take precautions against particular risks, to be sure, but no individual or nation can be precautionary as a general proposition. The reason is that risks are on all sides of social situations. If a person or state purports to be precautionary, it is almost certainly taking steps that create risks of their own. The point certainly holds for aggressive regulation of genetic modification of food and greenhouse gases; it holds as well for preemptive wars. 
The psychological hypothesis is that the operation of the Precautionary Principle, and differences in risk perception among nations, have a great deal to do with the availability heuristic. If people can think of cases in which a risk has come to fruition, they are far more likely to think that the risk should be taken seriously. “Availability bias,” in the form of excessive fear, and “unavailability bias,” in the form of unjustified neglect, are unfortunate results. All cultures suffer from both of these. But they suffer from them in different ways, because what is available in one culture is often less available, or unavailable, in others. 
Of course availability is a product of social influences. Cascade effects and group polarization play substantial roles in making one or another incident available to many or most. There are multiple equilibria here: It is hardly inevitable that SARS would have great salience in Canada but not in the United States. Single incidents and small shocks can make an extraordinary difference. Moreover, what is available to some will not be available to all, in part because of social influences, and in part because of individual, cultural, and national predispositions. Hence I have emphasized that some cultures will find some risks “available” not because of simple facts, but because the relevant citizens are predisposed to focus on some risks but not on others. 
I believe that the availability heuristic provides many clues about the operation of the Precautionary Principle and cross-cultural risk perceptions. But a great deal of empirical work remains to be done, not least in exploring the complex interactions among individual cognition, cascade effects, the behavior of those who spread information, and cultural predispositions. Readers with comments should address them to: 
Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The Division of Labor within and between Law Firms (April 2004) Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Hierarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of Knowledge: Theory and Evidence from the Legal Services Industry (April 2004) James C. Spindler, Conflict or Credibility: Analyst Conflicts of Interest and the Market for Underwriting Business (July 2004) Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of Public International Law (July 2004) Douglas Lichtman and Eric Posner, Holding Internet Service Providers Accountable (July 2004) Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein, Company Stock, Market Rationality, and Legal Reform (July 2004) Cass R. Sunstein, Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information Markets (August 2004) Cass R. Sunstein, Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross-Cultural Risk Perceptions (August 2004) 
The Supreme Court has said that there is a constitutional "right to marry"; but what can this possibly mean? People do not have a right to marry their dog, their aunt, June 29, a rose petal, or a sunny day. This essay attempts to make some progress in understanding both the content and the scope of the right to marry. With respect to content, it concludes that people have no more and no less than this: a right of access to whatever expressive and material benefits the state now provides for the institution of marriage. It follows that the right to marry falls within the "fundamental rights" branch of equal protection doctrine, and is not properly understood in terms of substantive due process; it also follows that the state could abolish the official institution of marriage tomorrow. With respect to scope, the essay identifies a minimal understanding, to the effect that the right to marry is enjoyed by any couple consisting of one adult man and one adult woman. The minimal understanding can claim a plausible defense in a tradition-based understanding of fundamental rights; and on institutional grounds, a tradition-based understanding has a great deal of appeal. Its problem is that it has a degree of arbitrariness. This is a formidable problem, but for reasons of prudence, federal courts should not adopt a broader understanding that would, for example, require same-sex marriages to be recognized. The essay concludes with some remarks on the possible abolition of the official institution of marriage. It explains that there are plausible grounds for objecting to that institution. It emphasizes that marriage is emphatically a government-run licensing system, no more and no less, and that an understanding of this point should inform constitutional discussion. 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This is a substantially revised text of the Uri & Caroline Bauer Memorial Lecture, delivered at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law on September 8, 2004; readers are asked to make allowances for a text originally intended for oral delivery. I am most grateful to the students and faculty of the law school community for their kindness and multiple suggestions during my visit. I am also grateful to Martha Nussbaum for many discussions, to Mary Anne Case, Elizabeth Emens, and Carolyn Frantz for helpful comments, and to Rob Park for excellent research assistance. 
2081 
personal rights essential to the orderlypursuit of happiness by free men.... Marriage is one of the basic civil rights of man, fundamental to our very existence andsurvival. -Loving 
v. Virginia** 
it. -Friedrich Nietzsche*** 
should the state privilege only dyads? Why not triads? In other words, what business does the state have in deciding which adult personalrelationshipsare deserving of legalprotection and benefits and which arenot? -Patricia Cain**** 
INTRODUCTION 
Is there a constitutional right to marry? On several occasions, the Supreme Court has said so.' But the very idea of a "right to marry" presents two sets of puzzles. The first involves the content of the right-what it provides for those who are entitled to it. The second set of puzzles involves the scope of the right to marry-the kinds of relationships that can claim it. 
Begin with the first puzzle. As an official matter, marriage is no more and no less than a government-run licensing system. Why should governments license marriages? Some people are skeptical of the official institution of marriage and argue that it should be abolishednot by forbidding private arrangements, religious or otherwise, but by eliminating the special status that governments confer, including a unique set of legal benefits and burdens. 2 Doubts about this particular licensing system cast in sharp relief the wide range of possibilities, with respect to human relationships, that the simple notions of "married" and 388 U.S. 1(1967). * **** Friedrich Nietzsche, Twilight of the Idols, in THE PORTABLE NIETZSCHE 544 (Walter 
"single" tend to erase. 3 But are states under a constitutional obligation to recognize an official institution called "marriage?" Does the Due Process Clause really mean that governments must provide tax, social security, and other benefits to those who are lawfully married? Or does it mean, much more modestly, that states may not forbid religious and other organizations from performing "marriage ceremonies" and allowing those who go through such ceremonies to claim that status as a matter of personal choice? 
And what relationships are included within the right to marry? People do not have a right to marry their dog, their house, their refrigerator, July 21, or a rose petal. At most, people have a right to marry people. But the Supreme Court cannot possibly have meant to suggest that "people" have a general right to marry "people"; it did not mean to say that under the Due Process Clause, any "person" has a right to marry a dozen other people, or five, or even two. We might conclude that the Court is saying at most that one person has a right to marry one other person. But if a right to marry exists, what is the basis for this particular limitation on the right? 
The major goal of this essay is to make some progress in understanding the content and scope of the right to marry. My initial suggestion is that the right to marry is best understood as an analogue to the right to vote. In both cases, states are under no obligation to create the relevant institutions; but once the state creates those institutions, the Constitution imposes large barriers to government efforts to deny people access to them. This point suggests that the right to marry should be taken as part of the "fundamental rights" branch of equal protection, not as part of substantive due process. But what is the institution of marriage? It has two characteristics: the expressive legitimacy that comes from the public institution of marriage; and the panoply of material benefits, both economic and non-economic, that the marital relationship confers. 4 The right to marry, then, comprises a 3 Anita Bernstein, For and Against Marriage:A Revision, 102 MICH. L. REV. 129 (2003); Elizabeth F. Emens, Monogamy's Law: Compulsory Monogamy and PolyamorousExistence, 29 N.Y.U. REV. L. & SOC. CHANGE 277 (2004). 
4 For a highly illuminating summary of one state's law, see Goodridge v. Dep 't of Pub. Health, 798 N.E.2d 941, 955-56 (Mass. 2003) (citations omitted): 
With no attempt to be comprehensive, we note that some of the statutory benefits conferred by the Legislature on those who enter into civil marriage include, as to property: joint Massachusetts income tax filing; tenancy by the entirety (a form of ownership that provides certain protections against creditors and allows for the automatic descent of property to the surviving spouse without probate); extension of the benefit of the homestead protection (securing up to $300,000 in equity from creditors) to one's spouse and children; automatic rights to inherit the property of a deceased spouse who does not leave a will; the rights of elective share and of dower (which allow surviving spouses certain property rights where the decedent spouse has not made adequate provision for the survivor in a will); entitlement to wages owed to a deceased employee; eligibility to continue certain businesses of a deceased spouse; the 
right of access to the expressive and material benefits that the state affords to the institution of marriage. Unless a compelling justification can be found, no one can be denied access to those benefits. This understanding of the right to marry suggests that states may abolish marriage without offending the Constitution; it also suggests that so long as the institution of marriage exists, the relevant right entitles people, not to any particular set of expressive and material benefits, but to exactly that panoply of benefits that the relevant state offers. In this respect, the dimensions of the right are determined by close reference to positive law. 
But what is the scope of that right? At a minimum, the right includes relationships between one man and one woman. Hence we can specify the minimal content of the right to marry: a right, by one adult man and one adult woman, to enter into the marital relationship, with whatever expressive and materialincidents the state affords, unless the relevant restriction is supported by compelling justifications. This minimal understanding is fully consistent with the Supreme Court's decisions. It can also claim plausible support in a tradition-centered approach to constitutional interpretation, one that attempts to root an right to share the medical policy of one's spouse; thirty-nine week continuation of health coverage for the spouse of a person who is laid off or dies; preferential options under the Commonwealth's pension system; preferential benefits in the Commonwealth's medical program, MassHealth; financial protections for spouses of certain Commonwealth employees (fire fighters, police officers, prosecutors, among others) killed in the performance of duty; the equitable division of marital property on divorce; temporary and permanent alimony rights; the right to separate support on separation of the parties that does not result in divorce; and the right to bring claims for wrongful death and loss of consortium, and for funeral and burial expenses and punitive damages resulting from tort actions. 
Exclusive marital benefits that are not directly tied to property rights include the presumptions of legitimacy and parentage of children born to a married couple; and evidentiary rights, such as the prohibition against spouses testifying against one another about their private conversations, applicable in both civil and criminal cases. Other statutory benefits of a personal nature available only to married individuals include qualification for bereavement or medical leave to care for individuals related by blood or marriage; an automatic "family member" preference to make medical decisions for an incompetent or disabled spouse who does not have a contrary health care proxy; the application of predictable rules of child custody, visitation, support, and removal out-of-State when married parents divorce. 
Where a married couple has children, their children are also directly or indirectly, but no less auspiciously, the recipients of the special legal and economic protections obtained by civil marriage. Notwithstanding the Commonwealth's strong public policy to abolish legal distinctions between marital and nonmarital children in providing for the support and care of minors, the fact remains that marital children reap a measure of family stability and economic security based on their parents' legally privileged status that is largely inaccessible, or not as readily accessible, to nonmarital children. Some of these benefits are social, such as the enhanced approval that still attends the status of being a marital child. Others are material, such as the greater ease of access to familybased State and Federal benefits that attend the presumptions of one's parentage. understanding of liberty in longstanding practices.5 Under the minimal understanding, some bans on incestuous marriages are probably unconstitutional; but the bans on homosexual, bigamous, and polygamous marriages are legitimate, simply because such marriages do not involve one man and one woman. 
The principal problem with the minimal understanding is that it seems to draw arbitrary lines. Why should the scope of the right be limited in that way? Compare a maximal understanding of the right to marry: a right, by two or more adults, to enter into the marital relationship, with its expressive and material incidents, unless the relevant restriction is supported by compelling justifications. This approach would essentially convert marriage from a closed licensing system into an open-ended one, allowing people to enter into marital agreements as they see fit. Such an approach might tailor its economic incidents to the particulars of the relationship-refusing, for example, to accord economic benefits when there is no sufficient reason for them. From the constitutional point of view, the problem with the maximal understanding is that it depends on a broad and unanchored understanding of "liberty," one that endangers restrictions on marriage that are at least time-honored. The task is to produce a conception of the scope of the right that lacks the arbitrariness of the minimal understanding and also the extreme breadth of the maximal one. 
I suggest that for courts, the best way to carry out that task is by reference not to the Due Process Clause, which is founded on tradition, but the Equal Protection Clause, which calls traditions into sharp doubt. The question is whether a state has an adequate justification, under the appropriate standard of review, to deny certain people access to the expressive and material benefits of marriage. The maximal understanding is certainly not compelled by equal protection principles, but the minimal understanding runs into serious difficulties, above all in the context of prohibitions on same-sex marriages. I contend that in principle, bans on same-sex marriage do run into real problems under the Equal Protection Clause, but that federal courts should be extremely reluctant to invalidate such bans for prudential reasons involving their limited role in the constitutional order. The issue of same-sex marriage is best handled through democratic arenas and at the state level (plausibly including decisions of state courts). 
I conclude with some general remarks about the institution of marriage. As many people have argued, there are reasons to question whether states should operate and license the marital institution. It is not unreasonable to ask whether marriage should be deregulatedwhether it should be run by religious and other institutions, subject not 5 Michael H. v. Gerald D., 478 U.S. 186 (1986) (plurality opinion). to state licensing law, but to rules of contract and criminal prohibitions. I attempt to spell out the grounds for this view. Because the abolition of state-licensed marriage would be such a radical step, one that would defeat longstanding expectations and eliminate one means through which people affirm their commitments to one another, I do not favor it. But an appreciation of the arguments in opposition to official marriage helps to cast the right to marry in a fresh light, by demonstrating that we are speaking here of a system of aggressive government intervention, not of anything that stems from nature. For the future, the shape of that system should be seen as chosen rather than dictated. Constitutional decisions should be cautious, here as elsewhere, but they should be made with an awareness that marriage is a government-operated licensing scheme, no less and no more. 
I. 
MARRIAGE AND THE SUPREME COURT 
The constitutional right to marriage has long origins. In 1888, the Court described marriage as "the most important relation in life,"' 6 and said that it was "the foundation of the family and of society, without which there would be neither civilization nor progress."'7 In Meyer v. Nebraska,8 one of the cases that created substantive due process in its current form, the Court said that the Due Process Clause protected the right "to marry, establish a home and bring up children." 9 In Skinner v. Oklahoma,10 striking down a compulsory sterilization law, the Court described marriage as "fundamental to the very existence and survival of the race."' I Griswold v. Connecticut12 held that states could not ban married couples from using contraceptives. The Court emphasized that it was dealing with "a right of privacy older than the Bill of Rightsolder than our political parties, older than our school system. Marriage is a coming together for better or for worse, hopefully enduring, and intimate to the degree of being sacred."' 3 
None of these cases, however, involved the right to marry as such. In its modern form, the right to marry is principally a product of three cases. The initial decision is Loving v. Virginia,14 where the Court struck down a ban on interracial marriage. Most of the Court's opinion 6 Maynard v. Hill, 125 U.S. 190, 205 (1888). 7 Id. at 211. 8 262 U.S. 390 (1923). 9 Id. at 399. 10 316 U.S. 535 (1942). 1l Id. at 541. 12 381 U.S. 479 (1965). 13 Id. at 486. 14 388 U.S. 1 (1967). 
spoke in terms of the Equal Protection Clause, seeing that ban as a form of racial discrimination. The Court could easily have stopped there. But in a separate ruling, set off in a puzzlingly independent section, the Court also held that the ban violated the Due Process Clause. In the Court's words, "the freedom to marry has long been recognized as one of the vital personal rights essential to the orderly pursuit of happiness by free men." 15 It added that "[m]arriage is one of the 'basic civil rights of man,' fundamental to our very existence and survival." 16 What does this mean? Apparently the Court believed that procreation, and possibly the successful raising of children, are inextricably linked to the institution of marriage. 
But the Loving Court's due process ruling was not free from ambiguity. After emphasizing that freedom to marry is "one of the vital personal rights," the Court added that the Due Process Clause is violated if the government denies "this fundamental freedom on so unsupportable a basis as the racial classifications embodied in these statutes"; it stressed that "freedom of choice to marry" may "not be restricted by invidious racial discrimination." 17 Subsequent cases confirm that the right to marry counts as fundamental for constitutional purposes-and is sufficient by itself to take the analysis into the domain of heightened scrutiny. 
The key decision is Zablocki v. Redhail.18 There the Court invoked the Equal Protection Clause to strike down a Wisconsin law forbidding people under child support obligations to remarry unless they obtained a judicial determination that they had met those obligations and that their children were not likely to become public charges. The Court announced that "the right to marry is of fundamental importance for all individuals,"' 9 and added that "the decision to marry has been placed on the same level of importance as decisions relating to procreation, childbirth, child rearing, and family relationships. '20 The Court did not give a careful explanation for this conclusion. It noted that women have a right to seek an abortion or to give birth to an illegitimate child; it claimed that "a decision to marry and raise the child in a traditional family setting must receive equivalent protection. 2 1 The Court added that if the "right to procreate means anything at all, it must imply some right to enter the only relationship in which" the state "allows sexual relations legally to take place." 22 The apparent suggestion here is that 15 Id.at 12. 16 Id.(citing Skinner v. Oklahoma ex rel. Williamson, 316 U.S. 535, 541 (1942)). 17Id. at 12. 18 434 U.S. 374 (1978). 19Id.at 384. 20 Id.at 386. 21 Id. 22 Id. the right to marry has constitutional status because the status of marriage represents a legal precondition for sexual relations. (In a period in which the Constitution is seen to protect sexual relations outside of marriage, 23 this suggestion loses its foundation.) Notwithstanding its clear association of the right to marry with other rights protected by the Due Process Clause, the Court's ultimate holding turned on the fundamental rights branch of the equal protection doctrine, not on substantive due process-a point to which I will return. 
The Court did not mean to suggest that because of the existence of the right to marry, it would apply strict scrutiny to "every state regulation which relates in any way to the incidents of or prerequisite for marriage. '24 The Court said that it would uphold "reasonable regulations that do not significantly interfere with decisions to enter into the marital relationship. ' 25 But any "direct and substantial" interference with the right to marry would be strictly scrutinized. In a concurring opinion, Justice Stevens underlined the point, urging that the Constitution would cast serious doubt on any "classification which determines who may lawfully enter into the marriage relationship. '26 This suggestion appears to be extremely broad, applying to incestuous and same-sex marriages among others-though it is doubtful that Justice Stevens meant to suggest that states must recognize those marriages. In Zablocki itself, the restriction could not be justified, for it was an unnecessarily intrusive means of ensuring compliance with child support obligations. 
striking down a prison regulation that prohibited inmates from marrying unless there were "compelling reasons" for them to do so. "Compelling reasons" were understood to include pregnancy or the birth of an illegitimate child.28 The Court acknowledged that the prison setting is distinctive and usually calls for a measure of judicial deference. But it concluded that Zablocki applies in that setting, at least in such a way as to call for invalidation of the prison regulation. In fact the Court went beyond its previous decisions to spell out some of the foundations of the right to marry. It said that marriages, by inmates as by others, "are expressions of emotional support and public commitment. '29 It emphasized that these are "important and significant aspects of the marital relationship. ' 30 It added that marriages are often recognized as 23 See Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 5 24 434 U.S. at 386. 25 Id.at 386-87 (citing Califano v. Jobst, 434 U.S. 47 (1977)). 26 Id.at 404. 27 482 U.S. 78 (1987). 28 Id.at 82. 29 Id.at 95. 30 Id.at 96. having spiritual significance-and that "marital status often is a prerequisite for" a number of material benefits, including property rights, government benefits, and less tangible advantages. 3 1 These conclusions underlay the Court's conclusion that even in prisons, the right to marry must be respected unless the state produces compelling reasons to interfere with such a right. 
Very oddly, the Turner Court did not specify whether the right to marry is rooted in substantive due process (as Loving suggested) or in the fundamental rights branch of equal protection doctrine (the most sensible reading of Zablocki). It would be fair to read the Court as treating marriage as akin to other privacy rights, in a way that suggests that substantive due process is involved. But for purposes of reaching its conclusion, the Court did not have to choose between the two possible sources of its decision. 
II. 
WHAT IS THE RIGHT TO MARRY? OF POSITIVE RIGHTS AND 
NEGATIVE RIGHTS 
Suppose that there is a right to marry. What, exactly, does this mean? Imagine that a state abolishes the institution of marriage in the following sense: it says that it will not recognize anything called "marriage," nor will it provide marriage licenses in any form. It will not legitimate particular relationships through declaring them as "marriages." Nor will it confer special economic or other benefits on people who deem themselves to be "married." But it will not forbid such private arrangements as people choose. Above all, it will allow private persons to organize their personal relationships as they see fit, subject to imaginable limitations stemming from the criminal law (as in the ban on sexual relations with children and on incest). Religious ceremonies, constituting relationships that the parties may call "marriage," or whatever they like, would not be abolished. If the parties follow the proper formalities for enforceable contracts, their agreements would be enforceable under the ordinary terms of contract law. The state would provide default rules here as elsewhere. But as a matter of law, and apart from these points, there would be no such thing as "marriage" as an official matter of state licensing. 
Does the "right to marry" mean that the abolition of marriage would be unconstitutional? 32 Under the Court's decisions, this would not be an implausible conclusion. Perhaps the Court is best understood as recognizing the existence, within Anglo-American law, of the 31 Id. 
32 See Cain, supra note 2, for general discussion on whether the abolition of marriage would be unconstitutional. institution of marriage as one that the government recognizes and safeguards. But if there is a right to an official institution of marriage, what must the state do or provide? The initial question is what marriage actually entails. We need to distinguish here between material benefits on the one hand and expressive ones on the other. 
Many material benefits, economic and non-economic, accompany the marital relationship. 33 Of course state law varies, but these benefits fall into six major categories. 34 is paid to the "marriage penalty," the tax system rewards many couples when they marry-at least if one spouse earns a great deal more than the other.3 5 (The marriage penalty can be significant if the spouses both earn substantial incomes.) 36 Married couples can file joint returns. Members of such couples are allowed to transfer property between one another within being subject to gainloss valuation. couples through a number of entitlement programs. Under the Family and Medical Leave Act, 37 for example, employers must allow unpaid leave to workers who seek to care for a spouse; they need not do so for "partners." Veterans benefits provide a range of economic programs (involving medical care, housing, and educational assistance) to the spouses, but not the partners, of veterans. 38 Those who are married to federal employees can also claim benefits unavailable to those who are unmarried. Under state law, the entitlement to consortium 
MARRY 
protects spouses; the status of members of unmarried 39 couples is unclear. married couple obtains a number of benefits at the time of death. Default rules favor wives and husbands for those who die without a will, and many states forbid people from refusing to leave money to the person to whom they are married.40 Under the Uniform Probate Code, those who die intestate give much of their estate to their spouse, even if they had children. 41 In wrongful death actions, spouses automatically qualify for benefits; the status of those in unmarried couples is far less clear.42 Ownership benefits. Under both state and federal law, spouses may have automatic ownership rights that nonspouses lack. In community property states, people have automatic rights to the holdings of their spouses, and they cannot contract around the legal rules. Even in states that do not follow community property rules, states may presume joint ownership of property acquired after marriage and before legal separation. The idea of tenancy by the entirety may establish legal unity to married couples in a way that also grants ownership benefits (and burdens) to those involved. 43 
are given the right to make surrogate decisions of various 39 Compare Butcher v. Superior Court of Orange County, 188 Cal. Rptr. 503, 510 (Cal. Ct. App. 1983) (permitting a claim of loss of consortium when the couple is unmarried, based on a foreseeability of cohabitation standard), and Bulloch v. United States, 487 F. Supp. 1078 (D.N.J. 1980) (finding that New Jersey law permits an unmarried cohabitant to file a claim for loss of consortium), with Walsh v. Armstrong World Indus., Inc., 700 F. Supp. 783 (S.D.N.Y. 1988) (finding that New York law does not permit recovery for loss of consortium when the couple is not married), and Gurliacci v. Mayer, 590 A.2d 914, 931 (Conn. 1990) (holding that claims for loss of consortium are limited to spouses under Connecticut law). 
40 See Ralph C. Brashier, Disinheritanceand the Modern Family, 45 CASE W. RES. L. REV. 84, 94-98 (1994) (describing how nine states, under their community property laws, require that certain marital property be held as community property, half of which is automatically retained by the surviving spouse upon the other's death). 
41 UNIF. PROBATE CODE § 2-102 (amended 1990); 8 U.L.A. § 2-102 (1997). 
42 Under New York law, a spouse who married the decedent after the lethal injury was inflicted can recover under the state's wrongful death statute. See Walsh, 700 F. Supp. at 785-86; see also MD. CODE ANN., CTS. & JUD. PROC. § 3-904(b) (2003) (if the deceased person has no spouse, parents, or children, a person "substantially dependent" on the deceased can recover as a secondary beneficiary). But see Holguin v. Flores, 18 Cal. Rptr. 3d 749, 759-60 (Cal. Ct. App. 2004) (under California law, while cohabitating same-sex couples have a statutory right to recover for wrongful death, cohabitating heterosexual couples do not). 
43 See, e.g., In re Estate of Suggs, 405 So. 2d 1360 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 198 1) (describing that a conveyance to spouses will by default create a tenancy by the entirety, while the same type of conveyance to an unmarried couple will create a tenancy in common by default). sorts in the event of incapacitation. When an emergency arises, a spouse is permitted to make judgments on behalf of an incapacitated partner.4 4 More generally, a spouse might be appointed formal guardian, entitled to make decisions about care, residence, and money, as well as about particular medical options. 45 state courts, recognize marital privileges, including a right to keep marital communications confidential and to exclude adverse spousal testimony.46 
This catalogue includes a large set of benefits, and there are sharp political constraints on any effort to rethink them; but certainly the state is not constitutionally required to provide them. Suppose, for example, that the state altered a host of laws to place married people closer to, or on the same plane as, or even below unmarried couples or single people. It defies belief to suggest that the alteration would be an unconstitutional violation of the "right to marry." Recall that Zablocki limited its holding to "direct and substantial interference" with the right to marry; the Court expressly said that it did not mean to draw into question laws that affect people's incentives to marry. The line the Court meant to draw is not entirely clear, but at the very least, existing doctrine does not require economic benefits to be provided to married people as such. 
But if the right to marry does not require a panoply of economic benefits, what, exactly, does it entail? Perhaps it operates as a kind of precondition for certain familial rights that continue to be material in a sense but that are, broadly speaking, associational in character-the right, for example, to visit and make choices for a loved one in case of incapacitating illness. Under existing law, marriage is not literally a precondition for these rights; but it usually makes their exercise significantly easier. Is the state constitutionally obliged to provide the institution of marriage so as to recognize these rights? Suppose that a state refuses to license or to acknowledge marriages and denies members of long-term relationships the right to make decisions on behalf of their incapacitated partners in the hospital. There is a plausible argument that the Due Process Clause forbids states from disallowing such visits. 47 Or suppose that the state refuses to license or 44 See, e.g., Mark Fowler, Note, Appointing an Agent to Make Medical Treatment Choices,84 COLUM. L. REv. 985, 992-95 (1984) (describing the rights of spouses and other family members to make medical decisions on behalf of an incapacitated patient). 
45 See Chambers, supra note 34, at 455. 
46 See Trammel v. United States, 445 U.S. 40 (1980); State v. Christian, 841 A.2d 1158 (Conn. 2004). 
47 The argument seems afortioriafter Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57 (2000), which held that there is a constitutional right, on the part of parents, to control visitation. to acknowledge marriages and denies people in long-term relationships the right to adopt children. Serious constitutional questions would be raised by the denial of that right.48 Indeed, serious questions can be raised by the denial of that right under existing law. 
But none of this is an argument about marriage as such. So long as official marriage exists, the state might be permitted to say that marriage is both a necessary and sufficient condition for the enjoyment of certain benefits, privileges, and default rules. 49 Indeed, one argument for marriage is that the institution allows the ready creation of default rules for otherwise unprovided-for cases. 50 If official marriage was abolished, the Due Process Clause might give people a right to some of the benefits and arrangements to which married people are ordinarily entitled under existing state law. But this point does not suggest a right to marriage. I conclude that the government is under no constitutional duty to recognize marriage as a way of giving economic, associational, or other material benefits to married couples. 
What else, then, might an affirmative right to marry entail? The only possible answer is expressive-a kind of official endorsement or recognition of the marital relationship. Recall that in Turner, the Court stressed that marriages are "expressions of emotional support and public commitment." 51 If a state says that people are "married," then they are in fact married, and not only for purposes of financial and other benefits. They are married in the sense that the relationship is taken, by everyone who knows about it, to have a particular quality as an official matter. In short, marriage has an important signaling function, and quite apart from material benefits, the official institution of marriage entails a certain public legitimation and endorsement. 
Consider two people who announce their marriage to the world, or who seem to act as married couples do, or both, but with one wrinkle: under state law, they are not in fact married. (Suppose too that they have not been married through any formal ceremony, religious or otherwise.) To be sure, people can become "engaged" simply by announcing that fact. But to be married as a matter of formal law, they must go through certain official procedures. 52 Does the right to marry mean that the Constitution requires states to make those procedures available? Perhaps it does. If so, the right to marry has some of the features of the public forum doctrine, which requires the government to 48 See Troxel, 530 U.S. at 65-66. 
Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 5 
50 I am grateful to Mary Anne Case for raising this point in several discussions. 51 Turner v. Safley, 482 U.S. 78, 95 (1987). 
52 I put to one side the interesting case of common law marriages, where people are sometimes permitted to become "marridd," within the view of the state, just by virtue of living together for a long period. leave the streets and parks open for expressive activity. In the leading case from the early part of the twentieth century, the Court said: Wherever the title of streets and parks may rest, they have immemorially been held in trust for the use of the public and time out of mind, have been used for the purposes of assembly, communicating thought between citizens, and discussing public questions. Such use of the streets and public places has, from ancient times, been a part of the privileges, immunities, rights, and liberties of citizens. 53 
It is not entirely clear that the public forum doctrine forbids the government from privatizing the streets and parks; but this view is far from implausible. If we attend to the purposes of the public forum doctrine, perhaps public streets and parks are constitutionally required, so as to ensure something like "public spaces" in which free expression can occur. Without such spaces, the system of free expression would be badly compromised. 54 Perhaps marriage can be understood in similar terms. On this view, states are under an obligation to make the marital form available-not to give married people economic advantages, but to give official recognition and endorsement to the marital relationship. And on this view, what is at stake in the right to marry is expressive, rather than material. 
But in the end this argument seems unconvincing-and hence there is probably no right to the institution of marriage as such. We are speaking here of fundamental rights, and rights protected as such are generally rights to be free from government intrusion; they do not require affirmative provision by the state. 55 The right to choose abortion, for example, forbids the state to impose legal barriers to the right to choose, but it does not require the state to fund abortion. 56 For the ordinary privacy rights with which marriage is associated, the Constitution requires governmental noninterference; it does not require the government to provide money, institutional arrangements, or anything else. 
Of course this analogy is not decisive. We could imagine a ruling to the effect that the legal institution of marriage is so time-honored, and so indispensable to family formation, that states must make it available. But this argument would likely fall on deaf ears in any situation in which marriage really was abolished. To see why, note the difficulty, at the present time, of imagining a state that has actually abolished the legal institution of marriage. This is difficult to imagine simply because most people cherish that institution. If a state abolished marriage, it would be because most people, or most influential people, had come to believe that the institution should be abolished. In those circumstances, the idea that there is a right to that institution would be difficult to accept. I conclude, then, that whatever the content of the right to marry, it does not include a right that the state maintain an official scheme for recognizing and legitimating marriage. 
The argument so far does not suggest that the state may "outlaw" the institution of marriage without offense to the Constitution. Suppose, for example, that a state said it would not only fail to recognize marriages as such, but also that it would not permit private organizations, religious and otherwise, to recognize marriages. (Why would a state do this? Any answer would be fanciful under present circumstances, but perhaps we could imagine a decision that the institution causes more harm than good-an issue to which I will return.) The initial question, a hard one, is what exactly this means. Suppose that it is essentially expressive and terminological-that by banning marriages, the state is not forbidding civil unions or relational commitments via contract. If so, the ban on marriages is not so different, analytically, from a refusal to recognize marriage as an official matter. But suppose a state went further, deciding that it really sought to "forbid marriage," among other things by refusing to allow its ordinary background law to be used to create the expressive and economic equivalents of marriage. As stated, this very idea is obscure, but suppose that the state abolishes not only material benefits, but also an effort to recreate, through private contract, the expressive equivalent of state-sponsored marriage. 57 
Here it is reasonable to say that a serious constitutional problem would be raised under the "right to marry" cases-at least as these are informed by cases recognizing a (narrow) right to intimate association. 58 To be sure, people do not have a right to contract on whatever terms they choose, and the state has a great deal of power to intrude into contractual relationships. But it is most doubtful that the Court would permit states to abolish the formalization of intimate relationships through voluntary agreements. Surely any such effort would be unconstitutional, under the Free Exercise Clause, as applied to religious institutions. And the Due Process Clause would almost certainly be taken to invalidate efforts to forbid nonreligious "unions" created solely for expressive purposes. Thus the constitutional right to marry does not only provide access to an official institution; it also forbids state efforts to interfere with certain private arrangements that recognize what the parties consider to be the marital form. 
My conclusion is that the "right to marry" entails both some right of intimate association in the private sphere and (more relevantly for present purposes) an individualright of access to the official institution of marriageso long as the state provides that institution. With respect to the access right, the best analogy is to the right to vote. As the Constitution is now understood, states are not required to provide elections for state offices. 59 But when elections are held, the right to vote qualifies as fundamental, and state laws that deprive people of that right will be strictly scrutinized and generally struck down. The analogy between the right to marry and the right to vote is quite close. In both cases, the state may not be required to create the practice in the first instance. But so long as the practice exists, the state must make it available to everyone. 
The major difference is that the right to vote is unambiguously protected under the "fundamental rights" branch of equal protection doctrine, 60 whereas the right to marry has not been squarely placed there, rather than under the Due Process Clause itself. And insofar as the Court has suggested that the right to marry has due process foundations, that right does emerge as unusual, even unique. The Due Process Clause provides, substantively, no other right to an institution that government is permitted to abolish. Substantive due process rights in the same general area, such as the right to freedom from governmental interference in the domain of consensual sex, are very different. As I have said, those rights involve a right to freedom from government intrusion, rather than a right of access to a state-created practice. And this very point suggests that the Court has erred insofar as it has treated the right to marry as part of substantive due process rather than as part of the fundamental rights branch of equal protection doctrine. The latter course is a far more sensible way of analyzing the question. Apparently the Court went off track because of the intuitive connection between sexuality and reproduction (protected by substantive due process) and marriage (not easily analyzed in the same terms). I conclude that the right to marry should be seen as part of the fundamental rights branch of equal protection doctrine, rather thar. as substantive due process. 
But this conclusion raises a serious question of its own. Why does the right to marry so qualify? In fact it is not at all easy to explain, in general, why some rights qualify as fundamental for equal protection purposes. The Equal Protection Clause seems to forbid certain kinds of discrimination; it does not appear to create fundamental rights of any kind. With the right to vote, perhaps we can say that the answer is internal to the right itself: the right to vote, to count as such, must be provided equally to all. On one view, political equality and the right to vote should be taken to entail one another. If some people are not permitted to vote, or if effective barriers are created so as to ensure that some people's votes count more than others, or if the right of access to voting is compromised, then the idea of political equality is undermined; and that idea is integral to the voting itself. I do not mean to say that this argument is ultimately convincing. I mean only to suggest that if the right to vote qualifies as fundamental for equal protection purposes, it is because there is something in that right that, by its very nature, calls for equality in its distribution. 
The same cannot be said of the right to marry. There is nothing internal to that right that calls for its equal distribution. If the right to marry qualifies as fundamental for equal protection purposes, it must be simply by virtue of its importance-an idea that does have resonances in some of the fundamental rights cases under the Equal Protection Clause. 6 1 But this idea itself raises further complexities. On what scale of importance does marriage so qualify, when welfare benefits and housing do not (as the Court has held)? 62 Perhaps we can answer that importance is not all that is involved, and that the central idea is that for interests of certain kinds-perhaps those connected with family formation-the state is under an obligation of powerful justifications whenever it imposes selective restrictions or curtailments. 
Suppose that the point is accepted. It remains to ask what, in particular, makes the right to marry special in a constitutionally relevant sense. The first answer, a tempting one, would point to the material incidents of marriage. As I have noted, a large number of benefits accompany the marital relationship. Some of these can be provided by explicit agreements, but others (such as tax benefits and family leave 61 See Skinner v. Oklahoma, 316 U.S. 535 (1942). 
62 See, e.g., Lindsey v. Normet, 405 U.S. 56 (1972); Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471 (1970). benefits) require official marriage. But on reflection, these material benefits cannot be the basis for the view that marriage counts as a fundamental right. Material benefits of the most fundamental kind are involved in many programs involving welfare and subsistence; and under current doctrine, they do not qualify as fundamental for equal protection purposes.63 Hence it would be extremely odd to say that the marital benefits of marriage by themselves are enough to give the right to marry the status of a fundamental right. 
A second answer, suggested by Zablocki, is that marriage is a legal precondition for certain other rights that do have constitutional status, including the right to engage in sexual relations and to procreate. And if Zablocki is taken at face value, this answer is certainly plausible. But it faces two serious problems. The first is Turner, which understands the right to marry in terms that have nothing to do with the enjoyment of other privacy rights. The second is Lawrence v. Texas,64 which recognizes a freestanding right to engage in sexual relations-a right that exists outside of the context of marriage. In the end, this second answer is impossible to accept, even though it is supported by some of the language of Zablocki. 
This leaves only one possibility: the right to marry counts as fundamental, for equal protection purposes, because of the expressive benefits that come from official, state-licensed marriage. In a sense, this too is an odd conclusion. In no other context is a purely or even largely expressive reason a sufficient basis for giving special constitutional protection to an interest. And the expressive benefits of marriage are contingent on a particular constellation of social norms; there is nothing inevitable about them. In a different society, for example, the expressive benefits would be much lower. In fact American society is moving in that direction. All I am suggesting is that the underlying logic of the right to marry has everything to do with the fundamental importance of the expressive interests at stake. 
III. 
A. 
material and expressive incidents. And the discussion thus far should be enough to suggest that when the Supreme Court says that there is a right to marriage, it is not claiming that there is merely a right to the 63 See Lindsey, 405 U.S. at 69-74; Dandridge,397 U.S. at 485-87. 64 539 U.S. 5 material incidents of marriage. Suppose that a white person and an African-American seek to marry, and that a state says that such relationships can be formed as civil unions but not as marriages. Suppose too that civil unions have all the legal incidents of marriage. It is clear that under Loving, this form of discrimination would violate the Due Process Clause as well as the Equal Protection Clause. The state cannot deny interracial couples the right to marry merely by insisting that it is providing such couples with the right to the material incidents of marriage. So too, a state could not say that unless they have met their child support obligations, people may enter into civil unions but not marriage. 
Nor-though the question is harder-could a state agree to provide, for some rather than all, the expressive benefits of marriage but not its material ones. Certainly a state could not say that mixed race couples can "marry," but without receiving the material advantages that normally flow from marriage. What makes this question more difficult is that it is imaginable that a state could legitimately vary the material benefits of marriage with the features of that particular marriage. A state might say, for example, that people married for a certain period of time qualify for community property arrangements-but not until that time has passed. More controversially, perhaps a state might say that those who owe child support obligations may marry, but that the amounts due, for child support, supersede any spousal rights. Nothing in Zablocki renders adjustments of this kind unconstitutional. But-and this is the central point-such adjustments must be tailored to relevant facts about the situation; the material benefits of marriage cannot be used as a weapon by which to penalize some and to reward others. Hence the Court's opinions seem to mean that for those who enjoy it, the right to marry conveys a right of access to the symbolic and the material benefits of marriage,so long as the institution of marriage exists. In the cases involving the right to marry, and subject to the qualifications just given, a denial of either the symbolic or the material benefits of marriage would be impermissible. 
Notwithstanding the Court's rhetoric, however, it seems implausible to suggest that the Court meant to raise serious questions about all state laws dictating who may enter into a marital relationship. To approach the question, and to prepare the way for a discussion of the scope of the right to marry, it is necessary to distinguish between two possibilities: (1) The state does not allow certain people to enter into the marital relationship as that relationship is officially understood, but it does not ban those people from conducting unofficial marriage ceremonies and even from holding themselves out as married, so long as they do not seek the material benefits that flow from official recognition of that status. 
(2) The state does not allow certain people to enter into the marital relationship as officially understood; and it also outlaws, through criminal or civil sanctions, the performance of marriage ceremonies by such people, and bans them from holding themselves out as married. 
The first approach involves a mere refusal to recognize certain marriages; the second involves a prohibition on them. It should be obvious that the two must be treated differently. 
As an official matter, state laws distinguish among marriages that are void, voidable, and criminal. When a marriage is void, it is invalid from its inception. *In Illinois, for example, same-sex marriages are void, 65 as are those which are incestuous 66 or polygamous. 67 New York voids polygamous and incestuous marriages from their inception. 68 Incestuous marriages are defined to include those between an ancestor and descendant; brothers and sisters of the whole or half blood; an uncle and a niece or an aunt and a nephew. (Marriages between cousins are legitimate under New York law.) Notably, one state-Virginia-voids not only same-sex marriages but contracts designed to create same-sex unions. 
A civil union, partnership contract or other arrangement between persons of the same sex purporting to bestow the privileges or obligations of marriage is prohibited. Any such civil union, partnership contract or other arrangement entered into by persons of the same sex in another state or jurisdiction shall be void in all respects in Virginia and any contractual rights created thereby shall be void and unenforceable. 69 
Some marriages, while not void, can be annulled at the behest of either spouse. Marriages are voidable if they occurred under duress (through coercion, fraud, or the threat of force) or if one member is either physically or mentally incapable of entering into the marriage relation. 70 For fraud, many courts apply a strict test, "requiring that the misrepresentation go to the 'essentials' to render the marriage voidable.' '7 1 Others merely require that the fraud be material to the marriage. 72 Violation of the minimal age requirement typically makes a marriage voidable. In New York, if either spouse is under age eighteen at the time of the marriage, then the marriage is voidable for lack of consent. 73 And if either spouse has an incurable mental illness, then the marriage can be voided at either party's request.74 Frequently, physical incapacity, defined as the inability to have sexual relations, renders a marriage voidable; the inability must exist at the time of marriage and be incurable. 
There are also criminal sanctions for entering into some marriages. In New York, a person commits the crime of "incest when he or she marries ...a person whom he or she knows to be related to him or her, either legitimately or out of wedlock, as an ancestor, descendant, brother or sister of either the whole or the half blood, uncle, aunt, nephew or niece. ' 75 Other states similarly criminalize incestuous marriages. 76 It follows that to commit incest, sexual relations with a relative are not necessary; marrying one suffices for criminal liability. New York defines the crime of bigamy more precisely than incest: "A person is guilty of bigamy when he contracts or purports to contract a marriage with another person at a time when he has a living spouse, or the other person has a living spouse." 77 incapacitation-might be provided by ordinary contracts. It is not clear whether the Virginia statute is intended to make those contracts "void" in the case of same-sex relationships. 70 Id. § 7. 
71 D. KELLY WEISBERG & SUSAN APPLETON, MODERN FAMILY LAW: CASES AND MATERIALS 218 (2d ed. 1998). 
72 N.Y. DOM. REL. LAW § 7 (Consol. 2004); see also Sabbagh v. Copti, 251 A.D.2d 149 (N.Y. App. Div. 1998) (holding that misleading a wife into marrying by pretending to want children was grounds for an annulment). 
73 N.Y. DOM. REL. LAW § 7. 74 Id. 75 N.Y. PENAL LAW § 255.25 (Consol. 2004). 
76 See, e.g., CAL. PENAL CODE § 285 (West 2004); MISS. CODE ANN. § 97-29-27 (2004); MASS. GEN. LAWS ANN. ch. 272, § 17 (West 2004). 
77 N.Y. PENAL LAW § 255.15 (Consol. 2004); see also MISS. CODE ANN. § 97-29-13 (2004). 
Is there a difference, for constitutional purposes, among criminalizing a marriage, making it void, and making it voidable? In principle there should be. One reason that marriages are voidable is that there is a problem with consent; and if one of the parties complains that consent was absent, there is no constitutional problem with taking the complaint seriously. And if a state refuses to recognize certain marriages, it might be doing so because of its desire not to confer the economic benefits of marriages in circumstances in which such benefits are not justified. A state might believe, for example, that two-person marriages provide the only plausible justification for many or most of those benefits. If a state refuses to confer the economic benefits of marriage for this reason, but fails to criminalize purely private marriages, the issue is surely different from what it would be if a state imposed a criminal ban. I am not suggesting that criminal bans on polygamy are unconstitutional;7 8 I am suggesting only that a refusal to license marriages is less intrusive than a criminal ban. 
In many cases, a state might believe, not that those who participate in certain marriages should be subject to criminal sanctions, but that it does not want to confer expressive legitimacy on those marriages. It might believe, for example, that same-sex marriages do not deserve the same social approval as opposite-sex marriages; hence many people think that same-sex couples should be permitted to enter into civil unions but not into marriage. It would be possible to think that states have an adequate justification for rendering marriages void, but not for banning them, if performed by private organizations, religious or otherwise. A prohibition on private religious ceremonies allowing, for example, same-sex marriages, would raise serious questions under the Free Exercise Clause; and a ban on private ceremonies, even without a religious component, would raise questions of substantive due process. 
To say this is not to say that existing criminal prohibitions are generally or even mostly invalid. In general, the ban on incestuous marriages could be defended by pointing to the risk of coercion and the danger to any children who would result. 79 But it is easy to imagine some cases in which any such defense would be weak-as, for example, where the would-be spouses are both adults and do not plan to have children. Perhaps bans on polygamy could be defended by pointing to 78 They were upheld in Reynolds v. UnitedStates, 98 U.S. 145 (1878). 
79 For skeptical remarks on those harms, see Courtney Cahill, "What is Our Bane, That Alone 
(2000). the risk of exploitation, especially of the women involved. 80 It is easy to imagine a claim that if polygamy is permitted, women will be subordinated as a result. But this claim might be contested, and in any case it is doubtful whether Loving and Zablocki should be read to require a careful judicial inquiry into that question. That doubt makes it necessary to turn to the question of the scope of the right to marry. 
THE MINIMAL RIGHT TO MARRY 
Begin with a minimal understanding of the scope of the relevant right. By deeming the right to marry fundamental, the Court did not mean to suggest that it would strictly scrutinize any law that departed from the traditional idea that a marriage is between (one) woman and (one) man. It meant only to say that when a man and a woman seek to marry, the state must have exceedingly good reasons for putting significant barriers in their path. Thus the minimal understanding of the right to marry says that without very good reason, states may not deny an adult man and an adult woman access to the institution of marriage. This rationale has the advantage of fitting with the results in Loving, Zablocki, and Turner. It has the further advantage of not drawing into question bans on polygamous marriages or marriages between people and cats. 
A. 
But the minimal understanding does run into two problems. First, it might turn out to be less minimal than it appears, for one simple reason: it raises serious questions about bans on incestuous marriages. If this problem is deemed serious, two options are available. The right might be described more narrowly still: without very good reason,states may not deny an adult man andan adult woman access to the institution of marriage, unless the relevant marriage runs afoul of longstanding views about who may enter into the marital relationship. This extraminimalist understanding of the right to marry also fits with the Court's decisions, and it would ensure that the Court would uphold any restriction that is not novel (as were those in Zablocki and Turner)-a benefit for those who believe in a cautious judicial role in this domain. Alternatively, bans on incestuous marriages might be permitted only if they can be compellingly justified-and struck down if they cannot be. 
80 But see Emens, supra note 3, at 332-34 (describing some of the arguments made by legal scholars and economists in favor of polygamy). Thus, for example, an uncle might not be permitted to marry his niece simply because of the risk of coercion and psychological harm. But a ban on marriage between cousins might well be struck down. 
The second problem with the minimal understanding is much more formidable. The lines it draws might seem arbitrary in principle. Why, exactly, should the right to marry be limited in this way? Why, in any case, should the definition be such as to require the state to give a strong justification for any law that forbids marriage between one woman and one man-but not to give a strong justification for any other law that impinges on marital choices? 
A possible answer would be that marriage is a legal status, one whose scope depends on nothing more than conventions. The Court, on this view, has not been willing to revisit the question of what marriage is; it has worked entirely within the convention on that count. But are conventions really determinative? Suppose that a white person and an African-American seek to marry, and a state responds (in, say, 1965) that they cannot marry, because marriage is defined as, or is conventionally understood as, a legal relationship between people of the same race. The mere fact that there is a convention to this effect cannot be decisive. The convention is constitutionally unacceptable. There are countless conventions, and their legal legitimacy depends on whether they fit with the Constitution; their status as conventions cannot resolve that question. 
But perhaps this conclusion depends fundamentally on the antidiscrimination principles of the Equal Protection Clause. Perhaps the convention is authoritative unless it draws distinctions that offend that clause. Compare the idea of "parent," insofar as that idea has legal relevance. If I am the biological parent of a child, the state must have an extremely good reason to sever my relationship with that child. If I have adopted a child, the state must do the same. But suppose that someone claims that he wants to be "father" of his dog, or his horse, or his best friend, or his grandfather. (What does this mean? Suppose it means that the claimant seeks the expressive benefits of being a parent, the material benefits and burdens of parenthood, or both.) The prohibition on parental status, in such cases, need not be compellingly justified.8 1 Perhaps it is sufficient to say that to be a parent, it is necessary to fit within certain conventional categories. But I do not think that this is sufficient. If the convention, with respect to parenthood, drew invidious or irrational lines, it would be impermissible. If there is a distinction in terms of liberty alone, the real point is that for a biological or adoptive parent, state intervention imposes a loss that is distinctive in both degree and kind. That loss 81 Note that frequently there is no such prohibition. Adults can sometimes adopt adults; in fact adults can sometimes adopt adults who are older than they are. counts as a deprivation of liberty that must be compellingly justified. No such loss is involved when someone is prevented from becoming the parent of his dog, or his horse, or his best friend, or his grandfather. (What, exactly, is lost by that?) 
Marriage is quite different. If a man is told that he cannot marry another man, it is not so frivolous to suggest that the same loss is imposed on him as in Loving, Zablocki, and Turner. The same may well be true if someone is told that she cannot have two spouses. The claim here is not that the relevant restrictions are unconstitutional. It is only that they cannot be defended by reference to convention alone. 
Apart from convention, what might be said in favor of the minimal understanding of the right to marry? The initial answer is rooted in constitutional traditionalism. The central claim would be that in its substantive form, the Due Process Clause is backward-looking; it requires the state to justify any departure from longstanding views about individual rights.82 This view can find its foundation in Justice Holmes' famous dissenting opinion in the Lochner case, where he urged not that substantive process should be eliminated, but that it should apply only in cases involving departures from longstanding traditions. 83 Justice Holmes' position was prominently reiterated in Bowers v. Hardwic8k4 and Washington v. Glucksberg,85 where the Court suggested that the reach of the Due Process Clause should be defined with close reference to American traditions. And it is not difficult to understand why the Court might see the Due Process Clause in this way. A decision to root substantive due process in traditions, narrowly understood, might be the best way of reducing judicial mistakes and judicial burdens (in economic terminology, the costs of errors and the costs of decisions). Let us see how this argument might be spelled out. 
The idea of "substantive due process" is textually awkward, to say the least, 86 and doubts about its constitutional legitimacy might well lead the Court to attempt to reduce its reach. Quite apart from the textual problem, the notion of substantive due process seems hard to cabin. Which liberty rights count as special, for due process purposes? If this question is not easy to answer, the Court might be drawn to due 82 1 try to defend this view in Cass R. Sunstein, Sexual Orientationand the Constitution:A Note on the Relationship Between Due Process and Equal Protection, 55 U. CHI. L. REV. 1161 (1988). 
83 Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45, 75-76 (1905) (Holmes, J., dissenting). 84 478 U.S. 186 (1986). . 85 521 U.S. 707 (1997). 86 See J.H. ELY, DEMOCRACY AND DISTRUST (1983). 
process traditionalism simply as a way of sharply disciplining itself. Of course traditions are not self-defining; they do not come prepackaged for easy identification. 87 And hence it is tempting to object that constitutional traditionalism is a fraud, in which the key value judgment-how should the tradition be defined?-ends up doing all the work. 88 But the objection is overstated. If traditions are understood at the lowest possible level of abstraction, 89 then their use imposes a real limitation on judicial discretion. We should be able to agree, for example, that in the United States, there is no tradition of respect for incestuous marriages, or homosexual marriages, or marriages that involve more than two people. Thus the emphasis on tradition, described at a maximum specificity, might be defended on the ground that it reduces the burdens of judicial judgment, making substantive due process into something much closer to a system of rules. 90 
On a plausible view, moreover, the discipline imposed by tradition is far from arbitrary. Suppose that we believe, with Edmund Burke, 9' that traditions are likely to be wise, simply because they represent the judgment not of a single person, but of countless people over a long period of time. If so, then traditions have some of the advantages of markets, reflecting the assessments of many rather than few. To say this is not to say that longstanding practices are always justified. They might reflect prejudice or unjustified inequalities in power rather than wisdom. But perhaps practices are likely to be longstanding only if they serve important social interests; if so, there should be a presumption in their favor. It is certainly not senseless to say that if American states have generally refused to recognize certain marriages, there is reason to think that the refusal has some sense behind it. 
In any case the question is not whether longstanding practices always deserve support, measured against the best answer to that question on the merits. The question is instead an insistently comparative one: for judges interpreting the Due Process Clause is constitutional traditionalism preferable to an alternative approach, in which, for example, judges pay close attention to their own judgments about liberty, or judgments of an evolving public? 92 If we believe that 87 See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, Against Tradition, in DESIGNING DEMOCRACY: WHAT CONSTITUTIONS Do 67 (2002). 
88 See Jack Balkin, Tradition, Betrayal, and the Politics of Deconstruction, I1 CARDOZO L. REV. 1613 (1990); LAWRENCE TRIBE & MICHAEL DORF, ON READING THE CONSTITUTION (1991). 
89 See Michael H. v. Gerald D., 491 U.S. 110 (1989) (plurality opinion of Scalia, J.). 90 Thus there is a clear link between Justice Scalia's embrace of tradition, read at a level of great specificity, and his enthusiasm for binding judges via rules. See ANTONIN SCALIA, A MATTER OF INTERPRETATION (1997). 
91 See EDMUND BURKE, REFLECTIONS ON THE REVOLUTION IN FRANCE (Charles Posner ed., 1968). 
92 See Cass R. Sunstein & Adrian Vermeule, Interpretationand Institutions, 110 MICH. L. judges are prone to err, an effort to root substantive due process in traditions might well be better than any alternative. Seen in this light, due process traditionalism has a kind of rule-utilitarian defense. Compared to other approaches, it may be likely to reduce both the costs of decision and the costs of error. And even if we believe that judicial decisions have some advantages, we might agree that in the face of doubt, democratic judgments, especially in a federal system, deserve a measure of respect, in part because self-government is one of the rights to which people are entitled. 
For all of these reasons, due process traditionalism is far from irrational or arbitrary, even if it produces results that can be characterized as such in particular cases. And if we are due process traditionalists, we might insist that if there is a right to marry, it includes only the time-honored form: one man and one woman. On this reading, Loving v. Virginia is best seen as a simple equal protection ruling; if it has a substantive due process component as well, this is because the ban on racial intermarriage offended the minimal understanding. But even if it can be defended in principle, due process traditionalism has a serious doctrinal obstacle: Lawrence v. Texas.93 Any judgment about the scope of the right to marry must come to terms with what the Court said in Lawrence; and this is no simple matter. 
The simplest point is that in Lawrence the Court expressly rejected the idea that substantive due process is limited to practices that have long received respect. Striking down a state law forbidding same-sex relationships, the Court freely conceded that there is no history of accepting those relationships. On the contrary, and in a dramatic departure from both Bowers v. Hardwick and Washington v. Glucksberg, the Court said that longstanding traditions are not decisive. Current convictions are important, not old ones. "[W]e think that our laws and traditions in the past half century are of most relevance here. ' 94 Hence the Court stressed an "emerging recognition that liberty gives substantial protection to adult persons in deciding how to conduct their private lives in matters pertaining to sex."'95 
marry. Perhaps there is a distinction between "matters pertaining to sex," properly conceived as private, and the marital institution, which REV. 885 (2003); Adrian Vermeule, InterpretiveChoice, 75 N.Y.U. L. REV. 74 (2000). 93 539 U.S. 5 94 Id. at 571. 95 Id. requires official decisions by the state. But Lawrence raises some problems for a minimal understanding of the right to marry. It suggests that due process traditionalism is dead-and hence that the minimal understanding of that right cannot be defended by reference to tradition alone. 
On the other hand, a narrow reading of Lawrence-one that also confines the reach of substantive due process-is possible. Perhaps a right qualifies for substantive protection under the Due Process Clause either if it has a claim in longstanding traditions or if it is firmly rooted in society's "emerging recognition. '9 6 Of course this view has serious problems of its own. Is the Court reliably able to identify emerging recognitions? And if some recognition really is emerging, might it not be vindicated democratically, rather than judicially? Why should the Supreme Court, rather than legislatures, have the task of insisting on emerging recognitions? One answer would see Lawrence as a case about an American version of desuetude 97-as a prohibition on the use of the criminal law in circumstances in which the underlying conduct did not offend citizens' moral commitments, as reflected in a pattern of nonenforcement. In those circumstances, the statutory ban in Lawrence was a recipe for arbitrary and even discriminatory action, in a way that does violence to democratic ideals and even the rule of law. It does violence to democratic ideals because a law plainly lacking public support is nonetheless invoked to regulate private conduct. It violates the rule of law because a measure of this kind lacks, in practice, the kind of generality and predictability on which the rule of law depends. 98 
If this is the foundation for Lawrence, then the decision, while fatal to due process traditionalism, is not at all fatal to the minimal reading of the right to marry. It is not fatal to that reading because no problem of desuetude is involved. Indeed, no such problem is involved even if the idea of desuetude could be extended beyond the criminal law. Even if so, almost all states refuse to recognize marriages that exceed the minimal understanding; and because the refusal is widespread, it is acceptable. Indeed, Lawrence might be read to reach beyond the realm of desuetude to embody a general project of judicial modernization, involving not simply substantive due process but equal protection and cruel and unusual punishment as well.99 But even if that general project is embraced (of course a controversial matter), it does not justify, at the 96 See David A. Strauss, Modernization and Representation Reinforcement: An Essay in Memory of John HartEly, 57 STAN. L. REv. 761 (2004), for a discussion of "modernization" in connection with Lawrence. 
97 See Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? OfAutonomy, Desuetude,Sexuality, and Marriage,2003 SUP. CT. REV..27. 
98 See LON FULLER, THE MORALITY OF LAW (1962). 99 See the illuminating and suggestive treatment in Strauss, supranote 96. present time, judicial rulings that go beyond the minimal understanding of the right to marry. 
Lawrence has a great deal of ambiguity, and some people might be tempted to understand the decision in a way that suggests a broad autonomy principle, 10 0 one that might well jeopardize the minimal understanding. To clarify the issue, imagine a maximal understanding of the scope of the right to marry: two or more people have a right of access to the marital relationship, with its expressive and material incidents, unless the relevant restriction is supported by compelling justifications. It should not be so difficult to imagine a parallel world, perhaps not so radically different from our own, in which the maximal understanding were accepted. In such a world, people could deem themselves married, and receive the appropriate license from the state, so long as force and fraud were not involved. Religious marriages and official licensing would be entirely severed. Approval and disapproval would operate through norms, not through law. Should this understanding be accepted? What would be the implications? 
For many two-person marriages that are currently void, voidable, or criminal, compelling justifications for restricting marriage are present, and hence the relevant prohibitions would be upheld even under the maximal understanding. Thus prohibitions on nonconsensual marriages are plainly legitimate; so too with marriages involving people who are underage, and most incestuous marriages. Just as under the minimal understanding, some incestuous marriages would be in trouble under the maximal understanding; but most would not. The real difference between the minimal and the maximal understanding operates along only two dimensions. First, the latter eliminates the numerosity requirement. 10 1 Second, the latter eliminates the ban on same-sex marriages. There is no sign that the first step will attract any interest from federal or state judges; the second step is of course an active area of controversy, at least in the state courts and in democratic arenas. 102 
100 See Laurence Tribe, Lawrence v. Texas: The "FundamentalRight" That Dare Not Speak Its Name, 117 HARV. L. REV. 1893 (2004). 
101 Cf Emens, supra note 3, at 284 (discussing that requirement but without reference to the institution of marriage). 
102 See Goodridge v. Dep't of Pub. Health, 798 N.E.2d 941 (Mass. 2003). Goodridge relied on the Massachusetts Constitution to strike down bans on same-sex marriages. My cautionary notes here, about the need for judicial deference, are strongest in the context of federal judicial decisions, which by hypothesis have national application; there is far more room for experimentation within state courts, especially because states can allocate authority to their own 
If the maximal understanding were adopted, the numerosity requirement would come under severe pressure. Put to one side the fact that it is fanciful to suppose that such pressure might be imposed in the near future. What would happen if it were? The question is whether states could produce compelling justifications for refusing to recognize marriages of three or more people. An initial justification would suggest that many of the material benefits of marriage make sense only for couples. To come to terms with this justification, we would have to go through those benefits one by one. Very likely, federal and state governments would be able to support their refusal to give joint filing privileges to four-person "marriages"; such privileges might produce substantial tax benefits for no sufficient reason. Perhaps states could compellingly justify the decision to withhold some, but not all, of the material incidents of marriage from polygamous relationships. But even if so, the maximal understanding might nonetheless require states to recognize certain relationships as "marital" for expressive reasons. In other words, acceptance of the maximal understanding would make it necessary to distinguish between the material and expressive incidents of marriage-and also to treat the various material incidents as distinct. 
But these points do not capture the real reason that polygamous relationships cannot be deemed "marriages." Note here that most states do not merely refuse to recognize them as such; they also impose criminal penalties on those who participate in them. All this is because the state believes that polygamous relationships cause individual and social harm and in any case are immoral. Under the maximal understanding, however, states must produce compelling justifications for the relevant laws. 0 3 Should they be required to do so? 
I do not believe so. A central reason is institutional; the maximal understanding would place courts in a position for which they are extremely ill-suited. It would require them to assume the exceptionally difficult task of policing the adequacy of official justifications for refusing to recognize marriages that involve more than two people. Those justifications are best evaluated democratically, not judicially. If this objection is convincing, then we can imagine an intermediate understanding of the scope of the right to marry: two adults have a right courts as they wish, and because state constitutions are more readily amended than the national Constitution is. In my view, it would have been far better if gay marriage had been authorized democratically rather than judicially, even in Massachusetts; but there is less reason for institutional objections if state courts are involved. In fact aggressive decisions by state courts have the advantage of ensuring a degree of experimentation (subject to democratic override). If one or more states recognize less traditional marriages, it will be possible to see how they work out in practice, and hence to evaluate the objections of those who fear adverse social consequences. 
103 Even if we put marriage to one side, Lawrence raises serious questions about statutory bans on polygamous relationships so long as they are voluntary. of access to the marital relationship, with its expressive and material incidents, unless the relevant restriction is supported by compelling justifications. Is this understanding preferable from the constitutional point of view? How should that question be answered? 
104 This argument is sketched in Sunstein, supranote 82, at 1174-75. involves an evaluation, by federal courts, of the lines that traditions have drawn. If so, then the due process inquiry, testing the legitimacy of relevant lines, replicates the equal protection inquiry, but in a more indirect form. Perhaps it is appropriate for federal courts, under the Due Process Clause, to posit some general value (say, sexual autonomy) and to assess particular practices in light of that value. But at least there is some sense in being direct and explicit about the matter-of acknowledging that an equality norm is being brought to bear on the question whether the tradition should be understood at a level of great specificity or a somewhat higher level of abstraction. I am suggesting, then, that judgments about the scope of the right to marry ought to be made with close attention to the Equal Protection Clause. 
Do bans on same-sex marriage violate that clause? 10 5 To answer that question, the question of constitutional principle must be distinguished from the question of appropriate judicial decisions. In principle, I believe that it is not easy to defend this form of discrimination against gays and lesbians in constitutionally acceptable terms. What sorts of social harms would follow from recognizing marriages between people of the same sex? It is conventional to argue that the refusal to recognize same-sex marriage is a way of protecting the marital institution itself. If same-sex marriages were permitted, perhaps marriage itself would be endangered, at least in its traditional form. But aside from simple semantic arguments, this is very puzzling; how do same-sex marriages threaten the institution of marriage? Extending the right to enter into marriage would not seem to endanger traditional marriages-unless it were thought that significant numbers of heterosexuals would forego traditional marriages if gay and lesbian marriages were permitted (a difficult causal argument, to say the least). 
Or perhaps same-sex marriages would harm children-an empirical claim on which there is much dispute. 0 6 Do we really have enough evidence of harm to justify a ban? Perhaps a kind of precautionary principle 0 7 could be sufficient, suggesting that societies should not play dice with children even if the evidence is speculative or unclear-an idea that should almost certainly survive rationality review, even with the complication that states that disallow same-sex marriages sometimes permit gay adoptions. If it is possible to question whether children do as well with gay or lesbian couples, perhaps states have sufficient grounds to ban gay or lesbian marriages. But under strict 105 See SUNSTEIN, supranote 87. 
106 See George W. Dent, Traditional MarriageStill Worth Defending, 18 B.Y.U. J. PUB. L. 419, 428, 432 (2004) (claiming that "[t]raditional marriage is the best context for raising children," a notion that social scientists have set out to prove empirically, because same-sex marriage will sever the connection between marriage and child rearing). 
107 On the role of that principle is environmental law, see CASS R. SUNSTEtN, LAWS OF FEAR: BEYOND THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE (2005). scrutiny, speculation is not enough; and in any case the argument at most justifies a ban on gay adoptions, and not on gay marriages. 
Countless people believe that the state can legitimately reserve the idea of marriage to men and women for expressive reasons. Perhaps the state can urge that it does not want to give the same expressive support to same-sex unions as to opposite-sex unions. Perhaps it does not want to "endorse" such unions or to suggest that they are appropriate or legitimate, or have a standing similar to that of traditional marriage. But why not? Why should states refuse to endorse such unions? Compare the case of adultery, where the defense of traditional marriage and expressive condemnation are far easier to understand. As compared to a ban on same-sex marriages, a prohibition on adultery seems simple to justify. Such a prohibition is likely, in numerous cases, to protect one or even both spouses, while also protecting children. If, as seems clear, Lawrence draws prohibitions on adultery into some doubt, it would seem much harder to invoke expressive condemnation in support of prohibitions on same-sex marriage, which have a far weaker foundation in the goal of protecting traditional marriage. 
For those who believe that the ban on same-sex marriages raises a serious equality problem, a key problem is institutional. It involves appropriate judicial modesty in the face of strong public convictions and in particular the distinctive judicial virtue of prudence. As Alexander Bickel emphasized, the point is highly relevant to constitutional law, especially in the area of social reform.108 As it operates in the courts, constitutional law is a peculiar mixture of substantive theory and institutional constraint. Constitutional rights are systematically "underenforced" by the judiciary, and for excellent institutional reasons. 109 Those reasons have to do with the courts' limited factfinding capacities, their weak democratic pedigree, their limited legitimacy, and their likely ineffectiveness as frequent instigators of social reform. There are strong prudential reasons for federal courts to hesitate in the context of same-sex marriage, not least because the issue of same-sex marriage is under intense discussion at the local, state, and national levels-and there are many possibilities, ranging from diverse forms of civil unions to ordinary marriage. Some platitudes are worth repeating: a central advantage of a federal system is that it permits a wide range of experiments; a central disadvantage of centralized rules is that they foreclose such experiments. In the context of criminal punishments for consensual activity, experiments should be avoided. But in the context of marriage, a degree of flexibility should not be forbidden by federal courts. 
108 See ALEXANDER BICKEL, THE LEAST DANGEROUS BRANCH (1965). 
109 Cf Lawrence Gene Sager, Fair Measure: The Legal Status of Underenforced ConstitutionalNorms, 91 HARV. L. REV. 1212 (1978). 
As in the context of abortion, it would be most unfortunate if the Supreme Court settled the issue at this early stage. In fact the Court gave fresh support to this idea in its standing decision in Elkgrove Unified School District v. Newdow, involving a challenge to the use of the words "under God" in the pledge of allegiance." 0 The Court emphasized that among "the principal areas in which this Court has customarily declined to intervene is the realm of domestic relations."'I It added that "in general it is appropriate for the federal courts to leave delicate issues of domestic relations to the state courts."' 1 2 Much of the Court's opinion stresses the need for judicial caution in the domain of family law. 
This claim connects nicely with the suggestion that the Lawrence decision was rooted in an American-style version of desuetude. When a law has lost support in public convictions, judicial invalidation is least damaging to democratic goals and to the Court's own institutional position. At least at this stage, the ban on same-sex marriage stands on much firmer footing. I emphasize my belief that, in principle, such a ban raises serious equal protection concerns and is not simple to defend in constitutionally acceptable terms; the objection to an aggressive ruling from federal courts has everything to do with their properly limited role in the constitutional structure. 
DEREGULATION 
An issue here still lurks in the background, one that raises even larger questions than those I have discussed thus far. Marriage is an official licensing scheme. Should it continue? Would deregulation be appropriate, here as elsewhere? 
A. 
Many people argue that thb law ought to move in this direction."13 For one thing, the institution of marriage has a discriminatory past, enmeshed as it has been in sex inequality, and this past cannot easily be severed from the current version of the institution. 14 For another, the 110 Elk Grove Unified Sch. Dist. v. Newdow, 124 S. Ct. 2301 (2004). I am grateful to Mary Anne Case for pointing out the relevance of Newdow to the marriage issue. 
I ld. at 2309. 112 Id. 113 See FINEMAN, supranote 2. 114 See Nancy D. Polikoff, We Will Get What We Ask For: Why Legalizing Gay and Lesbian 
MARRY marital institution was originally a means of licensing both sexual activities and child-rearing; and it no longer has that role. For many generations, official marriage served to authorize people both to have sexual relationships and to have and to raise children. But currently this is not so; indeed, people have a constitutional right to have sexual relationships outside of marriage, and people become parents, including adoptive parents, without the benefit of the marital form. In an era in which marriage is not a necessary condition for sex or for children, perhaps the state's role is no longer essential. 
Still others emphasize that marriage has been a means for protecting dependents, above all children and women; but they contend that marriage is a crude tool for providing that protection, which could be ensured in better, more direct ways. 1 5 Note in particular that a primary reason for the official institution of marriage has been less to limit entry (though that is certainly one of its purposes) than to police exit. If divorce is difficult, as a result of legal restrictions or social norms, then marriages are more likely to be stable. Marital stability is often desirable for children. It can also be desirable for spouses, who may benefit from social understandings that work against impulsive or destructive decisions that are detrimental to their long-term welfare. But if exit is not policed, through law or accompanying social norms, it is at least harder to contend that the official institution of marriage is valuable as a way of promoting the stability of relationships. And in the modem era, exit is much less rigorously policed. As a matter of law, at least, people can generally leave the marital form whenever they wish to do so. Increasingly, marriage resembles a contract, dissoluble at the will of the parties, rather than a permanent status. 
It is also possible to object to the freedom-limiting functions of the state's licensing system. Marriage licenses divide the world into the status of those who are "married" and those who are "single," in a way that produces serious economic and material disadvantages for the latter (and sometimes for the former). Many of these economic and material inequalities are not simple to defend. In any case, one or the other status has a number of signalingfunctions, some of them incompatible with the desires of those involved. Private relationships, intimate and otherwise, might be structured in many different ways, and the simple dichotomy between "single" and "married" does not do justice to what people might choose. Indeed, that simple dichotomy is an imprecise description of what people actually do choose, and perhaps increasingly so."1 6 Many people are in relationships that are intimate, committed, Marriage Will Not "Dismantle the Legal Structure of Gender in Every Marriage," 79 VA. L. REv. 1535 (1993). 
115 See id. 116 See id.; Emens, supranote 3, at 298 ("[A]dultery occurs often enough to undermine even and monogamous, but without the benefit of marriage. Many people are in marriages that are neither intimate nor monogamous. Countless variations are possible. Why not leave people's relationships to their own choices, perhaps subject to the judgments of relevant intermediate organizations, religious and otherwise? 
To the extent that those choices leave gaps or uncertainties, the law could choose a menu of default rules, perhaps intended to mimic what most people would do, perhaps intended to force the parties to make their wishes clear, perhaps intended to protect those most in need of protection. An obvious concern is the well-being of children. But private arrangements, religious and otherwise, might provide as much protection of children as official marriage does; and the protection of children might be ensured directly, through requirements of care and support, rather than through marriage in its current form. It is also possible to insist that couples benefit from public statements of commitments-that the official institution of marriage helps to secure people's commitments to one another, in a way that is both an individual and social good. Probably this is so. But why is government licensing necessary? Might not private institutions be able to provide the same kinds of commitments? 
B. 
The answer is hardly clear. But beware of a simple negative answer, for the very familiarity of the institution of marriage might have a distorting influence. To clarify the problem, imagine a parallel world in which many people have official "best friends." In this parallel world, the status of best friend is officially licensed. Most of the time, there is a happy ceremony, and the relationship is accompanied by identifiable responsibilities and rights, some of them acknowledged and imposed by law. A best friend might, for example, have some of the economic rights that spouses enjoy-for example, to help make decisions in the event of incapacitation. In addition, it might be understood by all that best friends, having achieved that (legal) status, have strong informal duties to one another-to give comfort amidst distress, to celebrate good developments, and to put personal concerns to one side, when necessary, to attend to the relationship. We could even imagine a sincere suggestion, in our own world, that formalization of the status of "best friend" would help with an array of public and private problems. Perhaps it is not the worst imaginable idea. the idea of simple, serial monogamy-the idea that people have one sexual partner at a time."). 
But we could also imagine a state in this parallel world, after having lived with the "best friend" status for generations, now deciding that it should eliminate the institution, on the ground that the formalized idea of "best friend" creates excessive rigidity, and that in general, people should be able to make private arrangements as they see fit. Radical reformers might make exactly this suggestion. If their arguments were heeded, people in this society, after the reforms, would certainly be permitted to announce to one another that they are "best friends" or even to have private "best friend" ceremonies. Or they could dispense with the idea if they chose. In this parallel world, the abolition of the status of "best friend" would count as a genuine revolution. But would it clearly be a mistake to abolish official best friend licenses? Those who object to the official institution of marriage think that people would be better off, all things considered, in a system in which state licensing did not occur. 
Of course the analogy is imprecise. Very plausibly, the argument for best friend licenses is much weaker than the argument for marriage licenses. Consider, then, another parallel world, in which the relevant government has never recognized marriages, but in which it is possible to find a multiplicity of private arrangements. In this parallel world, many people are married within their religious traditions. Many others are married through secular institutions of one or another kind. Many couples do not marry at all. Monogamy is sometimes chosen; sometimes it is rejected. In this parallel world, a reformer proposes that states should grant licenses to couples willing to apply and who meet the relevant requirements. Perhaps the proposal should and will be accepted. But we could easily imagine a vigorous debate. The skeptics would contend that the state ought not to decide who can marry whom-that this is a decision for individuals and for private organizations. In any case, an appreciation of the grounds for their skepticism suggests that the case for an official, publicly administered institution of marriage is not entirely clear. 
I am not contending that state licensing of marriage should be abolished. 1 7 For countless generations, people have relied on the existence of a state licensing scheme, and it is hardly clear that the scheme does more harm than good. The official ceremony, accompanied by state licenses, contributes to a degree of solemnity that is widely perceived as beneficial to those involved, and that almost 117 See Bernstein, supra note 3, at 191-209 for detailed discussion. certainly contributes to the stability of relationships, in a way that benefits adults and children alike. Even with the official institution in place, people can organize their relationships in multiple different ways, through (for example) religious marriages that do not involve the state and informal understandings of monogamy or continuity that do not involve official marriage. Hence it is not at all clear that the institution of marriage does much damage. 
There is an institutional point as well. For social reform, as for courts, the presumption should be in favor of incremental change; and abolition of state-licensed marriage would be anything but incremental. But it is important to understand the argument against official marriage, if only to show that the topic here is a form of government intervention, and that there is a sharp distinction between religious marriages, and marriages of other sorts, and marriages as recognized and legitimated by official licensors. What I have been discussing here is the latter, not the former. 
CONCLUSION 
My goal has been to make progress on two questions. The first is the content of the right to marry. The second is the scope of that right. 
I have suggested that like the right to vote, the right to marry is a right of equal access to a publicly-administered institution. If a state abolished the official institution of marriage, it would be acting constitutionally, so long as it did not also abolish private marriage ceremonies. The state is under no obligation to confer either the expressive or the material benefits of marriage. Some of the associational benefits now connected with marriage could, and probably must, be respected even if marriage did not exist. But this is not a claim that marriage itself must be recognized by state law. These points help to show that the right to marry is parasitic on positive law. It is a right of access, by those who enjoy it, to the expressive and material benefits that official marriage provides. 
This point strongly suggests that the right to marry ought not to be protected as a matter of substantive due process. It is far more sensibly seen as part of the "fundamental rights" branch of equal protection doctrine. Unfortunately, there is no simple explanation of why it should so qualify. The most plausible account points to the expressive benefits of marriage. It suggests that in view of the great importance of those benefits, and their relationship to other constitutionally protected interests, states must provide extremely strong justifications for interfering with the right to marry. 
I have also identified competing understandings of the scope of the right to marry. The minimal understanding views the right to require access, by any couple consisting of one adult man and one adult woman, to the expressive and material benefits of marriage, so long as the institution of marriage exists. This minimal understanding has the advantage of fitting with the Court's decisions; it also has a degree of simplicity, promises a deferential role for courts, and can claim to build on, rather than to reject, longstanding traditions. The minimal understanding does create problems for some bans on incestuous marriages; but where those bans cannot be plausibly defended by reference to actual harm, judicial invalidations are hardly deplorable. 
The chief advantage of the minimal understanding is that it promises to minimize judicial discretion and to rely on practices that, simply because they are time-honored, have a claim to social respect. The chief disadvantage of the minimal understanding is that it has a degree of arbitrariness. The best way to handle that arbitrariness, I suggest, is not through the Due Process Clause, which grows out of traditional practices, but through the antidiscrimination principles of the Equal Protection Clause, which is sharply critical of them. There can be no doubt that the Due Process Clause, in its substantive guise, has come to have an equality component, one that tests the question whether the lines drawn by tradition can claim adequate support. 1 8 But for constitutional purposes, any judgment about the right to marry involves an assessment of the legitimacy of those lines. There are significant advantages in acknowledging that the Equal Protection Clause, a selfconscious attack on traditional practices, is the relevant text for making that assessment. I have suggested that in principle, there are serious constitutional problems with the ban on same-sex marriage. But I have also suggested that federal courts should greatly hesitate in this domain, allowing a great deal of room for democratic judgment and for state experimentation. 
plausible arguments for privatization-for eliminating the government's role and for allowing private institutions, religious and otherwise, to do as they wish, subject to default rules and criminal prohibitions. Some of the longstanding arguments for official marriage have been weakened, now that exit is freely available, and now that private alternatives are legally permissible. In addition, the official institution does some harm, insofar as it makes certain distinctions that are not so easy to justify (as, for example, in the tax code), and insofar as it separates, too rigidly, relationships into the simple dichotomy of "married" and "unmarried." 118 See Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 5 Developments in the Law-The Constitution and the Family, 93 HARV. L. REV. 1156, 1177, 1186-92 (1980). 
Each government agency uses a uniform figure to measure the value of a statisticallife (VSL). This is a serious mistake. The very theory that underlies currentpractice calls for far more individuation of the relevant values. According to that theory, VSL should vary across risks. More controversially, VSL should vary across individuals-even or especially if the result would be to produce a lower number for some people than for others. One practical implication is that a higher value should be given to programs that reduce cancer risks. Another is that government should use a higher VSL for programsthat disproportionatelybenefit the wealthy-and a lower VSL for programs that disproportionatelybenefit the poor. But there are two serious complications here. First, bounded rationality raises problems for the use of private willingness to pay, which underlies current calculations of VSL. Second, the beneficiaries of regulation sometimes pay only a fraction or even none of its cost; when this is so, the appropriateVSL for poorpeople might be higher, on distributional grounds, than market evidence suggests. An understandingof this point has implicationsfor foundational issues about government regulation,including valuation of persons in poor and wealthy nations. 
Copyright © 2004 by Cass R. Sunstein. 
t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. A version of this Article was presented as one of the 2004 Seeley Lectures at the University of Cambridge, and I thank the audience at that occasion for many illuminating comments and questions; a version of the lectures, and hence of this Article, will appear in CASS R. SUNSTEIN, LAWS OF FEAR: BEYOND THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE (forthcoming 2005). I am grateful to participants in a workshop at the University of London and at a work-in-progress lunch at the University of Chicago Law School and to Matthew Adler, Robert Hahn, Eric Posner, Richard A. Posner, Robert Stavins, David Strauss, Adrian Vermeule, and W. Kip Viscusi for valuable comments on a previous draft. Special thanks to Ronald Dworkin for particularly illuminating comments. Sarah Sulkowski provided outstanding research assistance. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction ............................................................................................. 386 I. WTP: Theory and Practice ................................................................ 396 A . A gency Practice .......................................................................... 396 B. Of Welfare and Autonomy ....................................................... 400 C. Questions and Doubts ............................................................... 401 D. The Value of Statistical Risks, Not the Value of 
Statistical Lives ........................................................................... 404 II. Individuation ....................................................................................... 404 A . Risks ............................................................................................. 405 B . Person s ......................................................................................... 412 C. Theory and Practice ................................................................... 416 III. Why WTP? Easy Cases, Hard Cases .............................................. 421 A . Easy Cases ...................................4.2.2...... B. Harder Cases: Autonomy, Kaldor-Hicks, and Welfare ......... 434 C. Harder Cases as Easy Ones, and VSL Again .......................... 437 IV. Global Risk Regulation and Cross-National Valuations ............. 439 A. Are Indian Lives Worth Less Than American Lives? ........... 439 B. Policy and Practice ..................................................................... 442 Conclusion ................................................................................................ 444 
For over two decades, executive orders have required regulatory agencies to engage in cost-benefit analysis of major regulations,' and Congress has imposed similar requirements in several statutes.2 To 120-35 (5th ed. 2002) (examining executive orders that require federal agencies to balance the benefits of their decisions against the cost). 
(2000) (defining "unreasonable adverse effects on the environment" as "any unreasonable risk to man or the environment, taking into account the economic, social, and environmental costs and benefits of the use of any pesticides"); Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2605(c)(1) conduct cost-benefit analysis, agencies must assign monetary values to human lives that are potentially saved by a proposed regulation. How do they come up with the numbers that they use? Do some deaths count for more than others? 
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) uses a uniform value for a statistical life (VSL): $6.1 million? Other agencies use numbers that are both higher and lower than the EPA's VSL, with a range, in recent years, between $1.5 million (the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in 1990') and the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA's) current figure of $6.5 million. Although substantial differences can be found across agencies,6 uniformity is the intended practice within each agency.7 No agency treats cancer risks, (2000) (mandating that the administrator consider and publish a statement documenting the effects, benefits, and economic impacts of proposed toxic substance regulations); Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. § 300g-l(b)(3)(c) (2000) (requiring the documentation of quantifiable and nonquantifiable costs and benefits in the establishment of maximum contaminant levels). 
Compliance and New Source Contaminants Monitoring, 66 Fed. Reg. 6976, 7012 (Jan. 22, 2001) (codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 9, 141, and 142). I refer throughout to uniform numbers, but this is of course a simplification. There are differences across agencies, and within agencies practices are variable over time and across regulations. By referring to a uniform number, I mean that regulatory agencies do not distinguish among risks or among protected classes, so as to produce the variations that I emphasize here. Within regulations, uniform numbers are used, and when disparate numbers are used across regulations, it is not because of a judgment about different risks or different protected classes. 
In its July 2003 regulation governing food labeling of trans-fatty acids, the Food and Drug Administration used a VSL of $6.5 million. Food Labeling: Trans Fatty Acids in Nutrition Labeling, Nutrient Content Claims, and Health Claims, 68 Fed. Reg. 41,434, 41,489 (July 11, 2003) (codified at 21 C.F.R. pt. 101). In its March 2003 proposed rule on dietary ingredients and dietary supplements, the same agency suggested a VSL of $5 million. See Current Good Manufacturing Practice in Manufacturing, Packing, or Holding Dietary Ingredients and Dietary Supplements, 68 Fed. Reg. 12,158,12,229 (proposed Mar. 13, 2003) (to be codified at 21 C.F.R. pts. 111, 112) (using this value to calculate the "value of a statistical life day"). 
than the VSL used by most agencies. See Brake System Safety Standards for Freight and Other Non-Passenger Trains and Equipment; End-of-Train Devices, 67 Fed. Reg. 17,556, 17,560 (Apr. 10, 2002) (codified at 49 C.F.R. pt. 232) (recording the Department of Transportation's VSL as $2.7 million). 

constant figure for the monetized value of life" is one means of correcting for wealth distortions in individual preferences). There are some differences within agencies across contexts and across time, but those differences do not seem deliberate. See supra note 3 (comparing VSLs both within and across agencies). The most explicit discussions of varying VSLs have come from or other mortality risks that produce unusual fear or involve special suffering, as worthy of more concern (and a higher valuation) than other risks. No agency contends that distinctive values should be assigned to the risks associated with airplane deaths, motor vehicle deaths, or deaths from defective children's toys. No agency treats young people as worth more than old people.8 No agency values the lives of poor people less than the lives of rich people. No agency distinguishes between whites and African Americans or between men and women. For statistical lives, the governing idea is that each life is the EPA. In its 2003 discussion of hazardous air pollutants, National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Industrial/Commercial/Institutional Boilers and Process Heaters, 68 Fed. Reg. 1660 (proposed Jan. 13, 2003) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 63), the EPA noted: There is general agreement that the value to an individual of a reduction in mortality risk can vary based on several factors, including the age of the individual, the type of risk, the level of control the individual has over the risk, the individual's attitude toward risk, and the health status of the individual. 
Id. at 1695. Nonetheless, the agency announced, without explanation, that it "prefers not to draw distinctions in the monetary value assigned to the lives saved even if they differ in age, health status, socioeconomic status, gender or other characteristic of the adult population." Id. 
An extended discussion of related issues can be found in the EPA's arsenic proposal, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations; Arsenic and Clarifications to Compliance and New Source Contaminants Monitoring, 65 Fed. Reg. 38,888 (proposed June 22, 2000) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 141, 142). In this proposal, the EPA noted that the factors which may influence the estimate of economic benefits associated with avoided cancer fatalities include (1) a possible 'cancer premium' (i.e., the additional value or sum that people may be willing to pay to avoid the experiences of dread, pain and suffering, and diminished quality of life associated with cancer-related illness and ultimate fatality); (2) the willingness of people to pay more over time to avoid mortality risk as their income rises; (3) a possible premium for accepting involuntary risks as opposed to voluntary [sic] assumed risks; (4) the greater risk aversion of the general population as compared to workers in the wage-risk valuation studies; (5) 'altruism' or the willingness of people to pay more to reduce risk in other sectors of the population; and (6) a consideration of health status and life years remaining at the time of premature mortality. 
Id. at 38,945. The EPA acknowledged that these factors "may significantly increase the present value estimate," but said that "there is currently neither a clear consensus among economists about how to simultaneously analyze each of these adjustments nor is there adequate empirical data to support definitive quantitative estimates for all potentially significant adjustment factors." Id. Hence the EPA solicited comments on these issues and said that it would ask its Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) to conduct a review. Id. As noted below, the comments produced a sensitivity analysis that contains several upward adjustments from the $6.1 million figure, see infra note 100 and accompanying text, but the SAB's review suggested that at the present time, upward adjustments were not justified by existing evidence, see infra note 141 and accompanying text. 
Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay, 104 COLUM. L. REV. 205, 206 (2004) ("[G]overnment should consider not simply. .. the VSL; it should concern itself also or instead with the number of life-years at stake, or the value of statistical life-years (VSLY). At the very least, the number of statistical life-years is a more precise measure of what is involved."). worth exactly the same. With respect to cost-benefit analysis, much is disputed.9 But on the idea of a uniform value per life saved, there is a solid consensus, at least in terms of regulatory practice.'0 
The stakes are exceedingly high. If cost-benefit analysis is the basis for the ultimate decision to approve or reject a proposed regulation, everything turns on the selected VSL. If an agency uses a VSL of, say, $15 million, many more regulations will be justified than if it uses a VSL of, say, $2 million. And if a uniform number is rejected, the pattern of justified regulations will shift dramatically. Some existing regulations will be revealed as too weak, and more stringency will be required; others will seem too aggressive and will have to be weakened or even eliminated. If agencies shifted to using VSLs that varied along one or more variables, the regulatory system would look very different from how it does today. 
In this Article, I intend to question the consensus in favor of a uniform VSL, and to do so in a way that raises foundational issues about the economic valuation of human lives. I suggest that a uniform value is obtuse. Under the very approach that agencies use to produce the current numbers, VSL should vary along two dimensions. VSL is calculated based on people's willingness to pay (WTP) to avoid particular risks, and if WTP is particularly high, VSL will be high as well. For two reasons, VSL should be expected to be highly variable, in a way that makes a uniform number senseless. 
THE PRICE OF EVERYTHING AND THE VALUE OF NOTHING (2004) (attacking the very practice of assigning dollar values to lives and health as part of cost-benefit analysis); W. KIP VISCUSI, FATAL TRADEOFFS: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE RESPONSIBILITIES FOR RISK (1992) (suggesting that the government should "respect citizens' preferences" in assigning valuation and thus should consider subjective valuation in cost-benefit analysis, even when such valuation is irrational); Adler & Posner, supra note 5, at 1106 ("The problem with the traditional definition of [costbenefit analysis] in terms of actual preferences is that satisfaction of actual preference and maximization of well-being are not equivalent.... Cost-benefit analysis can be redefined as the sum of welfare equivalents...."). 
focus on lives or instead life-years; the latter approach might well value older people less than younger ones. For discussion, see Sunstein, supra note 8, at 205. Professor W. Kip Viscusi implicitly challenges the consensus, stating: "The current approach of ignoring length-of-life issues creates inequities by valuing the life of a person with . . . a 6-month life expectancy the same as a ... person with a 40-year life expectancy." W. Kip Viscusi, Risk Equity, 29 J. LEGAL STUD. 843, 870 (2000). W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph E. Aldy note the existence of heterogeneity by income, union status, and age, and they explain that the "existence of such heterogeneity provides a cautionary note for policy." W. Kip Viscusi & Joseph E. Aldy, The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates Throughout the World, 27 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 5,7 (2003). 
First, VSL should vary across risks. For example, people are willing to pay high amounts to avoid cancer risks, and hence there is reason to think that people's VSL is higher for cancer deaths than for sudden, unanticipated deaths." Cancer risks are involved in the work of many regulatory agencies, and people seem to be particularly concerned about such risks, in a way that should produce a high VSL-almost unquestionably higher than the values that agencies now use. More generally, deaths that produce unusual fear,'2 or that are accompanied by high levels of pain and suffering, should be expected to produce a higher VSL. Human beings face countless mortality risks, and it would be truly bizarre to maintain that people value avoiding each of those risks identically. 
Second, VSL should vary across individuals, simply because different people are willing to pay different amounts to avoid risks. People who are risk averse will be willing to pay more, and will therefore show a higher VSL, than people who are risk-seeking.'" Those who are rich will show a higher VSL than those who are poor. People who are thirty might well show a higher VSL than people who are sixty." It follows that different demographic groups will show diversity in their VSLs as well.'6 
of Mortality Risk, 28 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 73, 80 (2004) ("The value of preventing a fatal cancer is often considered to be greater than the value of preventing a fatal trauma in a workplace or transportation accident."). 
Carlsson et al., Is TransportSafety More Valuable in the Air?, 28 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 147, 148 (2004) ("There are several reasons why individuals would be willing to pay more for the same risk reduction when traveling by air compared to by other transport modes, such as car or train."). 
statistical life to non-labor market contexts, as is the case in benefit-cost analyses of environmental health policies for example, should recognize that different populations have different preferences over risks and different values on life-saving."). 
are willing to pay especially high amounts to reduce the risks associated with flying). 
STATISTICAL LIFE I (Nat'l Bureau of Econ. Research, Working Paper No. 10199,2003) ("[Olne might expect that older individuals may value reducing risks to their lives less because they have shorter remaining life expectancy."). 
Values of a StatisticalLife, 27 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 239, 252 tbl. of the story: I am not arguing that government should assign a higher VSL to white lives than to African-American lives. I am speaking here of demographic differences that would emerge from a fully individuated approach to VSL, in which each person's WTP was calculated on an individual basis. Once these values are aggregated, the white VSL would likely be higher than 
If these two forms of variability-across risks and across persons-are put together, it will be clear that the unitary $6.1 million figure used by the EPA is far too crude." Each person in society is willing to pay a distinctive amount to avoid each risk. It follows that in theory, each person should have a particular VSL for each and every risk, resulting in a fully individuated VSL. s Such a fully individuated VSL would mean, for example, that agencies would value avoidance of cancer risks more highly than many other mortality risks-and that the VSL of some racial groups would likely be lower than that of others.19 But the latter differences would not be the result of a governmental decision to take racial characteristics into account; in fact it would not be a product of any kind of group-level discrimination on the government's part.0 The differences would be the result of aggregating the VSLs calculated for each individual. the African-American VSL, simply because of disparities in wealth and income. Richer people pay more for safe cars and smoke alarms than poor people do. See infra text accompanying notes 17-21. 
figure, but the analysis applies equally to any agency's unitary figure, and to uniformity across agencies. 
than elicited, by social situations-an especially serious complication for contingent valuation studies. See John W. Payne et al.M,easuring ConstructedPreferences: Toward a Building Code, 19 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 243, 244 (1999) (addressing the "alternate viewpoint .. . that preferences are generally constructed-not revealed-at the time a valuation question is asked"); Cass R. Sunstein & Richard H. Thaler, LibertarianPaternalismIs Not an Oxymoron, 70 U. CHI. L. REV. 1159, 1177-78 (2003) ("[I]n the contexts in which [contingent valuation] studies are used,... it is unclear that people have straightforward 'values' that can actually be found. Hence some form of paternalism verges on the inevitable: Stated values will often be affected.., by how the questions are set up." (footnote omitted)). 
Nonfatal Injury Risk by Gender and Race, 27 J.RISK & UNCERTAINTY 257, 270 (2003) (finding that the implied VSL for Hispanic males is $5.0 million overall and $4.2 million for blue-collar workers, whereas the implied VSL for white males is $3.4 million overall and $4.2 million for blue-collar workers); Viscusi, supra note 16, at 252 (finding VSLs of $15 million for whites and $7.2 million for African Americans, $18.8 million for white males and $9.4 million for white females, and $6.9 million for African-American females and $5.9 million for African-American males). 
for the unequal opportunities that produce lower VSLs for African Americans than for whites. See Viscusi, supra note 16, at 255. Professor Viscusi goes on to suggest that "it is inappropriate to attribute the observed differences to a greater willingness by black workers to bear risk." Id. In a sense Professor Viscusi is correct; there is no reason to think that African-American workers have an intrinsically greater predisposition to take risks. But in the market, one's willingness to bear risks is a product of "market opportunities," and hence those with fewer opportunities will show a greater willingness to bear risk. Such aggregation occurs today in, for example, ordinary consumer markets that price reduction of the statistical risks associated with smoke alarms, unusually safe cars, and much more.2 
In practice, of course, a fully individuated VSL is not feasible, for two different reasons. First, government lacks the information that would permit the calculation. Regulators do not know how much each person would be willing to pay to reduce each statistical risk; generalizations through the use of categories are therefore inevitable. Second, many regulatory programs involve collective goods and protect many people at once. A clean air program, for example, cannot easily ensure that some people in a geographical region are exposed to no more than 10 parts per billion (ppb) of some pollutant, while others in the same region are subjected to 50 ppb. Because collective goods are typically involved in regulation, the problem is pervasive. When government is providing a regulatory good to many people at once, feasibility requires that it use a single VSL, not a range of VSLs. 
Notwithstanding issues of feasibility, an understanding of the reasons for individuating VSL is important for two reasons. The first involves conceptual clarity. The theory behind the use of VSL and WTP remains poorly understood. In brief, VSL, as currently understood, is a product of agency judgments about people's WTP to reduce or eliminate certain risks. When a particular VSL is used (say, $6 million), it is because the agency estimates that people are willing to pay a certain amount to reduce statistical risks of a specified magnitude. This point should be enough to show that whatever terminology agencies use, there is no "value of a statistical life"; there are only values for the reduction of statistical risks." Once regulators identify the real question as the identification of those values, they will find it difficult to defend a unitary VSL, simply because there is no such thing. An appreciation of the case for individuation will clarify the theory-both its rationale and its limitations, empirical and ethical. I emphasize that the theory is undergirded by considerations terms). 
Industrial/Commercial/Institutional Boilers and Process Heaters, 68 Fed. Reg. 1660, 1695 (proposed Jan. 13, 2003) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 63) (noting that the value of a statistical life is "the value to an individual of a reduction in mortality risk"). of both autonomy and welfare-and that those considerations also show when the use of WTP to calculate VSL is misguided. 
The second reason involves the possibility of moving a long way toward greater individuation, even if full individuation is not feasible. With respect to the reduction of cancer risks, for example, there is reason to believe that people are willing to pay an extra amount; hence VSL, based on WTP, is significantly higher than studies of risks not involving cancer suggest." For this reason, the government's current valuation of cancer risks is probably too low, resulting in widespread underprotection of the public. Similarly, there is reason to think that VSL should be higher for mortality risks from airplanes than for statistically identical risks on the highways. 2' More generally, different agencies, dealing with qualitatively different risks, might well use different VSLs, simply because market evidence is likely to show just those differences.25 Full individuation is not feasible, but greater individuation would be quite easy. The result would be different judgments from agencies, simply because new VSLs-some higher, others lower-would produce different conclusions about when regulation is justified. 
A far more troublesome problem, to which I will devote considerable attention, involves disparities along demographic lines. Ftoorpanyo,wa,ndnotthicoeseawsiitmh pliltetlefaicntcuoamlpeoainntd: wWeTaPlthiswdilelpsehnodwenlitttloen WabTiPli.ty26 It follows that the VSL of poor people, when calculated based on WTP, will be lower than the VSL of rich people, simply because poor people are poorer. Suppose that the $6.1 million figure used by the EPA represents the average WTP of a population-wide sample. When risks are faced disproportionately by wealthy people, VSL, 
airline deaths is more than double their WTP to reduce the risk of taxi deaths). 
these differences seem random and do not stem from a careful inquiry into the questions that I am emphasizing here. 
use regulatory policy to promote redistributive goals. Regulation would be based on WTP, and tax laws would ensure such redistribution. Hence the analysis of VSL and WTP would be different with an optimal tax policy from what it must be without such a policy. If tax policy were optimal, a highly variable WTP would be appropriate and there would be no need to take account of distributional concerns. The discussion below is based on the assumption that more redistribution is desirable and that regulatory policy can sometimes help to promote that goal, though less effectively than an optimal tax. based on actual WTP, should be higher than $6.1 million-just as it should be lower when the regulated risks are faced disproportionately by poor people." It is inevitable that people in poor nations will have a lower VSL than people in rich nations, a point with implications for valuation of the harms from global warming." Similarly, people in poor areas will have a lower VSL than those in wealthy areas, a point with implications for valuation of a variety of risks in the domestic setting. If variations across risks and persons are significant, the question of individuation should be a central part of the second generation of cost-benefit analysis-a step beyond the firstgeneration debate about whether to do such analysis at all, and a step toward doing such analysis in a way that is more refined and more closely attuned to the consequences of regulations in terms of choice, welfare, and distributional equity. 
Of course it is offensive and wrong to suggest that in principle, poor people are "worth less" than rich people. If poor people are subject to a risk of 1/10,000, they do not have less of a claim to public attention than wealthy people who are subject to the same risk; in fact they may have a greater claim, if only because they lack the resources to reduce that risk on their own. But the topic here is regulation rather than subsidy, and the two ought not to be confused. In principle, government should not force people to buy protection against statistical risks at a price that seems excessive to them.29 At least as a general rule, people should not be required to pay $70 to reduce a risk of 1/100,000 if they are willing to pay no more than $50. 
If a uniform VSL would benefit the poor, there is a strong argument for a uniform VSL. But regulation based on a uniform VSL may or may not produce a more equitable distribution of income; in fact any redistribution may be perverse, and a single VSL might not promote equality at all.' ° And if poor people are forced to pay an amount for risk reduction that exceeds their WTP, desirable redistribution will hardly result; forced exchanges, on terms that people would voluntarily reject, are not a good way of redistributing assigning them a higher VSL, then there is a good argument for assigning them a higher VSL. I explore this issue in Part III.B. 

basis of a uniform VSL, and if the public as a whole pays for it, then any redistribution will benefit the wealthy, not the poor. wealth to the disadvantaged. (Requiring poor people to buy Volvos is not the most sensible means of assisting them.) On the other hand, it is possible that some regulatory programs, based on a uniform VSL, will help those in need, if their beneficiaries receive risk reduction for which they pay little or nothing-an issue to which I will devote considerable attention. 
A larger lesson follows from this discussion. For purposes of law and politics, there is no sensible answer to the abstract question about the correct monetary value of human life. Any judgment about the appropriate VSL, and about individuation, must be heavily pragmatic; it must rest on the consequences of one or another choice. Whether government should use a higher or lower VSL across demographic lines cannot be answered simply. An important implication involves the assessment of VSL across nations. A poor nation would do well to adopt a lower VSL than a wealthy nation; for China or India, it would be disastrous to use a VSL equivalent to that of the United States or Canada. But this point should not be taken to support the ludicrous proposition that donor institutions, both public and private, should value risk reduction in a wealthy nation above equivalent risk reduction in a poor nation. 
This Article is organized as follows. Part I clarifies the theory behind the valuation of statistical lives. The major point is that regulators do not really use a VSL; instead they use a mean WTP to eliminate a statistical risk. For example, agencies might say that they are using a VSL of $6 million, but when they do so, they are relying on evidence more or less establishing that the average person is paid $600 to face a risk of 1/10,000. The case for using this evidence depends on considerations of both autonomy and welfare. Part II, in some ways the heart of the Article, explores the need for individuation across both risks and persons. Part III offers a more ambitious discussion of the uses and limits of WTP in regulatory policy. It distinguishes between easy and hard cases for using WTP to calculate VSL. The central claim in Part III is that the argument for using WTP is strongest when the beneficiaries of regulation must pay all of its cost-though even in that event, the argument is subject to important qualifications, above all involving bounded rationality. The argument for using WTP is weaker when the beneficiaries of regulation pay only a fraction of that cost. When this is so, some people will benefit from regulation even if it is inefficient in economic terms. I discuss the implications of this point for a uniform or fully individuated VSL. Part IV turns to global regulation and the question of cross-national differences in VSL. My conclusion is that while thirdparty donors should help those people who need help most, without reference to lower VSLs in poor countries, governments in wealthy nations should use a higher VSL than governments in poor ones. 
I begin with an explanation of existing agency practice in calculating VSL and of the theory that underlies it. As discussed below, agencies calculate VSL on the basis of market evidence of WTP. Agencies are not really able to identify a "value of a statistical life"; instead they take advantage of information about how much people are willing to pay for facing statistical risks. I suggest that considerations of both welfare and autonomy make it reasonable for agencies to consult WTP. Unfortunately, many questions might be raised about the numbers that agencies now use. 
It has now become standard for regulatory agencies to assign monetary values to human lives. Consider the following table, which captures several examples of agency practices from 1996 through 2003: 
EPA EPA EPA EPA EPA 
Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations (Feb. 3, 2003) 31 
1051, 1065, and 1068). 

Transportation/FAA Licensed Launch Activities (Aug. 26, 1998)0" Department of Health Quality Mammography Standards (Oct. 28, & Human Services/FDA 1997) 44 Department of Health Regulations Restricting the Sale and & Human Services/FDA Distribution of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to Protect Children4 and 
Adolescents (Aug. 28, 1996) 1 
Agriculture/Food Safety Critical Control Point (HACCP) Systems and Inspection Service (July 25, 1996)46 
Department of Aircraft Flight Simulator Use in Pilot Transportation/FAA 
TTrraaiinniinngg,CTeenstteinrgs (aJnudlyC2h,e1c9k9i6n)g47and at 
Safety Commission Consumer Product Safety Commission 
CReoqnutaiirnemersenotsf CfohrarLcaobaelli(nMgaoyf 3R, e1t9a9i6l) 48 Large Multiple-Tube Fireworks Devices (May 3, 1996)49 3 million 
These numbers show substantial variations, though less so than even ten years ago.' The variations appear not to have any rationale behind them; agencies with higher or lower numbers have not explained their choices (and this is a significant problem). But the most fundamental question is how agencies generate monetary amounts of this kind. Agencies rely on two kinds of evidence. The first and most important involves real-world markets, producing evidence of compensation levels for actual risks.5 In the workplace and in the market for consumer goods, additional safety has a price; market evidence is investigated to identify that price. 2 The second kind of evidence comes from contingent valuation studies, which ask people how much they are willing to pay to reduce statistical risks.3 The EPA's $6.1 million figure, for example, is a product of studies of actual workplace risks; such studies attempt to determine how much workers are paid to assume mortality hazards. 4 The relevant risks usually are in the general range of 1/10,000 to 1/100,000."5 The calculation of VSL is a product of simple arithmetic. Suppose that workers must be paid $600, on average, to assume a risk of 1/10,000. If so, the VSL would be said to be $6 million. 
For some of the two dozen labor market studies on which agencies currently rely,56 consider the following table:57 
A large advantage of labor market studies of this kind is that they avoid the lively disputes over the use of "willingness to pay" or "willingness to accept" (WTA) in regulatory policy.58 In many contexts, in both experiments and the real world, people demand more to give up a good than they are willing to pay to obtain it in the first instance-a disparity that significantly complicates efforts to assign monetary values to regulatory benefits, including mortality and morbidity. 9 If people are willing to pay $25 to eliminate an existing risk of 1/100,000, but demand $100 to incur a new risk of 1/100,000, then it is difficult to know how to proceed for purposes of monetary valuation of risks. Should agencies use $25, $100, or some intermediate figure? Fortunately, this problem dissipates in the context of labor market studies. If workers who face a risk of 1/10,000 are paid $600 more for doing so, and if workers who refuse to face such a risk are paid $600 less, then it is irrelevant whether agencies speak in terms of WTP or WTA. 
Why do regulators care about market valuations of statistical risks? There are two possible answers. The first and more conventional involves welfare. The second and perhaps more interesting involves autonomy. 
In economic terms, these valuations provide a clue to the welfare consequences, for individuals, of one or another outcome. If people are willing to pay $60, but no more, to eliminate a risk of 1/100,000, then it can be reasonably assumed that their welfare is increased by asking them to pay that amount-and that their welfare is decreased by asking them to pay more. There are many demands on people's budgets, and if they prefer not to spend more than $60 to eliminate a risk of 1/100,000, it may be because they would like to use their money for food, shelter, recreation, education, or any number of other goods. With respect to mortality risks, it is possible that people L. REv. 1227 (2003) (explaining the so-called "endowment effect," by which individuals often demand more to relinquish an item (WITA) than they would pay to obtain that same item (WTP)). 
possess than they would pay for the same good if they did not possess it at present." (footnote omitted)); Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law, 22 J. LEGAL STUD. 217, 226-27 (1993) ("The range of the disparity appears to vary from slight amounts to a ratio of more than four to one, with WTA usually doubling WTP."). are sometimes inadequately informed, and there might be reason to override their judgments. But so long as information is available, the welfare argument is straightforward. 6° 
Perhaps regulatory policy should not be based on welfare; perhaps it is unclear what "welfare" really means, and WTP might be defended instead on the ground of personal autonomy.6 On this view, people should be sovereign over their own lives, and government should respect personal choices about how to use limited resources (again so long as those choices are informed). When people decline to devote more than $60 to the elimination of a 1/100,000 risk, it is because they would prefer to spend the money in a way that seems to them more desirable. If regulators do not use people's actual judgments, then they are insulting their dignity. The use of WTP therefore can claim a simultaneous defense from both utilitarian and deontological accounts. 
Nonetheless, some questions might be raised about the use of the relevant studies by the EPA and other agencies. 62 Most obviously, the studies show significant variety in the crucial numbers, ranging from $16.3 million in 1988 to $.7 million in 1991. The EPA has adopted the $6.1 million figure on the ground that it represents the median in the relevant studies. 63 But there is a risk of arbitrariness in fastening on that median figure, particularly if there is no reason to believe that the relevant study is the most accurate. In fact a more general look at the VSL data produces further puzzles and wider ranges. Some studies find no compensating differentials at all, indicating a VSL of zero64-implausibly low, to say the least, for purposes of policy. Others find that nonunionized workers receive negative compensating differentials for risk-that is, they appear to be paid less because they 
EQUALITY 122 (2000) (arguing that liberty "is essential to any process in which equality is defined and secured"). 
Analysis and Relative Position,68 U. CHI. L. REV. 323, 323-28 (2001), and Parker, supra note 56, at 1348-57. 

Revisited, 52 INDUS. & LAB. REL. REV. 116, 133 (1998) (finding "statistically significant positive compensation" for only a few categories of workers). face mortality risks.65 Another study finds that African Americans receive no significant compensating wage differential and hence that their particular VSL is zero.6 On the other hand, some studies find VSLs actually above the VSLs presented in Table 1; consider the finding that for people who choose jobs with low level risks, the VSL is as much as $22 million. 7 
The most recent metastudy, far more comprehensive than the EPA's own analysis, finds that most studies produce VSLs ranging from $3.8 million to $9 million.' The range is fairly compressed, in a way that disciplines agency decisions; for many regulations, the "bottom line" of the cost-benefit assessment will not be affected by a choice of $3.8 million or $9 million. But that range still leaves significant room for discretion, in a way that would have significant implications for policy and law. Consider the fact that the monetized value of a program that saves two hundred lives would range from $760 million to $1.8 billion; note also that the EPA's highly publicized arsenic regulation would easily fail cost-benefit analysis with a $3.8 million VSL but easily pass with a $9 million VSL.69 The simple point is that the variety of the outcomes raises questions about the reliability of any particular figure. 
In addition, most of the studies on which the EPA relies are based on data from the 1970s. 70 Since that time, there has been significant growth in national income." This change suggests that any VSL derived from 1970s data is too low. Of course people with more money are expected to be willing to pay more, other things being equal, to reduce statistical risks. One study finds that at the beginning of the twentieth century, VSL was about $150,000 in current dollarsless than one-twentieth of the corresponding amount a century later." On reasonable assumptions, the EPA's use of 1970s data has 
in evaluating the arsenic regulation). The regulation was projected to cost about $200 million, and its monetized benefits, with a $6.1 million VSL, were around $190 million. Id. at 2275. It should be easy to see that a $3.8 million VSL would make the regulation impossible to defendand a $9 million VSL would make it impossible to challenge. 
produced a significant undervaluation of the monetary value of the lives at stake; the $6.1 million figure reflects no adjustment to account for changes in national real income growth.73 In principle, the failure to undertake an adjustment is a serious mistake. The actual mean WTP might be substantially higher.74 
Even more fundamentally, the relevant numbers deserve respect only if they do not result from bounded rationality or an absence of information on the part of the people whose choices generate them. Suppose, for example, that workers do not know the risks that they face or that their decisions are products of the availability heuristic or optimistic bias.7" In either case, regulators should not use, for purposes of policy, a finding that workers are paid $60 to run a risk of 1/100,000; by hypothesis, that number does not reflect a rational tradeoff by informed workers. I return to these points below.76 Current practice is based on an assumption, not that all or even most workers make informed choices, but that market processes ensure the right "price" for various degrees of safety.7 7 Compare pricing for soap, cereals, and telephones: most consumers do not have full information and use heuristics that lead them astray, but market competition produces a sensible structure of prices, at least most of the time. 
adjustments. Sunstein, supra note 54, at 2284. 
ECON. REV. PAPERS & PROC. 227, 229 tbl.1 (2003) (suggesting a likely current value of $12 million); Viscusi, supra note 16, at 252 tbl.5 (finding values as high as $15.1 million for white males). In the context of arsenic regulation, the EPA also noted in its sensitivity analysis that the appropriate adjustment would increase the VSL from $6.1 million to $6.7 million. National Primary Drinking Water Regulations; Arsenic and Clarifications to Compliance and New Source Contaminants Monitoring, 66 Fed. Reg. 6976, 7012 (Jan. 22, 2001) (codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 9, 141, and 142). Recent evidence suggests that the current VSL is $4.7 million for the entire population, $7 million for blue-collar males, and $8.5 million for blue-collar females. Viscusi, supra note 55, at 39. 
readily "available" to people's minds, and underestimate risks when no such event is available. Timur Kuran & Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascadesand Risk Regulation, 51 STAN. L. REV. 683, 685 (1999). Optimistic bias suggests that people will be excessively optimistic about risks that they themselves face. Cass R. Sunstein, HazardousHeuristics,70 U. CHI. L. REV. 751, 772 (2003). 
has some of the same characteristics as a policy that requires people to buy Volvos. In principle, the government should force exchanges only on terms that people find acceptable, at least if it is genuinely concerned with their welfare. 
Note, once again, that the argument for using WTP does not imply satisfaction with the existing distribution of wealth. The problem with forced exchanges is that they do nothing to alter existing distributions. In fact they make poor people worse off, requiring them to use their limited resources for something that they do not want to buy. 
Does the easy case seem implausibly unrealistic? In many contexts, it certainly is. The costs of air pollution regulation, for example, are not fully borne by its beneficiaries."' But for workers' compensation regulation, for example, the situation is very different: with the enactment of workers' compensation programs, nonunionized workers faced a dollar-for-dollar wage reduction, corresponding almost perfectly to the expected value of the benefits that they received.' For drinking water regulation, something similar is involved. The cost of regulation is passed onto consumers in the form of higher water bills. "2 Hence the easy case finds a number of real-world analogues. 
of WTP to calculate VSL. They point to some important qualifications, but none of them is a convincing refutation of the straightforward argument. 
a. Adaptive Preferences and "Miswanting." The first objection emphasizes the possibility that people's preferences have adapted to existing opportunities, including deprivation.'53 Perhaps people show a (1988) (arguing that occupational health and safety regulations are not an effective method of redistribution). 
2001, at 34, 35-38. 
STATE 69, app. D at 231-38 (2000). 
drinking water quality would have resulted in an annual increase of $30 in the water bills for most households). 
what happens when "people tend to adjust their aspirations to their possibilities"); Adler & low WTP for environmental goods, including health improvements, simply because they have adjusted to environmental bads, including health risks. Perhaps people's WTP reflects an effort to reduce cognitive dissonance through the conclusion that risks are lower than they actually are.5 To generalize, perhaps people suffer from a problem of "miswanting";... they want things that do not promote their welfare, and they do not want things that would promote their welfare. If this is so, then WTP loses much of its underlying justification; people's decisions do not actually promote their welfare," 6 and their autonomy, properly understood, may not require respect for their decisions, which may be nonautonomous. If government can be confident that people are not willing to pay for goods from which they would greatly benefit, perhaps government should abandon WIP. 
In some contexts, this objection raises serious problems for neoclassical economics and for unambivalent enthusiasm for freedom of choice.'57 Autonomy is implicated in addition to welfare. Suppose that people do not want risk reduction because they believe risk to be inevitable, or because their preferences have adapted to dangerous and unfair conditions. If so, people's preferences do not reflect their autonomy. In other words, the idea of autonomy requires not merely Posner, supranote 5, at 1128-30 (hypothesizing, for example, that "people are not willing to pay for parks because they have adapted to a world without parks"). 
Consequences of Cognitive Dissonance, in AN ECONOMIC THEORIST'S BOOK OF TALES 123 (1984) (analyzing the incorporation of the psychological theory of cognitive dissonance into economic models). 
Timothy D. Wilson, Miswanting, in FEELING AND THINKING: THE ROLE OF AFFECr IN SOCIAL COGNITION 178, 179 (Joseph P. Forgas ed., 2000), who explain that: 
Although we tend to think of unhappiness as something that happens to us when we do not get what we want, much unhappiness... has less to do with not getting what we want, and more to do with not wanting what we like. When wanting and liking are uncoordinated in this way we may say that person has miswanted. 
ADVANCES IN EXPERIMENTAL SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 34 people's ability to accurately predict their own feelings). 
Back to Bentham? Explorations of Experienced Utility, 112 Q.J. ECON. 375, 379-88 (1997) (arguing that utility's impact on human behavior can be understood better and researched more effectively by analyzing the normative idea of "total utility" as the discrete concepts of "experienced utility" and "decisional utility"). 
PredictingFuture Feelings,in WELL-BEING: THE FOUNDATIONS OF HEDONIC PSYCHOLOGY 85 (Daniel Kahneman et al. eds., 1999). respect for whatever preferences people happen to have, but also social conditions that allow preferences to be developed in a way that does not reflect coercion or injustice. With respect to some risks, the relevant preferences are nonautonomous; consider the fact that many women face a risk of male violence under circumstances in which they believe that little can be done and hence adapt. 
In the context of ordinary regulatory policy, however, this objection has more theoretical than practical interest. Typically regulation involves the reduction of low-level mortality risks (say, 1/50,000). Much of the time, there is no reason to believe that the use of informed WTP (say, $100) is a product of adaptive preferences. When people's WTP does appear to result from adaptive preferences, however, the judgment about the easy cases must be revised. 
b. Inadequate Information and Bounded Rationality. A closely related objection would point to an absence of information and to bounded rationality. As I have stressed throughout, people have difficulty dealing with low-probability events.5 If people are not aware of what they might be gaining by regulation, their WTP can be too low. Perhaps the availability heuristic will lead people to underestimate the risk. If people cannot recall a case in which some activity produced illness or death, they may conclude that the risk is trivial even if it is not. Or perhaps the same heuristic, and probability neglect, will lead people to exaggerate risks, producing a WTP that is wildly inflated in light of reality. And if people are unable to understand the meaning of ideas like "one in fifty thousand," or to respond rationally to such ideas, then there are serious problems with relying on WTP. 
It is also possible that people's WTP reflects excessive discounting of future health benefits. If workers are ignoring the future, or applying an implausibly high discount rate, then there is a good argument for setting aside their WTP. In the context of global warming, for example, the temporally distant nature of the harm might well lead to insufficient concern for a potentially catastrophic risk. The same is true for less dramatic risks that people face in their daily lives. Young smokers, for example, probably give too little attention to the health harms caused by smoking. Those who choose a likelihood of low-probability or low-salience events because these threats simply do not make it onto people's 'radar screens."'). poor diet and little exercise almost certainly fail to consider the longterm effects of their behavior. Self-control problems are an important part of bounded rationality. If a low WTP shows a failure to give adequate attention to the future, then there is reason not to use WTP. 
In many cases, however, WTP is a result of adequate information and bounded rationality is not leading people to err. If so, appropriate adjustments should be made to WTP, and the VSL that emerges from WTP should be corrected. 
c. Rights. A quite different objection would point to people's rights. Perhaps people have a right not to be subjected to risks of a certain magnitude, and the use of WTP will violate this right. It seems fully reasonable to say that whatever their WTP, human beings should have a right not to be subject to risks above a particular level. Imagine, for example, that poor people live in a place where they face a 1/20 annual risk of dying from water pollution; it makes sense to say ttohaptatyheongloyv$e1rntmoeenlitmsihnoautelditreadnductehethpaetrr-ipsekrseovnenc oifstpieso$p1le00a.'r5e9 willing 
As an abstract claim about people's rights, the objection is entirely correct. Something has gone badly wrong if people are exposed to serious risks and their WTP prevents them, and is invoked to prevent their government, from doing anything in response. It would be foolish to suggest that WTP is determinative of the appropriate use of government subsidies; a redistributive policy does not track people's WTP. (Would it make sense to say that government would give poor people a check for $100 only if they were willing to pay $100 for the check?) And in many cases people are subject to risks whose magnitude is indeed a violation of rights. But this point has little force against the particular argument that I am making. 
The initial problem with this objection is that in the cases under discussion, rights of this kind are usually not involved; I am speaking here of statistically small risks. Suppose that this initial response is unconvincing and that rights are indeed involved. If so, there is a still more fundamental response. When rights are involved, the proper response is not to force people to buy protection that they do not want, but to provide a subsidy that will give them the benefit for free or enable them to receive the benefit at what is, for them, an that risks above a certain level should count as violative of rights. acceptable price. 6° Nothing here is meant to deny the possibility that government should provide certain goods via subsidy, or indeed that subjection to risks above a certain level is a violation of rights."' The question instead is one of regulation under the stated assumptions. So long as that is the question, use of WTP does not violate anyone's rights. 
d. Democracy versus Markets. An independent objection would stress that people are citizens, not merely consumers; it would urge that regulatory choices be made after citizens have deliberated with one another about their preferences and values.162 The argument against forced exchanges treats people as consumers; it sees their decisions about safety as the same as their decisions about all other commodities.'63 For some decisions, this approach is badly misconceived." Our constitutional system is a deliberative democracy,"' not a maximization machine, and many social judgments should be made by citizens engaged in deliberative discussion with one another rather than by aggregating the individual choices of consumers. 166 
Consider some examples: 0 In the context of race and societies do not aggregate 
sex discrimination, people's WTP. The sensible level of instead lump sums. 
of harm (as opposed to actual harm) is itself a harm. See Matthew D. Adler, Risk, Death and Harm: The Normative Foundationsof Risk Regulation,87 MINN. L. REV. 1293, 1340-88 (2003) (reviewing arguments supporting and refuting the proposition that the risk of death is itself a harm that affects welfare). 
and exchange, and even political arguments, contribute to the formulation and revision of values"). 
Choice Theory, Value Pluralism,and DemocraticPolitics, 90 COLUM. L. REV,2121, 2176 (1990) ("In the highly differentiated world of the modem liberal state, the same person may have distinct interests in her role as consumer from those in her role as worker, or as citizen, or as a parent, or as member of a religious community."); see generally ELIZABETH ANDERSON, VALUE IN ETHICS AND ECONOMICS (1993). 
approaching many choices not from a unitary, fixed perspective, but from several different perspectives that pull them in different directions."). 
DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT (1994). 
permissible discrimination is not set by using market evidence or contingent valuation studies to see how much people would be willing to pay to discriminate (or to be free from discrimination). Even if discriminators would be willing to pay a lot to avoid associating with members of unpopular groups, such discrimination is banned. Through political processes, citizens have decided that certain forms of discrimination are illicit, whatever people's WTP. * The prohibition against sexual harassment does not emerge from a governmental WTP. Many harassers would be willing to pay something, perhaps a great deal, for the privilege of harassing; in imaginable circumstances, the harassers' WTP might exceed their victims' WTP to prevent harassment. 
Nonetheless, harassment is forbidden, and WTP is irrelevant. * The protection of endangered species is not chosen on the basis of aggregated WTP. Whether and when to protect members of endangered species is a moral question to be resolved through democratic discussion, not through exercises in consumer sovereignty. Some people may be willing to pay a significant amount to harm endangered species, at least if that harm is necessary to undertake development activities. Their WTP is not taken to be part of the legal assessment of what they are permitted to do. • Laws that forbid cruelty to animals, and that impose affirmative duties of protection on human beings, stem not from WTP, but from a belief that moral commitments call for such laws. When laws require that animals be protected against suffering, it does not matter that those who are regulated (university laboratories, for example) may be willing to pay a significant amount to avoid the regulation. Of course the cost of the regulatory burden might play a role in deciding whether to impose it. But the underlying moral judgment is rooted in a belief in the avoidance of suffering that does not essentially turn on WTP. 
Emphasizing the limits of any approach that takes "preferences" to be the foundation of regulatory policy, Professor Amartya Sen stresses that "discussions and exchange, and even political arguments, contribute to the formation and revision of values."'67 He urges that in the particular context of environmental protection, solutions require regulators "to go beyond looking only for the best reflection of given individual preferences, or the most acceptable procedures for choices based on those preferences. ' '6 
Professor Sen's claims are both fundamental and correct. They point to some serious limitations on the use of WTP. But it is important not to read such objections for more than they are worth. In trading off safety and health in their private lives, people do not have static values and preferences. Much of the time, human choices are a product of reflection, even if choosers are simply acting as consumers. Reflection and deliberation, including reflection and deliberation with other people, are hardly absent from the market domain. To be sure, moral questions should not be resolved by aggregating private WTP. Sometimes people's preferences, even though backed by WTP, are morally off-limits, and policy should not take account of them. In addition, people are sometimes unwilling to pay a great deal for goods that have strong moral justifications; animal welfare is an example. In these circumstances, the market model is inapplicable and WTP reveals very little. 
But what about the easy case? Do these arguments suggest that government should override individual choices about how much to spend to eliminate low-level risks, even when those choices are adequately informed? For environmental protection generally, it is indeed important to go beyond "the best reflection of given individual preferences.' ' 169 But this point does not mean that people should be required to pay $100 to eliminate mortality risks of 1/100,000 when they are willing to pay only $75. If people's WTP reflects an absence of information or insufficient deliberation, then it is important for other people, in government and elsewhere, to draw attention to that fact. And in some cases, a low WTP might be overridden on the ground that it is rooted in errors, factual or otherwise. But these points should not be taken as a general objection to my conclusion about the easy case, or to suggest that government should force people to reduce statistical risks at an expense that they deem excessive. 
Here is one way to understand the argument that I am making: The American system is a deliberative democracy, to be sure, but in this democracy, it is valuable for regulators to consider more fully individuated VSLs in deciding how to proceed, at least under the stated assumptions. 
e. Very Low Probabilitiesand CatastrophicRisks. Suppose that everyone in the United States faces an annual death risk of 1/10,000,000-and that this risk, if it comes to fruition, will kill every person in the country. The expected number of annual deaths is twenty-six, ' which would produce expected annual costs in excess of $158 million, assuming a VSL of $6.1 million. But if the government attempted to elicit each individual's WTP to avoid a risk of 1/10,000,000, it might well produce a number very close to zero. How much would you be willing to spend to avoid a risk of 1/10,000,000? If you say "nothing," you might well be like most people. And if most people really are like that, the supposed risk of 1/10,000,000, applicable to everyone in the United States, yields both twenty-six expected annual fatalities and expected annual costs very close to zero-an especially odd result in light of the fact that there is a 1/10,000,000 risk not simply that each American will die, but that every American will die.'71 
This result does seem anomalous. For one thing, is it really sensible to conclude that the prevention of twenty-six deaths is worth nothing, or close to it? An affirmative answer is suggested by a perspective that is fully based on people's WTP to avoid very low probability risks. But assigning a value near zero, for the prevention of dozens of deaths, seems quite implausible. In cases of this kind, there is a serious problem with using WTP to calculate the benefit of avoiding that risk. 
This conclusion actually understates the problem. In the case at hand, the risk is potentially catastrophic. As I have said, if the 1/10,000,000 chance is realized, every American will be dead. Even if people show a WTP near zero to avoid a risk of that size, it does not seem right to think that the nation should spend almost nothing to prevent it." 2 The point has a general bearing on precautions against low probability risks of catastrophe: some degree of prevention 
Sunstein, Irreversibleand Catastrophic,CORNELL L. REV. (forthcoming 2006). 
demand a very high price to bear it, however slight it is, in which event the value of life implied by their behavior may be astronomical."). should be undertaken even if WTP numbers do not justify it. Part of the problem with those numbers is that individual behavior will not reflect the "catastrophe premium" or "extermination premium" that would almost certainly emerge if it were possible to test for it. People may be unwilling to pay anything to avoid a risk of 1/100,000,000 that they themselves face; but if they were told that every person in the nation faced this risk, they might come up with a significantly higher figure. It would take the right question to produce the higher numbers. Another the problem is that WTP is not an adequate measure of social responses to catastrophes-in part because people are not familiar with making choices about risks of that sort. 
In my view, this is a sound objection to the use of a low or nearzero VSL in the context of catastrophic risks, even if the WTP calculation would produce that VSL. As Judge Richard Posner shows,173 this is an important point when government is considering how to respond to small risks of catastrophic harm. But notice that the objection has built-in limitations. It does not apply to the overwhelming number of cases in which VSL is used. In those cases, the risks in question are 1/10,000 to 1/100,000, and no large-scale catastrophe is at issue. Here, then, is a limitation on the use of WTP, but the domain of the objection is restricted. 
f Third-Party Effects. A final objection would point to effects on third parties. If outsiders would be adversely affected by the undervaluing of a particular risk, and if their welfare is not being considered, then the WTP calculus is seriously incomplete. This point demonstrates a general and badly neglected problem for WTP as it is currently used: agencies consider people's WTP to eliminate statistical risks, without taking account of the fact that othersespecially family members and close friends-would also be willing to pay something to eliminate those risks. John might be willing to pay $25 to eliminate his own risk of 1/100,000, but his wife, Jane, might be willing to pay $25 to eliminate John's risk also. If regulators add the WTP, on John's behalf, of John's friends and relatives, the total WTP might soon exceed $100. This is a real problem for existing uses of WTP. 
But thus far the discussion has been assuming that there are no third-party effects. The argument for using WTP, on the stated assumptions, is that government should not force people to buy goods that are not worthwhile for them. At least at first glance, this argument seems sound with respect to statistical risks of the kind on which I am focusing. 
There is an obvious artificiality in the assumptions thus far. Most important, people do not always bear the full social costs of the regulatory benefits that they receive. Sometimes they pay only a fraction of those costs-or possibly nothing at all. When this is so, the normative analysis is much more complicated. In the context of air pollution regulation, for example, there is a complex set of distributional effects, and on balance, poor people, and members of minority communities, appear to be net gainers.'75 An efficiency analysis, based on WTP, might not produce an adequate account of the welfare effects of air pollution regulation. And even if it did, an account of welfare effects might not resolve the normative question, because the distributional gains are important to consider.' The difficulty is that a high VSL, one that exceeds what WTP studies show for poor people, may produce outcomes that are in the best interest of poor people, in the sense that the result is a welfare improvement for them.'7" And if poor people do not bear all of the costs of event, people's WTP could not tell the whole story. 
California and finding that, under the Clean Air Act, "poorer, less educated populations have experienced a greater overall improvement in air quality between 1980 and 1998"). 
recent guidelines governing regulatory impact analysis. See Office of Mgmt. & Budget, Draft 2003 Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations, 68 Fed. Reg. 5492, 5517 (Feb. 3, 2003): 
Those who bear the costs of a regulation and those who enjoy its benefits often are not the same people. . . . Your regulatory analysis should provide a separate description of distributional effects (i.e., how both benefits and costs are distributed among sub-populations of particular concern) so that decisionmakers can properly consider them along with the effects on economic efficiency. 
REv. 223, 227-28, 255-61 (2000). Professor Jolls argues that accommodation mandates might produce desired redistributive gains whether or not they are efficient, and she supplies a detailed analysis of when those gains are most likely to occur. See id. at 250 ("Even if the value of the accommodation is less than its cost, the mandate may make disadvantaged workers better off because nondisadvantaged workers will bear some of the associated cost."). At present, there is no parallel discussion for regulation of the sort that I am discussing here. My suggestion is that under imaginable assumptions, some regulation will be defensible on distributive grounds. programs that benefit them, the autonomy argument for WTP is greatly reduced; they are enjoying a benefit (partly) for free, and it does not insult anyone's autonomy to give them a good on terms that they find acceptable. Note that these points do not bear directly on the question of whether VSL should vary across risks. But they do bear on the issue of varying VSL across persons, and in particular across disparities in income and wealth. 
Suppose, for example, that beneficiaries of a proposed drinking water regulation are willing to pay only $80 to eliminate a risk of 1/50,000. Assume, in addition, that the per-person cost of eliminating a 1/50,000 risk is $100-but that for every dollar of that cost, the beneficiaries pay only $.80. The remaining $.20 might be paid by water companies themselves, in the form of reduced profits, or by employees of the water companies, in the form of reduced wages and fewer jobs. In this example, the costs of the regulation exceed the benefits: it is inefficient. But by hypothesis, the regulation makes its beneficiaries better off. If the WTP criterion is used, the fact that the monetized costs exceed the monetized benefits is decisive. But as a normative matter, the analysis here is far harder than in the easy cases. On what assumption should the WTP numbers be decisive? 
The assumption must be that economic efficiency is the goal of government, at least in the context of regulation-that to know what to do, government should aggregate the benefits and costs of regulation, and act if and only if the benefits exceed the costs. When using the WTP numbers, government is acting as a maximization machine, aggregating all benefits and costs as measured by the WTP criterion. But this is a highly contestable understanding of what government should be doing. In fact it represents a shift from the relatively uncontroversial Pareto criterion, exemplified above, to a version of the far more controversial Kaldor-Hicks criterion,' s which assesses policy by asking this question: Are the gainers winning more than the losers are losing? The Kaldor-Hicks criterion is sometimes described as potential Pareto superiority,'79 because it asks whether in principle, the winners could compensate the losers, and a surplus equivalents. A direct assessment of welfare, if it were possible, might justify the regulation in question on Kaldor-Hicks grounds. 
Kaldor-Hicks concept is also and suggestively called potential Pareto superiority: The winners could compensate the losers, whether or not they actually do."). could be left over. The difficulty of course is that Pareto superiority is merely potential. Some people really are losing and others are gaining. 
In these harder cases, the gainers are gaining less (in monetary terms) than the losers are losing-and hence the regulation is said to be unjustified. Under the assumptions that I have given, the regulation is indeed inefficient: its social cost is higher than its social benefit. But is the regulation undesirable? This is not at all clear. The first problem is that WTP is measuring gains and losses in monetary terms, rather than in welfare terms.8 ' It is possible that those who gain, in the harder cases, gain more welfare than the losers lose; WTP is not dispositive on that question. The second problem is distributional. Suppose that in terms of overall welfare, the regulation is not desirable; it makes aggregate welfare lower rather than higher. But suppose too that those who benefit are less advantaged than those who lose. If, for example, those who are willing to pay $80 are disproportionately poor, and those who pay the remainder are disproportionately wealthy, the regulation might plausibly be justified despite the welfare loss. 
It is natural to respond here that, if redistribution is the goal, then it should be produced not through regulation but through the tax system, which is a more efficient way of transferring resources to people who need help.181 I agree. But suppose that redistribution is not possible through the tax system. If so, then regulation in the harder cases cannot be ruled off-limits despite its inefficiency. The fact that a regulation is helpful to the most disadvantaged is not decisive in its favor. If it is trivially helpful, and if it inflicts huge costs on everyone else, little can be said for it. But everything depends on the magnitude of the relevant effects. A program that produced large gains for the least well-off would seem to be justified even if it imposed, in terms of WTP, slightly higher costs than benefits on balance. 
(exploring various methods of measuring the utility of temporally extended outcomes). 
the Income Tax in RedistributingIncome, 23 J. LEGAL STUD. 667, 667 (1994) ("[R]edistribution through legal rules offers no advantage over redistribution through the income tax system and typically is less efficient."); Steven Shavell, A Note on Efficiency vs. DistributionalEquity in Legal Rulemaking: Should DistributionalEquity Matter Given Optimal Income Taxation?, 71 AM. ECON. REV. PAPERS & PROC. 414, 414 (1981) (describing how an income tax can compensate for inefficient liability rules and redistribute income); David A. Weisbach, Should 
Is there a reason to treat the harder cases as identical to the easy ones? Is this absurd? 112 Agencies do not distinguish between them, although recent guidelines, encouraging agency attention to distributional issues, might eventually persuade them to do so.1"3 A possible reason for treating the harder cases the same as the easy ones is the existence of an optimal income tax. If the tax system produced the right level of redistribution, there would be good reason for agencies to rely on individualized VSL and not to concern themselves with whether the beneficiaries of regulation were paying for any or all of the costs. The hard cases would be treated as the easy ones. For people who believe that the hard cases must be treated differently, it is because further redistribution is desirable. 
Another reason for treating the harder cases as the easy ones would be optimism: perhaps everything will balance out in the end. Perhaps no group will be systematically helped or hurt, and the tax system will produce appropriate redistribution. In the real-world cases, regulators might also think that a direct inquiry into welfare, bypassing WTP, would be extremely difficult or perhaps even impossible to operationalize. If distributional considerations are relevant, interest-group warfare may be the consequence, rather than distribution to those who particularly need and deserve help.1" More modestly, it might be concluded that agencies should generally pursue efficiency, using WTP as the foundation for decisions, but should allow distributional findings to cut the other way in cases in which there is compelling reason to do so. In fact this approach is a plausible Legal Rules Be Used to Redistribute Income?, 70 U. CHI. L. REV. 439, 439 (2003) ("[Tjhe tax system is a better tool for redistribution of income than legal rules."). 
(2000) (urging that "there are separate reasons why preferences are an unsatisfactory basis for valuing lives," including that, "in contexts involving risks, people's preferences are generally muddled and incoherent" rather than rational). If preferences are in fact muddled and incoherent, current practice is of course on thin ground. 
(Sept. 17, 2003) (noting that "possible justifications [for regulation] include.., removing distributional unfairness"), available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/aOO4/a-4.pdf. 
warfare, how an affluent suburban neighborhood successfully thwarted the development of a nearby landfill, resulting in the landfill's being moved to a "pristine research forest and nature preserve" belonging to Duke University because the university was located in a neighboring county and thus possessed less political clout than the suburban neighborhood). way of reading the Office of Management and Budget's current guidelines on regulatory impact analysis."' 
In the easy cases, the resulting redistribution is almost certainly perverse, because forced exchanges, under the stated assumptions, are highly likely to harm the people who are being coerced. But in the harder cases, it cannot be said that the beneficiaries of regulation will be harmed if government uses a number that exceeds their actual VSLs. Everything depends on the distributional effects of the regulation. If the beneficiaries are well-off, a high VSL might produce perverse redistribution if those who lose are toward the bottom of the economic ladder. It is possible to envision this result, for example, with a pollution program that protects those who visit expensive recreational areas. In contrast, if the beneficiaries are poor, and if the costs are borne by the wealthy or by the general population, a high VSL might be in the interest of those who need help. Air pollution programs, providing special protection for people in cities, appear to be an example. 186 It is therefore reasonable to reject the confident view of economically inclined analysts who believe that accurate VSLs, based on actual WTP (and hence individuated), should always be the basis of regulatory policy. But it is similarly reasonable to reject the confident view of skeptics who believe that a uniform VSL, refusing to make distinctions among persons, is best on distributive grounds. 
What are the implications for individuation of VSL? It remains true that according to the theory that underlies agency valuations, a higher degree of individuation would be desirable. It also remains true that with respect to risks, individuation is appropriate insofar as valuations differ depending on the nature of the risk at stake. The principal qualification is that a uniform VSL, one that gives disadvantaged people regulatory protection in excess of their WTP, might turn out to have fortunate distributional consequences in the harder cases. Regulators should be careful about this point. It will not 
There are justifications for regulations in addition to correcting market failures. A regulation may be appropriate when you have a clearly identified measure that can make government operate more efficiently. In addition, Congress establishes some regulatory programs to redistribute resources to select groups. Such regulations should be examined to ensure that they are both effective and cost-effective. 
basin, where regulation is especially stringent, experienced a larger pollution exposure reduction than [other] California residents"). always hold, and if the goal is to provide more assistance to those in need, a uniform VSL is hardly the best way to achieve that goal. Consider the case of poor areas of the country: a national VSL of $6.1 million would almost certainly be harmful, simply because the resulting levels of regulation would have adverse effects on wages and employment levels. My only point is that in some cases, individuation across persons will produce worse outcomes on distributional grounds and possibly on grounds of welfare as well. 
VALUATIONS 
The analysis thus far has significant implications for global risk regulation and cross-cultural variations in WTP and VSL. In this Part, I turn to those implications. My conclusion is that poor countries should use a lower VSL than wealthy countries, and that people in poor countries are not helped if the United States, or an international body, insists on a high one. But the analysis must be different if the question is the behavior of donors or donor nations. Nations who are most in need deserve help, even if their WTP is low. For purposes of regulation, however, insistence on a high VSL will not provide that help. I begin with the distinction between donor practices and government regulation and then turn to the practical question of cross-national valuations. 
I have suggested that people in poor nations show a lower WTP and hence VSL than people in wealthy nations. ' 8 Because poor people have less money than rich people, this finding should not be at all surprising. Building on evidence of this kind, some assessments of the effects of global warming find far higher monetized costs from deaths of people in rich countries than from deaths of people in poor countries."8 These assessments have been highly controversial; 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: PROSPECTS FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 202, 206-07 (Anil Markandya. & Kirsten Halsnaes, eds., 2002) (calculating a VSL for the European Union of $3.9 million in 1995 prices, compared to VSLs of $315,000 to $1.2 million for the four developing countries in the case study); cf INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE, THIRD ASSESSMENT REPORT: CLIMATE CHANGE 2001: MITIGATION 483 (finding that "[t]he VSL is generally lower in poor countries than in rich countries"), availableat http://grida.no/climate/ipcc-tar/wg3. Professor John Broome, for example, notes that under one approach, an American life is worth ten or twenty Indian lives, a judgment that he deems "absurd., 189 As a result, some analysts, including the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, have opted for a worldwide VSL of $1 million, a choice that seems quite arbitrary and potentially harmful to people in rich and poor nations alike. 
The issue raises important dilemmas. How should global institutions assess the monetary value of human lives? What are the monetized costs of ten thousand worldwide deaths from global warming, deaths that include eight thousand people from poor countries and two thousand from wealthy ones? The discussion thus far suggests that there is no sensible abstract answer to these questions; it is important to know what, in particular, the answer is for. If a general question is asked, outside of any particular context, about the monetary value of a stated number of deaths in 2020, it is best left unanswered (except perhaps with laughter). The appropriate assessments of VSL, and variations across countries, depend on their intended use. If disparate numbers are meant to identify the actual monetary values of human lives, and to suggest that people in Canada are "worth" much more than people in Argentina or that poor people are "worth" less than rich ones, the numbers are ludicrous as well as offensive. 
It is possible to go further. If the disparate numbers are meant to suggest the appropriate amount that donor institutions should spend to reduce mortality risks, they make little sense. The fact that a poor person in a poor nation would be willing to pay $1 to eliminate a risk of 1/10,000, whereas a wealthy person in a wealthy nation would be willing to pay $100, cannot plausibly be used to defend the view that money-metric utility function to represent a person's preferences," an approach that Professor Broome rejects). In the easy cases, I suggest that a money-metric utility function is not absurd, and it is not quite absurd in the hard cases either. See INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE, supra note 188, at 483: 
The VSL is generally lower in poor countries than in rich countries, but it is considered unacceptable by many analysts to impose different values for a policy that has to be international in scope and decided by the international community. In these circumstances, analysts use average VSL and apply it to all countries. Of course, such a value is not what individuals would pay for the reduction in risk, but it is an "equity adjusted" value, in which greater weight is given to the WTP of lower income groups. On the basis of EU and US VSLs and a weighting system that has some broad appeal in terms of government policies towards income distribution, Eyre et al. (1998) estimate the average world VSL at around 1 million Euros (approximately US$1 million at 1999 exchange rates). an international agency should devote its resources to the latter rather than the former. To illustrate this point, imagine choosing between two programs: (A) Program A would eliminate (at a stated cost of $500) a 1/10,000 risk faced by fifty poor people in Costa Rica, each willing to pay $2 to eliminate that risk. (B) Program B would eliminate (also at a stated cost of $500) a 1/10,000 risk faced by fifty wealthy people in Germany, each willing to pay $350 to eliminate that same risk. 
In principle, there is no reason to think that a donor should prefer to save the Germans, even though their WTP is far higher than that of the Costa Ricans. In fact, Program A has much higher priority, because it would help people who were facing extreme deprivation. What is true at the individual level is true across nations as well. 
But now consider a different issue. The government in a poor nation is deciding on appropriate policy to reduce workplace risks; what VSL should it use? At least under the assumptions that I have given thus far, such a government would do well to begin by using the admittedly low WTP of its own citizens. If citizens in that nation show a WTP of $2 to eliminate risks of 1/10,000, then their government does them no favors by requiring them to pay $50 or $10 for that protection. This is the sense in which VSL properly varies across nations, and in which citizens of poor nations have lower VSLs than citizens of wealthy ones. 
The point has strong implications for international labor standards. It is tempting to suggest that workers in poor countries, for example China and India, should receive the same protection as those in the United States; why should a worker in Beijing be subject to significantly higher death risks than a worker in Los Angeles? So long as the distribution of global income has the form that it does, a system that gives Chinese workers the same protection as American workers is not in the interest of Chinese workers-assuming, as I am, that the cost of that protection is borne by workers themselves. Requiring Chinese workers to have the same protection as Americans amounts to a forced exchange on terms that Chinese workers reject. 
In these circumstances it is unsurprising that workers in wealthy nations, not in poor ones, often clamor the loudest for greater protection of workers in poor nations; workers in wealthier nations would be the principal beneficiaries of such regulation, which would protect them against competition from those in poorer nations. The idea that workers in poor nations should have the "same" protection as workers in wealthy nations is an error, rooted in a "moral heuristic" involving the equal worth of all human lives-a heuristic that sometimes works well but that also misfires.' 90 The real question is the effect of different numbers. 
If the Chinese government uses a VSL of $6 million, on the theory that its citizens should not be valued less than those of wealthy nations, social harm will almost inevitably result. In the easy cases, the forced exchanges will be ludicrously harmful to the people whom they are supposed to help. In the hard cases, in which the beneficiaries pay only a fraction of the cost (which is mostly borne by others in the same nation), the nation will be spending far too much of its money on risk reduction (or more precisely, on reducing the risks that happen to get onto the regulatory agenda). The inefficiency of an extremely high VSL will be felt acutely and in many forms, including decreased employment. But if the costs of risk reduction will be paid by third parties-for example, wealthy nations-then people in the poor country will be helped even if risk reduction is based on an excessive VSL. 
Of course the citizens of poor nations would almost certainly be helped more if they were given cash (supposing that it would not be squandered) rather than in-kind benefits. But if cash redistribution is not possible, regulatory benefits, provided for free or for a fraction of their cost, remain a blessing. If, for example, a global institution uses a worldwide VSL of $1 million, and if that amount exceeds the domestic VSL of people in poor nations, it is possible that poor people will gain a great deal if the resources for risk reduction are provided by wealthy nations. In the harder cases, the simple point is that many of the intended beneficiaries of regulation are in fact net gainers. 
How, then, should global institutions, such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, assess the monetary costs of risks faced by people all over the world? As I have suggested, the answer turns on the purpose of the assessment-on what issue the answer is supposed to address. There is no good acontextual way of Framing,88 MINN. L. REV. 1556 (2004). asking some question about the aggregate costs of global climate change by 2050, unless it has some particular point. A far more sensible question is whether it would make sense for any particular nation to accept a particular way of responding to the problem of climate change, such as the Kyoto Protocol. t At the national level, an assessment of the costs and benefits of the Kyoto Protocol is not much different from an assessment of the costs and benefits of any other regulation. 
For the United States, the likely costs of the Kyoto Protocol greatly exceed its likely benefits. The anticipated costs are $325 billion,192 an amount that might be worthwhile if the anticipated benefits for the United States were in the ballpark of that number. But the overall benefits of the Kyoto Protocol are small because the mandatory emissions reduction would make only a slight dent in global warming.9 In the United States, the benefits could not possibly justify the costs.9" The picture for the world as a whole is more mixed, with Europe anticipated to be a net gainer1.9 ' But even for the world, the Kyoto Protocol appears to impose costs in excess of benefits-and this is so even if improbable catastrophic risks are taken into account. The only qualification here is that the science of global warming is disputed; if this is a realm of uncertainty rather than risk, and if worst-case scenarios are emphasized, then the Kyoto Protocol might provide a sensible impetus toward technological innovation and far more dramatic reductions. 
For wealthy nations, of course, the argument for contributing to the reduction of global warming is strengthened by the fact that the harms of global warming will be felt disproportionately in poor nations-and also by the fact that wealthy nations have done by far the most to produce the situation that makes global warming a serious problem. Hence it is reasonable to say that the United States should join international agreements to combat global warming even if it loses more than it gains. The problem with the Kyoto Protocol is MODELS OF GLOBAL WARMING 168 (2000) ("Finally, the Kyoto Protocol has significant distributional consequences .... The lion's share of the[] costs are borne by the United States. Indeed, the United States is a net loser while the rest of the world on balance benefits from the Kyoto Protocol."). 
that it combines extremely high global costs with relatively low global benefits, even if the problem of global warming is taken quite seriously. A sensible approach would control emissions in developing countries, so as to increase the overall benefits, and also would use emissions trading and other strategies to reduce the overall costs. These routes could certainly produce sensible agreements to address climate change.196 To the extent that emissions control in developing countries would impose a significant burden, wealthy nations should help to foot the bill. 
But I am not attempting here to resolve any particular controversy. My major suggestions are that within nations, diverse VSLs are perfectly sensible, and that answers to questions about valuation must be closely attuned to the purposes for which those questions are being asked. 
The theory that animates current valuations of mortality risks argues in favor of far more individuation. Does the risk involve cancer? What kind of cancer? Does it involve air pollution or driving on the highways? If welfare and autonomy are the guides, it is obtuse to adopt an approach that values all statistically equivalent mortality risks in the same way. In addition, individuals display a great deal of heterogeneity in their VSLs-not simply because of different tastes and values, but also because of different levels of income and wealth. WTP depends on ability to pay. Nothing that I have said here is meant to suggest approval of existing distributions of resources. Certainly poor people are not "worth less" than wealthy ones, and it is often appropriate for government to provide resources directly to poor people or subsidize the provision of regulatory benefits. But forced exchanges are not a good way to assist poor people, and a uniform VSL is often a perverse response to inequality. In theory, risk-reduction policies should be more fully individuated, giving all people regulatory protection that corresponds to their WTP for the particular risk in question. 
Of course this is not practicable. Government lacks the necessary information about individual risk preferences; categorical judgments are inevitable. In any case many of the benefits provided by POLICY 38-40, 102-09 (2003). regulation are collective in character. Regulators cannot feasibly provide protection to one person without simultaneously providing protection to many. But it is nonetheless important to see what the current theory counsels in principle, and to understand that the limitations are practical ones, some of which may be overcome as knowledge progresses. Even with the practical limitations, a uniform VSL is increasingly difficult to justify. 
It is clear that some risks produce a higher VSL than others, resulting in significantly different analyses in many cases, above all by producing a higher VSL for cancer risks. A program that protects elderly people should produce a lower VSL than one that protects younger people, and there is no ethical objection to variations on the basis of age.1 7 If a program affects mostly wealthy people, a VSL based on the population-wide median will be too low. It would follow that the FAA should have a relatively high VSL, because people who fly are wealthier than the population median-and when the EPA is engaging in cost-benefit analysis for programs protecting poor people from risks associated with hazardous waste sites, it should have a relatively low VSL. 
The principal qualification is that when the beneficiaries of regulation do not pay all of its cost, a high VSL may actually be in their interests. The easy cases, in which the beneficiaries are forced to pay for regulatory benefits, are not the same as those in which beneficiaries pay only a fraction of the cost. Nonetheless, current practice treats such cases as identical, perhaps because of the great difficulty in untangling the incidence of regulatory benefits and costs. My goal has not been to resolve that difficulty, but to suggest that the theory behind current practice justifies far more individuation of VSL than regulators currently provide. However regulators deal with distributional problems and the hardest cases, the use of a uniform VSL is unacceptably obtuse. 
. about 30-40 percent lower than the market average and between one-third and one-half the size of the VSLs for prime-aged workers."); Sunstein, supra note 8, at 210 ("If thirty-year-olds are willing to pay more (or less) to eliminate a statistical risk than sixty-year-olds, then the difference should be reflected in cost-benefit analyses of regulatory proposals. ... [P]olicymakers should use different values for old people and young people if and only if WTP studies show such a disparity."). I am putting to one side the difficult questions raised by the need to produce a VSL for children. 
