 Cass R. Sunstein* Constitutional law tends, to define itself through reaction to great cases. The defining case for the last several decades was Brown v. Board of Education '-an example of social reorganization, in the interest of a racial minority, brought about through the judiciary. Roe v. Wade2 has to some extent played this role for the past decade, and its status as a defining case may grow larger in the next generation. But for more than a half-century, the most important of all defining cases has been Lochner v. New York. 3 The spectre of Lochner has loomed over most important constitutional decisions, whether they uphold or invalidate governmental practices.4 In the different answers to the question, what was wrong with the decision in Lochner?, can be found the various posi * Professor of Law, University of Chicago. This is a revised version of the Samuel Rubin lecture, delivered while the author was Samuel Rubin Visiting Professor of Law at Columbia Law School in the fall of 1986. The author would like to thank Bruce A. Ackerman, Akhil Amar, Richard Briffault, Stephen Ellman, Richard Epstein, Richard Fallon, Terry Fisher, George Fletcher, Philip Frickey, Wendy Gordon, Kent Greenawalt, Stephen Holmes, Pamela Karlen, Andrew Kaufman, Larry Kramer, Anthony T. Kronman, Daniel Meltzer, Frank Michelman, Geoffrey Miller, Martha Minow, Henry P. Monaghan, Richard A. Posner, Steven Shiffrin, Richard B. Stewart, Geoffrey R. Stone, David Strauss, Peter L. Strauss, Laurence H. Tribe, Mark V. Tushnet, and Roberto Unger for helpful comments. Participants in the legal theory workshops at the Harvard, New York University, University of Minnesota, and University of Pennsylvania law schools also gave valuable help. Daniel B. Rodriguez provided research assistance and useful comments. The Court is most vulnerable and comes nearest to illegitimacy when it deals with judge-made constitutional law having little or no cognizable roots in the language or design of the Constitution. That this is so was painfully demonstrated by the face-off between the Executive and the Court in the 1930's, which resulted in the repudiation of much of the substantive gloss that the Court placed on the Due Process Clause of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. There should be, therefore, great resistance to expand the substantive reach of those Clauses, particularly if it requires redefining the category of rights deemed to be fundamental. tions on most of the major constitutional issues of the modem era.5 The received wisdom is that Lochner was wrong because it involved 'judicial activism": an illegitimate intrusion by the courts into a realm properly reserved to the political branches of government. This view has spawned an enormous literature6 and takes various forms. 7 The basic understanding has been endorsed by the Court in many cases taking the lesson of the Lochner period to be the need for judicial deference to legislative enactments. 8 The principal purpose of this essay, descriptive in character, is to understand Lochner from a different point of view. For the Lochner Court, neutrality, understood in a particular way, was a constitutional requirement. The key concepts here are threefold: government inaction, the existing distribution of wealth and entitlements, and the baseline set by the common law. Governmental intervention was constitutionally troublesome, whereas inaction was not; and both neutrality and inaction were defined as respect for the behavior of private actors pursuant to the common law, in light of the existing distribution of wealth and entitlements. Whether there was a departure from the requirement of neutrality, in short, depended on whether the government had altered the common law distribution of entitlements. Market ordering under the common law was understood to be a part of nature rather than a legal construct, and it formed the baseline from which to measure the constitutionally critical lines that distinguished action from inaction and neutrality from impermissible partisanship. This understanding of the Lochner period is faithful to what the Court said when it both engaged in and abandoned Lochner-like reasoning, and it points to an important element in the Lochner Court's approach, one that has little to do with an aggressive judicial role in general. 9 5. The view that Lochner was wrong is not, however, unanimously held. See R. Understood in this way, however, Lochner has many descendants in current law. Numerous decisions depend in whole or in part on common law baselines or understandings of inaction and neutrality that owe their origin to Lochner-like understandings. And if Lochner is understood in these terms, its heirs are not Roe v. Wade10 and Miranda v. Arizona," but instead such decisions as Washington v. Davis,12 Buckley v. Valeo,13 Regents of California v. Bakke, 14 and various cases immunizing those who are thought not to be "state actors" from constitutional constraints. These and other decisions can be understood from a unitary perspective through the lens of the Lochner period. Such a perspective may or may not justify dramatic departures from current law. It may be that modem doctrine, insofar as it shares Lochner's premises, is entirely unobjectionable. to refer was not invented in the Lochner era. See Fletcher v. Peck, 10 U.S. (6 Granch) 87 (1810) (using contract clause and "general principles ... common to our free institutions" to invalidate rescissions of a land grant). It will be useful to begin with excerpts from two important decisions associated with the Lochner period. The first excerpt is from Adkins v. Childrens Hospital,16 a 1923 decision invalidating minimum wage legislation for women and children. The Court said: To the extent that the sum fixed [by the minimum wage statute] exceeds the fair value of the services rendered, it amounts to a compulsory exaction from the employer for the support of a partially indigent person, for whose condition there rests upon him no peculiar responsibility, and therefore, in effect, arbitrarily shifts to his shoulders a burden which, if it belongs to anybody, belongs to society as a whole.' 7 The next excerpt is from the case generally thought to spell the downfall of Lochner. In the 1937 decision of West Coast Hotel v. Parrish, Is the Court upheld a minimum wage law for women. The Court said: The exploitation of a class of workers who are in an unequal position with respect to bargaining power and are thus relatively defenceless against the denial of a living wage.., casts a direct burden for their support upon the community. What these workers lose in wages the taxpayers are called upon to pay .... The community is not bound to provide what is in effect a subsidy for unconscionable employers.' 9 The notion of subsidy is of course incoherent without a baseline from which to make a measurement. Both of these excerpts refer to subsidies, but by the time of West Coast Hotel, the concept has been turned on its head. In Adkins, the Court saw minimum wage legislation as requiring a subsidy to the public from an innocent employer. Such legislation was thus a kind of "taking" from A to B. According to the Court, if B is needy, it is not A, but the public at large, who should pay. In West Coast Hotel, it is the failure of a state to have minimum wage legislation that amounts to a subsidy--this time, from the public to the employer.2 0 The common law system, for the West Coast Hotel Court, turns out to subsidize "unconscionable employers." In the fifteen-year period between Adkins and West Coast Hotel, the baseline has been shifted. What accounts for the shift? In answering that question, it will be useful to turn to Lochner itself. Lochner involved a regulation enacted by the state of New York prohibiting employers from permitting or requiring bakers to work for more than sixty hours in a week. The Court's analysis came in several steps. The Court said that the right of contract-in particular, the right to buy and sell labor-is part of the liberty protected by the due process clause. But the Court recognized that the "police power" was available to justify intrusions on liberty of contract; thus, for example, the government could protect health or morals by restricting contractual agreements. Here, however, the Court concluded that maximum hour legislation was not permissible as a "labor law," because bakers were of full legal capacity and "in no sense wards of the State." 2 1 Only wards could be protected through labor legislation. tion attacked in Lochner. On the other hand, one could reject both features of the Court's approach, as did Justice Holmes in his famous dissent. available, it was invalidated as impermissibly partisan-what might now be called special-interest legislation. The legislative result was thus unprincipled; it depended on "whose ox is gored." Under this framework, the common law categories were taken as a natural rather than social construct. The status of the common law as a part of nature undergirded the view that the common law should form the baseline from which to measure deviations from neutrality, or self-interested "deals." 3 0 Justice Holmes' celebrated dissenting opinion is a rejection of neutrality altogether. It comes close to modem interest-group pluralism, which treats the political process as an unprincipled struggle among self-interested groups for scarce social resources.3 1 Under this view, Lochner's means-ends scrutiny, examining whether there is a "public" and hence neutral justification for the statute, is difficult to understand. Holmes' opinion treats the political process as a kind of civil war, in which the powerful succeed; if courts interfere, they will be bottling up forces that will express themselves elsewhere in other and more destructive forms.3 2 Thus for Holmes, the Constitution does not prevent "the natural outcome of a dominant opinion." '33 Holmes' opinion is probably best known for its apparent humility: the rejection of Spencer's Social Statics,34 with which Holmes was sympathetic as a matter of personal predilection; the proposition that the Constitution does not embody any particular social and economic theory; and its author's apparent willingness to disregard his personal views in the process of constitutional interpretation. But the opinion is 30. Two qualifications are in order here. First, not every common law right was, by virtue of its status as such, immunized from collective control. Marginal and not-somarginal adjustments were permissible. Nonetheless, the basic framework of the common law formed the baseline from which to decide cases. Indeed, one can trace to this period the idea that legislative extinguishment of "core" common law rights was permissible only if the legislature furnished an adequate alternative remedy. See, e.g., New York Cent. R.R. v. White, 243 U.S. 188 (1917) (upholding workers' compensation in part because of quid pro quo); see also Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Envtl. Study Group, 438 U.S. 59, 88 & n.32 (1978) (upholding liability-limiting provisions of Price-Anderson Act against due process challenge but suggesting relevance of quid pro quo). best understood as an outgrowth of the very species of constitutional social Darwinism that it purports to reject. Holmes' market-oriented conception of politics and his skepticism about normative argument are the very personal building blocks for his enthusiasm for judicial deference. The decline of the Lochner understanding was slow and wavering. In some cases the Court upheld statutes by deferring to claims of plausible means-ends connections. Elsewhere the Court seemed gradually to conclude that redistributive goals were permissibly public and thus in some sense neutral, even if there was a departure from the common law; the common law categories thus broke down.3 6 But it was in West Coast Hotel that the Court rejected the theoretical foundations of the Lochner period. The case involved a statute providing minimum wages for women. Perhaps oddly, at least to modem readers, the emphasis of the opinion was not on the undemocratic character of the Court's previous approach or on the value ofjudicial deference to legislative determinations. 3 7 Instead the Court stressed the need for minimum wage regulation, referring to "the exploiting of workers at wages so low as to be insufficient to meet the bare cost of living" and the fact that "the exploitation of a class of workers who are in an unequal position with respect to bargaining power casts a direct burden for their support upon the community."3 8 In perhaps the most striking passage of the opinion, the Court referred to the subsidy problem and added, "[t]he community may direct its law-making power to correct the abuse which springs from [employers'] selfish disregard of the public interest."' 39 In the Lochner era itself, of course, the police power could not be used to help those unable to protect themselves in the marketplace. 40 The expansion of the police power in West Coast Hotel signalled a critical theoretical shift, amounting to a rejection of the Lochner Court's conception of the appropriate baseline. The key lies in the notion that failure to act would amount to "a subsidy for unconscionable employers." The idea that what appears, in the Lochner framework, to be government "inaction," or neutrality, might amount to a subsidy is at first glance quite puzzling. The Court's claim is that the failure to impose a minimum wage is not nonintervention at all but simply another form of action-a decision to rely on traditional market mechanisms, within the power was by no means precisely defined. common law framework, as the basis for regulation. 41 West Coast Hotel rests on an understanding that in any case, government-through minimum wage laws or the common law system-is making a choice. The common law could not be regarded as a natural or unchosen baseline. The traditional treatment of the police power was unable to survive this understanding. 42 For the Court in West Coast Hotel, the baseline for analysis was instead a system in which all workers had a living wage. 41. Here the parallel to the affirmative action debate is especially striking. See infra prising that Erie v. Tompkins, 4 7 the principal case recognizing the constructed rather than prepolitical character of the common law, was decided only one year after West Coast Hotel. on the baseline used for measurement; thus the second defect presupposes some variation on the first. The third understanding, stressing use of the status quo, is in turn simply a generalization of the Lochner Court's treatment of the common law. For better or worse, these understandings of the Lochner era treat judicial activism as a secondary concern. The central problem of the Lochner Court had to do with its conceptions of neutrality and inaction and its choice of appropriate baseline. This understanding of Lochner is hardly uncontroversial, but variants have been offered. 5 1 And if Lochner is understood in these terms, it has not been entirely overruled. Numerous decisions, in widely disparate areas of constitutional law, depend on Lochner-like baselines and similar principles of neutrality and inaction; one or more of the understandings of Lochner set above are reflected in many areas of current law. The areas to be covered span a wide range, including affirmative action, campaign finance regulation, gender discrimination, the state action doctrine, the distinction between de facto and de jure discrimination, and judicial review of inaction by federal administrative agencies. The discussion begins with areas using common law baselines and later shifts to areas in which the status quo is the foundation for decision. We begin with Buckley v. Valeo, 5 2 which involved a first amendment attack on campaign finance regulation. The regulation at issue im posed a ceiling on campaign expenditures by candidates and political parties. In defense of the regulation, the government argued that it sought to equalize the relative ability of individuals and groups to influence the outcomes of elections. Disparities in wealth, the government claimed, enabled some to drown out the voices of others. Restrictions on the speech of the wealthy served the interest of "dissemination of information from 'diverse and antagonistic sources.' -53 By equalizing participation in the political realm, campaign finance regulation, it was said, did not undermine but instead promoted first amendment interests. Buckley is a direct heir to Lochner. In both cases, the existing distribution of wealth is seen as natural, and failure to act is treated as no decision at all. Neutrality is inaction, reflected in a refusal to intervene in markets or to alter the existing distribution of wealth. Buckley, like Lochner, grew out of an understanding that for constitutional purposes, the existing distribution of wealth must be taken as simply "there," and that efforts to change that distribution are impermissible. Under both cases, the category of permissible legislative ends was sharply limited. To be sure, Buckley was a construction of the first amendment, whereas Lochner rested on the due process clause; and that distinction may turn out to be important. 55 But whether or not Buckley was rightly decided, it has much in common with Lochner. The due process clause accords procedural protection to "liberty" and "property," terms that the Court has had some difficulty defining in recent years. 56 The principal problems have arisen in deciding which, if any, statutory benefits-those said to be "conferred by the goverment"-are entitled to procedural protection. 5 7 For a long period the Court concluded that some benefits were "created" by the government, whereas other benefits were not. Only the latter-generally interests protected by the common law-were entitled to procedural protection. In the wake of an assault on this position, rejecting Lochnerlike baselines deriving from common law,58 the Court has apparently concluded that statutory benefits will sometimes be considered "liberty" or "property"- but only when there is a statutory entitlement, defined as a limitation on the administrator's discretion to provide the benefit in question. 59 Lochner-like premises powerfully influence this debate. For the most part, liberty and property are defined by reference to the common law.60 Interests protected at common law-including most prominently the right to private property, the right to bodily integrity, and other rights protected in the Lochner era-are axiomatically entitled to protection. The difficulties arise with other sorts of rights, including the right to freedom from discrimination, the right to government employment, and the right to welfare. The statutory entitlement approach is based on a partial rejection of Lochner-era understandings. But the Court's failure to put benefits said to be created by the government on the same footing with benefits said to be "natural" is a clear holdover from the Lochner period. The distinction itself treats the common law as unchosen and statutory benefits as a form of "intervention"-the same choice of baseline that affected the Lochner Court. An alternative approach would have been to select liberty and property interests by reference to some criterion of importance independent of the common law, or at least not determined by common law categories. 6 1 Similar issues have arisen as a matter of substantive due process. culties produced by such an approach. In Flemming v. Nestor,6 2 the Court concluded that social security benefits were not constitutionally protected "property. ' 6 3 The same conclusion has been reached elsewhere, as courts have concluded that government may eliminate benefits of its own creation-where that notion is defined by reference to the common law.64 The failure to accord substantive protection to statutory benefits derives from Lochner era distinctions between common law interests and other benefits. Similarly, the constraints of Article III have been administered under Lochner-like premises. The Court is less likely to require an Article III tribunal when a right created by Congress is at stake. The common law thus defines a large amount of the territory captured by Article III requirements.6 5 The state action doctrine is a product of an (uncontroversial) understanding that the Constitution is directed to acts of government rather than acts of private individuals. But how does one decide whether government is "acting"? The legal test could in theory depend on whether government agents are involved in the process. But as the dispute provoked by such cases as Shelley v. Kraemer6 6 makes clear, such a test would be inadequate. State officials are involved in the enforcement of private contract, tort, and property law every day, and their involvement does not subject all private arrangements to constitutional constraints. Instead, state action doctrine has always depended on a baseline establishing the legitimate or at least ordinary functions of government. And in setting forth such a theory, and using it as the basis of inquiry, courts have not merely searched for state "action," but instead relied on common law baselines like those in Lochner. For example, the Constitution is frequently said to be a charter of "negative" rather than "positive" rights. 67 This understanding can be found in a number of areas of state action doctrine. When the government fails to provide protection against private racial discrimination, the failure is said not to be "state action" and thus raises no constitutional question. 68 Nongovernmental discrimination is created by the private rather than the public sphere. So too, no constitutional ques tion is raised when private property owners deny the public access to their property. As the Court held in Hudgens v. NLRB, 69 the first amendment is not violated when landowners invoke state trespass law in order to prevent picketers from displaying their messages on private lands. All of these issues are resolved by the choice of a Lochner-like baseline of government "inaction," one that appears neutral and natural. Neither enforcement of the trespass law nor repeal of laws forbidding private discrimination is taken as state action-a conclusion that relies upon common law notions about the role of government. Horowitz, Reitman v. Mulkey: A Telophase of Substantive Equal Protection, 1967 Sup. Ct. Rev. 39. ing Reitman to an "expanding concept" of equality and state responsibility). from private racial discrimination, or if a state repeals a statute that had provided such protection. This understanding is made explicit in one of the most vexing of modem state action cases, Reitman v. Mulkey. 72 At issue in Reitman was a California constitutional amendment providing that no state statute may be enacted that interferes with the private right to sell property to whomever the property owner chooses. By a five-to-four vote, the Court invalidated the amendment on the ground that its purpose and effect were to encourage private racial discrimination. But the Court was careful to emphasize that the amendment stood on a very different footing from a "mere" failure to provide protection against private racial discrimination. 73 For purposes of the Constitution, PruneYard appeared an easy case, and the failure to provide protection against trespass was obviously state action; whereas Reitman was quite difficult, and the failure to provide protection against racial discrimination was obviously not state action. What accounts for this? The answer lies in the fact that the search for state action can be made coherent only against a background normative theory of the legitimate or normal activities of government. Without such a theory, the search is unguided. It is only because of the persistence of Lochner-like theory that state action was uncontroversially at stake in PruneYard but difficult to find in Reitman v. Mulkey. 74 In PruneYard, there was a deviation from the common law baseline. In a case in which the state fails to provide protection against racial discrimination, or enforces the law of trespass, there is not. In state action doctrine, as in the Lochner period, the common law provides the benchmark from which to measure intervention. For the last two decades there has been considerable debate about the existence of affirmative rights against government. 75 The conventional wisdom, 76 referred to above, has it that the Constitution is a charter of negative guarantees-rights against government interference-and that "affirmative" rights are exceptional or nonexistent. Thus it is said that government may not intrude on private rights, but there is no claim against the government if it has failed to act. The basic position has resulted in rejection of claims to various public serv ices, ranging from police protection to welfare. Perhaps the most wellknown example is Harris v. McRae,77 in which the plaintiffs challenged the government's failure to fund abortions needed by poor women. The Court held that government had no duty to remove barriers "not of its own creation."' 78 The idea is that poverty is simply "there"; it is not a product of government action. By now it should be easy to see that this idea depends on Lochner-like definitions of neutrality, inaction, and appropriate baselines. for present purposes it is unnecessary to say whether the argument might be made persuasive.8 0 It should suffice to suggest that cases rejecting so-called "affirmative" rights depend on Lochner-like premises. The most conspicuously Lochner-like provisions in the Constitution are the contracts and takings clauses, especially in their incorporation of the status quo and of common law principles. The takings clause, protecting private property, provides the analytical foundations for Lochner itself. And it is hard to read the provision without accepting, at least to some degree, certain premises about neutrality, inaction, and common law baselines. The contracts clause protects a species of private property; it thus grows out of the same framework as Lochner. But in the last fifty years, the constraints of the contracts and takings clauses have been significantly curtailed, in part for the same reasons that led to the abandonment of Lochner itself. These developments suggest, among other things, that text and animating purposes have been far from central to decisions about whether to rely on Lochner-like principles. The answer lies in the dramatic expansion of the police power-in short, from an understanding based on Lochner to one rooted in West Coast Hotel. For a long period the contracts clause has permitted states to abrogate contracts so long as they are operating within the "police power." If a state bans the sale of heroin, and the ban applies retroactively to prevent enforcement of a contract, there is no constitutional problem.8 2 The reserved powers of the state, it is said, operate as an implicit limitation on the power to contract. But if the police power is understood in Lochner-like terms, there is still enormous room for immunity from legislative interference-a claim demonstrated by the interpretation of the contracts clause for much of the nation's history.8 3 80. See Black, Further Reflections on the Constitutional Right of Livelihood, 86 Colum. L. Rev. 1103 (1986); Michelman, Foreword: On Protecting the Poor Through the Fourteenth Amendment, 83 Harv. L. Rev. 7 (1969); S. Holmes, Liberal Guilt: Some Theoretical Origins of the Welfare State in Responsibility, Rights and Welfare (D. Moon ed. forthcoming 1987). is necessary because of Allied Structural Steel Co. v. have decided that there was a requirement of compensation. In Home Building Loan Association v. Blaisdell,84 however, the Court read the police power very broadlyv-thus replicating the outcome in West Coast Hotel and rendering the contracts clause functionally identical to the due process clause. One of the most important issues in modern administrative law is whether inaction by administrative agencies, defined as the failure to enforce regulatory statutes, should be subject to the same standards as administrative action, defined as regulatory enforcement. Under the traditional approach, agency action is subject to a strong presumption of reviewability.89 Much of administrative law grows out of an under standing that government may interfere with common law rights only if it has been authorized to do so by the legislature. 90 Judicial review is necessary to test the question of authorization. This understanding is a direct modern analogue to Lochner. In both cases, deviations from the common law status quo demand special justification. In Heckler, as in Lochner, it is government interference with the common law allocation that is subject to legal concern. Governmental "inaction" is treated as neutral and legally unobjectionable; indeed, it does not furnish a predicate for judicial intervention. In the context of administrative law, this phenomenon is especially striking. The rise of the modern administrative state was based largely on a rejection of common law ordering. For the proponents of the administrative agency, the common law system was hardly unchosen or neutral, but was instead highly partisan9 6-a perception shared, as we have seen, by the Court in West Coast Hotel and also in Erie. Regulatory intervention was based largely on a substantive rejection of the common law system. Administrative law doctrines, rooted in traditional private law, thus continue to reflect Lochner-like premises despite the repudiation of those premises during the rise of the administrative state. Similar considerations apply to the problem of standing. Originally, only those whose common law interests were at stake had standing to challenge administrative action. Thus the requirement of a "legal interest" meant, at its inception, that a litigant must be able to show that an interest protected by the common law was at stake.9 7 This test was built on an analogy to private law. Those adversely affected by illegality could not always challenge it; it was necessary to show that the defendant violated some duty owed to plaintiff. Thus the issues of standing, of a cause of action, and of a persuasive claim on the merits were inextricably intertwined, in a system of public law that owed its origin and shape to common law understandings. In three ways, however, modem standing doctrine still contains principles from the common law. First, the requirement of an injury in fact is often justified on the ground that officious intermeddlers ought not to be permitted to disrupt mutually advantageous relationships.10 2 This idea is a direct analogue to the common law view insofar as it understands public law cases in right-duty terms. Second, the notion of judicial restraint in the law of standing often has built into it a tacit distinction between the interests of regulatory beneficiaries and those of regulated industries. The former, it is said, are for the political process rather than the courts; the judicial role is said to be the protection of traditional private rights-a Lochner-like understanding.10 3 This rea soning is not a tribute to "judicial restraint" in the abstract, but distinguishes between two categories of interests in terms of the respective roles of politics and courts.10 4 This distinction should be quite controversial; it is held over from the Lochner era and its premises were repudiated during the New Deal. H. Racial Discrimination The law of racial discrimination is centrally affected by Lochner-like premises, but here the similarity to Lochner lies, not in the use of the common law, but in notions of action and inaction and in the importation of the status quo and the existing distribution of wealth and entitlements. 104. This approach is especially questionable when the legal claim is statutory rather than constitutional; in such cases, statutory beneficiaries have already won in the political process. See Wright, 468 U.S. at 737. school with whites, and the desire of whites to attend school without blacks. So far as Wechsler was concerned, no neutral principle had been brought forward to permit a choice between these two sets of preferences. 010 The decision depended on "whose ox was gored," and was thus not shown to be neutral."' This criticism has a powerful Lochner-like dimension. The existing distribution of power and resources as between blacks and whites should be taken by courts as simply "there"; neutrality lies in inaction; it is threatened when the Court "takes sides" by preferring those disadvantaged. Like the minimum wage legislation in Lochner, and for similar reasons, the attack on school segregation appeared impermissibly partisan to some of Brown's critics. 110. Id. at 31-34. Consider the parallel to contemporary debates over affirmative action, where favoring blacks over whites is also said to be neutral. See generally Strauss, The Myth of Colorblindness, 1986 Sup. Ct. Rev. 99, for an argument that affirmative action is not in principle different from nondiscrimination. baselines. Similar considerations can be found, in somewhat different form, in several areas of modem discrimination law. discrimination in favor of traditionally disadvantaged groups-will be treated more leniently than discrimination against members of such groups.11 3 But the validity of a particular affirmative action scheme will depend on a variety of factors: the nature of the institution that made the decision; the flexible or inflexible character of the scheme; the nature of the harm to members of the majority; and, perhaps most importo the effect that the institution tant, the existence of "findings" engaging in affirmative action has discriminated in the past. 1 4 The final factor has been the most sharply disputed among the justices. The dispute centers on when, if ever, past societal discrimination is a sufficient predicate for an affirmative action scheme, or whether affirmative action must be justified by a more particularized showing of discriminatory conduct on the part of the institution in question. Current indications are that societal discrimination is insufficient. 51 5 The constitutional attack on affirmative action depends on a perception that the natural course is to rely on market measures. The Constitution, in this view, requires government to allocate employment and other opportunities according to criteria that have nothing to do with race. To distinguish discrimination against blacks from discrimination against whites is not neutral; it makes the issue depend on "whose ox is gored." Government intervention to redress social discrimination, or some other harm, is partisan. Indeed, the suggestion in Adkins-that individuals should not be singled out for burdens that ought to be placed on the public as a whole-is very close to the understanding that underlies contemporary attacks on affirmative action. But if the current position of blacks is thought not simply to be "there," but instead to be a product of past and present social choices, the argument for affirmative action becomes much more powerful."t 6 No requirement of "neutrality" would be understood as mandating measures that are (or seem) indifferent to race. The constitutional arguments for and against affirmative action thus track the arguments for and against minimum wage legislation. principle and affirmative action are compatible rather than conflicting). blind rules are simply "there," and that something that counters those effects should be labelled "affirmative." The terms "affirmative" and "action" both rely on Lochner-like conceptions of appropriate baseline; both understand respect for the status quo and the existing distribution of power and resources as the point of departure for constitutional analysis. Moreover, racial discrimination is objectionable because of its purposes and effects; discrimination against blacks is usually accompanied by racial hostility on the part of the discriminators, and its effect is to perpetuate the social subordination of blacks. Critics of "affirmative action" take advantage of the rhetorical power of the notion of racial discrimination in a context in which the reasons for that rhetorical power-the purposes and effects of discrimination-are not at work and indeed argue in the other direction. Thus it is that Lochner-like premises infect the affirmative action controversy. 117. See Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229 (1976). 118. The point is made explicitly in Washington v. Davis. See id. at 239-41. 119. The intent test, as set out in such cases as Personnel Adm'r v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256 (1979), also disregards the phenomenon of selective racial care and indifference. Under Feeney the question is whether the government actor made the decision "because of" not merely "in spite of" its racially discriminatory effects. Id. at 279. But the equality question should be whether the actor would have made the decision regardless of which group was helped and which hurt. Such an inquiry would also turn on intent, but it would call into question a larger number of government decisions. such harms as constitutionally troublesome would hardly seem odd. Doctrine based on compensatory goals would be a permissible and perhaps mandatory course. In the last two decades, the Court has given "heightened scrutiny" to discrimination against women, invalidating a wide range of statutes. Sometimes the Court invalidates statutes because they are based on inaccurate stereotypes. 1 2' But the difficult cases arise when the Court faces measures reflecting differences that are in some sense real. Consider, for example, Califano v. Goldfarb,122 involving a statute allowing spouses of men automatically to qualify for social security benefits, but requiring spouses of women to establish dependency; Craig v. Boren,1 23 invalidating a law prohibiting boys from drinking alcoholic beverages until age twenty-one, but allowing girls to drink at age eighteen; Mississippi University for Women v. Hogan,124 involving a nursing school limited to women; and Rostker v. Goldberg,125 upholding a law requiring men but not women to register for the military draft. In all of these cases, the statute under attack responded, albeit sometimes crudely, to differences between men and women that were in some sense real. On what basis did the Court invalidate the first three measures? A clue can be found in Craig v. Boren, where the Court, responding to statistics showing that boys tended to be cited for drunk driving more often than girls, said that statistical demonstrations are "in tension with the normative philosophy that underlies the Equal Protection Clause."1 26 In all of these cases, the differences, even if "real," are not simply there, but are at least to some degree' 27 artifactual: a product of cultural forces, including the legal system, that have created and perpetuated differences between the sexes. Thus in Goldfarb, the fact that men tend to be wage-earners more often than women was not treated as exogenous to the legal system. Indeed, the fact was reinforced as such, even if in a minimal way, by the very statute in Goldfarb, which made the package of benefits more attractive for men than for women and tended to make it more desirable for men to work. Thus in the Hogan case, the Court said that the statute at issue "makes the assumption that nursing is a field for women a self-fulfilling prophecy."' 128 Rostker is a striking contrast. There the Court reasoned that since Congress had excluded women from combat, the difference in registration requirements responded to "real differences" between men and women. But those real differences were a product of law; it was a statute that created them. Rostker is in this sense reminiscent of a wide range of earlier cases failing to recognize the constructed character of gender distinctions and upholding discrimination because of a perception that subordination of women was a part of nature. 129 With the exception of Rostker, the cases under discussion derive from a partial rejection of Lochner-like principles that would take gender differences as exogenous variables, and would understand neutrality to lie in reasonable responses to those differences. 130 To this extent, the 126. 429 U.S. at 204. 127. Two qualifications are necessary here. First, it is not necessary to ask to what degree gender differences have a biological component. Even if there is such a component, it hardly justifies the measures at issue in most cases; it is by no means clear that the legal system should turn biological differences into social disadvantages. The point here is that Lochner-like reasoning would take gender differences as a proper basis for legal differentiation, no matter their source, and that some of the current law of gender discrimination is opposed to such reasoning. Cf. C. MacKinnon, Feminism Unmodified (1987) (discussing ways in which legal system naturalizes discrimination against women). The second problem lies in deciding when something is artifactual or not. A strong view of the lesson of the Lochner period is that everything is-precisely because government decisions not to change matters are, after all, decisions. In this view, qualifications of the sort in the text-suggesting that gender differences, poverty, and the distribution of benefits and burdens along racial lines are "partly" a product of the legal system-are unnecessary and misleading. Such qualifications themselves import Lochner-like premises. law of gender discrimination is an outgrowth of ideas that abandon the status quo as a neutral baseline and instead rely on a baseline of gender equality operating to some extent as a criticism of the existing order. But many areas of the law of gender discrimination share Lochner-like premises. Consider, in addition to the Rostker decision, cases finding discriminatory effects insufficient for constitutional invalidation;' 3 1 decisions permitting employers to exclude fertile women from employment when actual or potential fetuses may be endangered;13 2 and Michael M. v. Sonoma County Superior Court,133 upholding distinctions in age for statutory rape. Above all, cases involving discrimination on the basis of actual or potential pregnancy, or control of reproductive functions, are Lochner-like to the extent that they turn differences that are often regarded as natural into legal disadvantages.' 3 4 In this sense, Roe v. Wade itself might be seen as profoundly anti-Lochner insofar as it accorded to women the power to make a decision that it had been previously thought was not theirs because of nature.1 3 5 To say that such cases treat gender differences as real, when the social and legal meaning of those differences is a decision of the legal system, is not necessarily to say that they were wrongly decided.13 6 But it is to suggest that they depend on Lochner-like premises about neutrality. Both public and private law generally take private preferences as the appropriate basis for social choice. In private law, paternalism tends to be disfavored,' 3 7 and the most well-known conceptions of public law understand the purpose of legislation to be the aggregation of private preferences.' 3 8 To this degree, preferences are treated in Lochner-like fashion as exogenous variables; and legal interferences with those preferences are generally thought to be partisan and illegitimate. The processes of preference formation and the-possibility of distorting factors are generally not a subject for legal inquiry. 13 9 Sometimes, however, constitutional courts conclude that preferences are a product of some kind of distortion. Consider, for example, the constitutional hostility to freedom-of-choice plans as a remedy for school segregation. 140 At first glance it is hard to see why such plans should be objectionable, for they allow blacks and whites to send their children to whatever schools they prefer. If the result is continuing segregation, the problem might be thought to lie in private choices rather than in the legal system. choice, but that in certain limited contexts 143 concludes that preferences reflect relations of power brought about by, among other things, the legal system itself. We have seen that Lochner has many progeny in modern constitutional law.' 4 4 Sometimes, as in Buckley and Wygant, Lochner-like premises are used as a basis for invalidating government measures. Sometimes, as in Harris v. McRae and Washington v. Davis, premises of that sort are used in order to uphold such measures. Nor is the problem limited to constitutional provisions protecting individual rights. The structural provisions of the Constitution were designed partly to protect private property and liberty from government incursion. 14 5 The rise of the modem administrative state is based largely on a perception that aggressive governmental action, repudiating the common law, has become necessary. 14 6 One of the most important tasks of modem constitutional theory is to implement the original purposes of the structural provisions in a time when traditional conceptions of limited government have been repudiated. 14 7 The claim that there is in many areas of current public law an analytic connection to Lochner is only descriptive, and it does not necessar 143. The limitation derives from a fear that if the legal system is generally permitted to intervene whenever preferences are "distorted," lines will become difficult or impossible to draw and the range of permissible interventions will be limitless. See Sunstein, supra note 139, at 1169-73, for general discussion; on the related problem of "false consciousness," see also J. Elster, Making Sense of Marx (1984). ily argue for doctrinal change. Indeed, it would be difficult to imagine a constitutional system that did not have some premises in common with Lochner. The framers themselves shared those premises, and versions can be found at every stage of American constitutionalism. But the argument for Lochner-like premises is conceptual as well as historical. It is hard to escape Lochner in thinking about this or any other legal system; its premises are built into our language itself. 148 Without some foundations or baselines from which to make measurements, legal analysis cannot go forward, and in some cases it is hard to dispute that understandings like those reflected in the common law or the status quo are the appropriate baseline. The point is buttressed by the fact that in any legal system, one should hope for some degree of continuity over time. The current system owes its foundations to the common law. It would be most surprising, and probably undesirable, to find those foundations entirely abandoned.' 4 9 But Lochner was wrongly decided, and one of the reasons that it was wrong is that it depended on baselines and consequent understandings of action and neutrality that were inappropriate for constitutional analysis. The New Deal to a large degree rejected those understandings, and the rejection has only partly found its way into law. Which, if any, of current doctrines should be abandoned for the same reason? How should constitutional law proceed if it is to escape its roots in Lochnerlike reasoning? It is difficult to answer these questions in the abstract; whether and how Lochner-like premises should be rejected is too large a question to discuss as a whole. This section ventures some thoughts on the relevant inquiries. The Lochner Court chose the status quo, as reflected in market ordering under the common law system, as the baseline for measurement of departures from neutrality and of action and inaction. There are approaches to statutory construction that are not based on hostility to departures from common law categories. often good reasons to abandon that baseline, at least as a general rule.15 0 The common law is not prepolitical; its conception of the function of the state has been repudiated by the political branches of government, and for good reasons. Constitutional and statutory interpretation is properly informed by this repudiation.15 1 Efforts to change the common law framework are not by virtue of the fact constitutionally suspect, and measures that respect that framework are not "inaction" necessarily to be immunized from legal scrutiny. Use of the status quo as a baseline is. sometimes objectionable for similar reasons. Consider the fact that discrimination on the basis of race is responsible for the existing distribution of benefits and burdens along racial lines. If the baseline provided by the common law or the status quo is abandoned, there are two principal alternatives. One possible response to the decline of Lochner would be to conclude that constitutional courts ought to play little or no role in deciding whether the existing distribution of wealth and entitlements should be changed. Associated with one strand in the New Deal but presaged by Holmes' Lochner opinion, this view appears prominently in Learned Hand's lectures on the Bill of Rights, 152 James Landis' work on administrative law, 153 and the opinions of Justice Frankfurter.' 5 4 Under the Holmesian view it does not matter, for constitutional purposes, whether the state is reaffirming or rejecting the common law, or whether it is dramatically changing the existing allocation of entitlements and power. The abandonment of common law baselines requires an abandonment of baselines altogether, at least for purposes of constitutional law. Neutrality is not required because it cannot be achieved; all legal categories are socially constructed and irreducibly subjective.' 5 5 Such an approach would mean that the basic terms of social life are for political rather than legal determination.' 56 Sometimes this view is founded on interest-group pluralism;'5 7 sometimes it is derived from skepticism about the notion of objectiv 150. See the discussion of baselines in Kreimer, Allocational Sanctions: The Prob ing the constructed character of legal categories). ity s5 8 and about distinctions between reason and power.15 9 For those who believe in interest-group pluralism, efforts to ensure neutrality, in the form of public-regarding legislation, ignore the inevitably self-interested character of political behavior. Neutrality, however understood, is thus inconsistent with the very nature of politics. 1 60 The conclusion is that baselines should be rejected for purposes of constitutional law; courts should uphold legislation except in the most extreme cases. For those skeptical about objectivity, neutrality is an unacceptable effort to privilege a position that is itself contingent and likely to reflect some kind of social interest. 16 1 At its most general level, this concern is reflected in a wide range of work questioning the legacy of the Enlightenment.16 2 This position offers obscure guidance for constitutional courts; it counsels a general rejection both of neutrality and of baselines, but at least in some forms, it offers no alternative position from which to decide cases. whether to accept those understandings is inescapably normative, and the traditional view might be defended on the foregoing grounds. A third approach would avoid the difficulties associated with both Lochner and the Holmesian alternative, but it would carry with it large 164. Consider, for example, the interpretation of Madison in Bork, supra note 7, at 2-3, suggesting that in a Madisonian system majorities are allowed to rule in some areas of life "for no better reason than that they are majorities." Compare the interpretation in D. Epstein, The Political Theory of The Federalist 178 (1984) (suggesting that the system was intended to ensure a large measure of deliberation on the part of national representatives). problems of its own. That approach would attempt to generate a baseline independent of either the common law or the status quo through some theory ofjustice, to be derived from the language and animating purposes of the text and based to a greater or lesser degree on existing interpretations. Such an endeavor would require a theory of interpretation, a theory of institutional role, and a theory ofjustice. The effort would be the legal analogue to the various efforts in modem political theory to go beyond or replace classically liberal social contract theories. 168 The text would be the foundation for a theory169 that would be independent of common law ordering, or the status quo, and would serve as a basis for evaluating it. Approaches of this sort might treat the Constitution as a unit, reflecting a single overarching theory. For reasons explored below, it would be preferable to proceed provisionby-provision, 170 constructing theories for each constitutional clause and allowing considerable variation among them. Helpful guidance can be found in republican theories of politics, which carry with them substantive constraints 17 1 and whose premises are highly congenial to ralist fashion, does not capture the view of the framers and is not likely to provide desirable outcomes). the New Deal attack on the common law. 172 A profitable strategy would be to avoid abstraction and to examine particular areas with considerable care.1 73 Such an approach would force courts to confront the question of why and how the artifactual quality of a particular system is relevant to the legal question. The fact that a practice is artifactual hardly means that it should be changed; and the fact that it is in some sense natural is not necessarily a reason to respect it.' 74 Consider here the area of gender discrimination; it is the legal system that makes relevant any biological difference, and a decision to turn a difference into a disadvantage demands independent support. 7-5 But a finding that a practice or system is a product of government is relevant in various respects. First, it may suggest that changes should not be regarded as "takings"; the notion of a taking depends on an antecedent baseline, and if the baseline is not natural, one needs an independent reason to respect it. Moreover, if a practice is revealed as simply an adaptation to the status quo, new legal rules will not be futile. Finally, it is sometimes thought that interferences with practices that are an outgrowth of nature infringe on liberty or on some other right. The Lochner era is itself an example, and the areas of race and gender discrimination might be similarly understood. A recognition that the practices in question are artifactual may weaken such objections. The fact that a practice is a creature of government thus removes some arguments for retaining it, though standing by itself, it is hardly a powerful reason to change it. 172. Republican approaches tend not to see rights as prepolitical; the Lochner understanding of the common law can thus be criticized on republican grounds, and those grounds tend to replicate the ideas described supra notes 7-8, 39-45 and accompanying text. so, the task is instead to be critical of existing practices without pretending to have transcended the particular culture altogether. 177 One can point to some such efforts in current law. The first amendment prohibitions of discrimination on the basis of point of view and of government preference of particular religions are prominent examples. 178 The law of racial discrimination is a particularly helpful illustration here. Courts have developed theories that permit them to evaluate particular social practices from an independent baseline, one that prohibits intentional discrimination against blacks. Discrimination on the basis of gender, alienage, and illegitimacy is handled in similar terms. The principal effort here is to develop and justify an alternative baseline, and to imagine a world in which the illegitimate or irrelevant considerations were not at work. The problem is hardly limited to the area of school segregation. It arises in many cases in which courts are asked to reject the status quo as the appropriate baseline. Consider, for example, a decision to allow a showing of discriminatory effects to trigger the equal protection clause. To a greater or lesser degree, such a decision would require courts to imagine what the system of benefits and burdens across the races would look like in a world unaffected by a legacy of racism. Although inquir 177. See P. Ricoeur, Lectures on Ideology and Utopia (1986) (discussing critique of prevailing ideology from within that ideology and from standpoint of "utopia"); M. Nussbaum, supra note 173 (arguing in favor of Aristotelean approach to ethics); M. Walzer, Interpretation and Social Criticism (1987) (urging "connected criticism"); see also R. Bernstein, supra note 173 (exploring various approaches that attempt to criticize status quo without pretending to evade convention entirely); R. Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature 155-64 (1980) (criticizing foundationalism in philosophy). ies of this sort are familiar in some areas of the law, in the present context they would be difficult to anchor; the causal links are so complex that a reconstruction of the past would inevitably rest on uncertain premises. 18 ' The area of gender discrimination poses similar problems. Imagine efforts to see how veterans' preferences or abortion would be treated in a world unaffected by sexism.18 2 This is not the occasion to set out a general theory of appropriate baselines from which to decide constitutional cases; as we will see, the answer is likely to vary across provisions. It should suffice to suggest that the common law or status quo baseline in Lochner will often be unacceptable; that the existing order should not be regarded as natural or inviolate; that the abandonment of baselines altogether is also unacceptable; and that generation of an independent alternative is sometimes necessary but poses large difficulties of its own. Current law is an amalgam of all three approaches. The primary purpose here is to suggest some of the ingredients in the decision why and when Lochner-like premises should be abandoned. Even if the Holmesian approach is rejected, a less extreme version would suggest that in deciding whether Lochner-like premises should be accepted, it is highly relevant whether the Court is permitting government to act or prohibiting it from doing so. Courts might, in short, be inclined to uphold measures defended in terms like those in West Coast Hotel, even as they were disinclined to invalidate legislation under premises derived from either Lochner or West Coast Hotel. Deference to representative processes argues in favor of this result.' 8 4 Under this view, the parallel of modem decisions to Lochner is closest when the 181. Cf. J. Vining, supra note 90 (discussing difficulties of reconstruction of past in general). 184. To some degree this position itself incorporates Lochner-like premises; it distinguishes judicial action from inaction, and makes the distinction turn on whether the Court is forcing dramatic changes in the status quo. Here, however, the inquiry depends on institutional concerns having to do with the role of the judiciary. Court is invalidating democratically-enacted legislation. Even if one rejects the most extreme claims about the undemocratic character ofjudicial review, one might agree that Lochner-like premises should rarely be used to invalidate legislation. Similar considerations apply to redistributive measures enacted under the constracts and taking clauses. Notwithstanding recent criticism under Lochner-like premises, 18 6 current law under both clauses is generally correct. It permits a wide realm of action for legislatures, an appropriate conclusion in the face of textual ambiguity, the evident desires of the majority, changed circumstances, and the growing scope of the police power.' 8 7 In all of these contexts, an understanding like that in West Coast Hotel should operate, at least prima facie, as a "shield" against constitutional attacks on legislation, just as it does under the due process clause in the aftermath of Lochner. All this is hardly to suggest that the issue of swords and shields 185. See Lempert, The Force of Irony: On the Morality of Affirmative Action and 188. The relevant norms might, however, be regarded as binding on legislators and administrators even if they are not enforced by the judiciary. See Sager, Fair Measure: The Legal Status of Underenforced Constitutional Norms, 91 Harv. L. Rev. 1212 (1978). should control the constitutional question; that would represent a return to Holmesian understandings about the judicial role and in its own way reflect Lochner-like distinctions between action and inaction. 18 9 But the issue is highly relevant. Constitutional law is often an uneasy mixture of substantive theory and institutional constraint.1 9 0 The existence of institutional limits on the part of the judiciary forces the courts to limit the scope of substantive constraints on government action. This combination sometimes produces doctrinal awkwardness, but it is hard to think of an alternative. In these circumstances, it is important whether a decision would call for simple validation of a measure enacted by Congress or instead would require courts to undertake significant social change on their own. The catalog of Lochner-like premises in modern public law spans a wide range, and it implicates a large number of constitutional provisions, including the contracts, takings, due process, and equal protection clauses as well as the first amendment. But Lochner-like premises are more necessary or appropriate under some provisions than under others. A lawyer's natural reaction to the problem would be to disentangle the various provisions. The interpretive process, informed to a greater or lesser degree by the text and original purposes, might well vary across clauses; different clauses may abandon or include Lochnerlike premises. A theory of constitutional interpretation would of course be necessary to accomplish this task. only procedural in character; 193 it may require the government only to show some minimal justification for its decisions; it may not sharply confine the permissible ends of the state. The takings clause, by contrast, was built on a belief in the meaning and importance of private property, and it would be difficult to read that clause in the fashion of West Coast Hotel without reading it out of the Constitution. The same conclusion may be appropriate under the contracts clause. At a minimum, then, the takings and contracts clauses cannot easily be read -to create a constitutional baseline other than that of the status quo; the notion of property itself develops and evolves from common cultural understandings that cannot easily be subject to independent judicial reconstruction.' 94 The eminent domain and contracts clauses are most naturally read to embody Lochner-like premises about neutrality and inaction. 193. SeeJ. Ely, supra note 6, at 18. 194. See B. Ackerman, Private Property and the Constitution (1977) (comparing views of "ordinary observer" and "scientific policymaker" in interpretation of eminent domain clause). rejection of Lochner's premises, just as the takings and contracts clauses are most obviously their constitutional embodiment. first amendment doctrine. Moreover, there are good reasons to complain about restrictions on the speech of the powerful. Buckley itself was wrongly decided; the principle at issue there might be confined to financial expenditures without endangering the general principle of viewpoint neutrality. 20 2 But it should not be surprising to find Lochnerlike premises in first amendment doctrine. Another factor has to do with the reality or perception of a close causal link between identifiable government action and the practice under attack. In the context of welfare, the link between government action and poverty may seem too attenuated to justify a claim of causation; numerous other causal factors play a role. The same conclusion is drawn in the context of de facto segregation. School and housing patterns are affected by many factors, and the relevant legal rules were not in force in the immediate past. The case of discriminatory effects may be similarly understood, for the existence of such effects is the result of a wide range of factors. Consider by contrast the courts' ready acceptance of remedial plans for actual racial discrimination in the recent past by the defendant. Here the link between state action and racially based harm is so tight that causation is unquestionable. Judgments about causation thus play a significant role in the cases. Judgments about caustion are not based solely on a reconstruction -of history.20 3 Sometimes the decision is affected by the perceived consequences of finding a causal link. Consider, for example, recognition of a constitutional right to welfare. It may be conceded here that pov 202. For general discussion, see Fiss, supra note 196 (arguing against viewpoint neutrality because of maldistributions of social power). erty is in some sense a creation of the state. But if it were to follow that welfare was constitutionally guaranteed, the result may be to undermine incentives for productive labor. Another example has to do with discriminatory effects. If such effects were sufficient to produce invalidity, the consequences would be enormous. Affirmative action would be constitutionally mandated. Such a step would impose a severe strain on the judiciary. Moreover, it would impose costs of two kinds. The decision about which discriminatory effects were permissible and why would be enormously complex. Serious strains would be imposed on the judiciary, particularly in the remedial process. We have seen that the question whether Lochner-like premises should be abandoned cannot be answered in the abstract. The issue depends on a mixture of substantive, institutional, and interpretive considerations. The substantive problems present issues of distributive justice; the institutional issues present problems of democratic theory; the interpretive questions raise problems of linguistic theory as well as substantive and institutional issues.20 4 In generating a set of constitutional doctrines in the aftermath of Lochner, it is necessary to proceed with considerable caution. No formula is available. But the foregoing discussion suggests some generalizations and examples that may prove helpful here. In Lochner itself, the textual pedigree of the decision was uncertain; and the outcome reached by the Court ran in the face of a powerful and mounting national consensus in the other direction. Similar considerations justify, at least in broad outline, the Court's current approach to the takings and contracts clauses. These provisions are necessarily Lochner-like in character; they cannot be read out of the Constitution, but a generous approach to the police power is appropri 204. For some, the three problems, in concert, mean that judges must decide cases by reference to the "intent of the framers," or original meaning, or some other purportedly sharp constraint on judicial decisions. That approach is rejected here. See supra note 167 and accompanying text. ate under both provisions. Affirmative action for both race and gender is relatively easy. The measures in question have been adopted democratically; the equal protection clause is a repudiation of Lochner-like principles; utilitarian concerns cannot be said to count powerfully against affirmative action and may argue in favor of validation; the uncertainty of causation is a secondary matter. Judicial review of agency inaction and standing for regulatory beneficiaries are also relatively easy. Here Congress has created and endorsed a broad presumption of reviewability, and most important, review would serve only to vindicate constitutional and statutory provisions as against the executive branch. Some benefits that are the creature of statute should stand on the same footing as common law interests for purposes of both procedural and substantive due process. The rise of hearing rights for beneficiaries of spending programs is therefore appropriate. 20 5 Buckley v. Valeo was decided incorrectly. In the context of financial expenditures, the first amendment need hardly be read in the Lochner-like fashion suggested by the Court. The Lochner Court required government neutrality and was skeptical of government "intervention"; it defined both notions in terms of whether the state had threatened to alter the common law distribution of entitlements and wealth, which was taken to be a part of nature rather than a legal construct. Once the common law system came to be seen as a product of legal rules, the baseline from which constitutional decisions were made had to shift. When the Lochner framework was abandoned in West Coast Hotel, the common law system itself appeared to be a subsidy to employers. The West Coast Hotel Court thus adopted an alternative baseline and rejected Lochner era understandings of neutrality and action. rights on participatory and dignatory grounds). and more particular conceptions of baseline, neutrality, and action, it has not been entirely overruled. Numerous modem decisions reflect similar understandings. Cases distinguishing between "positive" and "negative" rights are built on Lochner-like premises that take the common law as the baseline for decision. Much of the law of racial discrimination can be understood similarly, though here the baseline is the status quo rather than the common law. The constitutional attack on affirmative action, indeed the very term, suggests that the current distribution of benefits and burdens along racial lines is simply "there." The state action doctrine borrows heavily from common law understandings about the proper role of government. Some of first amendment doctrine, especially that involving campaign financing, is based on similar premises. ervation of the status quo as reflected in market outcomes, or instead whether the Constitution, recognizing the artifactual quality of the market allocation, permits and sometimes demands change. One might understand the Lochner era as, above all, a warning about constitutional doctrine that defines neutrality in terms of the perpetuation of current practice, and that treats government conduct tending to sustain it as "inaction" invariably escaping legal sanction, and government conduct proposing change as "action" tending to raise legal doubts.