University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1987 

Cass R. Sunstein 

The Beard Thesis and Franklin Roosevelt 
The Beard Thesis and Franklin Roosevelt 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "The Beard Thesis and Franklin Roosevelt," 56 George Washington Law Review 114 
(1987). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

The  Beard  Thesis  and
Franklin Roosevelt

Cass  R.  Sunstein*

I.

Of the numerous  writings  surrounding  the debate over the Amer-
ican Constitution,  The Federalist No.  101  is  probably the most impor-
tant.  In  that  essay,  Madison  set  out the somewhat  surprising thesis
that  a large  republic  would be  better  able  than  a small  one  to  pro-
mote  traditional  republican  goals.  According  to  Madison,  a  small
republic  would  likely  be  ridden by  factional  warfare.  In  a large  re-
public,  by  contrast,  public-spirited  representatives  would  emerge.
Such representatives,  Madison  claimed,  would have  the  wisdom and
the virtue  to escape parochial pressures  and to promote deliberation
in  government.  A  large  republic  would  contain  so  many  factions
that they would  effectively  offset each other.  The result would be an
increased  likelihood  that  the  system  will  be  protected  against  the
effects  of factionalism  and  that republican  deliberation  will  actually
occur.  Interest-group  trade  offs  -
the grant  of wealth  or opportu-
nity  to  A  rather  than  to B  simply  because  of A's  political  power -
would  therefore  be  reduced  or  eliminated.

These aspects  of The Federalist No.  10 are highly  congenial to many
modern  readers.2  But  other  aspects  are  more  controversial.

*  Professor of Law, Law School  and Department  of Political  Science, University of
Chicago.  Some of the ideas  in this essay are discussed  in  more detail  in Sunstein,  Consti-
tutionalism After the New Deal,  101  HARv.  L.  REv.  -
(1987).  I am  grateful  to  Martha  Mi-
now  and  Kathleen  Sullivan  for helpful  comments  on  a previous  draft.

1.  THE FEDERALIST  No.  10  (J. Madison).
2.  But not  for all; a belief in local self-determination  is a prominent theme in mod-
em  political  and  constitutional  thought.  See,  e.g.,  B.  BARBER,  STRONG  DEMOCRACY  117

November  1987  VoL  56  No.  I

HeinOnline  -- 56 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 114 1987-1988

Sunstein
THE  GEORGE  WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW

Madison  suggests  that:

The  diversity  in  the  faculties  of men  from  which  the  rights  of
property  originate,  is  not less  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  a  uni-
formity  of interests.  The protection  of these faculties  is  the  first
object of Government.  From the protection  of different and une-
qual  faculties  of acquiring  property,  the  possession  of different
degrees  and kinds  of property  immediately  results  .... 3

And Madison  doses  the essay by emphasizing  the advantages  of the
proposed  constitution  in  countering  "a  rage  for paper  money,  for
an  abolition  of debts,  for an  equal  division  of property,  or for  any
other improper  or wicked  project." 4

In  this  respect,  there  are  powerful  antiegalitarian  and  anti-
democratic  dimensions  in  The  Federalist No.  10.  The  insulation  of
representatives  from popular will appears to be intended not only to
promote deliberation, but also  to protect against popular desires for
the  redistribution  of  wealth  and  entitlements.  Indeed,  the  two
themes were  merged  in  much of the  thinking  of the  Framers.  Fac-
tionalism  was  sometimes  thought  to  consist  precisely in  changes  in
the existing  distribution  of property.,  In this sense,  constitutional-
ism was designed partly as a self-conscious  check on democracy  - a
notion  that came  up  frequently  in  the constitutional  convention.

It is  instructive  to  compare  Madison's  claims  in  The Federalist No.
10 with  a discussion by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in accepting
the Democratic  nomination  for  the  presidency  in'1936.  Roosevelt
said:

[l]t  was  to  win  freedom  from  the  tyranny  of political  autocracy
that  the American  Revolution was  fought....

The royalists  of the  economic  order have  conceded  that  polit-
ical  freedom  was  the business  of the  government,  but  they  have.
maintained  that  economic  slavery  was  nobody's  business.  They
granted  that the government  could protect the  citizen in his  right
to vote but they denied that the government could do anything to
protect the  citizen in his  right to  work and live.

Today  we  stand  committed  to  the  proposition  that freedom  is

no  half-and-half affair....

Better the occasional  faults of a government that lives in a spirit

(1984)  (stating that  "[s]trong  democracy  is  a  distinctly  modern  form  of participatory
democracy  [that)  rests  on  the idea  of a  self-governing  community  of citizens  who  are
united ... by civic education and who  are made capable  of common purpose and mutual
action by  virtue of civic  attitudes and participatory  institutions").

3.  THE FEDERALIST  No.  10,  at 58  (J. Madison)  (J. Cooke ed.  1961).
4.  Id. at 65.
5.  This  is  of course  an  overgeneralization,  for  the Framers  were  welldisposed  to

some  kinds of redistributive  measures,  particularly  the poor laws.

1987]

HeinOnline  -- 56 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 115 1987-1988

of charity than the consistent omissions  of a government  frozen in
the ice  of its  own  indifference. 6

Ideas  of this  sort  contributed  to  Roosevelt's  eventual  endorse-
ment of a "second  Bill of Rights,"  available  to all "regardless  of sta-
tion, race,  or creed,"  and  including:

The right to  earn  enough  to  provide  adequate food and  cloth-

ing  and  recreation;

The  right of every  family  to  a decent  home;
The  right to  adequate medical  care;
The  right  to  adequate  protection  from  the  economic  fears  of

old  age,  sickness,  accident  and unemployment;  [and]

The  right to  a good  education. 7

The  New  Deal  understanding  of the  functions  of constitutional-
ism,  embodied  in  Roosevelt's  program  for  constitutional  reform,
thus  departed  dramatically  from  the  original  conception.  In  the
New  Deal  reformulation,  constitutionalism  was  no longer  to  be re-
garded  as  a  check  on  popular  demands  for  the  redistribution  of
wealth and  entitlements.  On  the contrary,  constitutionalism  was  in-
tended  to  promote  at  least  a  certain  degree  of  redistribution.
Roosevelt  was  of course  no  socialist;  he believed  strongly  in  both
private  property  and  private  industry.  His  goal  was  to  soften  the
harsh  edges of the economic  system,  not to  overturn it.  But a prin-
cipal  purpose  of the New  Deal was  to  protect the poor  and the dis-
advantaged  from  the  risks  of the  marketplace.  In  the  New  Deal
period, such  efforts  at protection did not appear to  be a product  of
"faction,"  or to represent  raw interest-group  transfers,  but were in-
stead  a  plausible  outcome  of a deliberative  process  among  citizens
and  representatives.  The point holds  even  though  some  of the in-
novations  of the  New  Deal  period  turned  out  to  be difficult  to  de-
fend on  economic  or  noneconomic  grounds.

Thus the insulation  of administrative  officials  from political  pres-
sure -
a  prominent New  Deal  theme - was  designed to allow for a
measure  of government intrusion  on  the privileges  of powerful  pri-
vate  groups.  In  this  respect,  Roosevelt's  version  of constitutional-
ism  endorsed  the  Madisonian  belief  in  the  insulation  of political
actors  from  parochial  pressures,  but  to  bring about,  rather  than  to
prevent,  collective  action  to  redistribute  resources.

The refashioning of the constitutional  structure  during the period
of the New  Deal sheds  considerable light both on the original frame-
work and  on  current  constitutional  predicaments.  Indeed,  the New
Deal  period  furnishes  some  basis,  though  partial  and  indirect,  for
understandings  of the original system  that can be roughly associated
a  conclusion  that  should  not be
with  the work of Charles  Beard  -

6.  Acceptance  Address  by  President  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt,  Democratic  National
Convention  (June 27,  1936),  reprinted in  2  VITAL  SPEECHES  OF  T-r  DAY  634,  634-36
(1935-1936).

7.  State of the  Union Address  by President Franklin  D. Roosevelt  (Jan.  11,  1944),

reprinted in  10  VITAL  SPEECHES  OF THE  DAY  194,  197  (1943-1944).

HeinOnline  -- 56 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 116 1987-1988

[VOL.  56:114

Sunstein
THE GEORGE  WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW

surprising  in light of the fact  that Beard  was  a part of the progres-
sive  movement,  which  provided  much  of the  underpinning  of the
New  Deal.  In  this  essay,  I  explore  some  of the  central  economic
commitments  of the  original  constitutional  design,  not by  offering
biographical  data about the Framers,  but by pointing to a number of
features  of that design and by  providing a comparison  of the origi-
nal document  with  the New Deal reforms.

During the  celebration  of the bicentennial,  it is  important  to  ap-
preciate  not  only  the  achievements  of the  Constitution's  original
drafters, but also those of others who have affected the meaning and
structure  of the  Constitution.  One  need  look  no  further  than  the
founding  generation  itself for  counsel  of this  sort.  It was  Thomas
Jefferson  who  asserted  that  members  of the  preceding  age  were
"very  like  the present, but without the  experience of the present,",
and who criticized  those who "look at constitutions with sanctimoni-
ous  reverence,  and deem  them like  the ark of the  covenant,  too sa-
cred  to  be  touched." 9  Jefferson  advised:  "Let  us  ... [not]  weakly
believe  that  one  generation  is  not as  capable  as  another  of taking
care of itself, and of ordering its own affairs....  [T]he dead have no
rights."10  Of those who followed  this  advice,  those  associated with
the New  Deal reformulation  -
oc-
cupy  a singularly  important place.

above  all  Franklin  Roosevelt -

II.

Three basic  commitments  underlay the original  constitutional  de-
sign.  The  first was  to  some form  of "limited  government,"  under-
stood in a vaguely libertarian  fashion;  the second was to a system  of
checks and balances; the third was to federalism.  The three commit-
ments were  closely allied.  The institutional principles  of the system
were  designed  to  serve  the  substantive  belief in  rights  of private
property  and contract.

The  substantive  commitment,  reflected  in  The  Federalist No.  10,
was  to a  degree  of immunity  from  government  incursions  into  the
private realm - whether those incursions  were  supported by  a mi-
nority or a majority.  Thus the original Constitution singled out pro-
tection  of  private  contract  as  one  of  its  rare  safeguards  of
substantive  rights; and  the Eminent  Domain  Clause, protecting  pri-
vate  property,  was  a  prominent  feature  of the  Bill  of Rights.  It
would be a mistake  to  suggest that the Framers  intended  to  abolish
all  of what we  would  currently  describe  as  redistribution  of prop-

8.  Letter  from Thomas Jefferson  to  Samuel  Kercheval  (July 12,  1816),  reprinted in

THE  PORTABLE  THOMAS  JEFFERSON  552,  559  (M.  Peterson  ed.  1977).

9.  Id. at 558-59.
10.  Id. at 559-60.

1987]

HeinOnline  -- 56 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 117 1987-1988

117

erty,  but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  their  conception  of private
rights  led  to deep  suspicion  about forms  of government action  that
are now taken as unobjectionable.  Modern  zoning regulation,  social
security,  minimum-wage  and  maximum-hour  provisions,  occupa-
tional  safety  and  health  controls,  environmental  measures,  labor
and civil rights  laws -
all of these would likely have  been quite mys-
terious  to  the founding  generation.

At  the  national  level,  a  variety  of efforts  were  made  to  insulate
public representatives  from  constituent pressures,  in the interest  of
bringing  about  a kind  of deliberative  democracy.  Modem  pluralist
or  economic  theories,  understanding  the political  process  as a kind
of market  among  self-interested  actors,  were  thus  rejected  by  the
Framers  at  both  the  positive  and  normative  levels.  Well  aware  of
the risks  posed by self-interested  private  groups,  the founding  gen-
eration  sought  not  to  ensure  an  equilibrium  among  those  groups,
but instead  to insulate representatives  from factions in order to pro-
mote  the performance  of deliberative  tasks.  Thus the  President was
to  be  selected  by  the  electoral  college,  a  deliberative  body.  The
Senate was  to be  elected indirectly;  only  members  of the House  of
Representatives  were  to  be  elected  directly.

In the premium placed by the Framers  on deliberative  democracy,
it is  possible to see the impact  of classical republican  thought on the
constitutional  framing  -
a  significant  theme  of modern  historians
writing  on  the  founding  period.  The  Framers  did  not  disparage
civic virtue, or believe that self-interest was the inevitable motivating
force  of human behavior.  As Hamilton wrote  in The Federalist No. 55,
"[a]s  there  is  a  degree  of depravity  in  mankind,  which  requires  a
certain  degree  of circumspection  and  distrust:  So  there  are  other
qualities  in  human  nature, which justify  a certain  portion  of esteem
and  confidence."' 1  Thus  the Framers  emphasized,  time and  again,
their  hope and  expectation  that virtuous  leaders  would  emerge  in  a
national  republic.

In  recent  years,  there  have  been  many  efforts  to understand  the
Framers as  thoroughgoing  modernist skeptics  -
indeed  as forerun-
ners  of Chicago-school  economists  -
treating  economic  self-inter-
est  as  the  basis  of political  conduct  and  understanding  the  task  of
representatives  as  the  largely  mechanical  one  of  translating  the
political power of various  constituents  into political outcomes.  Such
efforts are badly off the mark;  they read into  the period  of the fram-
ing something  that  simply  was  not there.1 2

But  the  Framers  did not believe that  a system  of deliberative rep-
resentation  was  sufficient  in  itself.  The  system  of checks  and  bal-
ances  was  designed  to  serve  a  variety  of  supplemental  functions,
providing  safeguards  in  the  event  of a breakdown  in  representative
processes.  That  system  would,  for  example,  furnish  a  measure  of

11.  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  55,  at 378  (A.  Hamilton)  (J.  Cooke ed.  1961).
12.  See  Meyers,  Reflection  and Choice:  Beyond the Sum of the Differences, in THE MIND OF
THE  FOUNDER:  SOURCES  OF  THE  POLITICAL  THOUGHT  OF JAMES  MADISON  at  xi-xix  (M.
Meyers  rev.  ed.  1981).

HeinOnline  -- 56 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 118 1987-1988

[VOL.  56:114

Sunstein
THE  GEORGE  WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW

protection against factionalism;  some  groups might be able  to usurp
the  power  of  one  branch,  but  they  would  be  unlikely  to  obtain
power over all three.  At the  same  time, checks  and balances  would
diminish  the risk  that rulers  might  have  and  act  upon interests  ad-
verse  to  those  of the  ruled -
to  minimize  what we  might now  call
"agency  costs."  In  the  words  of The  Federalist No.  51,  "[a]mbition
must be  made  to  counteract  ambition,"  and  incursions  by  govern-
ment restricted.1 3  Moreover,  as  Montesquieu  suggested,  a  system
of separated  powers  should  naturally produce  "a  state  of repose  or
inaction."' 4  The result would be to promote stability,  to  disable the
public sphere  at least in some respects,' 5  and to  protect-the  private
spheres  of property and  contract.  In this last sense in particular, the
institution  of checks  and  balances  comfortably  coexisted  with  the
substantive  understanding  underlying  the original  system.

The  federal  system  provided  an  additional  set  of  safeguards.
Thus  The Federalist No.  51  understands  federalism  as a kind of verti-
cal  separation  of powers,  protecting  private rights:

In the compound  republic  of America,  the power  surrendered  by
the people, is first divided between  two distinct governments,  and
then  the  portion allotted  to  each  subdivided  among  distinct  and
separate  departments.  Hence  a  double  security  arises  to  the
rights  of the  people.  The  different  governments  will  controul
each  other;  at  the  same  time  that  each  will  be  controuled  by
itself."' 6

In this  respect, federalism  operated in the service of limited govern-
ment.  Under an approach  that sees  freedom in immunity from  gov-
ernmental  restraints,  this  additional  safeguard  is highly  desirable.

At the same time,  the federal structure provided  a set of opportu-
nities  for  local  self-determination.  This  was  an  entirely  distinct
strand  in federalist  theory.  The idea  here is  that  local  self-govern-
ment  furnished  a vehicle for active  citizen  participation  in a largely
commercial  republic.  The traditional  republican  goal  of local  self-
determination17  was  thus  promoted  through  a  two-tier  set  of gov-
erning bodies.  Madisonian representation  at the national level, sup-
plemented  by a system  of checks  and balances,  was accompanied  by
state  and local  avenues  for self-government.  The state and  national

13.  THE FEDERALIST  No. 51,  at 349  (J. Madison)  (J. Madison  ed.  1961).
14.  1 MONTESQUlEu,  THE SPIRrr OF THE  LAws  160 (T. Nugent  trans.  rev. ed.  1899).
15.  The  Constitution  was  also  designed  to  promote a  healthy  division  of labor by
splitting the legislative and executive functions; and an energetic executive was of course
a principal  purpose  of the shift from  the Articles  of Confederation.

16.  THE  FEDERALiST  No.  51,  supra note  13,  at  351.
17.  See generally Michelman,  Foreword  Traces of Sef-Government,  100  HARv.  L. REv.  4,
tradition  of  "self-government  realized

74  (1986)  (discussing  the  civic-republican 
through  politics"  as the ideal  manifestation  of freedom).

1987]

HeinOnline  -- 56 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 119 1987-1988

119

governments were also intended  to "controul  each other,"' 8  provid-
ing a kind of vertical check  and balance  that would  also work to pro-
mote  liberty.

Judicial  review  of course  fit  comfortably  with  this  system.  Insu-
lated  actors  would  check majoritarian  excesses,  often  redistributive
or  the result  of factionalism,  and  furnish a final set of constraints  on
the operation  of democracy.  It was  for this reason  that  the Federal-
ists  readily  rejected  concerns  raised  by  the  Anti-Federalists,  who
were fearful  that judicial review would create a "countermajoritarian
difficulty"  of the kind that  has been so prominent in recent constitu-
tional  theory.

What emerges from this  brief sketch is a system in which constitu-
tionalism  operated  as a self-conscious  series of checks  on the opera-
tion  of democracy  -
a system  designed  to prevent factionalism  and
self-interested  representation,  but also  to protect the existing  distri-
bution  of wealth.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  examine  the  economic
incentives  of the Framers,  or to attribute to them sinister motives,  to
agree  that  one  purpose  of the original  system was  to  guard  a large
set  of individual  rights,  including  the prerogatives  of private  prop-
erty  and  contract.  The structure  of the original  Constitution  itself
furnishes  powerful  evidence  for that  view.

III.

Each  of the original  constitutional  commitments  traced  above  is
recognizable  as  part  of  the  modern  constitutional  structure.  But
each  of them  has  undergone  considerable  reformulation  since  the
framing.  A  principal  source  of the  reformulation  is  the  New  Deal,
which  altered  the  original  system  in  a number  of ways.' 9  First,  the
preexisting understanding  of legal  entitlements,  with  its  heavy  em-
phasis  on  the  protection  of wealth  and  property  from  democratic
control, was rejected.  For the New Deal reformers,  the common law
system  of private  rights  was  a  regulatory  system,  serving  the  inter-
ests  of some at  the expense  of others;  it had  no  prepolitical  status.
The Supreme Court's conclusion,  in Lochner v. New  York, 20  that regu-
latory  measures  should  be  understood  as a  sort of "taking"  from A
for  the benefit  of B  depended  on  a view  that  the  common  law  was
natural  and  prepolitical. 2 1 The very  notion  of a  taking  depends  on
an  antecedent  theory  of entitlement,  and  the baselines  drawn  from
the common  law and  the existing  distribution  of wealth  and  entitle-
ments  underlay pre-New  Deal  understandings.  In  West  Coast Hotel v.
Parrish,22  by  contrast,  the  Court  stated  that  the  failure  to  establish
minimum  wages  could  be  understood  as  providing  a kind  of "sub-

18.  THE FEDERALIST  No.  51,  supra note  13, at 351.
19.  The  New  Deal  was  not, however,  a sudden  break  from  tradition.  It should  be
seen as  the  culmination  of a longer  period  of administrative  and institutional  develop-
ment.  See S.  SKOWRONEK,  BUILDING  A NEW  AMERICAN  STATE  288-89  (1982).

20.  198  U.S.  45  (1905).
21.  For an  elaboration,  see Sunstein,  Lochner's  Legacy,  87  COLUM.  L. REv.  (1987).
22.  300  U.S.  379  (1937).

120

HeinOnline  -- 56 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 120 1987-1988

[VOL.  56:114

Sunstein
THE  GEORGE  WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW

sidy for unconscionable employers." 23  This opinion reflected a dra-
matic shift in the baselines from  which legal decisions  were made,  a
shift that  upset original  understandings  about the  primacy of prop-
erty  rights.

The  understanding  that  the  common  law was  constructed  rather
than natural  led to a  dramatically different  conception  of legal enti-
tlements.  In the New Deal period, the previous  catalogue appeared
both  over- and underinclusive.  Some items  that were treated  as le-
gally  protected  rights  became  subjects  for  legal  intervention.  In
particular,  rights  of private  property  were  no  longer  immunized
from  state  control.  To  a  large  degree  this  understanding  derived
from a perception  that rights of property were not prepolitical  but a
product  of positive  law,  above  all  the  law  of trespass. 24  Because
such  rights  were socially  constructed  rather than  natural,  they were
permissible  objects of legal  control.

At  the same  time,  the  New  Deal  reformation  led  to  a  belief that
interests that were previously  seen as  legal gratuities,  or more often
a product of private charity, should be protected by the legal system.
Hence, for example, Roosevelt's  "second Bill of Rights."  More con-
cretely,  the New  Deal period resulted  in the creation  of legal rights
in  the  form  of  regulatory  protection  against  poverty,  unemploy-
ment, accident,  disease,  oppression  by employers,  and a wide range
of related  harms.  In  this  system,  factionalism  was  seen  not  as  the
redistribution  of property  rights,  but  as  the  insulation  of existing
practice  from  collective  control.  This  theme -
a  dramatic  depar-
ture  from  original  constitutional  principles  -
played  a  prominent
role  throughout Roosevelt's  presidency.  Some  of the New Deal ini-
tiatives,  particularly  in  the  area  of economic  regulation,  were built
on  shaky  foundations.  But  the  understanding  that  factionalism
could manifest  itself in government  inaction rather  than action  and
the concern  that failure  to protect  the disadvantaged  could itself be
a product  of interest-group  power  were  fundamental.

Understandings  of this  sort had drastic  institutional  implications.
In particular,  they  led quite naturally  to skepticism  about the  origi-
nal system  of checks  and balances  and about  tripartite  government.
That system  was  closely  associated  with  the common  law  and  with
the  system  of laissez-faire,  because  as  we  have  seen,  it  "naturally
form[ed]  a state  of repose or inaction. ' 2 5  The most radical  sugges-
tions of the time called for a total abolition of checks  and balances in
favor of a concentration  of power in  one entity.  Those suggestions

23.  Id. at  399.
24.  This  was  of course a prominent  theme in  the legal realist movement.  See Hale,
Coerdion  and Distibution in  a Supposedly  Noncoercive  State,  38  PoL. Sc.  Q.  470,  471-77
(1923).

25.  See supra note  14  and accompanying text.

1987]

HeinOnline  -- 56 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 121 1987-1988

were  repudiated,  but  some  of  the  impetus  behind  them  was  re-
flected  in the  enthusiasm  for an  increase  in  presidential  power and
for administrative  regulation.  The result  was  that the system  of tri-
partite  government  was  substantially  altered.  Power  that  was  for-
merly  exercised  by  Congress  and  by  common  law  courts  was
concentrated  in  the  presidency.2 8  Administrative  agencies  com-
bined  traditionally  separated  functions.  In both  cases,  the goal was
to  ensure  an  institutional  structure  accommodating  the  belief that
national  intervention  into  the  economic  structure  should  be  facili-
tated  rather  than  blocked.

the  idea  of vertical  separation  of powers  -

At the  same  time, original understandings  of federalism  were  sig-
nificantly  altered.  The states,  it was  thought, were  too large  to pro-
vide  genuine  self-determination.  The  notion that  the states  and  the
federal  government should  control  each  other by ensuring a kind of
stasis  -
seemed  per-
verse.  Finally,  states  had  proved  themselves  ineffectual  in  dealing
with social and  economic problems.  The depression of the 1930s  is
of course  the critical  development  here.  In  the New  Deal  reforma-
tion,  it was  the presidency,  not the states,  that was  the locus  of self-
government. 
this  understanding  allied
Hamiltonian  beliefs  in  a  strong  executive  with Jeffersonian  aspira-
tions  for genuine  self-determination  by  the citizenry.

In  a  single  stroke, 

The  New  Deal  thus  produced  a radically  different  constitutional
structure, one  that  sheds  considerable light  on the purposes  and ef-
fects  of the  original framework  and  on the  origins  of current consti-
tutional  predicaments.  During  the  New  Deal  period,  the  original
understanding  of rights  was  substantially  altered,  the  system  of tri-
partite  government  was  abandoned,  and  federalism  took  a signifi-
cantly  different  form.  Most  modern  constitutional  controversies
arise  out of nostalgia  for the original framework,  on one  or more  of
these  fronts,  or from  concern  that  the insights  of the New  Deal  pe-
riod have  been  taken  insufficiently  far.

IV

This is  hardly the place to evaluate  the claims  made by those skep-
tical about  the  New  Deal reformulation.  We may  suggest, however,
that  the New  Deal  rejection  of the  federal  system  was  far too  cava-
lier.  The President  does  not provide  an  avenue for self-determina-
tion  by  the citizenry,  and national  solutions  have  often  ignored  the
need,  emphasized  by  the  Framers,  for  diversity  and  flexibility  in  a
large republic.  There is  a continuing need  to achieve  traditional  re-
publican  goals  of local  self-determination,  though  avenues  are not
simple  to find.  Moreover,  the New Deal enthusiasm for technocratic
government,  embodied  in  the  belief in  regulatory  administration,
has  proved  myopic.  Failure in regulatory  implementation  has  been
relatively  common.  In  the  last  twenty-five  years,  there  have  thus
been  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  three  constitutionally  specified

26.  See T. Lowi,  THE PERSONAL  PRESIDENT  57-58  (1985).

122

HeinOnline  -- 56 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 122 1987-1988

[VOL.  56:114

Sunstein
THE  GEORGE  WASHINGTON  LAW  REVIEW

branches  to oversee  regulatory  performance,  and those efforts  have
often operated  in  the service  of the  substantive agenda  of the  New
Deal.

With  respect  to  the  new  conception  of rights,  in some  ways  the
New  Deal reformulation  did  not go  far  enough.  Much  of modem
law  depends  on  common  law  or  status  quo  baselines.  Most  strik-
ingly, common  law categories  continue  to  exert  a powerful  hold  on
modem  administrative  law.  Consider  the  definition  of liberty  and
property  interests,  where  the  Court  distinguishes  between  benefits
created  by the government  and those said to be simply  "given."  In
the  areas  of standing27  and  reviewability28  the  Court  continues  to
treat  the  beneficiaries  of regulatory  statutes  less  generously  than
regulated  class  members,  in  part because  the latter,  unlike the  for-
mer, are always  able to point to a common  law interest.  Consider as
well  the  areas  of discrimination  on  the basis  of race  and  sex.  Dis-
criminatory  effects  are  constitutionally  unobjectionable,  affirmative
action  is  seen  as  constitutionally  troublesome,  and  both  of these
conclusions depend on the idea that the existing distribution of ben-
efits and burdens as between whites  and blacks and men and women
should be seen  as  simply  "there."

However  the future  may  treat  the legacy  of the original  constitu-
tional  framework  and  the  New  Deal  reformulation,  an understand-
ing  of  the  1930s  illustrates  the  variety  of  possible  relationships
between  constitutionalism  and  democracy.  Historians  have  recited
a large  number of reasons  for skepticism  toward  Charles  A. Beard's
thesis  about the  relationship  between  the  economic  self-interest  of
the Framers  and  the Constitution.  Beard and his followers  were far
too  crude in  this  regard, and they  undervalued  the breadth and the
power  of central  features  of the  Framers'  vision.  But  the progres-
sive historians  were correct in pointing to the  central importance  of
controversial  understandings  of private property to the original con-
stitutional regime, and the ways in which those understandings have
been  repudiated in modem  political and  constitutional  thought.  In
a time in which  the nation celebrates  the enormous  achievements  of
the  drafters  of the original  document,  it is important  to  remember
the accomplishments  of others who have played a role in developing
the  modem  constitutional  structure.  This  category  includes  not
merely  the  most  important  Justices  of the  Supreme  Court,  but  a
small group  of others  who have  attained  the status of constitutional
framers  - prominent among  them  Franklin  D. Roosevelt.

27.  See Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S.  737, 753  (1984) (holding that black parents  do not

have standing  to challenge  tax deductions  for segregated  private schools).

28.  See  Heckler  v.  Chaney,  470 U.S.  821,  837  (1985)  (concluding that  agency inac-

tion  is  presumed  to be unreviewable).

1987]

HeinOnline  -- 56 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 123 1987-1988

