congressionalprogramsfaithfully and effectively has called into question the wisdom of the central institutionalinnovations of the New Deal: the expansion of the regulatory state and the shift in power from the states to the federal government. In this Article, Professor Sunstein challenges the New Deal morefundamentally, examining not only the institutionalchanges themselves, but also the shift in constitutional commitments that underlay those reforms. Professor Sunstein identifies three aspects of New Deal constitutionalism: the rejection of the original constitutionalcommitment to checks and balances in favor of independent and insulated regulatory administration, the recognition of substantive entitlements beyond those protected at common law, and the abandonment of principles of federalism that vested regulatory authority in both thefederal government and the states. Professor Sunstein argues that many of the presentfailures of regulatory administration - particularlythe problems of agency capture and factionalism - can be traced to the New Deal's failure to incorporate the original constitutional commitment to checks and balances into regulatory administration. The remedy, he suggests, is to reinvigorate the commitment to checks and balances through a system of coordinated review of agency action that includes a strong supervisory role for each of the three branches of government - the executive, the judiciary, and Congress. In addition, Professor Sunstein maintains that the protection of new entitlements during the New Deal was a natural andjustified outgrowth of the recognition by New Deal reformers that the common law itself favors some social interests over others. He suggests that this substantive aspect of the New Deal should be incorporated into modern public law, in which common law categoriespersist despite the insights of New Deal reformers. Finally, Professor Sunstein argues that the third aspect of New Deal constitutionalism - the emphasis on national rather than local control of regulatory issues - has been carried too far, depriving citizens of the opportunity to participatemeaningfully in the debate over the terms of their social life. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
We are in the midst of a period of considerable dissatisfaction with the performance of the federal government. The post-New Deal in* Professor of Law, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. Parts of this paper were presented at the annual American Political Science Association meeting in September, 1987, the annual American Association of Law Schools meeting in January, 1987, and the NEH/Federalist Society Conference on the Bicentennial of the Constitution, held in Chicago, Illinois, in November, 1986. The author would like to thank Bruce A. Ackerman, Akhil Amar, Walter Blum, Clark Byse, Robert Clark, David P. Currie, Christopher Edley, Richard Fallon, Robert Ferguson, Donald Gjerdingen, Barry Karl, Frank I. Michelman, Martha Minow, Henry P. Monaghan, Richard A. Posner, Carol M. Rose, Susan Rose-Ackerman, Richard B. Stewart, David A. Strauss, Peter L. Strauss, Kathleen Sullivan, and participants in the law and government workshop at the University of Chicago for valuable help. Veronica Dougherty and Daniel B. Rodriguez provided valuable suggestions and research assistance. crease in presidential power, and the creation of a massive bureaucracy concentrated in the executive branch, have augmented factional power and self-interested representation, often leading to regulation that fails to serve the interests of the public at large. In significant ways, the federal government both overregulates and underregulates. The failure of national institutions to intervene or to exercise restraint is not simply the product of the poor judgment of key government officials or the triumph of a particular political agenda. Much of the failure of public regulation over the past half-century reflects the inadequacy of important aspects of the constitutional vision embraced by the New Deal. Institutional reform is thus a major part of the agenda of modern public law. 
The regulatory system established during the New Deal' has failed to fulfill its original promise. In the New Deal period, reformers believed that administrative officials would serve as independent, selfstarting, technically expert, and apolitical agents of change. This basic understanding wedded the original constitutional belief in the need for an energetic national government 2 to the desire, associated with the Progressive movement, 3 to insulate public officials from par' The initial period of growth for the regulatory agency came before the New Deal, during the latter part of the 19th century and the first two decades of this century. See generally S. SKOWRONEK, BUILDING A NEW AMERICAN STATE: THE EXPANSION OF NATIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE CAPACITIES, I877-1920 (z982) (surveying the early development of the modern administrative state). It is important to emphasize as well that the New Deal was far from monolithic. There were competing strands and several different periods of experimentation, with different emphases. For all its novelty, the New Deal was not an altogether sudden break; it should instead be understood as the culmination of a set of ideas with much earlier foundations. See generally id.; W. WILSON, CONGRESSIONAL GOVERNMENT: A STUDY IN AMERICAN POLITICS 22-23 (I98i) [hereinafter W. WILSON, CONGRESSIONAL GOVERNMENT] (describing "the new leadership of the Executive"); W. WILSON, CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT IN THE UNITED STATES 57-81 (1921) [hereinafter W. WILSON, CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT]; id. at 6o (chronicling the rise of the President "as the unifying force in our complex system, the leader both of his party and of the nation"); W. WILSON, THE NEW FREEDOM: A CALL FOR THE EMANCIPATION OF THE GENEROUS ENERGIES OF THE PEOPLE 5-8 (196i) (detailing Wilson's campaign to regulate the trusts). The discussion in this Article is therefore stylized, emphasizing dominant features. For discussion of the period, see generally P. CONKIN, THE NEW DEAL (2d ed. 1975); K. DAVIS, FDR: THE NEW DEAL YEARS, 1933-1937 (1986); 0. GRAHAM, JR., TOWARD A PLANNED SOCIETY (1976); E. HAWLEY, THE NEW DEAL AND THE PROBLEM OF MONOPOLY (1966); R. HOFSTADTER, THE AGE OF REFORM (1955); B. KARL, THE UNEASY STATE (1983); J. PATTERSON, CONGRESSIONAL CONSERVATISM AND THE NEW DEAL (1967); J. PATTERSON, THE NEW DEAL AND THE STATES: FEDERALISM IN TRANSITION (x969). 2 See infra pp. 432-33. 
3 See, e.g., M. BERNSTEIN, REGULATING BUSINESS BY INDEPENDENT COMMISSIONS 35-39 (1955). See generally R. HOFSTADTER, supra note I, at 232-36 (describing Theodore Roosevelt's efforts to achieve a nonpartisan administration); S. SKOWRONEK, supra note I, at 177-211 (discussing the Progressive movement's goal of reformulating civil administration). tisan pressures in the service of a long-term public interest. The concept of autonomous administration, now under sharp attack, was originally the source of enormous optimism about possible reformation of the system of checks and balances. The New Dealers believed that institutional changes were necessary to allow the federal government to deal with the multiple social and economic issues that arose in the wake of the Depression. 
The institutional program of the New Deal was one element of a three-part critique of the traditional constitutional framework. The first criticism, substantive in character, was the culmination of a long period of rethinking both of that framework and of the system of common law ordering. For the New Deal reformers, the common law was neither natural nor prepolitical. Instead, it embodied a particular social theory, serving some interests at the expense of others. 4 In particular, the New Dealers viewed the common law as a mechanism for insulating the existing distribution of wealth and entitlements from collective control. The common law catalog of rights included both too much and too little - excessive protection of established property interests and insufficient protection of the interests of the poor, the elderly, and the unemployed. Hence the New Deal reformers called for substantial changes that would recognize new interests as entitlements and redistribute resources.5 Most dramatically, President Franklin Roosevelt urged a "second Bill of Rights," available to all "regardless of station, race, or creed," and including: 
shops or farms or mines of the Nation; 
The right to earn enough to provide adequate food and clothing and recreation; 
The right of every farmer to raise and sell his products at a return which will give him and his family a decent living; 
The right of every businessman, large and small, to trade in an atmosphere of freedom from unfair competition and domination by monopolies at home or abroad; 
The right of every family to a decent home; 
The right to adequate medical care and the opportunity to achieve and enjoy good health; 
The right to adequate protection from the economic fears of old age, sickness, accident, and unemployment; 
The right to a good education. 6 4 See infra pp. 437-38. 1 See infra pp. 437-40. 
6 F.D. Roosevelt, Message to the Congress on the State of the Union (Jan. 11, 1944), reprinted in 13 THE PUBLIC PAPERS AND ADDRESSES OF FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT, VICTORY AND THE THRESHOLD OF PEACE, 1944-45, at 41 (1950). President Roosevelt described the 
The second element of the New Deal critique focused on the institutional system of tripartite government and checks and balances. The New Deal reformers believed that the original constitutional structure, like the common law, was closely associated with protection of the existing distribution of wealth and entitlements. In their view, the system of separated functions prevented the government from reacting flexibly and rapidly to stabilize the economy and to protect the disadvantaged from fluctuations in the unmanaged market. 7 In addition, the New Deal reformers believed that the distribution of powers among the three branches of government created political struggles that disabled officials in the executive branch from making regulatory policies free of partisan pressure. 
Although the most radical attacks on tripartite government failed, some of the impulses behind those attacks paved the way for both enhanced presidential authority and the rise of regulatory administration. 8 The newly created agencies, largely a creature of the New Deal, 9 combined traditionally separated functions and remained free of direct control from Congress, the federal judiciary, and sometimes origin of the term "New Deal" in this way: 
The word "Deal" implied that the government itself was going to use affirmative action to bring about its avowed objectives rather than stand by and hope that general economic laws alone would attain them. The word "New" implied that a new order of things designed to benefit the great mass of our farmers, workers and business men would replace the old order of special privilege in a Nation which was completely and thoroughly disgusted with the existing dispensation. 
F.D. Roosevelt, 2 THE PUBLIC PAPERS AND ADDRESSES OF FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT, THE YEAR OF CRISIS, 1933, at 5 (1938). 
7 See Dunn, Regulation by Commission, i99 N. AM. REV. 205, 205-06 (1914) (discussing the inability of the courts, legislature, and executive branch to regulate properly); see also J. LANDIS, THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS *o-46 (1938) (arguing in favor of agencies rather than courts); Eastman, The Place of the Independent Commission, I2 CONST. REV. 95 (1928) (discussing the function and place of the independent commission within government). 8 See infra pp. 440-41. 
9 Although administrative agencies have been a part of government since the founding of the republic, the modern regulatory agency is a recent phenomenon. The Interstate Commerce Commission was created in 1887, and the Federal Trade Commission in 1914, but it was not until the New Deal that the modern agency became a pervasive feature of American government. Eleven agencies were created between the framing of the Constitution and the close of the Civil War; six were created from i865 to the turn of the century; nine agencies date from 19oo to the end of World War I; nine more were created between 1918 and the Depression in 1929; and no fewer than 17 were created in the decade between 193o and 1940. See ATTORNEY GENERAL'S COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE, FINAL REPORT 7-I1 (1941) [hereinafter ATTORNEY GENERAL'S COMMITTEE]. These New Deal agencies included the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Social Security Board, the National Labor Relations Board, the Commodity Exchange Commission, the Railroad Retirement Board, the Wage and Hour Division of the Department of Labor, and the Selective Service Administration. See id. at io-ii. In addition, of course, new duties were conferred on established entities during this period. even the President.' 0 The institutional critique of the period, pointing to the need for entities not burdened by tripartite government, naturally accompanied the New Deal's substantive program." 
The third element in the New Deal critique, also institutional, produced a massive shift in the relationship between the federal government and the states. Interdependencies in the economy, a central revelation of the Depression, made it increasingly difficult for reformers to believe that states could solve social and economic problems on their own. Competition among the states sometimes produced paralysis; many problems called for a uniform national remedy. States often seemed to be arenas for factional strife and parochialism. 12 Moreover, the size of state government and the dominance of wellorganized private groups within the states made it difficult to credit the traditional belief that local self-determination could genuinely be achieved by state autonomy. In these circumstances, the call for a dramatic increase in the exercise of federal regulatory power seemed quite natural. 
In the New Deal period, the original constitutional framework was thus reformulated in three fundamental ways. The New Deal set out a different conception of legal rights, rejecting common law and status quo baselines for deciding what constituted governmental "action" and "inaction"; it proposed a dramatically different conception of the presidency and a novel set of administrative actors; and it rejected traditional notions of federalism. The term "New Deal constitutionalism" describes the resulting structure. 
Although the reformers of the 1930's were largely successful in changing both legal entitlements and institutional forms, American nublic law has not entirely come to terms with New Deal constitutionalism, and many current controversies reflect ambivalence about its legacy. Some of modern public law, for example, is built directly on common law or status quo baselines. For example, rights to a hearing, 13 to an article III tribunal, 14 and to judicial review of agency action' 5 -are powerfully influenced by common law categories; the 10 See infra pp. 444-45. The degree to which agencies were intended to be or have in fact been immune from presidential control is subject to dispute. See id.; infra note 352. 
It See J. LANDIS, supra note 7, at 30-40 (describing institutional limits on the ability of courts to regulate economic activity); Hale, Coercion and Distribution in a Supposedly Noncoercive State, 38 POL. SCI. Q. 470, 478-81 (1923) (discussing coercion in markets). 12 See infra note 391 and accompanying text. 13 See infra pp. 502-03. 14 See Northern Pipeline Constr. Co. v. Marathon Pipeline Co., 458 U.S. 5o (1982). 1s See infra pp. 474-78 (discussing standing and reviewability). existence of a right protected at common law is highly relevant in all three areas. One of the greatest ironies of modern administrative law - an area whose origins lay in a substantial repudiation of the common law - is its continuing reliance on common law categories. 
The institutional issues are in a similar state of flux. Over the last three decades, autonomous administration has come under pressure from a variety of directions. In a number of statutes enacted since I96O, Congress has attempted to limit administrative discretion through timetables, deadlines, and clear instructions about implementation. In the i96O's and 1970's, the courts became increasingly aggressive in reviewing administrative activity. Since 1970, the President has sought to impose greater control. There has also been a resurgence of doubt about the constitutional status of agencies that are "independent" of presidential control. In all of these areas, traditional checks and balances have been reinvigorated in an effort to police the administrative process and to restore electoral accountability. Current failures of regulatory agencies have thus undermined the institutional learning of the New Deal during a period in which the New Deal skepticism about "limited government" remains for the most part intact, at least in the context of social regulation. 16 
Recent efforts to impose judicial and executive checks on the regulatory process have been especially controversial. In light of the ideological tension between the President and the judiciary during the Reagan Administration, it should perhaps be unsurprising that those who favor an active judicial role tend to oppose the exercise of presidential authority 17 and that those favorably disposed toward presi16 President Reagan, for example, has not fundamentally altered the regulatory state. During his first term, he spoke approvingly of the "social safety net," and his intrusions on spending and regulatory measures were not intended to eliminate minimum floors. See generally MAINTAINING THE SAFETY NET: INCOME REDISTRIBUTION PROGRAMS IN THE REAGAN ADMINISTRATION (J. Weicher ed. 1984) (examining changes in income security and redistribution programs during Reagan's first term). 
Morrison, OMB Interference with Agency Rulemaking: The Wrong Way to Write a Regulation, 99 HARV. L. REv. io59, 1o64-71 (1986) [hereinafter Morrison, OMB Interference with Agency Rulemaking]; Morrison, PresidentialIntervention in Informal Rulemaking: Striking the Proper Balance, 56 TUL. L. Rv. 879, 897-902 (1982) [hereinafter Morrison, PresidentialIntervention in Informal Rulemaking]. Courts have invalidated a number of deregulatory efforts. See, e.g., Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29 (1983) (invalidating an agency's rescission of passive restraint regulation); Action for Children's Television v. FCC, 821 F.2d 741, 745-77 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (invalidating the deregulation of children's television commercialization guidelines); Independent U.S. Tanker Owners Comm'n v. Dole, 809 F.2d 847, 853-55 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (invalidating the deregulation of subsidized merchant marine vessels), cert. denied, 56 U.S.L.W. 3243 Review, 98 HARV. L. REv. 507, 534-41 (x985) (describing deregulation cases under the Reagan administration); Sunstein, Deregulation and the Hard-Look Doctrine, 1983 SuP. CT. REV. 177, dential authority are skeptical about the supervisory role of the federal courts. 18 But the disagreement between advocates of presidential control and advocates of judicial power is undergirded not only by divergent views about how much social and economic regulation is desirable, but also by disagreement over the respective roles of politics, law, and technical expertise in the regulatory process. 19 The advocates of a strong judicial role generally embrace a technocratic conception of regulation - also associated with the New Deal - in which immersion in the law and facts leads to uniquely correct solutions, or at least to a sharply restricted range of acceptable outcomes. 20 In a curious reversal of the New Deal understanding that technocratic rationality precludes judicial control, some observers maintain that the courts should play an important role in regulation - to ensure "legality" and to prevent factionalism - and that the role of the President is secondary. 2 1 
The advocates of presidential control are deeply skeptical of this conclusion. For them, regulatory issues are above all "political." Here, as elsewhere, the precise meaning of the term "political" is not always clear, but the central ideas are that regulation poses issues of values and not of facts, and that the relevant values should be implemented by those accountable to the public. In addition, presidential control is said to promote technocratic rationality. 2 2 It follows igo-gi. Courts have also reviewed administrative inaction and sometimes compelled administrative action. See, e.g., Doyle v. Brock, 821 F.2d 778, 783-87 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (invalidating a decision by the Secretary of Labor not to challenge a union election procedure); NAACP v. Secretary of Hous. & Urban Dev., 817 F.2d 149, 157-61 (ist Cir. 1987) (requiring HUD affirmatively to further the antidiscriminatory policies of the Fair Housing Act); Public Citizen Health Research Group v. Auchter, 702 F.2d 1150 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (requiring OSHA to expedite rulemaking regarding industrial exposure to ethylene oxide); Carpet, Linoleum & Resilient Tile Layers Local 419 v. Brown, 656 F.2d 564 (ioth Cir. 1981) (reviewing agencies' failure to enforce the Davis-Bacon Act). But see Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821 (x985) (creating a presumption against review of agency decisions not to take enforcement action). 
18See, e.g., Gray, PresidentialInvolvement in Informal Rulemaking, 56 TUL. L. REV. 863, 869-78 (1982); Pierce, The Role of Constitutionaland PoliticalTheory in Administrative Law, 64 TEX. L. REV. 469, 520-24 (1985); Scalia, Vermont Yankee: The APA, the D.C. Circuit, and the Supreme Court, 1978 SuP. CT. REv. 345. 
19 Cf. C. Edley, Judging Governance: The Structure of Administrative Law (temp. ed. June 26, 1986) (unpublished manuscript on file at Harvard Law School Library) (arguing that the trichotomy of politics, adjudicatory fairness, and scientific expertise pervades judicial understanding of administrative decisions and provides misleading and unworkable distinctions). 
20 Cf. Morrison, OMB Interference with Agency Rulemaking, supra note 17, at ro66-67 (criticizing OMB for second-guessing the technical decisions of experts and politicizing the rulemaking process). 
21 See Davis, supra note 17 (criticizing the President's recent efforts to wield control through the Office of Management and Budget); Morrison, OMB Interference with Agency Rulemaking, supra note 17, at 1o66-67 (same). 
22See infra pp. 453-56. that the President should play a critical role in regulation, and that the courts should do very little. 
Controversies over clear congressional instructions to agencies often turn on similar disputes about the relationship between the political and technocratic features of regulation. Advocates of congressional specificity point to the risk of regulatory failure and the advantages of the legislative process in terms of visibility and accountability. 23 Critics contend that Congress is itself beset by factionalism 24 and that a measure of agency autonomy is necessary to ensure flexibility and specialization in the matter at hand. In all of these areas, the debate over the regulatory process has refocused attention on the nature of tripartite government in an era of positive regulation. 
Finally, efforts have been made to achieve some of the goals associated with the original federal structure. Proposals for increasing state autonomy, promoting local self-determination, and achieving economic democracy recall the roots of the Constitution in principles of civic republicanism. 25 At least for some, the goals of such proposals are to find a realm for active citizen participation in deciding the terms of social life, to promote flexibility and diversity, and to ensure that political outcomes result from civic virtue and deliberation rather than from self-interest and bargaining. 
The principal purpose of this Article is to describe the relationship between the original constitutional structure and the New Deal reformation and to outline some of the lessons of the last half-century for dilemmas in modern public law. The Article suggests that the New Deal's substantive critique was largely correct; indeed, in some ways it did not go far enough. 26 An important task for the future is therefore to generate a new set of entitlements to accompany the development of public law. On the other hand, the institutional framework of the New Deal was largely a mistake - an unnecessary and in some ways counterproductive means of achieving its own substantive program. Even if the institutional goal of insulating officials from constituents is grounded in established features of Amer23 See, e.g., T. LowI, THE END OF LIBERALISM: THE SECOND REPUBLIC OF THE UNITED STATES 298-301 (2d ed. 1979). 
24 See infra note 286 and accompanying text. 
25 See Stewart, Federalism and Rights, i9 GA. L. REv. 917, 918 (x985) ("[D]ecentralized self-government promotes republican values by providing citizens greater opportunities to participate in public and political life and collectively to deliberate and define the character of their community."). See generally B. BARBER, STRONG DEMOCRACY (984) (advocating decentralization in the interest of participatory democracy). 
26 In the area of economic regulation, however, and in economic premises generally, New Deal understandings were misguided, resulting in regulatory schemes based on faulty assumptions. See generally S. BREYER, REGULATION AND ITS REFORM (1982) (discussing regulatory failures that often result from "mismatching" the diagnosis of the market problems and the administrative remedy applied). ican constitutionalism,2 7 this goal has not been served by the institutional innovations of the New Deal. Administrative agencies have failed to serve as vehicles for democratic aspirations, and the regulatory regimes they have designed have often been unsuccessful. 
In these circumstances, it is necessary both to counter the pathologies of the current institutions and to consider new initiatives. Such strategies must of course recognize the need for regulatory agencies that can provide both flexibility over time and specialization in the subject at hand. But in the wake of the abandonment of the New Deal vision of independent administration, the best alternative is to develop a system of aggressive legislative, judicial, and executive control - a system in which the three institutions bring about something close to the safeguards of the original constitutional framework without retreating to anachronistic understandings of "limited government." Such a system, accompanied by a reformulated network of rights and strengthened federalism, will promote those aspects of New Deal constitutionalism that have the strongest claim to contemporary support. 
I propose a number of reforms to accomplish these goals. These include (i) increased presidential supervision of the executive agencies, accompanied by various safeguards; (2) reformulation of executive control to include the power and responsibility to encourage the undertaking of regulatory initiatives - to some degree on the ombudsman model28 - as well as the authority to discourage unnecessary or counterproductive proposals; (3) continuation of a moderately aggressive role for the federal judiciary; (4) development of a greater role for Congress in agency administration, through specifications of regulatory ends, deadlines, and various sorts of oversight; (5) reduction of statutes that identify the means by which agencies are to accomplish statutory goals; (6) inclusion of independent agencies within the supervisory authority of the President; (7) revision of the system of rights to extend the New Deal abandonment of common law and status quo baselines; (8) reformulation of administrative law doctrines to place regulatory beneficiaries on the same plane as regulated entities; and (9) a departure from the national focus of the New Deal to a system that increases opportunities for local self-determination and democratic participation. 
This Article is organized as follows. Part II describes the relationship between limited government and the traditional distribution of national powers; it also explores the ways in which New Deal constitutionalism departed from the original framework, both in its institutional critique and in its opposition to limited government. Part III 27 See infra pp. 431-32. 28 See infra pp. 488-89. describes and evaluates changing attitudes of the President, the courts, and Congress toward the administrative process, suggesting that because of the various intrusions on agency autonomy, traditional conceptions of administration have become anachronistic. Part III also addresses the relationships among the various forms of control and discusses the constitutional attack on independent agencies, relating that attack to the declining faith in New Deal administration. Part I argues in favor of a revised system of checks and balances, adapted for a period of active governmental regulation of the economy. Part IV discusses the reformulation of rights during the New Deal period, substantive regulatory reform, and the question of local self-determination. 
The New Deal was a self-conscious revision of the original constitutional arrangement of checks and balances, and some of the problems of modern regulation are a product of the myopic reaction of the New Deal reformers to the system of separated and divided powers. New Deal constitutionalism must therefore be understood against the backdrop of the traditional framework. It is necessary at the outset to note that the notion of separation of powers is in important respects a mis characterization of the constitutional system, which should instead be understood in terms of checks and balances. 2 9 The three branches of course have overlapping functions; each is involved to some degree in the activities of the other.30 The term "separation" tends to disguise this fact. 
The distribution of national powers was powerfully influenced by the Madisonian revision of classical republican thought and in particular by the Madisoiian conception of representation. 3 1 In Madison's framework, the central danger for a political system lay in factionalism - the usurpation of governmental power by well-organized private 29 See F. McDONALD, Novus ORDO SECLORUM 258 (1985) ("The doctrine of the separation of powers had clearly been abandoned in the framing of the Constitution; as Madison explained in Federalist numbers 47-51, mixing powers was necessary to ensure a system of checks and balances."). 
30 Examples of overlapping control include the President's role in lawmaking, most prominently the presentment clause; the power of Congress to advise and consent to presidential appointments; the power of Congress to vest the appointment authority in the President alone, department heads, or courts; judicial review; and the mixed roles of Congress and the President in the area of foreign affairs. 
31 See D. EPSTEIN, THE POLITICAL THEORY OF THE FEDERALIST 93-99 (1984) (discussing Madison's view of the duty of representatives to promote the public good). groups with interests adverse to those of the public as a whole. 32 Madison believed that politics should not consist of a series of unprincipled trade-offs among self-interested factions. The process should instead have a significant component of deliberation and dialogue about the public good. As Madison saw it, however, experience had shown that the classical republican belief in small-scale democracy, calling for active citizen participation 33 in government, was unrealistic and counterproductive. 3 4 In view of the self-interested character of citizen behavior, efforts to promote decisions by the citizenry at large would produce factional warfare. 35 Widespread citizen participation therefore would not serve the traditional republican belief in deliberative government. 
Madison's solution dramatically revised traditional republican thought.3 6 For classical republicans, only a small republic with direct self-rule could produce and benefit from a virtuous citizenry.3 7 Madison turned this understanding on its head. In his view, it was a large republic, with comparatively insulated representatives, that would be uniquely able to produce a well-functioning deliberative democracy. A small republic would be torn by factional warfare; in a large one, by contrast, representatives would be able to escape the pressures of powerful groups and engage in the deliberative tasks of politics. It was therefore necessary to place decisions in the hands of representatives chosen from a large territory, "whose wisdom may best discern the true interest of their country and whose patriotism and love of justice will be least likely to sacrifice it to temporary or partial considerations. '38 In this respect, there is a Burkean strand in Madison's theory of representation. 3 9 Madison abandoned the classical republican belief in direct self-rule by the citizenry 40 without rejecting the underlying republican faith in deliberative democracy. Of course, the framers set out other safeguards as well, including federalism and a measure of political accountability, achieved through direct election of the House of Representatives and through electoral control of other institutions. 
The distribution of national powers served two principal purposes. 4 1 The first was efficiency, brought about by a sensible division of labor. Often the separation of powers is thought to confine authority, but in some respects it increases and liberates it. For example, a central defect of the Articles of Confederation was its failure to provide for a strong executive. The framers, responding to this failure, created an executive branch designed to promote energetic and consistent governance. 4 2 
The goal of governmental efficiency was also promoted by the coordination of executive action, which was to be achieved through the creation of a unitary executive branch. 43 The framers rejected a "plural executive" on the ground that the fragmentation of power would make expeditious action impossible, attenuate accountability, and prevent coordination and centralization of policy. 44 Hence executive power was vested in the President alone.4 5 The division of power between the executive and the judiciary also served to free the executive from responsibility for decisions that all or parts of the citizenry might disapprove. By conferring adjudicative functions on a separate institution, the framers ensured that the executive would not be held responsible for decisions unfavorable to particular factions. 4 6 
Even though the distribution of national powers can be understood as an efficient division of labor, the best-known justification for the distribution is the need to diminish the risk of tyranny. Even as Madison extolled the value of a large republic in promoting publicspirited representation, he recognized that "enlightened statesmen will not always be at the helm." 47 The distribution of national powers was designed to check unenlightened or self-interested representatives. Above all, it diffused governmental power, reducing the likelihood that any branch would be able to use its power against all or parts of the citizenry. The system of checks and balances allowed each branch - armed with its own ambitions - to attempt to counter the other. 48 In these respects, checks and balances fit comfortably into a system in which dangers were thought to lie principally in governmental action rather than failure to act. 
In view of this history, it should not be surprising that the New Deal reformers associated the system of checks and balances with governmental inaction. This association prompted advocates of governmental intervention to seek a substantial reformation of the original distribution of national powers. The reformation has been only partly successful, however, and many of its failings recall the purposes underlying the original system of checks and balances. It is therefore 45 See Flaumenhaft, supra note 42, at 70-71, 74; id. at 70 (arguing that in the Hamiltonian system of energetic national government, "[o]nly replacing the vestiges of democratic participation by an efficacious administrative system could supply the energy to protect [Americans] against turmoil and invasion and the energy to manage their prosperity," and stating that "[t]he rejection of classical politics culminates in the politics of administration"). This understanding fits comfortably with Madison's theory of representation; it also presages the New Deal. See 'infra pp. 441-42. 
46 See Holmes, Precommitmentand the ParadoxofDemocracy, in CONSTITUTIONALISM AND DEMOCRACY (J. Elster & A. Slagstad eds. forthcoming 1988). 
47 THE: FEDERALIST No. io, at 58 (J. Madison) (C. Van Doren ed. 1945). 
48 This justification appears in THE FEDERALIST No. 47 (J. Madison) (C. Van Doren ed. 1945): "The accumulation of all powers, legislative, executive, and judiciary in the same hands, whether of one, a few, or many, and whether hereditary, self-appointed,. or elective, may justly be pronounced the very definition of tyranny." Id. at 322. This basic theme can also be found in Justice Brandeis' celebrated suggestion that the "doctrine of the separation of powers was adopted by the Convention of 1787, not to promote efficiency but to preclude the exercise of arbitrary power. The purpose was, not to avoid friction, but, by means of the inevitable friction incident to the distribution of the governmental powers among three departments, to save the people from autocracy." Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52, 293 (1926) (Brandeis, J., dissenting). necessary to explore the ways in which the distribution of national 1owers operates as a safeguard against tyranny. The framers emphasized several considerations; most are highly relevant to current institutional dilemmas. 
r. The Rule of Law. - The distinction between the legislature and the executive ensures that the power to execute the law is not in the hands of those who make it. Because legislators are unable to exempt themselves from law execution, they must, in enacting laws, take the perspective of ordinary citizens subject to the force of the law. Thus "[i]f a separate executive will enforce the law even against the lawmakers, the lawmakers will not have a 'distinct interest from the rest of the Community." 49 In this way, the distribution of national powers promotes generality in lawmaking - a fundamental constitutional value. 
stresses the desire to ensure that government officials will not act in their own interests, but in the interest of the public as a whole. The concern that rulers might have independent interests, and use them to oppress the public, played an important role in the framing of the Constitution.50 The term "self-interested representation" describes the phenomenon of representatives seeking to promote their own interests. 5' If authority were concentrated in one branch, that branch would be more likely and able to increase its own power at the expense of the governed. By allowing each branch to check the others, the distribution of national powers was intended to act as a partial solution to this problem, increasing democratic control over representatives and safeguarding both liberty and private property against governmental action. 52 
constitutional distribution of powers stresses the goal of limited government. The executive and judiciary must concur with the legislature in order for a law to be enforced. No law can be brought to bear against the citizenry without a broad consensus. Each branch has the power to prevent legal impositions. This system tends to make it difficult for government to act unless there is something close to general agreement that it ought to do so. This rationale echoes Montesquieu's observation that a system with three branches "should naturally form a state of repose or inaction."5 3 
49 D. EPSTEIN, supra note 31, at 130 (quoting J. LOCKE, Two TREATISES OF GOVERNMENT 410 (P. Laslett ed. 1965) (3d ed. 169S)). In this respect, the system of checks and balances has an implicit but powerful equal protection theme. 
so See THE FEDERALIST No. 5X (J. Madison). 
51 The economic term is "agency costs." See Jensen & Meckling, Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure, 3 J. FIN. ECON. 305 (1976). 52 See Levi, Some Aspects of Separationof Powers, 76 COLuM. L. REV. 371, 374 (1976). 53 C. MONTESQuIEu, THE SPIRIT OF THE LAWS 211 (D. Carrithers ed. 1977) (T. Nugent trans. 2d ed. 1748). 
For the framers, the legislature posed the primary threat of unjustified intrusion into the private sphere. The period immediately before the Constitutional Convention of i787 was characterized, in the view of many of the framers, by dangerous interventions by the legislature into the realm of liberty and private property.5 4 The distribution of national powers was therefore intended to ensure the protection of individual rights - most prominently rights of property - against the legislature.5 5 
There is in this respect an intimate connection between the distribution of national powers, the protection of private ordering, and the framers' emphasis on the need for "deliberation" before governmental action.5 6 Deliberation was designed in part as a check against popular passions for redistribution of wealth. 
national level also helped resolve a central problem of government: factionalism, which poses the risk that private groups might usurp public power in order to redistribute wealth or opportunities in their favor.5 7 Such private groups, whether minorities or (more likely) majorities, might use governmental authority to oppress others. The separation of powers and the system of checks and balances were intended to reduce that risk. A faction might come to dominate one branch, but it was unlikely to acquire power over all three. The distribution of national powers thus operated to protect minorities from the tyranny of powerful private groups. It is important to emphasize that the framers' concerns about factionalism, self-interested representation, and limited government were closely linked, and indeed ultimately merged in the general effort to use constitutionalism to limit the thrust of democracy.5 8 limit government; it also promotes stability by insulating the status quo from rapid change. In many cases, two or more branches must concur in order to alter current law; the system is structured to provide each branch with the means and the will to resist the others. The desire to promote stability was closely related to the framers' belief in private property and economic development in a commercial republic. 
Significantly, the system of checks and balances ensured that the terms of regulation often would be set by the common law courts, which had a vital place in the system. The importance of this point cannot be overstated. 5 9 Courts creating and implementing the common law could play a major role in social ordering, promoting private markets and resisting the various dangers associated with a government that combined the power to make, interpret, and execute the law. A politically insulated judiciary was permitted to assume this function because the common law was supposed to embody a system of natural or prepolitical rights; 60 in acting according to the dictates of "reason," courts were not subject to the risks posed by a combination of powers in the legislative or executive branch of the national government. As we will see, all of these understandings came under sharp attack during the New Deal period. 
At the same time, the federal nature of the system generated another series of constraints on government, 6 1 promoted flexibility, accountability, and diversity, and permitted a measure of self-determination through classically republican participation in government. The result was a complex system. Madisonian representation at the national level would allow for deliberation in government; the creation of a unitary executive and the division of labor would permit national action to meet national needs; the distribution of national powers would furnish checks diminishing the risks associated with factionalism, self-interested representation, and incursions into private property accord F. McDONALD, supra note 29, at 176-83 (discussing the view that the period before the framing was characterized by excessive democracy); I THE FOUNDERS' CONSTITUTION, supra note 44, at 544 (quoting a reference by Rep. Gerry to "the excess of democracy"). But see Diamond, supra note 36, at 68-72 (suggesting the democratic character of the original safeguards). 
59 See generally S. SKOWRONEK, supra note i, at 39-46, 285-92 (stressing that the original system was a "state of courts and parties"). 
60 See F. McDONALD, supra note 29, at 1-4o, 111-14 (tracing the relevance of common law to the framers' system). A recent commentator has illustrated this view in a manner characteristic of the nineteenth century. See R. EPSTEIN, TAKINGS: PRIVATE PROPERTY AND THE POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN (1985); Epstein, A Theory of Strict Liability, 2 J. LEGAL STUD. 151 (1973). The framers' understanding of the common law differed from the nineteenthcentury formulation; McDonald's historical account of the relevance of property and the common law is thus substantially different from that offered by Epstein. 
61 See THE FEDERALIST No. 51 (J. Madison) (describing the federal system as a method of distributing power and therefore a means of protecting against abuse). and liberty; and the federal system would create supplemental safeguards and allow a measure of citizen self-determination as well. 
i. Substantive and institutionalreform. - The modern regulatory agency emerged largely from deep dissatisfaction with both the common law system of private ordering and the original distribution of national powers. 62 The Progressives criticized the common law on a number of grounds. 6 3 A prominent part of their critique focused on the antidemocratic character of judicial lawmaking - a problem particularly severe in the constitutional context, but also troubling with regard to the common law. The problem was posed most sharply during the Lochner era, 64 when constitutional constraints owed their origin and shape to common law categories. 
An additional concern was the anachronistic, or at least incomplete, character of common law rights. The Depression and the failures of unregulated businesses made it harder to argue that governmental intervention beyond common law rules65 was antithetical to economic productivity. The collapse of the common law market system during the Depression made the utopian premises of laissez-faire thought seem fanciful. Indeed, economic recovery seemed to call for greater coordination and planning. A final concern was the perceived need for redistribution of wealth and entitlements, 66 which could not be brought about through the common law. Most fundamentally, many New Deal reformers regarded the common law itself as a regulatory scheme, not as prepolitical, and asserted that the common law had proved wholly inadequate in this regulatory role. 6 7 The very term "New Deal" is highly suggestive. It connotes a reshuffling of the cards, from which a different distribution of benefits and burdens would result. 
Reformers in the New Deal period thus called for the recognition of a new category of legal rights. Traditional rights of market ordering no longer captured the category of fundamental interests; they were both over- and under-inclusive. Rights to governmental assistance in the employment market, for example, were insufficiently protected by the common law, as were the interests of the poor, consumers of dangerous food and drugs, the elderly, traders on securities markets, and victims of unfair trade practices. At the same time, the common law system gave undue protection to rights of private property. In some settings the common law itself seemed a product of factional power in its protection of some interests and its unwillingness to recognize others. 68 
This basic theme, a central ingredient of New Deal constitutionalism, was prominent throughout Roosevelt's presidency. In his speech accepting the Democratic nomination for the presidency in 1936, for example, Roosevelt argued that although the constitutional framers were concerned only with political rights, new circumstances required the recognition of economic rights as well, because "freedom is no half-and-half affair."6 9 The most dramatic statement of this revised notion of entitlement came in President Roosevelt's State of the Union address of I944, which set forth the "Second Bill of Rights" quoted above. 70 These rights were to apply to all citizens, "regardless of station, race, or creed."'7 1 The substantive program of the New Deal thus constituted a rejection of the common law system in favor of a new conception of rights, albeit of uncertain dimensions. 7 2 The 1987] program dramatically altered the baselines from which governmental action or inaction and partisanship or neutrality would be measured. Although the new conception of rights revised the original understandings, it maintained a measure of continuity. President Roosevelt placed the new spirit of entitlement squarely within the framework of rights; his nomenclature both recalled the original Bill of Rights and added to it. 
The case for departure from common law ordering took various forms. Sometimes New Deal reformers emphasized the need for centralized planning under the authority of the national government. 73 On occasion they stressed the benefits of cartelization in promoting economic productivity. 74 There is, in this regard, a close connection between public interest justifications for regulation and explanations that see regulation as a product of interest-group deals; 75 such deals, in the form of cartelization, were designed to improve the operation of a depressed economy. Sometimes regulation was justified on more conventional economic grounds, such as "market failure" in the form of externalities ignored by the common law or a lack of information on the part of consumers and workers. 76 
substantive rights stressed the essentially undemocratic character of market ordering. In this view, collective control was necessary in order to achieve democracy. 77 Some regulation was thought to be lation in Historical and Comparative Perspective, in REGULATION IN PERSPECTIVE I55 (T. McCraw ed. 1981) and civil rights regulation between the years 1964 and 1977) 
73 For a detailed discussion, see 0. GRAHAM, JR., cited in note I above. The National Industrial Recovery Act, ch. 90, 48 Stat. 195 (1933), exemplifies the movement toward centralization. 
74 See The National Industrial Recovery Act, ch. 90, 48 Stat. 195 (i933). The NIRA, of course, was invalidated in part in Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States, 295 U.S. 495, 542 (1935), as an unconstitutional delegation of public power to private groups. Cf. K. DAvIs, supra note z, at 260-75 (arguing that large business interests dominated the NIRA); E. HAWLEY, supra note i, at 270 (same). 
75See generally Becker, A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political Influence, 98 Q.J. ECON. 371 (1983) (discussing the conflict amorng interest groups for political favors); Peltzman, Toward a More General Theory of Regulation, ig J.L. & ECON. 211 (1976) (developing a model to explain small group dominance in the regulatory process); Stigler, The Theory of Economic Regulation, 2 BELL J. ECON. & MGMT. SCI. 3 (1971) (arguing that regulation is designed and operated primarily for the benefit of industry). 
76 Regulations justified on such grounds include the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C.  301-392 (1982 & Supp. i11 1985), and the National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C.  15x-i68 (1982 & Supp. II 1985). 
77 The National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C.  i51-i68 (1982 & Supp. III i985), and the National Industrial Recovery Act, ch. 90, 48 Stat. I95 (1933), can be understood as efforts to assert collective control. As an earlier commentator argued: 
For better or worse the American people have proclaimed themselves to be a democracy, and they have proclaimed that democracy means popular economic, social, and moral emancipation .... The economic and social changes of the past generation have brought out a serious and a glaring contradiction between the demands of a constructive demo 
HeinOnline -- 101 Harv. L. Rev. 439 1987-1988 should remain with the agency. A promising development in this regard is the recent effort to require agencies to generate timetables and deadlines within which to respond to petitions to engage in rulemaking. 3 13 
Under such a system, neither presidential nor judicial control would be accepted on its own; each would balance the other. In such a system, political choices would be made by those most accountable; the paralysis associated with intra-executive checks and balances would be avoided; collective choices would be permitted; and there would be a safeguard against decisions that do not accord with the law or that stem from factional power or self-interested representation. 
(b) The Continuing Value of Checks and Balances. - The discussion thus far suggests that the New Deal critique of the original distribution of national powers and its checks and balances was contingent on a status quo of laissez-faire and a judiciary hostile to regulation. That critique was badly overdrawn, even (or perhaps especially) if one believes, as the New Deal reformers did, that substantial regulatory intervention is highly desirable in some settings. Four basic factors underlie this conclusion. 
First, a concentration of powers in the presidency or in administrators insulated from congressional or judicial control does not necessarily lead to vigorous enforcement of regulatory programs. Such concentration may instead produce inaction or decisions inconsistent with the commitments underlying the creation of the regulatory scheme. If administrators are fully committed to regulatory goals, checks and balances may seem to be an obstacle to reform; but in a period of executive ambivalence, checks may be an important instrument of statutory implementation. 
Second, the distribution of national powers is far from a guarantor of regulatory inaction. The New Deal critique has its greatest force when a laissez-faire system prevails; it is possible that checks and balances may help to perpetuate that system. For this reason, the critique was more powerful in the 1930's than it is today. If the status quo favors regulatory intervention, however, checks and balances may increase the likelihood that regulation will remain in place. 
Third, a system of distributed powers may in fact help those who seek change, including relatively powerless groups. An important function of the division of powers is to assure that different branches pursue different agendas. The existence of three branches of government thus multiplies the points of access to government, allowing for 313 See Luneberg, Petitionsfor Rulemaking: FederalAgency Practice and Recommendations for Improvement, in ADMINISTRATIVE CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES, RECOMMENDATIONS AND REPORTS 493. The Administrative Law Section of the American Bar Association adopted a recommendation to this effect on October 1o, 1987 (available in Harvard Law School Library). expression of diverse political views. Such a system increases the likelihood that at least one branch will be responsive to the interests of politically weak groups and thus will become an advocate for reform. A single branch often has initiated forms of social change.3 14 For example, the New Deal itself was largely a product of the leadership of one branch of government - the presidency. In a system of centralized and undivided power, by contrast, the likelihood that powerful majorities will remain entrenched is enlarged; no alternative institution exists to pursue interests adverse to the majority. In this sense, a government of separated powers has considerable advantages over more unitary systems. 
Vigorous advocacy by one branch - an option under a system of distributed powers - may thus serve to create momentum for change. Such momentum can be especially strong if one branch has the power to produce reform largely on its own - if, in short, government does not merely check and balance itself but is truly divided. The current constitutional structure to a large degree meets this condition because all three branches are able to generate change independently. In these circumstances, the New Deal belief that the original distribution of national powers would inevitably produce inaction, or inevitably frustrate governmental intervention, is unfounded. 
Fourth, and finally, even if a system of checks and balances may sometimes decrease the rate and amount of change, rapid change is hardly always desirable. In any case, the risks of too little change may be worth incurring in order to decrease factionalism and increase deliberation in government. The concentration of power in regulatory agencies may increase responsiveness to swings in popular opinion, but such responsiveness is far from an inevitable good. A balanced system of oversight of the sort recommended here is thus preferable both to the New Deal conception of administrative autonomy and to partial systems of control as represented, for example, in recommendations for increased presidential control and decreased judicial review.3 15 
314 Judicial oversight of executive agencies, when the President has been skeptical of regulatory enforcement in many areas, is the most recent example. The judiciary has also initiated substantial changes in the criminal justice system. See, e.g., Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (I966); Batson v. Kentucky, io6 S. Ct. 1712 (1986) (holding that the equal protection clause forbids a prosecutor from challenging potential jurors solely on account of their race). Congress likewise has brought about significant reform in environmental protection. See Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C.  7401-7642 (1982); Ackerman, Elliot & Millian, Toward a Theory of Statutory Evolution: The Federalizationof EnvironmentalLaw, i J.L., ECON. & ORG. 313, 317-18, 33538 (1985) (describing the circumstances surrounding passage of the Clean Air Act). 
31s To be sure, some difficulties accompany the present system of checks and balances, quite outside the area of administrative law. In particular, the current regime makes it especially difficult for the President to implement his program, with the occasional exception of vigorous action at the beginning of the presidential term. More generally, the split between the executive 
At the same time, it is important to be realistic about the value of institutional changes of the kind proposed here. Indeed, a focus on institutional checks tends to perpetuate the possibly anachronistic preoccupation of administrative law with control of discretion. 3 16 Regulatory performance, for example, depends on a wide range of factors other than institutional arrangements. Appropriations, quality of personnel, distributions of social power, ideological commitment, public attitudes, and substantive regulatory controls all play critical roles. 3 17 The various changes suggested here by themselves will not cure excessive regulation and implementation failure. Improvement of the regulatory process must be accompanied by a variety of other reforms, 3 18 some of which are discussed below. Nonetheless, institutional changes should make a substantial difference. The increase in presidential, judicial, and congressional control is likely to serve the institutional purposes of the original constitutional structure without at the same time returning to anachronistic conceptions of limited government. 
The simultaneous rise of executive, judicial, and legislative control has been accompanied by growing doubts about the constitutional status of regulatory agencies. Administration has of course been an important part of the national government since the founding. 3 19 The recent constitutional doubts, reminiscent of pre-New Deal challenges to the regulatory process, do not challenge administration in general, but only particular aspects that are perceived as threats to basic constitutional principles. Some of those doubts manifest themselves in renewed efforts to use the nondelegation doctrine to limit agency discretion. 320 Others form the impetus to urge courts to interpret article III literally and thus to remove adjudicative functions from regulatory agencies. 3 2 1 The most important set of challenges question congressional power to create agencies independent of the President. 
In all these cases, the basic concern is that regulatory agencies combining traditionally separated functions and immunized from presidential control are subject to the risk of factionalism and self-interested representation. The question of congressional authority to create "independent" agencies is closely associated with the issues explored thus far; it too calls for an analysis of the relationship between the system of checks and balances on the one hand and New Deal constitutionalism on the other. 
The independent agency, defined as an agency whose members are not subject to the plenary removal power of the President, is the model of the New Deal institution. It received constitutional sanction largely on the ground that the Constitution could not be read to bar expert and insulated officials from designing regulatory policy at the request of Congress, even though these officials do not fall within any of the constitutionally specified branches. 322 This understanding has met sharp criticism in the last decade, 323 however, and it would not be surprising to see a fundamental attack on the concept of independent administration in the near future. Such an attack would be the constitutional analogue of the increasing distrust of New Deal administration, manifested in the growth of legislative, presidential, and judicial control. 
These attacks on various aspects of modern administration, however, are flawed. They rest on methods of constitutional interpretation that are inadequate, especially in the context of administrative law. Literal interpretation of the constitutional text and the intent of its drafters is unhelpful in light of vast changes in the national government since the founding era. These changes call for an approach that takes changed circumstances into account, but at the same time reintroduces into the regulatory process some of the safeguards of the original constitutional system. 
The Delegation Doctrine:Could the Court Give It Substance?, 83 MICH. L. REV. 1223, 124974 (1985). 
321 Cf. Currie, Bankruptcy Judges and the Independent Judiciary, 6 CREIGHTON L. REV. 441 (1982-83) (arguing that article I's provisions for tenure and salary should be construed literally to invalidate congressionally created bankruptcy courts). 
322 See Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 295 U.S. 602, 628-32 (I935). 323 See generally Synar v. United States, 626 F. Supp 1374, 1398 (D.D.C. 1986) (asserting the difficulty of reconciling the holding in Humphrey's Executor with the separation of powers doctrine), aff'd sub nom. Bowsher v. Synar, io6 S. Ct. 3181 (1986); Miller, Independent Agencies, 1986 Sup. CT. REv. 41, 96-97 (arguing that the independent agency violates the principle of the separation of powers); Scalia, HistoricalAnomalies in Administrative Law, 1985 SuP. CT. HIST. Soc'v Y.B. io3, xo6-,io (questioning the distinction between executive agencies and independent agencies and contending that the holding in Humphrey's Executor should be limited to its factual and historical context). i. Formalism, Holmesianism, and Functionalism.- The last few years have seen a sharp rise of constitutional "formalism" in cases involving the separation of powers. Formalist decisions are premised on the beliefs that the text of the Constitution and the intent of its drafters are controlling and sometimes dispositive, that changed circumstances are irrelevant to constitutional outcomes, and that broader "policy" concerns should not play a role in legal decisions. Although this type of analysis was most prominent during the early growth of the modern regulatory state, 324 recent decisions also reflect some of these ideas. For example, in Buckley v. Valeo, 325 the Supreme Court struck down provisions of the Federal Election Act on the ground that members of the Federal Election Commission were not appointed by the President. Similarly, in INS v. Chadha,32 6 the Court invalidated the legislative veto on the grounds that it violated the presentation clause and evaded the constitutional requirement of bicameralism. And in Bowsher v. Synar,327 the Court invalidated the GrammRudman-Hollings Act on the ground that article II prohibits Congress from granting to itself the exclusive power to remove an officer charged with the execution of the law. All of these decisions treated the text of the Constitution and the intent of its drafters as if they supplied clear, self-evident answers to the problem at hand. Changed circumstances and even underlying considerations of constitutional structure were largely ignored. 
Constitutional formalism of this sort rests on weak foundations. The formalist approach is vulnerable to a wide range of objections relating to the appropriate characterization of the framers' intent, 328 the problem of interpretive intent, and the question how intent should be treated in unforeseen circumstances. 329 In the context of administrative law, the critical problem for formalism lies in the massive alterations in the executive branch since the New Deal. Formalist approaches assert, for example, that the notion of a "unitary executive" is sufficient to resolve many questions involving federal administrative agencies. But the federal government and the executive branch in particular have changed so dramatically since the founding that "framers' intent" cannot be mechanically applied as if it settles the matter. 
324 See, e.g., Hampton & Co. v. United States, 276 U.S. 394, 404-11 (1928); Field v. Clark, 143 U.S. 649 (1892). For a modern example, see Currie, The Distribution of Powers After Bowsher, 1986 SuP. CT. REV. 19. 
32' 424 U.S. I, 135-37, 140 (1976). 326 462 U.S. 919, 958 (1983). 327 io6 S. Ct. 3181, 3192 (1986). 
328 See Brest, The Misconceived Questfor the Original Understanding,6o B.U.L. REV. 204, 214-15 (I98O). 
329 See R. DWORKIN, A MATTER OF PRINCIPLE 138-55 (1985); Brest, supra note 328, at 215-17. 
The modern presidency is so different from the entity contemplated by the framers that it is unrealistic simply to "apply" their choices to the present situation. At its inception, the American presidency was by modern standards weak, especially in domestic affairs. 330 Its regulatory role was minimal. Police powers were exercised principally by the states. Federal lawmaking was the province of Congress. General questions of regulation were decided by the state legislatures and common law courts. Since the New Deal, however, the executive branch has become a major national policymaker; it often takes the initiative in lawmaking, exercising powers originally thought to lie within the domain of Congress and the states. 33 1 
For this reason, the Supreme Court's reasoning in Chadha and Bowsher was far too mechanical. The constitutionality of the legislative veto cannot be resolved solely by reference to the constitutional text. 332 For similar reasons, efforts to reinvigorate a literal approach to article III in order to remove adjudication from the executive branch should be resisted. 333 A general revival of the nondelegation doctrine would also be a mistake in light of a range of considerations: good reasons support the delegation of discretion, 334 standards can be extrapolated from seemingly vague statutes, judicial administration of a nondelegation principle would be both difficult and intrusive, and surrogate safeguards are available. 33 5 Of course, extreme measures, like that in Schechter Poultry, should be invalidated. 
At the opposite pole from constitutional formalism is a position that one might associate with Justice Holmes: courts should presume that whatever Congress does in the area of separation of powers is constitutional, unless no plausible argument can be made in its favor.336 Under the "Holmesian" view, separation of powers questions are essentially nonjusticiable, because the relevant institutions are able to protect themselves. 3 37 Some observers have argued in favor of a Holmesian approach on the ground that changed circumstances make the original constitutional commitments less relevant or more obscure. 338 Others have adopted the position because of the alleged 330 See T. Lowi, supra note 83, at 22-41. 
331 See'id. at 44-48. See generally S. Milkis, supra note 91 (describing the emergence of the "New Deal Constitution" as reflected by the rise in power of the executive and the decreased importance of party politics). 
332 See Elliot, INS v. Chadha: The Administrative Constitution, the Constitution, and the Legislative Veto, 1983 SuP. CT. REV. 125, 144-45; Strauss, supra note 43, at 597-99. 
33 See Fallon, Of Legislative Courts, Administrative Agencies, and Article III, loi HARV. L. REv. (forthcoming 2988) (cataloging arguments against article Ill literalism). 334 See supra p. 445. 33S See Stewart, supra note 284, at 335-43. 
336 See Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52, 177 (1926) (Holmes, J., dissenting); J. CHOPER, JUDICIAL REVIEW AND THE NATIONAL POLITICAL PROCESS 263 (980). 
337 See J. CHOPER, supra note 336, at 273-314. 338 See INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 99, 967-74, 978 (983) (White, J., dissenting); cf. Bowsher indeterminacy of the constitutional text.3 39 In the 1930's, the Supreme Court used a Holmesian approach to decide several cases involving separation of powers issues and administrative agencies, 34 0 but it has not done so recently. 
The Holmesian approach, however, is little better than formalism. In its usual form, it amounts to a wholesale abandonment of the separation of powers, and its belief in a self-calibrating institutional equilibrium, based on the supposedly equal power of the opposing forces, is without historical or theoretical support. There is good reason to suppose that without adequate controls one branch will sometimes exercise too much power over the others. 34 1 One of the purposes of the Constitution was to prevent that outcome and to check imbalances when they occur.34 2 Acquiescence by one branch to a redistribution of national powers may not prevent - indeed it may increase - the danger that the new arrangement will jeopardize some of the purposes that underlie the constitutional structure. The Holmesian position, effectively immunizing political outcomes from constitutional checks, is therefore inadequate. 
The alternative to formalism and Holmesianism might be described as functionalism. 343 In general terms, functional approaches examine whether present practices undermine constitutional commitments that should be regarded as central. The text of the Constitution and the intent of its drafters are relevant, but they are not sufficiently helpful in hard cases to be determinative; it is the basic structural principles that play the critical role. 3 44 As suggested above, those principles include the unitary execution of the laws, avoidance of factionalism, protection against self-interested or unaccountable representation, and v. Synar, io6 S. Ct. 3181, 3205 (1986) (White, J., dissenting) (noting the importance of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act as a response to the budget crisis). 
339 See Chadha, 462 U.S. at 974-84 (White, J., dissenting). 
340 See, e.g., Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 295 U.S. 602 (1935) (allowing Congress to develop new institutional forms); cf. Crowell v. Benson, 285 U.S. 22, 53-54 (1932) (arguing that a congressional grant of limited adjudicative powers to a non-article III tribunal can be justified to the extent it relieves the judiciary of an excessive workload). 
341 See, e.g., United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683 (1974); Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, 343 U.S. 579 (1952). 
342 Moreover, the fact that the legislative and executive branches are in agreement is an insufficient reason to foreclose a constitutional attack; the relevant provisions are designed not only to ensure the integrity of the branches but also to protect the citizenry. See Chadha,462 U.S. at 947-51, 957-59. 
343 See Strauss, Formal and FunctionalApproaches to Separation-of-PowersQuestions - A Foolish Inconsistency?, 72 CORNELL L. REV. 482, 488-89 (1987) (contrasting formalist and functionalist approaches to separation of powers issues). 
344 This method can be traced to McCulloch v. Maryland, 17 U.S. (4 Wheat.) 316 (i81g). See generally C. BLACK, STRUCTURE AND RELATIONSHIP IN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (1970) (arguing that the method of reasoning from structure and relation should play an important role in federal constitutional law). [Vol. 1O1:421 promotion of deliberation in government. 345 A functional approach maintains, for example, that the constitutionality of the legislative veto should not have been resolved solely by reference to the text. 3 46 Nonetheless, a functional approach would yield the same result as in Chadha. Practice had shown that the legislative veto aggravated the problem of factionalism 34 7 - the very problem it was designed to solve. In practice, the device provided well-organized private groups an additional opportunity to fend off regulation. In this way, it undermined the central constitutional effort to diminish the power of well-organized private groups over governmental processes. 
Although Bowsher is a harder case, it can be analyzed similarly. The congressional vesting of power in the Comptroller General removed the power of execution of the laws from the direct control of executive officials because, in practice, the Comptroller General operated independently of the President. 348 Execution of the laws was thus placed in the hands of someone who was, in practice, accountable to no one. An- alternative defense of Bowsher would point to the dangers of combining legislative and executive functions, because the Comptroller General is subject to congressional removal and has traditionally viewed himself as a congressional agent. 
Of course, there are problems with the functional approach as well. In particular, it allows for a large degree of discretion (and therefore uncertainty) both in characterizing the appropriate constitutional commitment and in deciding whether it has been violated. By contrast, the formalist and Holmesian approaches are highly predictable. The vices of functionalism in this regard can also be regarded as virtues, however, because they permit functionalism to avoid the defects in formal and Holmesian approaches. 
tutional formalism has been of special importance in recent attacks on "independent" agencies. Although the first independent agency, the Interstate Commerce Commission, was created in the late nineteenth century, the notion of agency independence did not become popular until several decades later, as a result of fears about an unduly powerful presidency and an accompanying belief in the salutary effects of impartial expertise. 34 9 In part, the rise of independent agencies can also be viewed as an indication of the power of private industries, which believed that commissions would treat them more favorably. 35 0 345See supra pp. 430-36. 
346 See Elliott, supra note 332, at 132-47; Strauss, Was There a Baby in the Bathwater? A Comment on the Supreme Court'sLegislative Veto Decision, 1983 DUKE L.J. 789, 8oo-oi. 347 See Bruff & Gellhorn, supra note 121, at 1413-14, 1425-26, 1438-39. 348 See Strauss, supra note 343, at 5,9-21. 349See M. BERNSTEIN, supra note 3, at 128-29, 137-39; Miller, supra note 323, at 79-83. 350 See M. BERNSTEIN, supra note 3, at 5; id. at 146 (arguing that "maintenance of the The New Deal saw the creation of a number of independent agencies, although, as with the Interstate Commerce Commission, limitations on presidential removal power predated the New Deal. 35 ' The form has been much less popular in the last twenty years, partly because of a perception that independent agencies have been, in practice, subject to the influence of well-organized private groups. 3 52 
The notion of independent administration is congruent with the Madisonian conception of representation in its desire to insulate public officials from political pressures. 3 53 But the New Deal conception of administration coupled the belief in insulation with optimism about the power of immersion in the facts and of technical expertise to resolve regulatory problems. Moreover, the advocates of the New Deal saw insulation as a mechanism for disrupting rather than preserving the status quo - a reversal of the view of the constitutional framers. The independent agency was a natural outgrowth of the New Deal plan. 
Despite some continuity with Madisonian theory, the independent agency is in considerable tension with principles traceable to the origmyth of commission independence represents a conscious effort by regulated groups to confine regulatory authority to an agency that is somewhat more susceptible than an executive department to influence, persuasion, and eventually, capture and control"); see also D. TRUMAN, THE GOVERNMENTAL PROCESS 417-19 (2d ed. 1971) (asserting that regulated groups have preferred regulation by independent agencies to supervision by an executive commission). 351 See infra notes 358-61. 
352 An influential critique of agency independence written thirty years ago can be found in M. BERNSTEIN, cited in note 3 above. For a contrary view, see Jaffe, cited in note 126 above, at 1187, 1193, 1198--99. The decline of agency independence apparently reflects the belief that presidential supervision will operate as a buffer against factionalism. The EPA and OSHA are within the executive branch. Only a few of the modern safety and health statutes are administered by independent agencies. See, e.g., 42 U.S.C.  717i(a) (1982) (the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission); I5 U.S.C.  2053(a) (1982) (the Consumer Product Safety Commission). Recent history thus suggests considerable congressional ambivalence about the independent agency. 
In practice, there is little difference between independent and executive agencies in terms of their functions. Many departments within the executive branch engage in activities that are indistinguishable from those of the independent agencies. Both types of entities undertake the basic tasks of adjudication, rulemaking, and prosecution. Moreover, independent agencies are by no means genuinely liberated from political control. Such agencies perceive themselves as subject to the control of Congress, whose committees exercise a powerful supervisory function. The President, furthermore, has a range of formal and informal mechanisms for controlling agencies nominally outside of his jurisdiction. See Strauss, supra note 43, at 589-91; see also M. BERNSTEIN, supra note 3, at 109-13 (describing such mechanisms). Indeed, a recent study suggests that the behavior of independent agencies varies systematically with presidential partisanship. See Moe, Regulatory Performance and PresidentialAdministration, 26 AM. J. POL. SCI. 197, 221 (1982). In some cases, however, Congress has decided that immunity from plenary presidential control is desirable. There can be no doubt that independence allows agencies some measure of insulation from presidential authority and increases the supervisory power of legislative committees, which need not contend with the insulating effect of presidential support. 353 See Sunstein, supra note 33, at 41-43; supra pp. 430-32. inal constitutional framework. The first section of article II vests executive power in "a President. '35 4 The "take Care" clause makes it the duty of the President, and no one else, to "take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed."355 These provisions reflect the framers' self-conscious decision to create a unitary executive who would be both accountable to the electorate and capable of energetic execution of the laws. 
This basic understanding of the executive branch found powerful vindication in Myers v. United States,35 6 in which the Supreme Court held that Congress could not involve itself in the decision whether to remove a postniaster. 35 7 In Humphrey's Executor v. United States,358 however, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the constitutionality of the independent agencies. Referring to the need for expertise and impartiality, the Court stated that the members of the FTC were to be independent in all things but their appointment, and that the FTC was not "in any proper sense ... an arm or an eye of the executive. ' 35 9 For the Court, the Commission "acts in part quasi-legislatively and in part quasi-judicially" and is "an agency of the legislative and judicial departments." 3 60 At least until recently, Humphrey's Executor has been interpreted ag establishing congressional discretion to create independent agencies as long as the relevant officials have adjudicative or rulemaking functions. 36 1 
Skepticism about the constitutional status of the independent agency has been renewed in the last decade, however,3 62 and there are signs that the legal meaning of independence will change in the near future. Such developments should not be surprising in light of 354 U.S. CONST. art. II,  i, cl. i. 355 Id.  3. 356 272 U.S. 52 (1926). 
357 See id. at 163-64 ("Article II grants to the President.. . the power of appointment and removal of executive officers - a conclusion confirmed by his obligation to take care that the laws be faithfully executed."). 
3s8 295 U.S. 602 (I935). 359 Id. at 628. 360 Id.at 628, 630. 
361 The claim that Humphrey'sExecutor held that rulemaking is quasi-legislative is, however, a misunderstanding. At the time of Humphrey's Executor, it had not been established that the FTC had rulemaking power. By "quasi-legislative" functions, the Court was referring to investigatory and reportorial actions. See Scalia, supra note 323, at lo9. 
Strictly speaking, Humphrey's Executor is an exceedingly narrow holding. The Court held only that a discharged member of the FTC has a right to back pay. The case did not involve a suit for reinstatement, and thus the Court did not conclude that Congress may ensure job tenure - only that compensation is due to those whom the President discharges. Moreover, the case did not involve a discharge on the ground of a refusal to implement presidential policy. 
362 See generally Miller, supranote 323, at 83 (noting the questionable constitutional grounds on which independent agencies are based); Note, Incorporation of Independent Agencies into the Executive Branch, 94 YALE L.J. 1766 (1985) (arguing that Humphrey's Executor should be overruled and that independent agencies should be incorporated into the executive branch). the declining faith in the New Deal model of administration, which put a high premium on insulation. This skepticism has been boosted by the formalist approach of recent Supreme Court decisions - an approach that is in severe tension with the analysis in Humphrey's Executor, which in any event has little to be said in its behalf. The notion of quasi-legislative and quasi-adjudicative functions, pivotal to the decision, is unhelpful. 363 The simple point for the formalist critics is that the Constitution makes no room for a governmental entity existing "outside" the three enumerated branches, and constitutional silence suggests that no such entity may exist. Constitutional formalism provides at least as powerful an argument against the existence of independent agencies as it offers against the Gramm-RudmanHollings Act and the legislative veto. The President, not independent administrators, is the constitutionally specified agent of Congress in the execution of federal law. 
There are, however, several counterarguments to the formalist position. The text of the Constitution and its history 364 do not provide unambiguous support for the attack on independent administration; and the changing character of the modern presidency makes it unrealistic to rely on founders' intent or to pretend that it can be mechanically applied to current problems. In light of the massive changes in the nature of the presidency, the decision to create a unitary executive cannot be treated as if it resolved the matter. Indeed, the decision to permit the creation of "independent" agencies might be understood as a necessary quid pro quo for the downfall of the nondelegation doctrine. The independent agency device allows Congress to limit presidential power in lawmaking, which has assumed unprecedented dimensions since the New Deal. In this sense, it might be thought to bring the national government closer to the original system of checks and balances. 
Moreover, the term "independent" is in practice a misnomer. There are lines of control from both Congress and the President to the independent agencies. 365 Even if the Constitution might bar Congress from creating regulatory agencies entirely immune from presidential control, congressional creation of independent agencies need not be understood in such terms. 
Although the formalist attack against independent agencies was at least implicitly at issue in Bowsher, the Court attempted to evade the problem. The Court indicated that its decision had no bearing on the constitutionality of the concept of independent administration. 366 The 363 See Miller, supra note 323, at 93. 
364 See Grundstein, PresidentialPower, Administration and Administrative Law, 18 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 285, 289-326 (ig5o). 
365 See Strauss, supra note 43, at 587-96; supra note 352. 366 See Bowsher v. Synar, io6 S. Ct. 3181, 3188 n.4 (1986). Court's language in Bowsher, however, may have an impact on the issue, in ways that fit comfortably with a functional approach to the question. The Court held that the enumerated bases for removal of the Comptroller General by Congress - inefficiency, neglect of duty, abuse of office - were "very broad" and permitted discharge "for any number of actual or perceived transgressions of the legislative will." 36 7 Yet the statutes creating independent agencies use almost precisely the same language. If this language creates "very broad" removal authority, the so-called independent agencies are not in practice independent of presidential control. 368 
Whatever the ultimate meaning of agency independence, and whether or not it is found constitutional, it should not be surprising if the recent attacks on independence and the related decline in the New Deal conception of administration eventually lead to increased presidential control of all regulatory agencies. Such a development would be highly desirable. Understood functionally, total independence threatens central principles of electoral accountability. There is evidence that the lack of accountability of independent regulatory agencies has led to abuses. 3 69 The constitutional commitments to the avoidance of factionalism and to limitations on the disjunction between rulers and ruled tend to support presidential supervision. The various policies underlying the notion of a unitary presidency are also relevant.3 70 
In any event, there is no reason to believe that the independent agency form - if independence is understood literally - is needed to carry out the principal substantive purposes of New Deal administration.3 7 1 Moreover, such control increases the likelihood of achieving an irriportant institutional goal of the New Deal - to provide for agency officials who serve public law. At the same time, presidential supervision of independent agencies would be an additional step in the reintroduction of checks and balances into the current administrative process, supplementing the various measures described and advocated above. 
367 Id. at 3190. 
368 This conclusion is buttressed by clear-statement principles of statutory construction, which counsel courts to avoid interpretations of statutes that pose constitutional issues. See, e.g., Kent v. Dulles, 357 U.S. 116, 127-30 (1958) (construing statute so as to avoid constitutional questions). Under this approach, statutes with ambiguous language should be read to allow considerable presidential supervisory power. 
369 See M. BERNSTEIN, supra note 3. 
370 See id. at 163, 286-87; NATIONAL ACADEMY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, supra note 145, at 15-20. 
371 Some independence, however, is necessary if the agency is to serve any role at all. For example, although the President may not make the ultimate decision, a point recognized in Myers itself, he may remove an officer after the decision is made. See supra p. 498. Moreover, agencies require some independence when acting in an adjudicatory mode. See Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52, 135 (1926). IV. REGULATION, RIGHTS, AND LOCAL SELF-DETERMINATION The discussion thus far has dealt primarily with the challenge of the New Deal to the system of checks and balances and with the reaction to those innovations in the last quarter-century. As discussed above, however, the New Deal significantly altered two other aspects of the constitutional structure: individual rights and federalism. The New Deal reformers rejected common law and status quo baselines for defining substantive entitlements, and believed that the presidency and regulatory agencies provided better opportunities than state and local government for democratic self-determination. A complete discussion of constitutionalism after the New Deal must thus address not only the questions of national institutions, but also those involving individual rights and federalism. Such a discussion must also deal with substantive, as opposed to institutional, reform of administrative law. 3 72 For present purposes, a few brief remarks should suffice. 
The New Deal reformers asserted that the catalog of rights protected by the common law was not natural or prepolitical, but a conscious social choice.3 7 3 This understanding dramatically shifted the baseline for distinguishing between governmental "action" and "inaction," or neutrality and impermissible partisanship - a point that modern public law has insufficiently recognized. In the pre-New Deal era, courts sometimes viewed deviations from the common law and the status quo as interference with the natural order, and as impermissible violations of principles of neutrality and nonpartisanship. This was the understanding that prevailed in the Lochner era, during which an aggressive Supreme Court identified the requirements of the due process clause with those of the common law.3 74 
When the Court rejected Lochner, it did so largely on the ground that the common law baseline from which the Court had been operating could no longer be justified. 3 75 The Court recognized that re372 See generally S. BREYER, supra note 26 (presenting a general analysis of regulatory reform); Stewart, supra note 318 (advocating the adoption of "reconstitutive" regulatory strategies as an alternative to both reliance on current regulatory systems and deregulation). 373 See supra p. 423. 
374 See New York Cent. R.R. v. White, 243 U.S. 188, 201 (,9,7) (suggesting that if government abrogates common law rights it must provide a "reasonably just substitute"). See generally Sunstein, supra note 135 (describing the influence of common law baselines). 
375 It should be unsurprising that the same Court that rejected the Lochner era understanding decided Erie R.R. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64 (1938), in which the common law was similarly found to be constructed rather than natural or prepolitical. See West Coast Hotel v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379, 399 (,937) (finding that failure to have a minimum wage law is a "subsidy" to employers); Miller v. Schoene, 276 U.S. 272, 279 (1928) (stating that failure to regulate is "nonetheless a choice"). spect for the common law baseline and for the existing distribution of wealth and entitlements could itself be governmental "action" or the product of faction; the common law was itself a creation of the legal system.3 7 6 The lesson of the demise of Lochner was that common law or status quo baselines should no longer be used reflexively in public law. 
Notwithstanding this understanding, pre-New Deal conceptions of legal rights permeate modern public law. For example, doctrines of judicial review of administrative action depend importantly on the common law. The interests of regulatory beneficiaries are not always judicially cognizable, most significantly in the areas of standing and judicial review of agency inaction. 3 77 State action doctrine turns not on whether the state has "acted," but on whether it has departed from governmental functions that are seen as normal or natural, 378 largely from a -common law point of view. The partial abrogation of a trespass law is thus uncontroversially state action, and possibly unconstitutional, 379 whereas the enforcement of the law of trespass, and the repeal of a law prohibiting private racial discrimination, are treated as constitutionally legitimate and perhaps do not represent 376 Cf. F.D. Roosevelt, Speech Accepting the Nomination for the Presidency (July 2, 1932), I THE PUBLIC PAPERS OF FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT, THE GENESIS OF THE NEw DEAL, 19281932, at 657 (1938) (suggesting that the laws of economics "are made by human beings" rather than "nature"); F.D. Roosevelt, Annual Message to Congress (Jan. 3, 1936), 5 THE PUBLIC PAPERS AND ADDRESSES OF FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT, THE PEOPLE APPROVE, 1936, at 13 (1938) ("In these latter years we have witnessed the domination of government by financial and industrial groups .... [Under the New Deal there has been] an appeal from the clamor of many private and selfish interests ... to the ideal of the public interest. Government became the representative and the trustee of the public interest. Our aim ... was to build upon essentially democratic institutions, seeking.., the adjustment of burdens, the help of the needy, the protection of the weak, the liberation of the exploited, and the genuine protection of the people's property."); F.D. Roosevelt, Message to Congress, H.R. Doc. No. 397, 73d Cong., 2d Sess. (1934), reprinted in STATUTORY HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES: INCOME SECURITY 61 (R. Stevens ed. 1970) (defending social security as necessary protection in "this man-made world of ours" (emphasis added)); infra note 386 (citing sources discussing the contextual nature of social thought). 
This view of law as a social construct was an outgrowth of legal realism. See Hale, supra note ii,at 493-94. The Coase theorem, see Coase, The Problem of Social Cost, 3 J.L. & ECON. i (ig6o), was a natural product of New Deal understandings. It, too, upset ordinary understandings of action and inaction by revealing that judgments about causation, or about who injured whom, were conventional rather than natural. See B. ACKERMAN, supra note 135, at 46-7, (1985). The Coase theorem was thus the private law analogue to the constitutional overruling of Lochner. 
PP. 474-78. 
378 See Sunstein, supra note 135, at 214. 
379 See PruneYard Shopping Center v. Robins, 447 U.S. 74, 83-84 (198o) (upholding a partial abrogation of state trespass law, but implying that a more extensive abrogation would constitute a taking); Kaiser Aetna v. United States, 444 U.S. 164, 179-80 (1979) (holding that the right to exclude is an incident of ownership). state action at all. 380 Similarly, the right to a hearing depends in part on whether a common law interest or instead an interest thought to be "created by the government" is at stake. The law of procedural due process thus reflects a distinction, based on common law categories, between natural and positive rights38 1 - a distinction that was repudiated during the New Deal. 
The debate over "positive" and "negative" rights also depends on the choice of baselines. Whether a right is "positive" or "negative" turns out to depend largely on whether it calls for alterations in existing practices. The selection of such baselines has been particularly critical in cases involving the imposition of "affirmative" duties on government: The protection of the trespass laws is thus generally perceived as a negative guarantee, whereas protection of welfare rights is viewed as a positive one. 3 82 Distinctions of this sort turn not on a genuine inquiry into the negative or positive character of the rights, but on whether they require government to depart from common law categories. 
Cases involving discrimination on the basis of race and gender raise similar issues. Thus, for example, the constitutional attack on "affirmative action" - indeed the very term - depends on acceptance, as a baseline, of the existing distribution of benefits and burdens as between blacks and whites and women and men. If the existing distribution were seen as a product of public and private decisions, it would be harder to argue that indifference to race, as reflected in market outcomes, was the course of "neutrality" or "inaction." Similarly, gender-discrimination law is marked by a debate whether some differences are "real" rather than socially constructed. 3 83 An approach consistent with New Deal understandings would recognize that even "real" differences are given their meaning by legal and social practices. 384 Such an approach would recognize, for example, that the 380 See Crawford v. Board of Educ., 458 U.S. 527, 538-39 (1982) (suggesting that "mere repeal" of state antidiscrimination law is constitutional); Reitman v. Mulkey, 387 U.S. 369 (1967) (invalidating a state constitutional provision overturning antidiscrimination statutes, but indicating that repeal of those statutes is by itself permissible). 
381 See Cleveland v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532 (1985); Board of Regents v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564 (1972). 
382 See, e.g., Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297 (198o) (distinguishing limitations on the government's power to regulate abortion from an affirmative obligation to finance such operations). 
383 See Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 204 (1976) (stating that statistical demonstration of broad sociological propositions "isin tension with the normative philosophy underlying the equal protection clause"). See generally C. MACKINNON, FEMINISM UNMODIFIED 32-45 (1987) (suggesting an approach to gender discrimination that focuses on the ways in which differences are turned into disadvantages, rather than on the ways in which differences arise). 384 See C. MAcKINNON, supra note 383, at 32-40; Minow, The Supreme Cou'rt, z986 Term Foreword:Justice Engendered, io HARv. L. REv. 10, 34-36 (1987) (describing the connection between legal analysis and categorization). legal treatment of reproductive rights and of abortion raises questions not only of privacy, but also of sex discrimination. 385 
A major task for the future is to bring the basic understanding of the New Deal - the socially constructed character of legal rights to bear on current doctrine. 386 Such a step would produce significant shifts in the baselines from which decisions are made. 387 The eventual goal would be to produce a theory of legal rights that is sometimes critical of existing practice, that is not merely positivist, and that does not rely on the status quo or the common law as the foundation from which to evaluate legal outcomes. That task is a large one, and it is doubtful that the courts can perform it on their own. The legislative and executive branches must play an important role. The effort, discussed above, 3 88 to place the interests of regulatory beneficiaries on the same footing as those of regulated industries would be an important step in this direction, and it might serve as a model for future development. 
In the original constitutional system, federalism provided an avenue for local self-determination. Self-government by the citizenry could be achieved through state and local government. 3 89 At the same time, the states and the national government would control each other,3 90 generating a vertical check on government oppression. Competition among the states for residents would act as an additional safeguard, encouraging humane and efficient policies. 
In the New Deal period, however, the belief in localism seemed unrealistic or perverse. State government seemed to be a forum for parochial pressures rather than for republican self-government. 3 9 1 The states were far too large to allow for face-to-face democracy. The notion of vertical checks and balances among competing local and federal spheres seemed inconsistent with the need for active govern385 See C. MAcKINNON, supra note 383, at 32-45. 
386 Such a task connects legal theory to prominent themes in contemporary social thought, involving the inevitably situated character of observation. See generally G. LAKOFF, WOMEN, FIRE, AND DANGEROUS THINGS: WHAT CATEGORIES REVEAL ABOUT THE MIND (1987) (showing that normative commitments are built into language itself); T. NAGEL, THE VIEW FROM NOWHERE (1986) (discussing difficulties in making normative and descriptive statements in light of the situated character of the speaker). 
387 Cf. Minow, supra note 384, at 16 (urging the judiciary to "approach questions of difference by seeking out unstated assumptions about difference"); id. at 70-95. 
388 See supra pp. 474-77. 389 See THE FEDERALIST No. 46 (J. Madison). 390 See THE FEDERALIST No. 51 (J. Madison). 
391 See B. KARL, supra note I, at 233-34 (discussing state autonomy as "democracy for some"); see also S. Milkis, supra note 91, at 72-73 (criticizing the New Deal shift in power from local to federal government for undermining traditional American government). mental intervention to counteract the Depression. Competition among the states would generate a "race to the bottom" that would both harm the disadvantaged and prevent coordinated action. New Deal reformers willingly abandoned the belief in self-determination through local government and looked instead to national institutions, and in particular to regulatory agencies and to the presidency, to fulfill democratic aspirations. 3 92 
In the 1930's, there was good reason for this basic position. Economic conditions, in particular, made local measures appear hopelessly inadequate. In retrospect, however, the New Deal's wholesale abandonment of the original goals of federalism was myopic. The New Deal actors were far too cavalier in their treatment of the problem. National institutions are at best an imperfect arena for obtaining selfdetermination by the citizenry, and federal controls are often excessively rigid and inefficient. The presidency itself, although visible, is hardly a forum for republican self-government. More importantly, experience has shown that the New Deal faith that autonomous administration would serve democratic goals was unjustified. The modern administrative agency has attenuated the links between citizens and governmental processes. Although reinvigoration of checks and balances should increase the democratic character of federal administration, it is no longer credible to believe that federal agencies can serve as an outlet for democratic aspirations. In this respect, the original framework of dual sovereignty was far superior to the New Deal understanding. 
In the last quarter-century, there have been numerous efforts to provide mechanisms to ensure citizen participation in the public and private spheres. 393 The task for the future is to incorporate New Deal understandings about the potentially destructive consequences of interstate competition, 3 94 and more recent perceptions of the frequently negative effect of state autonomy on disadvantaged groups, 3 95 into a 392 See sources cited supra note 391. 
393 See B. BARBER, supra note 25; D. ELAZAR, EXPLORING FEDERALISM (1987); S. ELKIN, CITY AND REGIME IN THE AMERICAN REPUBLIC (1987); R. STEWART, FEDERALISM AND POLITICAL ECONOMY IN THE GREAT REPUBLIC (forthcoming 1987); Brest, ConstitutionalCitizenship, 34 CLEV. ST. L. REv. 175 (x986); Frug, The City as a Legal Concept, 93 HARV. L. REV. 1059 (198o); Rapaczynski, From Sovereignty to Process:The Jurisprudenceof Federalism After Garcia, 1985 SuP. CT. REV. 341; Stewart, supranote 25; Walker, A Critique of the Elitist Theory of Democracy, 6o AM. POL. ScI. REV. 285 (1966). 
394 See G. MCCONNELL, THE DECLINE OF AGRARIAN DEMOCRACY 166-72 (1953); G. MCCONNELL, PRIVATE POWER AND AMERICAN DEMOCRACY 101-I8 (1966). 
395 See generally J.D. GREENSTONE & P. PETERSON, RACE AND AUTHORITY IN URBAN POLITICS (1973) (discussing the need for community participation by blacks in their struggle for equality); G. MCCONNELL, PRIVATE POWER AND AMERICAN DEMOCRACY, supra note 394, at ioi-1i (emphasizing the ways in which state and local autonomy harms disadvantaged groups and rejecting the claims that informality of government produces justice and that the surrender of public authority to private groups leads to democracy); Michelman, The Supreme Court, 1985 system that seeks to promote geographical diversity, local self-determination, and citizen participation in government. 
That task is also a large one, but it is possible to identify some promising reforms. One strategy would be to reformulate national regulatory schemes, taking the form of prescriptive rules, through a sort of "reconstitutive law" that allows increased state, local, and private flexibility.396 Reconstitutive approaches do not attempt to mandate particular results; they are thus distinguished from, for example, national occupational or health standards and "command and control" regulation requiring companies or states to reduce pollution to a certain level by specified means at a specified time. Reconstitutive approaches attempt to promote regulatory purposes through such flexible methods as reallocating entitlements, altering procedures, or shifting jurisdictional boundaries. Such methods encourage but do not compel particular outcomes; instead, they create incentives or pressures that nonetheless allow for private and local flexibility in a restructured marketplace. 
Some reconstitutive approaches include protecting and encouraging collective bargaining in labor law instead of imposing uniform national standards, 3 97 providing for tradable emissions permits instead of mandating national pollution controls, 39 8 allowing diverse forms of broadcasting regulations in different communities, and relaxing conditions in federal grant programs. 39 9 In the area of welfare and social services, states might also be granted some powers currently reserved to the federal government. Such an effort might have as its purpose the encouragement of experimentation and diversity in job training for the unemployed. Another approach to promoting self-determination is the movement toward economic and workplace democracy, 400 which has the advantage of seeking participation and self-determination in areas in which citizens are already actively engaged. 40 1 In all of these 
strict majoritarianism has not entailed active engagement by the citizenry); see also THE FEDERALIST No. 5i j. Madison) (discussing the danger of factious majorities in a small republic). 396 See Stewart, supra note 318. 
397See P. Weiler, The Future of Labor and Employment Law: Reflections on Wrongful Dismissal Within the Market, the Law, and Collective Bargaining (temp. ed. Oct. 1987) (unpublished manuscript on file with the author). 
398 See Ackerman & Stewart, Reforming EnvironmentalLaw, 37 STAN. L. REv. 1333 (1985). 399 See Stewart, supra note 318, at io6-07. 
400See, e.g., M. CARNoY & D. SHEARER, ECONOMIC DEMOCRACY (I98O); R. DAHL, A PREFACE TO ECONOMIC DEMOCRACY (2985); C. PATEMAN, PARTICIPATION AND DEMOCRATIC THEORY (1977); Elster, The Possibility of Rational Politics, 28 ARCH. EUR. SOC. 67 (1987). 
401 See C. GUNN, WORKERS' SELF-MANAGEMENT IN THE UNITED STATES (1984); R. MASON, PARTICIPATORY AND WORKPLACE DEMOCRACY 136 (z982) (arguing that "[p]articipation in the workplace is an efficient means to generate greater participation within government"). For a more cautious but nonetheless sanguine view, see E. GREENBERG, WORKPLACE DEMOCRACY: contexts, state and local officials might be given authority to establish procedures and to impose different sorts of controls. The national government could create ceilings and floors that permit local discretion. 
Strategies of this sort, however, should be undertaken only in certain areas. As the New Deal reformers were aware, competition among the states has a dark side. States often try to outbid each other in an effort to attract job- and revenue-producing industries by eliminating desirable regulation, 40 2 such as occupational health and safety measures. In addition, competitive pressures make minimal guarantees of income and social services extremely difficult to furnish at the state level. 40 3 In some contexts, moreover, a national moral commitment, often having constitutional foundations, calls for uniform federal standards - a point that is buttressed by the frequently negative effects of state and local autonomy on traditionally disadvantaged groups. 40 4 Discrimination on the basis of race and gender is a particularly inapt area for devolution of regulatory control to the states. The case for national requirements is thus strongest when interstate competition reduces regulation and income redistribution below the optimal level, when there are interstate spillovers or freerider effects, and when powerful moral commitments call for uniformity. 
The case for deregulation and devolution to state and local authorities often depends on the purpose of a regulatory scheme. Some regulatory schemes are designed to promote economic goals; 40 5 some are redistributive; 40 6 others are designed to protect rights. 407 Some regulatory programs are also intended to shape preferences, 40 8 to reflect the outcome of deliberative processes among the citizenry or representatives, or to promote noncommodity or public values. 40 9 Such measures include regulation of broadcasting, protection of the environment, 4 10 and prohibition of discrimination on the basis of race THE POLITICAL EFFECTS OF PARTICIPATION (1986), which analyzes the effects of workplace democracy in Pacific Northwest plywood cooperatives. 
402 See Rose-Ackerman, Does FederalismMatter?, 89 J. POL. ECON. 152, 154-58 (1981). 403 See P. PETERSON, CITY LIMITS 46-50 (i98I). 404 See sources cited supra note 395. 
405 See, e.g., 15 U.S.C.  i (1982) (federal antitrust laws); id.  2 (1982) (establishing and defining the powers of the Federal Trade Commission). 
406 See, e.g., 42 U.S.C.  7 (1982) (providing for Social Security). 
407 See, e.g., 42 U.S.C.  2ooo(e) (1982) (prohibiting the consideration of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin in employment decisions). 
408 See id. 409 See, e.g., Endangered Species Act, 16 U.S.C.  1531-1543 (1982). 
410 See Sax, The Legitimacy of Collective Values: The Case of the PublicLands, 56 U. CoLo. L. REV. 537 (x985) (discussing public land ownership as a means of promoting collective values); Stewart, supra note 79, at 1566-87 (outlining a theory of noncommodity values). and gender. 41 ' Efforts to sort out and specify the various purposes of regulation often reveal that deregulation or devolution to states and localities will be beneficial. 
The basic goal of deregulation, devolution, and reconstitutive strategies is to promote economic productivity, diversity, and flexibility, while recognizing the need, on both economic and noneconomic grounds, for substantial national intervention into private markets. By relaxing national controls, these strategies would also promote selfdetermination at the local level. Such strategies should be seen above all as an effort to integrate the New Deal reformation of rights with the existence, in the original constitutional regime, of opportunities for local self-determination. Movements toward local control are thus the analogue, at the vertical level, to the revival of the system of checks and balances at the horizontal level. In concert, such reforms will promote the purposes of the original constitutional plan without relying on common law or status quo baselines or retreating to anachronistic understandings of private rights. 
V. CONCLUSION 
The distribution of national powers was designed to ensure a sensible division of labor, to promote deliberation in government, and to provide a series of checks against factional power and self-interested representation. The original constitutional framework was also associated with the system of common law ordering, because the scheme of checks and balances made national action more difficult, thus allowing states and the common law courts to set the basic terms of regulation. 
In its substantive dimension, New Deal constitutionalism self-consciously rejected the common law. It held that a new conception of legal rights was necessary to protect workers, the poor, the elderly, consumers, and others disadvantaged by the marketplace. Above all, New Deal constitutionalism recognized that baselines derived from the common law or the status quo no longer provided neutral or natural standpoints from which to make legal decisions. 
The institutional position of the New Deal followed naturally from this critique. In the view of the 193o's reformers, the original distribution of national powers obstructed necessary governmental action. The New Deal alternative was both to increase the power of the presidency and to create the modern administrative agency, comprised of technically sophisticated officials promoting the public interest. New Deal agencies were expected to energize government and to 411 See, e.g., Lawrence, supra note 81, at 350-51. escape the paralysis associated with the judiciary and the system of checks and balances. 
The New Deal period thus saw a simultaneous attack on the substantive and the institutional legacy of the original constitutional regime. New Deal constitutionalism maintained a measure of continuity with the Madisonian belief in deliberative government, but the reformers of the 1930's intended deliberation to result in reconstruction rather than preservation of the existing distribution of wealth and entitlements. 
The last three decades have seen a growing rejection of the New Deal conception of administration, although the substantive critique of the common law has remained largely intact. Because they lack internal checks and balances, administrative agencies pose special risks from the standpoint of the traditional distribution of national powers. Dangers of factionalism and self-interested representation have been the foremost concern of modern administrative law. Most proposals for regulatory reform, whether judicial, executive, or legislative, stem from that preoccupation. 
The demise of the New Deal institutional structure first manifested itself in the courts, as judge-made doctrines were developed to "flush out" impermissible bases for regulatory decisions. The consequence is the modern hard-look doctrine, which rests on a deliberative conception of administration. Properly understood, the doctrine protects beneficiaries of regulation on the same terms as regulated class members. American presidents, too, have increasingly exerted control over the bureaucracy, most recently by delegating supervisory power to OMB. In addition, Congress has enacted judicially enforceable deadlines, "goals" statutes, and precise regulatory guidelines to ensure that agencies do not subvert regulatory statutes in the implementation process. The three branches of government have thus intruded on agency autonomy in ways that have restored some of the features of the original constitutional framework. 
The recent exercises of power by each branch of government reject the New Deal conception of administration. All have been highly controversial. Judicial control is said to substitute uninformed, unaccountable judges for technically expert and politically responsible administrators. Presidential power has generated sharp attack by critics who favor a New Deal model of autonomous administration. Congressional specificity is said to give rise to risks associated with factionalism and lack of technical competence. 
Simultaneous presidential, legislative, and judicial control can, however, be tied tightly both to the underlying goal of deliberative government and to the purposes of the original distribution of national powers. These controls can ensure that agency decisions take account of governing statutes, technical facts, and "politics," properly understood. It is a mistake to adopt a wholly technocratic or wholly political conception of administration. The deliberative approach outlined here maintains continuity with both the original framework and the New Deal, and accommodates political choice and technical specialization. A system of oversight by the constitutionally specified branches does not produce blind adherence to the status quo. By proliferating points of access to government, it may, on the contrary, increase the opportunities for groups to seek and obtain reform. 
The task for the future is to achieve some of the purposes underlying the distribution of powers without abandoning the understanding that the common law system of regulation is insufficient. This task has three components. At the national level, the goal is to promote Madisonian representation while furnishing safeguards against factionalism and self-interested representation. At the local level, the task is to promote diversity, participation, and self-government in such a way as to accomplish traditional republican goals, which are inadequately served either by modern state government or by the presidency.4 12 In terms of legal rights, the goal is to develop a set of entitlements that does not take the common law or the status quo as the baseline for decision. In this context, New Deal insights have been insufficiently incorporated into modern public law, which continues to rely on questionable understandings of "neutrality" and "inaction." 
All of these tasks are formidable ones. In particular, the notion of Madisonian representation has to some degree broken down in practice, 413 and the system of checks and balances is closely associated with fear of governmental "action" and acceptance of governmental "inaction." Devolution to the states must be selective, and must guard against elimination of regulatory safeguards that national institutions are uniquely able to furnish. Development of a system of legal rights that rejects status quo baselines is enormously difficult. 
Reforms of the sorts suggested here must be part of a far broader strategy for reconstruction of the constitutional system in light of developments occurring during and after the New Deal. It may not be too optimistic however, to suggest that we have put in place some of the structures with which to begin the task of integrating the growth of bureaucracy and the rejection of the common law into a system that seeks to diminish the risks of factional tyranny and self-interested representation. 
412 See Barber, supra note 39, at 30-38. 
413 See Peltzman, supra note 75, at 212-13; Stigler, supra note 75, at 10-13. But see M. DERTHICK & P. QuiRK, supra note 128, at 237-.52 (describing the role of ideology in the deregulation movement); S. KELMAN, supranote 12o, at 44-113, 231-85 (describing the publicspirited character of representative behavior); A. MAASS, CONGRESS AND THE COMMON GOOD (1983) (same). 
