 Cass R. Sunstein* Madison suggests that: The diversity in the faculties of men from which the rights of property originate, is not less an insuperable obstacle to a uniformity of interests. The protection of these faculties is the first object of Government. From the protection of different and unequal faculties of acquiring property, the possession of different degrees and kinds of property immediately results .... 3 And Madison doses the essay by emphasizing the advantages of the proposed constitution in countering "a rage for paper money, for an abolition of debts, for an equal division of property, or for any other improper or wicked project." 4 In this respect, there are powerful antiegalitarian and antidemocratic dimensions in The Federalist No. 10. The insulation of representatives from popular will appears to be intended not only to promote deliberation, but also to protect against popular desires for the redistribution of wealth and entitlements. Indeed, the two themes were merged in much of the thinking of the Framers. Factionalism was sometimes thought to consist precisely in changes in the existing distribution of property., In this sense, constitutionalism was designed partly as a self-conscious check on democracy - a notion that came up frequently in the constitutional convention. [l]t was to win freedom from the tyranny of political autocracy that the American Revolution was fought.... no half-and-half affair.... (1984) (stating that "[s]trong democracy is a distinctly modern form of participatory democracy [that) rests on the idea of a self-governing community of citizens who are united ... by civic education and who are made capable of common purpose and mutual action by virtue of civic attitudes and participatory institutions"). some kinds of redistributive measures, particularly the poor laws. of charity than the consistent omissions of a government frozen in the ice of its own indifference. 6 Ideas of this sort contributed to Roosevelt's eventual endorsement of a "second Bill of Rights," available to all "regardless of station, race, or creed," and including: The right to earn enough to provide adequate food and cloth ing and recreation; The right of every family to a decent home; The right to adequate medical care; The right to adequate protection from the economic fears of old age, sickness, accident and unemployment; [and] The right to a good education. 7 The New Deal understanding of the functions of constitutionalism, embodied in Roosevelt's program for constitutional reform, thus departed dramatically from the original conception. In the New Deal reformulation, constitutionalism was no longer to be regarded as a check on popular demands for the redistribution of wealth and entitlements. On the contrary, constitutionalism was intended to promote at least a certain degree of redistribution. Roosevelt was of course no socialist; he believed strongly in both private property and private industry. His goal was to soften the harsh edges of the economic system, not to overturn it. But a principal purpose of the New Deal was to protect the poor and the disadvantaged from the risks of the marketplace. In the New Deal period, such efforts at protection did not appear to be a product of "faction," or to represent raw interest-group transfers, but were instead a plausible outcome of a deliberative process among citizens and representatives. The point holds even though some of the innovations of the New Deal period turned out to be difficult to defend on economic or noneconomic grounds. 8. Letter from Thomas Jefferson to Samuel Kercheval (July 12, 1816), reprinted in erty, but there can be little doubt that their conception of private rights led to deep suspicion about forms of government action that are now taken as unobjectionable. Modern zoning regulation, social security, minimum-wage and maximum-hour provisions, occupational safety and health controls, environmental measures, labor and civil rights laws all of these would likely have been quite mysterious to the founding generation. But the Framers did not believe that a system of deliberative representation was sufficient in itself. The system of checks and balances was designed to serve a variety of supplemental functions, providing safeguards in the event of a breakdown in representative processes. That system would, for example, furnish a measure of In the compound republic of America, the power surrendered by the people, is first divided between two distinct governments, and then the portion allotted to each subdivided among distinct and separate departments. Hence a double security arises to the rights of the people. The different governments will controul each other; at the same time that each will be controuled by itself."' 6 In this respect, federalism operated in the service of limited government. Under an approach that sees freedom in immunity from governmental restraints, this additional safeguard is highly desirable. 13. THE FEDERALIST No. 51, at 349 (J. Madison) (J. Madison ed. 1961). 14. 1 MONTESQUlEu, THE SPIRrr OF THE LAws 160 (T. Nugent trans. rev. ed. 1899). 15. The Constitution was also designed to promote a healthy division of labor by splitting the legislative and executive functions; and an energetic executive was of course a principal purpose of the shift from the Articles of Confederation. 74 (1986) (discussing the civic-republican through politics" as the ideal manifestation of freedom). governments were also intended to "controul each other,"' 8 providing a kind of vertical check and balance that would also work to promote liberty. 18. THE FEDERALIST No. 51, supra note 13, at 351. 19. The New Deal was not, however, a sudden break from tradition. It should be seen as the culmination of a longer period of administrative and institutional development. See S. SKOWRONEK, BUILDING A NEW AMERICAN STATE 288-89 (1982). sidy for unconscionable employers." 23 This opinion reflected a dramatic shift in the baselines from which legal decisions were made, a shift that upset original understandings about the primacy of property rights. were repudiated, but some of the impetus behind them was reflected in the enthusiasm for an increase in presidential power and for administrative regulation. The result was that the system of tripartite government was substantially altered. Power that was formerly exercised by Congress and by common law courts was concentrated in the presidency.2 8 Administrative agencies combined traditionally separated functions. In both cases, the goal was to ensure an institutional structure accommodating the belief that national intervention into the economic structure should be facilitated rather than blocked. At the same time, original understandings of federalism were significantly altered. The states, it was thought, were too large to provide genuine self-determination. The notion that the states and the federal government should control each other by ensuring a kind of stasis seemed perverse. Finally, states had proved themselves ineffectual in dealing with social and economic problems. The depression of the 1930s is of course the critical development here. In the New Deal reformation, it was the presidency, not the states, that was the locus of selfgovernment. this understanding allied Hamiltonian beliefs in a strong executive with Jeffersonian aspirations for genuine self-determination by the citizenry. The New Deal thus produced a radically different constitutional structure, one that sheds considerable light on the purposes and effects of the original framework and on the origins of current constitutional predicaments. During the New Deal period, the original understanding of rights was substantially altered, the system of tripartite government was abandoned, and federalism took a significantly different form. Most modern constitutional controversies arise out of nostalgia for the original framework, on one or more of these fronts, or from concern that the insights of the New Deal period have been taken insufficiently far. This is hardly the place to evaluate the claims made by those skeptical about the New Deal reformulation. We may suggest, however, that the New Deal rejection of the federal system was far too cavalier. The President does not provide an avenue for self-determination by the citizenry, and national solutions have often ignored the need, emphasized by the Framers, for diversity and flexibility in a large republic. There is a continuing need to achieve traditional republican goals of local self-determination, though avenues are not simple to find. Moreover, the New Deal enthusiasm for technocratic government, embodied in the belief in regulatory administration, has proved myopic. Failure in regulatory implementation has been relatively common. In the last twenty-five years, there have thus been efforts on the part of the three constitutionally specified branches to oversee regulatory performance, and those efforts have often operated in the service of the substantive agenda of the New Deal. However the future may treat the legacy of the original constitutional framework and the New Deal reformulation, an understanding of the 1930s illustrates the variety of possible relationships between constitutionalism and democracy. Historians have recited a large number of reasons for skepticism toward Charles A. Beard's thesis about the relationship between the economic self-interest of the Framers and the Constitution. Beard and his followers were far too crude in this regard, and they undervalued the breadth and the power of central features of the Framers' vision. But the progressive historians were correct in pointing to the central importance of controversial understandings of private property to the original constitutional regime, and the ways in which those understandings have been repudiated in modem political and constitutional thought. In a time in which the nation celebrates the enormous achievements of the drafters of the original document, it is important to remember the accomplishments of others who have played a role in developing the modem constitutional structure. This category includes not merely the most important Justices of the Supreme Court, but a small group of others who have attained the status of constitutional framers - prominent among them Franklin D. Roosevelt. have standing to challenge tax deductions for segregated private schools). tion is presumed to be unreviewable).