 Sexual Orientation and the Constitution: A Note on the Relationship Between Due Process and Equal Protection Cass R. Sunsteint In Bowers v Hardwick,1 the Supreme Court held that the due process clause does not protect the right to engage in homosexual sodomy. The Court said that heightened judicial protection under that clause was reserved to rights "implicit in the concept of ordered liberty" or "deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition."' 2 According to the Court, homosexual sodomy could not qualify for special protection under either test.3 In some circles, Hardwick was thought to spell the end, at least for the immediate future, to efforts to use constitutional litigation to prevent government from imposing sanctions on the basis of sexual orientation. In Padula v Webster,4 for example, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit upheld the FBI's policy of considering homosexual conduct a "significant" and often dispositive factor in employment decisions. The court said that the issue was controlled by Hardwick: It would be quite anomolous [sic], on its face, to declare status defined by conduct that states may constitutionally criminalize as deserving of strict scrutiny under the equal protection t Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, The University of Chicago. Bruce Ackerman, Cynthia Chessick, David Currie, Richard Epstein, Barbara Flagg, Richard Fallon, Larry Kramer, Geoffrey Miller, Judith Resnik, Geoffrey R. Stone, David Strauss, and Laurence Tribe provided helpful comments on an earlier draft. The University of Chicago Law Review clause.... If the Court was unwilling to object to state laws that criminalize the behavior that defines the class, it is hardly open to a lower court to conclude that state sponsored discrimination against the class is invidious.' What the Padula court described as an anomaly became the holding of United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in Watkins v U.S. Army.6 There the court concluded that the equal protection component of the Due Process Clause forbids the Army from discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation.7 The court so held in spite of Hardwick and Padula, and in the face of a vigorous dissent from Judge Reinhardt. Judge Reinhardt predicted that "a wiser and more enlightened Court" would overrule Hardwick and, indeed, described that decision in exceedingly harsh terms: "I believe that the Supreme Court egregiously misinterpreted the Constitution in Hardwick.... I believe that history will view Hardwick much as it views Plessy v Ferguson .... 8 In Judge Reinhardt's view, however, the Hardwick decision compelled the conclusion that the Army's policy did not offend the Constitution. In this essay, I make two claims. The first is quite narrow. In spite of appearances, Hardwick-strictly as a matter of doctrine-was interpreted correctly in the majority opinion in Watkins,9 and misread in Padula and Judge Reinhardt's dissenting opinion in Watkins. Properly understood, the Hardwick decision does not resolve the issue in Watkins and Padula. The Equal Protection Clause, by contrast, has been understood as an attempt to protect disadvantaged groups from discriminatory practices, however deeply engrained and longstanding. The Due Process Clause often looks backward; it is highly relevant to the Due Process issue whether an existing or time-honored convention, described at the appropriate level of generality, is violated by the practice under attack. By contrast, the Equal Protection Clause looks forward, serving to invalidate practices that were widespread at the time of its ratification and that were expected to endure. The two clauses therefore operate along different tracks. 10 For examples of this conception of judicial review, see Alexander M. Bickel, The The University of Chicago Law Review generally, statutes that are unaffected by the Due Process Clause may be drawn into severe doubt by principles of equal protection. Perry Watkins enlisted in the Army in 1967, at the age of 19. The pre-induction medical form asked whether Watkins had homosexual tendencies; he answered "yes."' 2 The Army found Watkins qualified for admission and inducted him. In 1975, the Army convened a board of officers to decide whether Watkins should be terminated because of his homosexual tendencies. Watkins's commanding officer testified that he was "the best clerk I have ever known," that he did "a fantastic job excellent," and that Watkins's open homosexuality did not affect the company.1 3 A sergeant stated that Watkins's sexual orientation was widely known but that it caused no problems among other soldiers. The board unanimously recommended that Watkins be retained "because there is no evidence suggesting that his behavior has had either a degrading effect upon unit performance, morale or discipline, or upon his own job performance."'' In 1977, Watkins was initially denied a position in the Nuclear Surety Personnel Reliability Program; the ground for denial was Watkins's statements about his sexual orientation. Watkins's commanding officer requested that he be requalified for the position, stating that Watkins was "one of our most respected and trusted soldiers, both by his superiors and his subordinates" and that "[f]rom daily personal contacts I can attest to the outstanding professional attitude, integrity, and suitability ... of ... Watkins." 5 The decision to deny Watkins a position in the nuclear program was reversed. court. 17 While the action was pending, the Army rated Watkins's performance and professionalism, giving him a score of 85 out of 85 possible points. The Army's written statement said that "Watkins is without exception, one of the finest Personnel Action Center Supervisors I have encountered.... He requires no supervision .... Watkins' potential is unlimited.'" s The district court held that Watkins's discharge violated neither the Constitution nor any relevant statute."" A divided court of appeals reversed, holding that the discharge violated the Equal Protection Clause. The court concluded that Bowers v Hardwick did not resolve the equal protection issue, that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation should be subject to heightened judicial scrutiny, and that the Army could not meet its burden of justification. 0 If Hardwick is examined in simple lawyerly terms, the majority in Watkins appears to have understood the reach of the decision correctly. There was no equal protection issue before the Supreme Court in Hardwick. The plaintiffs invoked the Due Process Clause, complaining that the Georgia prohibition on consensual sodomy was an impermissible invasion of constitutional privacy. The Georgia statute did not classify on the basis of sexual orientation.2 ' Indeed, the Supreme Court said, in explicit terms, that its conclusion did not deal with principles of equal protection.22 At first glance, then, the result in Hardwick does not bear on challenges, brought on equal protection grounds, to discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. be quite strange to hold that the Constitution allows the state to criminalize certain conduct, but at the same time that it forbids the state to discriminate against those who engage in that very conduct.2 3 In the same vein, Judge Reinhardt argued that "when conduct that plays a central role in defining a group may be prohibited by the state, it cannot be asserted with any legitimacy that the group is specially protected by the Constitution. '24 At first glance, there is a powerful logic to this view. After Bowers v Hardwick, the Constitution does not protect homosexual acts from criminalization. Since it does not, it may appear peculiar to suggest that participation in conduct that may constitutionally be criminalized can help to entitle a group to special constitutional protection. Despite appearances, there is no peculiarity in this suggestion. In Hardwick, the Court did not answer the question whether a state may constitutionally criminalize heterosexual sodomy. Whether the Court had answered that question in the affirmative or in the negative, its answer would not have prevented a plaintiff from resorting to the Equal Protection Clause to challenge a statute discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation or, indeed, criminalizing homosexual but not heterosexual sodomy.26 It should make no difference if the question of heterosexual sodomy remains undecided. lesbians engage in the conduct at issue in Hardwick. violation of the Equal Protection Clause. Nothing in Bowers v Hardwick purports to answer that question. The fact that the underlying conduct can be criminalized is irrelevant to the problem; it is always immaterial to an equal protection challenge that members of the victimized group are engaging in conduct that could be prohibited on a general basis." The principal flaw in both Padula and Judge Reinhardt's dissenting opinion in Watkins is that they read the Constitution as an undifferentiated unit, rather than as a set of entitlements and prohibitions that are targeted at quite discrete problems. Each constitutional provision must be taken on its own. It would hardly be odd to find that one constitutional provision invalidates practices about which another provision has nothing to say. The Fourth Amendment, for example, does not disable the state from regulating activities that the First Amendment protects, and vice versa. The fact that the Fourth Amendment does not prevent the state from regulating all speech-related activities could not plausibly be a reason to immunize speech from special First Amendment scrutiny.28 Such phenomena can be found throughout constitutional law. As we shall see, results of this sort should be especially unsurprising for the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses. 27 To this extent, the Watkins court is persuasive in suggesting an analogy to discrimi nation against (for example) blacks who engage in acts that may constitutionally be prohibited. 847 F2d at 1340. The fact that the underlying conduct may be banned does not mean that a classification against some people who engage in that conduct is permissible. The analogy is imperfect, however, because it has already been decided that blacks are entitled to special judicial protection; the question in Watkins was whether gays and lesbians are entitled to such protection in the face of Hardwick. 28 See Stanley v Georgia, 394 US 557 (1969). 29 Positions of this sort are defended in, for example, David P. Currie, The Constitution in the Supreme Court ch 11 at 363-82 (Chicago, 1985); Robert H. Bork, Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment Problems, 47 Ind L J 1, 8-11 (1971). The view that the Due Process Clause is without substantive content has of course been repeatedly rejected by the Court. See for example Roe v Wade, 410 US 113 (1973); Moore v East Cleveland, 431 US 494 (1977). out a privacy principle, does not protect homosexual conduct would have no bearing on the question whether some other clause forbids the state from singling out gays and lesbians for special disability. The two questions are entirely unrelated. Or suppose that a ban on consensual homosexual activity were challenged as violative of the First Amendment or the Takings Clause. Such a challenge would in all likelihood 0 fail; but the failure would have no consequences for an attack brought under the Equal Protection Clause. the right to appeal is prohibited even though the states may eliminate both rights.2 Similarly, the Court has barred distinctions affecting the right to marry"3 and the right to procreate3 4 while assuming that those rights are substantively unprotected by the Due Process Clause. The Court's decision in Eisenstadt v Baird 5 was also in this tradition, invalidating a distinction between the rights of the married and the unmarried to obtain contraceptives without holding that there was a substantive right of access to contraception. In this sense, there is nothing at all unusual in the Watkins court's conclusion that the Equal Protection Clause forbids classifications with respect to practices that the Due Process Clause does not independently protect from state control.3 6 The principal objection to this line of argument stems from the way the Court constructed its opinion in Hardwick. In the Supreme Court, the plaintiffs challenged the regulation of consensual sodomy on due process grounds.3 7 The plaintiffs did not speak only in terms of sexual orientation. It was the Court that understood the case as presenting an issue of regulation of homosexual conduct rather than of sodomy in general.3 8 The Court upheld the statute only insofar as it applied to consensual homosexual sodomy. The Court reserved the question whether the statute would be valid if applied to heterosexual sodomy.3 9 In this way, the Court itself drew a line between homosexual and heterosexual conduct, upholding regulation of the first but not necessarily the second. The problem, in short, is this: if Watkins is correct, the very line drawn by the Supreme Court in Hardwick violates the Equal Protection Clause. On this view, it is quite odd to suggest that Hardwick did not at least implicitly resolve the equal protection problem. Equal Protection Clause, and that disclaimer would be puzzling indeed if the Court's interpretation of the Due Process Clause were understood to resolve the equal protection issue. The discussion thus far has suggested that purely as a doctrinal matter, the court of appeals was correct in concluding that the due process ruling in Hardwick had no bearing on the equal protection issue in Watkins. That claim reveals a more fundamental point. From its origin, the Due Process Clause has often been interpreted so as to protect traditionally recognized rights from state and federal power. 41 Nothing in the text of the clause compels such a conclusion, and on this point as on others the history is ambigu 40 That question is beyond the scope of the present discussion. It is notable, moreover, that at the very most, the Hardwick Court distinguished between homosexual and heterosexual acts; it did not draw any line between homosexual and heterosexual people, as did the Army regulation at issue in Watkins. 847 F2d at 1336-37 n 11. For reasons already discussed, that line raises distinctive considerations under the Equal Protection Clause. ous.4 2 But in its judicial interpretation, the clause has frequently been understood as an effort to restrict short-term or shortsighted deviations from widely held social norms; it has an important backward looking dimension. For purposes of due process, the baseline for inquiry has tended to be the common law, AngloAmerican practice, or the status quo. The Due Process Clause is thus closely associated with the view that the role of the Supreme Court is to limit dramatic and insufficiently reasoned change, to protect tradition against passionate majorities, and to bring a more balanced and disinterested perspective to bear on legislation. Quite outside of the area of incorporation, a number of the 412 See Frank H. Easterbrook, Substance and Due Process, 1982 S Ct Rev 85, 95 (arguing that the Fifth Amendment and the Bill of Rights generally were understood as a "nondegradation principle" designed to ensure that things would not "get worse."). substantive due process cases are rooted in similar instincts. For example, the Court's principal decisions in the Lochner period were based on the Due Process Clause.49 In those cases, the Court viewed deviations from common law standards with considerable skepticism. Regulation that interfered with the existing allocation of property rights was treated as impermissibly partisan and as constitutionally suspect.5 0 A large part of the reason for this skepticism was that the relevant regulation departed significantly from common law norms; public law was thus defined by reference to traditional private law.5 1 There is, of course, a broad consensus that the relevant cases were wrongly decided. The central point here is about structure, not about particular outcomes. The Court's skepticism about departures from what it perceived as historical understandings of property rights fits comfortably with a traditionbased conception of substantive due process. The most controversial and important of the modern substantive due process cases of course involve privacy.5 These cases also depend importantly on references to tradition. The theme is made explicit in the majority and concurring opinions in Griswold v Connecticut.5 6 It is also present in Moore v East Cleveland,5 7 where Justice Powell wrote, Appropriate limits on substantive due process come. . from careful 'respect for the teachings of history [and] solid recognition of the basic values that underlie our society.'. . Our decisions establish that the Constitution protects the sanctity of the family precisely because the institution of the family is deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition. 8 Despite rhetoric of this sort, the Court's privacy jurisprudence cannot be understood exclusively in these terms. It is a familiar point that the use of tradition has produced considerable awkwardness in the cases. The principal difficulty lies in determining the contours and reach of the relevant tradition. Traditions can be described at varying levels of generality. There may well be, for example, a tradition of respect for intimate association. The application of that tradition has hardly been consistent, however, and the hard cases arise when the general tradition of respect meets a particular context in which the general tradition has been repudiated and, to that extent, does not exist at all. There is no established tradition of protection of abortion, marital privacy, or use of contraception. In the hard cases, part of the question is whether the tradition should be read at a level of generality that draws the particular practice into question.59 Many of the important privacy cases read the role of tradition in precisely this way. 58 Id at 503, quoting Griswold, 381 US at 501 (Harlan concurring). 1, For discussion of some of the difficulties in using tradition as a source of constitutional decision, see, for example, John Hart Ely, Democracy and Distrust 60-63 (Harvard, 1980); Tribe, American Constitutional Law at 1311, 1426-29 (cited in note 50). In deciding the relevant level of generality, norms of equal protection become extremely important. See Hardwick, 478 US at 214 (Stevens dissenting). terpretive character of law). require far stronger justification than did the Hardwick Court for criminal bans on sexual activity between consenting adults. The function of the Equal Protection Clause is to protect disadvantaged groups, of which blacks are the most obvious case, against the effects of past and present discrimination by political majorities. The scope of the Clause and the precise content of the equality norm are of course deeply disputed. 7 But on any view, the Equal Protection Clause is not rooted in common law or status quo baselines, or in Anglo-American conventions. The baseline is instead a principle of equality that operates as a criticism of existing practice. The clause does not safeguard traditions; it protects against traditions, however long-standing and deeply rooted. See generally Bickel, The Least Dangerous Branch (cited in note 10). sions that reject common law or status quo baselines usually rely on the Equal Protection Clause. 8 Cases involving the protection of disadvantaged groups are, of course, the most conspicuous examples of this. 9 But it should be no surprise that the Equal Protection Clause has also been the source of decision in cases involving such matters as voting rights,70 access to court,71 and disparities in education. This approach also has implications for the privacy cases. In particular, it suggests that there is much to be said in favor of the mounting academic consensus73 that Roe v Wade involved issues of sex discrimination as well as privacy, and that the problem of abortion might plausibly have been approached in equal protection terms. Laws that restrict reproductive rights burden women exclusively; they are closely associated with traditional ideas about the role of women in the raising of children, ideas that have played a part in sex discrimination. The reason that it is both possible and problematic to treat cases involving reproductive rights in terms of due process is the same: the relevant tradition is highly ambiguous. It may be that the Equal Protection Clause will ultimately prove to be a preferable source of decision, though in order to defend the outcome in Roe, the argument would have to be quite elaborate.7 4 However these more difficult questions may be resolved, there is a large difference in the basic functions of the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses. The decision of the Court of Appeals in Watkins therefore contains a lesson for doctrinal development under the two clauses. The Due Process Clause may sometimes permit traditions that the Equal Protection Clause proscribes, even if those traditions are rooted in discrimination-a point that both Eisenstadt and Watkins make clear. It may be suggested, however, that the majority opinion in Watkins correctly emphasized the history of discrimination against gays and lesbians and the likelihood that challenged measures will reflect past and present prejudice.77 Empathetic identification on the part of the majority is peculiarly unusual in this setting. Statutes and regulations that discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation often reflect fear and hostility that are not susceptible to rational justification.78 The rationale accepted in Hardwick as sufficient for due process purposes-relating principally to traditionally held moral norms-has little or no weight in the context of an equal protection challenge; consider the Court's rejection of such norms in the areas of race and sex discrimination. The Watkins court also pointed to the peculiar difficulty of using political avenues to seek redress e and the usual irrelevance of sexual orienta against homosexuals). Sexual Orientation and the Constitution tion to legitimate governmental goals.8 0 In these respects, the pattern of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is strikingly analogous to the pattern of discrimination against blacks. Particularly notable is the Watkins court's treatment of the relationship between immutability and equal protection problems."' The arguments used to justify exclusion of gays and lesbians from the military are the same arguments that were once used to allow discrimination on the basis of race and sex. Those justifications refer primarily to adverse effects on military morale and discipline, adverse effects that are a product of private biases.82 The record in Watkins suggests that those arguments are no more persuasive here than there. The general argument for heightened scrutiny of classifications based on sexual orientation applies regardless of the weight of the justifications in particular cases, and regardless of the possibility that the military presents special considerations arguing in favor of judicial deference." It may be useful to conclude by suggesting that the legal regime produced by Watkins is coherent even in the face of Hardwick. Watkins makes it generally impermissible to single out gays ence, and among the most important sources of real world political failure is the undue influence of well organized private groups as against diffuse, poorly organized majorities. See Geoffrey P. Miller, The True Story of Carolene Products, 1987 S Ct Rev 397, 404-06, 42228; Ackerman, 98 Harv L Rev at 734-37 (cited in note 75). The insights of modern public choice theory thus bear significantly on the theory of equal protection. indicates that we have little control over our sexual orientation and that, once acquired, our sexual orientation is largely impervious to change.[citations omitted]. Scientific proof aside, it seems appropriate to ask whether heterosexuals feel capable of changing their sexual orientation. Would heterosexuals living in a city that passed an ordinance banning those who engaged in or desired to engage in sex with persons of the opposite sex find it easy not only to abstain from heterosexual activity but also to shift the object of their sexual desires to persons of the same sex?" 847 F2d at 1347-48 (emphases in original). and lesbians for special disabilities; differential treatment of that sort will face a large burden of justification. So long as Hardwick remains the law, however, measures that proscribe certain sexual activities may be upheld against a due process attack so long as the prohibitions apply regardless of sexual orientation . 4 The requirement of generality operates as a political safeguard, ensuring that if the heterosexual majority is to burden gays and lesbians, it must burden itself as well. In imposing this requirement of generality, the Equal Protection Clause, as understood in Watkins, serves its most familiar and established function. The Watkins court's interpretation of Bowers v Hardwick was correct. The court of appeals in Padula, and Judge Reinhardt in his dissenting opinion in Watkins, misconstrued the Hardwick decision. The conclusion that the Due Process Clause does not protect consensual homosexual sodomy does not resolve the question whether principles of equal protection forbid discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. 5 I" The qualification is necessary because Hardwick left open the possibility that heterosexual sodomy is constitutionally protected. According to the view presented here, of course, an equal protection attack would be available in those jurisdictions that banned homosexual but not heterosexual sodomy. See note 26. But see Baker v Wade, 769 F2d 289 (5th Cir 1985) (en banc) (upholding such a statute). Watkins itself need not be understood to go that far, however, since the decision applies to distinctions based on sexual orientation rather than on the nature of sexual acts. (1) Sometimes a civil disability might be imposed on gays and lesbians in jurisdictions in which there is no criminal prohibition on homosexual acts. In such a jurisdiction, Hardwick is of uncertain relevance. It is by no means clear that the fact that the state could criminalize the relevant acts is sufficient to support discrimination in circumstances in which the state has chosen to impose no such criminal disability. The conclusion of the Watkins court also contains a large and often overlooked lesson about the relationship between the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses. The Due Process Clause is backward-looking; a large part of its reach is defined by reference to tradition. The clause is closely associated with, even if not limited to, the view that the role of the Court is to protect against illconsidered or short-term departures from time-honored practices. The Equal Protection Clause, by contrast, is grounded in a norm of equality that operates largely as a critique of traditional practices. The Watkins decision provides reason to believe that constitutional protection against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation will ultimately take place under the Equal Protection Clause. It should be unsurprising if such developments occur even in the wake of Bowers v Hardwick. ject of this essay.