 Cass R. Sunsteint In this Article, Professor Sunstein describes those aspects of republicanism that have the strongest claim to contemporary support, outlines the role of republican thought in the founding period, and explores some of the implications of republicanism for modern public law. Sunstein claims that the basic republican commitments involve (1) deliberation in government; (2) political equality; (3) universality, or agreement as a regulative ideal; and (4) citizenship. Professor Sunstein contends that all of these commitments played an important role during the founding period, generating a distinctive conception of governance. In his view, the common opposition between liberalism and republicanism is a false one; the founders were liberal republicans-a position that, Sunstein argues, is superior to its principal competitors. Sunstein claims that republican ideas suggest reformation of a number of current areas of modern public law, encompassing such contexts as statutory construction, campaign finance regulation, federalism, and discrimination. Professor Sunstein concludes with a discussion of recent proposals for group or proportional representation, arguing that such proposals can be supported by reference to the republican belief in deliberative democracy. t Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the annual meeting of the American Philosophical Association and at the legal theory workshop at McGill University. Bruce Ackerman, Akhil Amar, Drucilla Cornell, Richard Craswell, Jon Elster, William Eskridge, Richard Fallon, Philip Frickey, J. David Greenstone, Stephen Holmes, Larry Kramer, Catharine MacKinnon, Michael McConnell, Frank Michelman, Martha Minow, Richard A. Posner, Stephen Schulhofer, Richard B. Stewart, Kathleen Sullivan, Allan Sykes, Mark Tushnet, Robin West, and Iris Young provided valuable comments. manifestations, moreover, the republican tradition has been highly militaristic, indeed heroic-exalting, as the model for public life, the fraternity of soldiers during wartime.' Equally important, the republican belief in the subordination of private interests to the public good carries a risk of tyranny and even mysticism. The belief is also threatening to those who reject the existence of a unitary public good, and who emphasize that conceptions of the good are plural, and dependent on perspective and power.' In spite of all this, republican theories of politics have a tenacious hold on political actors and observers, inside and outside of the judiciary. The characteristically republican belief in deliberative democracy continues to influence both legal doctrine and contemporary evaluations of the political process. Political advantages are generally sought through appeals to the public good, however cynical and transparent such appeals may sometimes appear. Beyond the Revival now firmly in place, in legal scholarship if not in legal doctrine. The tasks for the immediate future are twofold. The first is to spell out, with some particularity, those aspects of republican thought that have the strongest claim to contemporary support. The second is to describe institutional arrangements and doctrinal shifts, inside and outside the courts, that might serve to implement the most attractive features of the republican vision. This Article has two principal parts. The first is relatively abstract. Its goal is to outline and defend a particular version of republican thought, one that avoids some of the difficulties associated with competing conceptions of public life, both republican and antirepublican. This version of republicanism, I argue, is not antiliberal at all;" it incorporates central features of the liberal tradition. Liberal republicanism is characterized by commitments to four central principles. These principles are related to one another; each republican commitment serves to inform and define the others. All of the principles derive from the republican understanding of individual and political freedom. All of them provide distinctive ways of controlling and limiting governmental power. 8. Some of those who value civic virtue emphasize the improvement of individual character-as in the classical formulation-while others understand it as a precondition for the achievement of social justice. On the second view, civic virtue is necessary for participation in public deliberation, and it is instrumental to a well-functioning deliberative process. The second view is the principal object here. See infra text accompanying notes 55-56. For an emphasis on character, see A. Kronman, The Cooley Lectures (unpublished) (on file with The Yale Law Journal). American public law might be understood as a set of conflicts among competing conceptions of the nature of American political life. Elements of these conceptions played a role at the time of the framing; they continue to influence modern disputes. The first view, which takes both descriptive and normative forms, might be described as pluralist.9 Under this view, politics consists of a struggle among interest groups for scarce social resources. Laws are a kind of commodity, subject to the forces of supply and demand. Various groups in society compete for loyalty and support from citizens. Once they are organized and aligned, they exert pressure on political representatives, who respond, in a market-like manner, to the pressures thus exerted. The ultimate result is political equilibrium. The pluralist approach takes the existing distribution of wealth, existing background entitlements, and existing preferences as exogenous variables. All of these form a kind of prepolitical backdrop for pluralist struggle."0 The goal of the system is to ensure that the various inputs are reflected accurately in legislation; the system is therefore one of aggregating citizen preferences. This understanding carries with it a particular conception of representation, in which officials respond to constituent desires and exercise little or no independent judgment."1 The appeal of the pluralist understanding-if used normatively-stems from its utilitarian underpinnings, its effort to respect current preferences, and its desire to avoid the risks of tyranny that are associated with active and self-conscious preference-shaping by public officials. The most objectionable exercises of governmental power are often associated with approaches that see character formation as an end of politics. In these respects, pluralism is committed to familiar conceptions of majority rule12 and to a healthy revulsion to regimes that take citizen preferences as an object of collective control. But several risks threaten to undermine a pluralist system. In the aggregate, they suggest that pluralism is an altogether unattractive conception of politics. The case for pluralism becomes much weaker if some preferences can be shown to be objectionable or the product of unjust background institutions.1 3 A significant purpose of politics may be to reveal objectionable preferences as such through processes of political discussion and debate. 4 10. Existing entitlements are, of course, the product of positive law; in this sense they cannot be understood as prepolitical. See Hale, Coercion and Distribution in a Supposedly Non-coercive State, 38 POL. ScI. Q. 470 (1923). its competitors). 2. Countering "Deals": Deliberation More Generally The pluralist understanding increases the likelihood of undesirable lawmaking for another reason. Under republican approaches to politics, laws must be supported by argument and reasons; they cannot simply be fought for or be the product of self-interested "deals." Private-regarding reasons are an insufficient basis for legislation. Political actors must justify their choices by appealing to a broader public good. This requirement has a 15. See, e.g., Gewirtz, Choice in the Transition: School Desegregation and the Corrective Ideal, disciplining effect on the sorts of measures that can be proposed and enacted. The requirement of appeal to public-regarding reasons may make it more likely that public-regarding legislation will actually be enacted.2" The central idea here is that politics has a deliberative or transformative dimension. Its function is to select values, to implement "preferences about preferences,' 22 or to provide opportunities for preference formation 1 rather than simply to implement existing desires.23 The point is a quite general one, extending beyond discrimination law to environmental measures, regulation of broadcasting, welfare expenditures, and many other areas. Under the pluralist understanding, there is reason for skepticism about such laws; they might appear to be impermissible "rent-seeking," or illegitimate wealth transfers. 2 Indeed, on pluralist assumptions it is unclear why laws should not be bought and sold like commodities in a marketplace; such a process of sale might accurately aggregate preferences. But for those who believe in a deliberative function for politics, the marketplace metaphor will be misguided, and laws of these sorts must be understood in nonpluralist terms. Much of the appeal of pluralism stems from its connection with utilitarianism. 25 But even if one believes that an entirely utilitarian approach to politics is desirable, it is by no means clear that ordinary majoritarianism, understood in pluralist terms, should be accepted. 4. Absence of Participation Pluralist approaches place no premium on political participation. Indeed, for pluralists the absence of political participation is an affirmative good, suggesting general contentment with the status quo and proximity to the equilibrium point.3 Pluralists will therefore be unwilling to take steps 28. This is a standard economic objection. For recent discussion, see J. Elster, Nuts and Bolts (1987) (unpublished manuscript on file with author). to promote political activity. But the absence of participation may reflect instead a collective action problem"' or an adaptation to practices that are believed intractable;3 5 and in any case, a system lacking widespread participation will suffer from the failure to cultivate the various qualities that may accompany political life-self-development, feelings of empathy, social solidarity, and so forth.36 One need not believe that the political life is uniquely valuable, or that a system lacking widespread and frequent citiin order to conclude that pozen participation is necessarily oppressive '3 litical activity is often an important individual and collective good. Republican conceptions of politics diverge substantially from one another; there is no unitary approach that can be described as republican. 9 Classical republicans emphasized the role of the polis as the locus for achieving freedom through active citizenship. On this view, political participants were to subordinate their private interests to the public good through political participation in an ongoing process of collective self note 16 (showing that such effects are "essentially by-products"). Despite the differences among various forms of republicanism, republican theories tend to be united by four central commitments, and in any event it is in these commitments that the contemporary appeal of republican thought can be located. The elaboration of those commitments will be necessarily abstract. It would be possible to describe versions of republicanism that are quite concrete but far less attractive to modern observers;42 and as we will see, the republican commitments, as characterized here, have important implications for a number of controversies in modern public law. All of these commitments are united by the republican conception of individual autonomy as involving selection rather than implementation of ends, and the republican conception of political freedom, which prizes collective self-determination.43 1. Deliberation Many republican conceptions treat politics as above all deliberative; 4 and deliberation is to cover ends as well as means. Although elements of this idea can be found in Aristotle and, even more, in Harrington, the belief in political deliberation is a distinctly American contribution to republican thought."5 The function of politics, on this view, is not simply to implement existing private preferences. Political actors are not supposed to come to the process with preselected interests that operate as exogenous variables. The purpose of politics is not to aggregate private preferences, or to achieve an equilibrium among contending social forces. The republican belief in deliberation counsels political actors to achieve a measure of 40. See H. ARENDT, supra note 37, at 248-55; D. HELD, supra note 9. 41. Madison continued: "It is essential to such a government that it be derived from the great body of the society, not from an inconsiderable proportion, or a favored class of it .... It is sufficient for such a government that the persons administering it be appointed, either directly or indirectly, by the people ...." THE FEDERALIST No. 39, at 241 (J. Madison) (C. Rossiter ed. 1961) (emphasis in original). thought). accompanying notes 104-18 (discussing Madison and anti-federalists). critical distance from prevailing desires and practices, subjecting these desires and practices to scrutiny and review.4" To say this is not to suggest that deliberation calls for some standard entirely external to private beliefs and values (as if such a thing could be imagined).47 The republican position is instead that existing desires should be revisable in light of collective discussion and debate, bringing to bear alternative perspectives and additional information. Thus, for example, republicans will attempt to design political institutions that promote discussion and debate among the citizenry; they will be hostile to systems that promote lawmaking as "deals" or bargains among self-interested private groups; they may well attempt to insulate political actors from private pressure; and they may also favor judicial review designed to promote political deliberation and perhaps to invalidate laws when deliberation has not occurred. A central point here is that individual preferences should not be taken as exogenous to politics.' 9 They are a function of existing practice, including legal rules; such rules cannot, without circularity, be justified by reference to current preferences. As we have seen, private preferences may be a product of adaptation by the disadvantaged" and interest-induced beliefs on the part of the relatively well-off. 1 Republicans are thus unlikely to take existing preferences and entitlements as fixed. Both are permissible objects of political deliberation. In the republican view, for example, the distribution of wealth is a matter for political disposition; there is no hostility to redistributive measures. Republicans believe that if used as a term of opprobrium, the notion of "rent-seeking" is badly misdirected. 52. See Pitkin, Justice: On Relating Public to Private, 9 POL. THEORY 327, 346-47 (1981). 53. Whether and to what extent these outcomes are culturally specific is beyond the scope of this discussion. See, e.g., M. WALZER, SPHERES OF JUSTICE: A DEFENSE OF PLURALISM AND EQUITY (1982); Rawls, The Idea of an Overlapping Consensus, 7 OXFORD J. LEGAL STUD. 1 (1987). The republican conception of political truth is, moreover, better thought of as pragmatic than foundationalist. See infra text accompanying notes 79-81. includes constraints on inputs and outcomes; as a consequence, certain results could not be the product of a genuine deliberative process. 55. See, e.g., J.G.A. POCOCK, supra note 3, at 209 (noting that political actors should look "to the public good"); see also J. RAWLS, supra note 17, at 361 ("Each rational legislator is to vote his opinion as to which laws and policies best conform to principles of justice."). invoke civic virtue primarily in order to promote deliberation in the service of social justice, not to elevate the character of the citizenry. who were most strongly in favor of a bill of rights during the framing period. Many republican writers have placed a high premium on political equality. Political equality, in republican terms, is understood as a requirement that all individuals and groups have access to the political process; large disparities in political influence are disfavored. 3 Republicans are likely to be highly receptive, for example, to measures designed to reduce the effects of wealth in the political process6 4 or to furnish access to the media.6" On at least some versions of the pluralist conception of politics, such measures point in exactly the wrong directions. Government is inevitably the enemy of freedom of expression; the distribution of private power is off limits to politics.6 6 By contrast, many republican writers emphasized the close connection between republican systems and economic equality. Dramatic differences in wealth and power are, in this view, inconsistent with the underlying premises of a republican polity. Montesquieu was particularly insistent on this point, envisioning equality as a necessary precondition for republicanism. 7 Even for republicans who accept a large degree of economic inequality, sharp disparities in political influence are a severe source of concern. 68 63. For Madison's view, see supra note 41; infra note 75. On this score, there is a connection between the republican belief in political equality and some pluralist efforts to promote access to the political process, see, e.g., J. ELY, DEMOCRACY AND DisTRusT (1980), but the pluralist view places little premium on deliberation or citizenship. Beyond the Revival Some of the American antifederalists emphasized the threats of commercialism and argued in favor of material equality. Thus Centinel wrote that a "republican, or free government, can only exist where the body of the people are virtuous, and where property is pretty equally divided; in such a government the people are the sovereign and their sense or opinion is the criterion of every public measure; for when this ceases to be the case, the nature of the government is changed, and an aristocracy, monarchy or despotism will rise on its ruin." 9 Thus Cato wrote that "Domin. . An Equality of Estate will give an Equality of ion follows Property . Power; and an Equality of Power is a Commonwealth, or Democracy," . that and feared that "Very great Riches in private Men . 0 Balance of Property and Power, which is necessary to a Democracy. 1 7 Captain Welton claimed that for a popular or democratic system "an equal distribution of property was necessary. 11  It should not be surprising that a disproportionate number of those in favor of paper money and debtor relief legislation fell within the antifederalist camp. 2 commitment to political equality but ambivalence about economic equality); S. VERBA, ELITES AND THE IDEA OF EQUALITY 264-65 (1987) (noting that many people not committed to economic equality believe in political equality). 3. Universalism: Agreement as a Regulative Ideal Republican thought is characterized by a belief in universalism, a term that I will use in a somewhat idiosyncratic sense. The republican commitment to universalism amounts to a belief in the possibility of mediating different approaches to politics, or different conceptions of the public good, through discussion and dialogue. 6 The process of mediation is designed to produce substantively correct outcomes, understood as such through the ultimate criterion of agreement among political equals. It is because of the belief in universalism that republican approaches posit the existence of a common good, to be found at the conclusion of a well-functioning deliberative process." Republicans thus reject ethical relativism and skepticism, and believe that different perspectives are sometimes subject to mediation both in theory and in the real world. The institutional consequence is that republicans will be hostile to bargaining mechanisms in the political process 8 and will instead seek to ensure agreement among political participants. The republican belief in agreement as a regulative ideal, and the republican conception of political truth, are pragmatic in character. They do not depend on a belief in ultimate foundations for political outcomes.7 9 Under pluralist assumptions, the notion of a common good is alternatively mystical or tyrannical.8" Republican theories, on the other hand, property have been so far extended as to violate natural right. The earth is given as a common stock for man to labor and live on. this process occurs within cultural limits. rely on the deliberative functions of politics and on practical reason," x and embrace the notion of the common good as a coherent one. To some degree this belief depends on a commitment to political empathy, 2 embodied in a requirement that political actors attempt to assume the position of those who disagree. Political outcomes are, on this view, not limited to the achievement of Pareto improvements or to the supply of collective goods. Measures that attempt to select and pronounce values-embodied in, for example, broadcasting regulation, environmental measures, or antidiscrimination law-attest to the republican belief in universalism. Such measures represent the outcome of a deliberative process among political equals; they do not take existing preferences and practices as exogenous. To say this is not to suggest that republicans believe in a unitary public good, or that they deny that differently situated individuals and groups will frequently be unable to resolve their disagreements through conversation.8 3 Sometimes compromises are necessary;"" sometimes there will be political losers; some issues-religion is a familiar example-should be entirely off-limits to politics.8 3 It would be fanciful to suggest that different conceptions of the good life can or should always be mediated through politics. The republican position is not that every issue is subject to political resolution; it is instead that some questions can yield general agreement through deliberation. A conception of politics that disregards this fact will be doomed to repeat the failings of pluralism. Republican approaches place a high premium on citizenship and participation,88 and thus seek mechanisms both for citizen control of national 81. See Michelman, supra note 6, at 24-36. 82. See Okin, Reason and Feeling in Thinking about Justice, in ETHICS (forthcoming 1989); see also J. RAWLS, supra note 17, at 358 ("In everyday life the exchange of opinion with others checks our partiality and widens our perspective; we are made to see things from their standpoint and the limits of our vision are brought home to us."). According to the antifederalists, for example, representation was at best a necessary evil, and its risks were to be limited by ensuring that public officials would be tightly controlled by the citizenry. It was for this reason that in evaluating the institutions of the proposed Constitution, the antifederalists were least suspicious of the House of Representatives and regarded the President and the judiciary with most alarm; the Senate was an intermediate case.8" Allied with this idea is the familiar belief that republican systems should be small and decentralized. A large republic threatens to diminish the connection between rulers and ruled and decrease opportunities for participation. "[T]he civic humanist ideal had originated in a re-assertion of the vita activa, and it was the ultimate goal of the citizen to assert his virtue in action, of which the republic was the frame."9 A large republic would thus tend to produce corruption, the greatest obstacle to a wellfunctioning republican system. Moreover, and equally important, the republican belief in deliberation about the common good is most easily sustained when there is homogeneity and agreement about foundations. Where such agreement is entirely absent, deliberative processes may break down."1 A belief in decentralization and a fear of the diversity of a large republic naturally accompany this concern. This point raises important difficulties for efforts to revive republican thought in a large and heterogeneous nation. 87. See supra note 36. 88. See J. ELSTER, supra note 16, at 91-100, which shows that these effects cannot plausibly be the motivating force for political participation; they must instead be "essentially by-products" of activity engaged in for instrumental purposes. merce and luxury.92 Commercial development tends, in this view, to produce avarice and to weaken the attachment to the public good on which republican systems depend. Other forms of republicanism approach commerce quite differently, regarding it as a means of achieving cordial relations among potential adversaries and thus of softening social tensions.9" The four basic republican principles are closely related to one another. For example, the commitment to political equality is allied with the belief in deliberation. The norm of equality constrains both inputs and outputs of the deliberative process; particular groups may not be excluded from the process, and results that subordinate politically weak groups are proscribed.94 The belief in universalism and agreement as a regulative ideal is a natural consequence of the republican faith in deliberation and political equality. Citizenship is a predicate for political deliberation, and the norm of political equality has consequences for the desirable forms of citizenship. The various republican commitments thus help to qualify and inform each other. 92. MONTESQUIEU, THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, bk. XX, ch. ii (spec. ed. 1984) (Dublin 1751) ("We see that in countries where the people are actuated only by the spirit of commerce, they make a traffic of all the humane, all the moral virtues; the most trifling things, those which humanity would demand, are there done, or there given, only for money."). preferences); supra note 41 (Madison's view). 97. See generally Elster, Weakness of the Will and the Free Rider Problem, 1 ECON. & PHIL. C. American Constitutionalism There can be little doubt that elements of both pluralist and republican thought played a role during the period of the constitutional framing. John Adams, for example, was at times quite skeptical about the idea that anything other than self-interest could be the basis for political behavior.101 Noah Webster wrote that "the system of the great Montesquieu" might be improved by removing the word "virtue" whenever it appears in The Spirit of Laws and replacing it with "property or lands in fee simple."102 Patrick Henry said that the "real rock of political salvation is selflove, perpetuated from age to age in every human breast, and manifested in every action .... When we consult the common good, we consult our own."103 More important, much of Madison's own work, most notably Federalist No. 10, reflects skepticism about important elements of classical republican thought. Thus Madison believed that a small republic would be torn by factional warfare, endangering both private rights and the public good.10 Hamilton expressed similar views.1 5 Indeed, central features of the framers' thought consisted of fears about the consequences of decentralization and widespread citizen participation, 0" lack of enthusiasm for material equality,107 belief in the social and economic advantages of a commercial republic, and a thoroughly modern recognition that self-interest is often the mainspring of political behavior. In such ideas one can find a rejection of central features of traditional republicanism. Beyond the Revival the framers did not abandon the traditional republican belief in deliberative government and the need for civic virtue. First, and probably foremost, the framers stressed that their system was likely to attract and produce representatives who would have the virtue associated with republican citizens. Above all, Madison's conception of representation incorporated important features of traditional republican thought. Thus The Federalist No. 10 emphasized the capacity of a large republic to obtain public-spirited representatives, operating above the fray of constituent pressures. Madison wrote that in a large republic, representation would "refine and enlarge the public views by passing them through the medium of a chosen body of citizens, whose wisdom may best discern the true interest of their country and whose patriotism and love of justice will be least likely to sacrifice it to temporary or partial considerations." 0 9 for the President, The belief in deliberative representation led to particular enthusiasm for indirect elections. In describing the electoral process, Madison argued that state legislatures should choose "those men only who have become the most distinguished by their abilities and virtue." 1 0 And Publius expressed particular enthusiasm "a constant probability" that the presidency would be filled by characters "preeminent for ability and virtue." ' Significantly, the electoral college was to be a deliberative body. 2 And in a remarkable series of debates after the founding, early Congresses rejected a constitutional amendment that would entitle constituents to "instruct" their representatives about how to vote. In those debates, Madison and others made it clear that the representatives' task called for deliberation, and that task was inconsistent with a right to instruct.11 3 suggesting DATIONS OF THE AMERICAN REPUBLIC 75 (R. Horwitz ed. 1986). Consider also the view that the "debates of the Philadelphia Convention are notoriously the highest power ever reached by civic humanist theory in practice." Pocock, Cambridge Paradigms and Scottish Philosophers, in WEALTH AND VIRTUE 239 (I. Hont & M. Ignatieff eds. 1983). The framers' conception of representation, in short, incorporated the traditional republican faith in the value of virtue and deliberation in politics, with an accompanying belief in agreement of a regulative ideal.114 Madisonian republicanism calls for substantial autonomy on the part of representatives. They are charged not with implementing what their constituents "want," though that is of course relevant; the deliberative task requires a measure of independence. Thus Madison favored large election districts and long length of service, in order both to limit factionalism by separating representatives from constituents and to encourage deliberation on the general good. Thus it was that the framers had especially high hopes for the Presidency and the Senate, showed little fear of an insulated judiciary, and were modest in their expectations for the House of Representatives-precisely the reverse of the expectations and fears of the antifederalists.1 1 5 But classical republican thought did not have its exclusive locus in the Madisonian conception of representation. The act of creating a Constitution was itself supposed to depend on the capacity of the public as a whole to behave in the common interest. The decision to write and accept a Constitution serving the long-term interest called for a large degree of republican virtue; and that decision involved the citizenry in general."' The framers stressed more generally the need for virtue among the citizenry as a whole. Thus in the Virginia Ratifying Convention, Madison stated: "I go on this great republican principle, that the people will have virtue and intelligence to select men of virtue and wisdom. Is there no virtue among us? If there be not, we are in a wretched situation. No theoretical checks, no form of government, can render us secure. To suppose that any form of government will secure liberty or happiness without any virtue in the people, is a chimerical idea. If there be sufficient virtue and intelligence in the community, it will be exercised in the selection of these men; so that we do not depend on their virtue, or put confidence in our rulers, but in the people who are to choose them."' Even more strikingly, Madison suggested that republican government calls for more virtue from the citizenry than "any other form.""" In this sense, the very belief in virtuous representation from some optimism about the citizenry. What emerged is in several respects a hybrid. A number of elements competed in the theory of politics embodied in the American Constitution. First, the framers' conception of human nature synthesized elements of classical republicanism with its emerging interest-group competitor. Thus Publius wrote that "[tihe supposition of universal venality in human nature is little less an error in political reasoning than the supposition of universal rectitude."" 9 In the same vein, he claimed that "[a]s there is a degree of depravity in mankind which requires a certain degree of circumspection and distrust, so there are other qualities in human nature, which justify a certain portion of esteem and confidence."' 2 0 In these respects, purely pluralist readings of the founding period 12' are badly off the mark. Second, the federalist conception of representation steered a middle course between Burkean and pluralist approaches. A critical feature of the thought of the founding period is a belief in the deliberative capacities of representatives and the need to insulate public officials from constituent pressures in order to promote the performance of their deliberative tasks. At the same time, however, the framers were well aware of the need to ensure a measure of accountability to the public, and thus they built into the system mechanisms of electoral control.' 22 Third, the base institutions of the Constitution-checks and balances, bicameralism, federalism, and legal rights-continued the fusion of republican and pluralist elements. The system of checks and balances permitted "ambition . . . to counteract ambition"; 23 thus The Federalist No. 51 suggests that self-interest will be channeled in such a way as to protect the citizenry as a whole. Checks and balances would also increase the likelihood of deliberation in government. The requirement of agreement among mode of obtaining rulers is the characteristic policy of republican government"). the national The rights created by the Constitution share similar ambiguities. Many of the original constitutional rights provide spheres of private autonomy to be insulated from government interference; such rights can be justified in republican fashion, but some of them are more easily understood as an outgrowth of Lockean ideas. Other rights can be read as straightforwardly republican in inspiration. The right to a jury trial is a good example; 2 s of inculcating virtue and promoting participation. the right to protection against takings of private property can be understood in both pluralist and republican terms."2 9 The right to assembly falls in this category as well. 30 In a number of respects, then, the American constitutional tradition was influenced at its inception by features of republican thought. But it is not immediately clear why this fact should matter to contemporary constitutional controversies. Questions about the future of American constitutionalism might be approached straightforwardly as issues of political theory. The emphasis on republican and pluralist elements in the founding period would, under this view, be treated as a species of ancestor worship, carrying with it many of the risks of reliance on the framers' intent to solve constitutional problems. 13 1 Use of Madison might be justified if Madison's thought turns out to be helpful; but his status as a constitutional founder would be beside the point. Madison's views would, in this understanding, carry no more weight than those of, say, Hegel. I have presented a set of commitments with which republicanism is often associated. But republican thought has had numerous manifestations, and there are large divergences among them. In its most classical versions, republican thought drew a sharp distinction between public and private interests, and saw in public life an opportunity to abandon or subordinate private interests in order to promote the public good. Such understandings draw the most rigid of distinctions between private interests and public good;"3 6 prepolitical differences are an inadmissible basis for resolution of political controversy. Understandings of this kind depend on an expectation that citizens should entirely abandon their private identities when they come to politics. This expectation," built on an understandable desire to ensure against the distortion of politics by interest, is of course unrealistic. But the difficulty goes deeper. The notion that, for example, disadvantaged groups must put their interests to one side in the political process hardly seems likely to lead to just outcomes. Universalism ought not to be understood as a desire to obliterate social differences in politics. Deliberation is undermined, not promoted, by an expectation that differently situated individuals and groups will say the same thing. rallying and unifying the citizenry, is familiar in modern political life.1" 9 But efforts to assimilate politics to war will often lead in undesirable directions. In addition, classical republicanism was comfortable with firm social hierarchies, placed a large emphasis on the role of tradition, and was sometimes built on organic conceptions of the state that found common interests among members of different social classes. 41 Understandings of this sort are of course incompatible with modern beliefs in eliminating (at least some) status hierarchies; indeed, they coexist awkwardly with the republicans' own commitment to political equality. 139. President Johnson's War on Poverty and President Carter's response to the energy crisis are conspicuous recent examples. Much of recent writing on constitutional history has focused on a supposed tension between liberalism and republicanism. 4" The basic claim here is that before the framing of the Constitution, republican principles predominated. The framing period reflected a conflict between the two ideologies, out of which liberalism emerged victorious; after the Constitution was enacted, the nation entered into a period of liberalism in which republican principles played at most a subordinate role.""8 There is considerable dispute about the precise extent and timing of the victory of liberalism over republicanism,'4 9 but this basic chronology captures much of the current historical consensus. The opposition between liberal and republican thought in the context of the framing is, however, largely a false one. Only through a caricature of the tradition154 can liberalism be thought to be the antonym of the species of republicanism that operated during the constitutional period. The caricature singles out relatively marginal species of liberalism-possessive individualism or modern neo-Lockeanism-and treats them as representative and central. But most of the great liberal thinkers did not take interests as prepolitical. Indeed, they placed a high premium on deliberation and discussion,ES and on the capacity of political dialogue to improve outcomes and to undermine unjustified disparities in power. It is a similarly large mistake to suggest that liberal thinkers believed that threats lay only in government intrusions and that there was no right to protection from private power. 5 Liberal thinkers have been alert to the threats posed by both public and private power and have sought to design systems to limit both threats.1 57 It should not be forgotten that the original purpose of the social contract was to redistribute security.15 Certain aspects of Rawls' A Theory ofJustice 9 speak powerfully for these features of the liberal tradition, and embody much of the contemporary appeal of republican thought.16 0 Some elements of the liberal tradition are highly congenial to republican conceptions of politics. In their emphasis on the possibility of forming public policy through deliberation, on political equality, on citizenship, On this view, republican neutrality calls for the consistent application of the correct substantive theory, or even the consistent application of the speaker's own substantive theory. This idea is closely associated with the republican belief in political equality. The requirement of consistency or generalization that lies at the heart of notions of neutrality is a prominent equal protection principle. 6 The degree of constraint imposed by this requirement is of course a controversial and difficult question; but it would be a large mistake to abandon the idea altogether, or to attempt to eliminate its antonym, partiality or bias. If such notions were eliminated, similar ideas would undoubtedly arise with slightly different verbal formulations. 67 Consider the idea that theories of moral development are partial because they are based on male models, 168 or that much of the law of sex discrimination embodies a male referent. 6 9 concurring). In both liberal and republican systems, moreover, self-interest is an insufficient basis for political outcomes. In both systems, "rights" are not prepolitical givens, but the products (sometimes given constitutional status) of a well-functioning deliberative process. In both systems, social justice requires one "not to be a disembodied nobody," but instead to attempt "to think from the point of view of everybody." 17 0 The most collectivist forms of republican thought1 7 ' are of course at odds with the most atomistic versions of liberalism; 172 republican thinkers who endorse traditional hierarchies reject the liberal emphasis on political and social freedom for the individual; but in numerous respects republicanism and liberalism are hardly antonyms. Republican thought, understood in a certain way, is a prominent aspect of the liberal tradition. 170. Okin, supra note 82; ef. City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, 473 U.S. 432, 455 (1985) (Stevens, J., concurring) ("I cannot believe that a rational member of this disadvantaged class could ever approve of the discriminatory application of the city's ordinance in this case."). It would be foolish to attempt in this space to evaluate these various approaches, which, for all their diversity, overlap in important ways with liberal republicanism as set out here. From the republican standpoint, however, some of the difficulties in these approaches are apparent. In many forms, utilitarian understandings take existing preferences as exogenous variables-an approach entirely foreign to republicanism. 17 8 Moreover, on republican grounds it is unclear that "neutrality" among competing conceptions of the good life is always desirable 179 even if it were possible for governmental institutions'8 0 to achieve it. It is also quite doubtful that the notion of neutrality, at least as understood by some, can generate powerful substantive constraints on political outcomes.181 Enor against use of neutrality as basis of social theory). mous work is necessary to unpack the notion of "distortion" in communication and to explain its role in developing theories of social justice." 2 Standing by itself, the concept depends on a highly ambiguous ideal case. For republicans, the problem with the original position as a guide to political institutions or as a political ideal18 is that it is too solitary and insufficiently dialogic. The task for political actors is to generate institutions that will produce deliberation among those differently situated, not to mimic the decisions that would be made by the unsituated-a problem taken up below. In all of its various forms, republican conceptions of politics have been subject to vigorous criticism. Some observers have suggested that the belief in deliberative government is romantic and anachronistic-incompatible with the inevitably self-interested character of modern political life." 4 In this view, efforts to ensure civic virtue on the part of citizens and representatives are simply impractical-a diversion from more promising strategies for reform. A related objection would suggest that deliberation is purely formal, imposing no substantive constraints on political outcomes; on this view, any such constraints are the product of something other than deliberation. should be taught that he does not belong to himself, but that he is public property. Let him be taught to love his family, but let him be Minorities, 1974 Sup. CT. REV. I (discussing self-interested character of legislative process). In the same vein, Rousseau suggested that the "newly-born infant, upon first opening his eyes, must gaze upon the fatherland, and until his dying day should behold nothing else."' 187 Such understandings of republicanism allow and indeed encourage the imposition of a comprehensive view of social life on the nation as a whole.188 From this point of view, interestgroup pluralism seems quite attractive in its willingness to allow pursuit of divergent conceptions of the good. Pluralism understood in quite another sense-as respect for diverse social groups, public and private, living different lives-appears to be an especially desirable alternative. This view stresses the difficulties of basing a modern political system on beliefs in deliberation, common good, and universalism. A related problem with republican understandings is that they put a high premium on delib eration through public processes and through the state, and undervalue the need for intermediate organizations, often nominally private, that serve both as checks on government and as arenas for the cultivation and expression of republican virtues.' The most powerful statement of this position can be found in Tocqueville.' 9 2 Citizenship, understood in republican fashion, does not occur solely through official organs. Many organizations-including labor unions, religious associations, women's groups of various sorts, civil rights organizations, volunteer and charitable groups, and others, sometimes marking themselves outside of and in opposition to conventional society-serve as outlets for some of the principal functions of republican systems. These functions include the achievement of critical scrutiny of existing practices, the provision of an opportunity for deliberation within collectivities, the chance to exercise citizenship and to obtain a sense of community, and the exercise of civic virtue, understood as the pursuit of goals other than selfinterest, narrowly conceived. The problem with at least some forms of republicanism is that they tend to ignore or devalue groups of this sort. What is needed, on this view, is a more differentiated approach to the relationship between citizen and state than that afforded by republican theories. trality. Instead they require public-regarding justifications offered after multiple points of view have been consulted and (to the extent possible) genuinely understood.1 9 Such an approach is the foundation of contemporary republicanism. It is for this reason that republican conceptions treat an understanding of the partiality of one's own perspective as a regulative ideal for politics, and are highly suspicious of approaches that see prepolitical interests as the exclusive determinants of political participation. The antirepublican critique rejects this approach as unrealistic and misguided. But the categories to which it refers and the commitments that it embodies are highly likely to reflect republican understandings. For example, spheres of autonomy for individuals and groups must be defended on some ground; they cannot be justified as prepolitical; and if the defense is to be persuasive, it will have to incorporate republican notions of deliberation and universalism. Indeed, the very conception of a disadvantaged group-central to some attacks 1 7 on republican notions of universalism-depends on a commitment to an understanding of what disadvantage amounts to, and a belief that the understanding can be vindicated through discussion with those initially skeptical. 9 The antirepublican critique, like many arguments of this sort, "can give no account of the normative foundations of its own rhetoric." '19 9 Arguments that reject universalism tend to disable themselves from supporting their own descriptive and normative commitments; arguments that reject neutrality eliminate a possible source of argument that is not only strategically useful, but an accurate description of what is sometimes at work. 0 0 Republicans do not insist that political actors must forget their private concerns, or that differences and disagreement are inadmissible in politics. A belief in universalism need not be accompanied by a desire to erase differences. Indeed, republicans see disagreement as a creative and productive force, highly congenial to and even an indispensable part of the basic republican faith in political dialogue.2 0 1 Discussion and deliberation 196. See Okin, supra note 82. Of course this idea, standing by itself, will not resolve particular problems-a difficulty that also infects attempts to use "empathy" as a tool for solving political or legal problems. depend for their legitimacy and efficacy on the existence of conflicting views.20 2 The basic constitutional institutions of checks and balances and federalism should be understood at least partly in this light. Modern republicanism is thus not grounded in a belief in homogeneity; on the contrary, heterogeneity is necessary if republican systems are to work. As we shall see, this understanding will call for institutional innovations.20 3 It would be extraordinarily foolish to suggest that disparities in perspective and power do not complicate and distort deliberative processes, or to claim that exhortations to citizens and representatives to consult the common good are sufficient to bring about desirable results. And it would be a mistake to suggest that the republican commitments as described here lead directly to a particular social theory or a particular set of institutional arrangements. Large questions-having to do with the appropriate conception of rights, institutions, and groups-remain to be resolved. But the question is one of governing ideals; and here liberal republicanism is superior to its competitors. Republican thought, thus understood, furnishes the basis for approaching a variety of issues in modern public law in somewhat different ways. To be sure, one cannot simply "apply" republican ideas as if they provided self-evident solutions to contemporary legal problems; there will be room to contest any particular application. But many contemporary controversies look quite different if viewed through the lens of the republican tradition. Some of these controversies involve public law doctrine in the courts; most of them call for initiatives from nonjudicial bodies. For the most part, the discussion of particular areas will be brief and summary, attempting to suggest how republicans would approach a variety of problems rather than to examine those problems in detail. Expression Consider, for example, the problems raised by modern campaign finance regulation. Such regulation has often been challenged on the ground that it is inconsistent with the "marketplace of ideas"-indeed, that it effects a kind of First Amendment taking from rich speakers in each has its unique perspective and spirit to contribute to the community, but also because internal conflict is an essential and healthy phenomenon in its own right."); id. at 82 ("Citizen virtue is not the product of a uniform solidarity of identification or obedience. Indeed, in the Citizen vision, precisely plurality, competition, diversity, rather than uniformity, are the source of . . .strength." (emphasis in original)); id. at 300-04; cf. Michelman, supra note 6. order to help poorer ones. It was under this rationale that the Supreme Court invalidated campaign finance regulation in Buckley v. Valeo.2 4 There the Court said that "the concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of our society in order to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First Amendment."2 0 5 The Court did not hold that the effort to promote deliberation among political equals was insufficiently weighty, or inadequately promoted by the legislation at issue; the Court held, much more sweepingly, that that effort was illegitimate under the First Amendment. IT]he Court fails to recognize the essential point that the fair-value of the political liberties is required for a just political procedure, and that to insure their fair-value it is necessary to prevent those with greater property and wealth, and the greater skills of organization which accompany them, from controlling the electoral process to their advantage. . . .On this view, democracy is a kind of regulated rivalry between economic classes and interest groups in which the outcome should properly depend on the ability and willingness of each to use its financial resources and skills, admittedly very unequal, to make its desires felt. B. Federalism and Intermediate Organizations A critical feature of the learning of the New Deal period-one with continuing influence on American law-is that the original constitutional structure of dual sovereignty was a large mistake, allied with anachronistic goals of limited government and inconsistent with the need for continuinto marketplaces.20 9 But one of the great ing national intervention strengths of the original constitutional system was its simultaneous provision of deliberative representation at the national level and self-determination at the local level, furnishing a sphere for traditional republican goals. A central lesson of the republican revival is the need to provide outlets for self-determination in the public and private spheres. 10 The Tocquevillian understanding of a variety of groups, some in local government, some in purely private organizations, furnishes an alternative understanding, far superior to the New Deal model. C. Rationality Review Courts review statutes for "rationality" under a variety of constitutional provisions, including the due process, contracts, takings, and equal protection clauses.216 To some, the idea that statues must be "rational" is inconsistent with the nature of the political process, which consists of "deals" among self-interested actors.2 1 But the requirement of rationality is best understood* as a requirement of deliberation by political officials. The Constitution requires some showing that a burden was imposed, or a benefit denied, for a reason other than the exercise of political power by the advantaged class. In its requirement of an element of deliberation in politics, rationality review recalls republican themes, indeed it is closely associated with Madisonian theories of representation."' Whether or not constitutional courts should enforce the rationality norm more vigorously,21 9 the norm does have constitutional status, and its continuing existence reveals the tenacity of deliberative conceptions of politics. 2 0 The republican tradition also furnishes a different angle from which to understand the lesson of the Lochner period. In that period, the Supreme Court invalidated a wide range of regulatory measures, frequently by invoking libertarian conceptions of private rights. The Lochner period is frequently understood as a lesson in institutional role, revealing the risks of an aggressive judicial function in overseeing the political process.221 But a different understanding would stress issues of substance as well as of institutional competence. Republican thought might also provide a basis for understanding that the role of constitutionalism is countering classifications in such areas as race, sex, sexual orientation, and poverty. A central concern here is that culties in developing a workable alternative to an "intent" test. the values supporting such classifications are the product of social power; they must therefore be subject to scrutiny and review.22 6 In this view, judicial decisions that take a skeptical approach to such classifications are consistent with the rejection of the Lochner decision, not with Lochner itself. Republican premises might eventually serve as the foundation of a theory of social subordination to undergird constitutional hostility to discrimination against various social groups. The republican beliefs in political equality and deliberation would function as the defining notions. The argument here would have to be quite elaborate, but some of its foundations can be found in current law. 227 There is an irony here. Republican thought has traditionally been allied with exclusionary practices. It is thus odd to invoke republicanism as a basis for rejecting those same practices. But the premises of republican thought furnish an aspiration that turns out to provide the basis for criticism of republican traditions. There is nothing especially unusual in this phenomenon. Frequently cultural commitments are used to revise cultural practices; indeed those who attempt to revise existing practice inevitably draw on traditional commitments. 22 8 The use of republican aspiration to counteract republican practice is simply an illustration of this general proposition. In recent years, there has been something of a revival of interest in theories of statutory construction. It should not be controversial to suggest that approaches to construction are informed by theories of the political process. Thus it is suggested that courts should understand statutes as "deals" among self-interested actors and enforce them as such.229 Suggestions of this sort of course are an outgrowth of interest-group pluralism. 230 The idea that the role of the court is solely to implement congressional purposes in the particular case is also congenial to pluralist understandings. On the republican view, by contrast, one of the tasks of statutory construction is to promote actual deliberation in the lawmaking process and to interpret statutes, within the appropriate confines of the judicial role, so as to minimize the pathologies of pluralism.2 3 1 226. This point has been emphasized above all in the gender cases. See, e.g., Mississippi Univ. for yokes a Lochner-like presumption in favor of private ordering as a tool of construction. 232. Some canons of construction attempt to discern the intent of the legislature; others, by contrast, operate as a kind of tie-breaker when legislative intent is unclear, and frequently invoke procedural or substantive goals that are sometimes constitutionally inspired. The notions that statutes should be construed so as to promote state autonomy, see Pennhurst State School & Hosp. v. Halderman, 451 U.S. 1 (1981), or to avoid harming Indian tribes, see Montana v. Blackfeet Tribe, 471 U.S. 759 (1985), are examples of substantive canons; the claims that deference should be given to agency interpretations of statutes, see Chevron USA Inc. v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837, 865-66 (1984), or that courts should not lightly find that appropriations statutes amend substantive statutes, see TVA v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153 (1978), are examples of process-oriented statutes. For general and more detailed discussion of these devices, see Sunstein, Statutes and the Regulatory State (1988) (unpublished manuscript); Eskridge, Public Values in Statutory Construction (1987) (unpublished manuscript on file with author). forwardly on republican grounds. The narrow construction of appropriations statutes is designed to restrict the effect of measures likely to represent interest-group deals; protection of state and local autonomy recalls the republican belief in local self-determination; in interpreting statutes as integrated wholes, courts minimize the pathologies of pluralism. Some cases suggest a judicial perception that statutes should be construed so that the aggregate social benefits are proportionate to the aggregate social costs.28 This principle, implicit in some of the recent cases,2"" recognizes the risk that well-organized groups might be able to obtain legislation that would likely not be the outcome of a well-functioning Madisonian process. On this view, moreover, regulatory statutes should ordinarily be understood to contain de minimis exceptions. Administrators should generally be authorized to refuse to impose costly regulations for highly speculative or de minimis gains." 8 An analogous principle, also implicit in the cases, counsels courts narrowly to construe procedural limitations on substantive rights. Many cases involve, for example, the question whether to imply a private right of action to enforce a regulatory statute;23 the appropriate procedures for adjusting or eliminating a substantive benefit, as in a claimed right to a hearing before elimination of welfare benefits;24 0 and the availability of judicial review to test enforcement or nonenforcement.2 4 1 Constitutional questions are of course implicated here. But the constitutional issues are avoided if courts construe procedural qualifications narrowly in the belief that the procedures are less likely to be the product of a deliberative process than the substance, and from fear that procedural qualifications might enable well-organized groups to defeat substantive programs. Courts have also employed clear statement principles of statutory construction so as to help bring about consistency and coordination in the law.24 2 Such a role has clear precedent in the context of administrative law. Courts have, for example, aggressively construed statutes of the 1920's and 1930's so as to require old-line agencies to consider environmental concerns.24 The Bob Jones case 2" might best be understood as an effort to ensure that the I.R.S. takes account of the widespread social antagonism toward racial discrimination, as part of the general thrust of "public policy." Some cases limiting agency authority to impose significant costs for speculative benefits can be understood in similar terms. 2 45 Decisions of this sort might be justified on republican grounds, as part of the integration of statutory systems into a coherent whole that could plausibly be understood as the outcome of deliberative processes. Finally, republicans would urge that principles of statutory construction be designed to ensure that decisions are made by those who are politically accountable and highly visible. If the issue is one of allocation of institu tional authority, courts should construe statutes in such a way as to promote political accountability. An example is the Supreme Court's decision in Hampton v. Mow Sun Wong,24 in which the Court held-as a matter of due process-that if aliens were to be prevented from serving as federal employees, the decision must be made by Congress or the President rather than by the Civil Service Commission. In other cases the Court, and individual Justices, have suggested that the Constitution requires that certain disabilities may not be visited on certain groups unless an accountable actor has so decided.247 Decisions of this sort might be understood as involving a kind of clear statement principle. In recent years, there has been a revival of interest in systems of proportional or group representation. Blacks, women, the handicapped, gays and lesbians, and other disadvantaged groups have often had little success in the ordinary electoral process. In particular, the problem of racial block voting has sometimes made it impossible for blacks to elect anyone in certain election districts.149 This problem-sometimes described as minority vote dilution-produces a system in which blacks and other groups have a much lower percentage of representatives than of the population. 5 ' Be Proportional representation might be designed to ensure representation in the legislature of all those groups that are able to attain more than a minimal share of the vote. Such a system has variants in Germany, Israel, Italy, and many other countries.2 57 In another form, the system might be designed to ensure that members of disadvantaged groups are given the VOTES COUNT? (1987) (criticizing Voting Rights Act for producing proportional representation). government). power to exert influence on political outcomes.2 5 Rather than exhorting political participants to seek the common good, advocates of proportional representation claim that the political process should be structured so as to encourage the expression and affirmation of diverse perspectives and interests. 262. Cf Michelman, supra note 6, at 76-77 (arguing for "plurality" on courts). Aristotle supplied the basic underpinnings of the argument, suggesting that when diverse groups "all come together . . . they may surpass-collectively and as a body, although not individually-the quality of the few best. . . . When there are many who contribute to the process of deliberation, each can bring his share of goodness and moral prudence; . . . some appreciate one part, some another, and all together appreciate all." ARmSToTtLE, POLrrICS 123 (E. Barker trans. 1972). See the discussion of Aristotle in J.G.A. POCOCK, supra note 3, at 72-73 (suggesting Aristotelian effort to work "out the theory of society in which every conceivable individual and social type had its appropriate role in decision-making"). spectives for the governmental process. 65 In this sense there is continuity between recent proposals for proportional representation and the republican elements of the original constitutional regime. Republican conceptions of politics have taken many forms; only some of them are attractive. I have suggested that the most powerful versions of republicanism are not antiliberal at all. Instead they borrow from a significant strand of the liberal tradition, emphasizing political equality, the need to provide outlets for self-determination by the citizenry, the impossibility of maintaining democracy without a degree of citizen mobilization, the value of institutional and rights-based constraints on factionalism and self-interested representation, and the deliberative functions of politics. Above all, republican theories stress the importance of dialogue and disagreement in the governmental process; they are designed to ensure, not that political actors are disembodied, but that to the extent possible they look through the eyes of all those affected." 6' It would be a mistake to suggest that by itself, an approach of this sort could lead to a particular set of institutional arrangements or a particular specification of public and private rights. But if understood in this fashion, republican theories have played a central role in American public law. The task for modern republicanism is not, however, one of excavation. Contemporary republicanism is more to be made than found, even if historical commitments can illuminate, in somewhat surprising ways, the nature of American constitutionalism at its inception. Young, Sodal Movement Challenges, supra note 2.