 Cass R. Sunstein* It is ironic that during the early period of administrative law, doctrines controlling regulatory agencies were built directly on commonthat administrative regulation was self-consciously law principles designed to displace.' Not until the 1960s did courts, in concert with Congress, begin to develop an independent public law-a set of principles that owed their origin not only to traditional private law, but also to the ideas that gave rise to administrative regulation in the first place.2 At their best, the emerging principles revealed an understanding of the functions and malfunctions of regulation, the potential dangers of inaction and deregulation as well as overzealous intervention, the risks and possibilities of judicial control, the appropriate roles of politics and technical sophistication in the administrative process, and the extent to which regulatory systems repudiated the premises of market ordering that had been built into common-law principles. 3 The last decade has seen preliminary signs of a countermovement, with courts reorienting administrative law in the direction of ideas that last appeared in the initial encounters between the judiciary and the administrative state. 4 Some of those signs have been especially con * Professor of Law, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Bruce A. Ackerman, Akhil Amar, David P. Currie, Frank H. Easterbrook, Richard Fallon, Larry Kramer, Michael W. McConnell, Daniel Meltzer, Martha Minow, Richard A. Posner, Richard B. Stewart, David A. Strauss, and Joseph Vining for helpful comments on a previous draft; and to Margaret Antinori for valuable research assistance. the recent decisions call though spicuous in the Supreme Court's standing decisions. 5 Recent and still quite tentative innovations in the law of standing have started to push legal doctrine in the direction of what we may call a private-law model of standing. Under this model, a nineteenth century private right is a predicate for judicial intervention; as a result, courts may not redress the systemic or probabilistic harms that Congress intended regulatory schemes to prevent. Congress did not usurp executive prerogatives). Some of these ideas retain vitality. See Strauss, Formal and Functional Approaches to Separation-of-Powers Questions-A Foolish Inconsistency?, 72 Cornell L. Rev. 488,496-502 (1987) (defending the result in Bowsher and the continued use of separation of powers principles, understood in functional terms, to limit congressional initiatives). For most of the nation's history, there was no distinctive body of standing doctrine. Whether there was standing depended on whether positive law created a cause of action.8 In the modem period, however, judicial review of administrative action has been an outgrowth of a simple framework.9 If administrators intruded on interests protected at common law, judicial review was available to test the question whether there was statutory authorization for what would otherwise be a common-law wrong. If no common-law right were at stake, judicial protection was unavailable. The most distinctive feature of this framework was the use of common-law understandings to define the judicial role in public-law cases. 10. An exception is the third-party beneficiary doctrine in contract law. See E. working hours unconstitutional). In the context of standing, this view had two principal implications. First, regulated entities-industries and others who were the object of regulation-had access to court to challenge agency action as unlawfully infringing on their common-law rights. In such cases, there was no problem of standing. Regulated entities were usually in the position of actual or prospective defendants, and there was little doubt that defendants had standing to resist coercive governmental action-a view with constitutional foundations.1 7 Second, the interests of competitors and regulatory beneficiaries1 8 were not legally cognizable. t 9 Those interests, treated as privileges or legal gratuities, were to be vindicated through the political process or not at all. We may describe the resulting framework-an ambiguous amalgam of federal common law, statutory construction, and constitutional law-as a private-law model of public law. 15. See generally L. Tribe, American Constitutional Law § 1-3, at 5, § 1-4, at 76-77 (2d ed. 1988) (describing the Lochner-era "belief that property and its contractually realizable advantages were attributable to some natural order to things implicit in a revealed structure of common-law rights"); Sunstein, supra note 12, at 879 (common law formed "baseline from which to measure deviations from neutrality, or self-interested 'deals' "). Against this background, courts favorably disposed toward the New Deal reformation developed doctrines of standing, ripeness, and reviewability largely to insulate agency decisions from judicial intervention. 23 Such doctrines were used enthusiastically by judges associated with the progressive movement and the New Deal, most prominently Justices Brandeis and Frankfurter, who reflected the prevailing belief that traditional conceptions of the rule of law were incompatible with administrative regulation. 24 In this view, the interests supporting the 20. See Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Comm. v. McGrath, 341 U.S. 123, 154-55 (1951) (Frankfurter, J., concurring) (upholding agency action by denying standing in part because challenged action was not final); Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley Auth., 297 U.S. 288, 341-45 (1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring) (upholding agency's dealings with corporation by denying standing to corporate stockholders); cf. Fairchild v. Hughes, 258 U.S. 126, 129-30 (1922) (dismissing prospective challenge to constitutional amendment and its enforcement by attorney general, by denying standing to plaintiff); Wilson v. Shaw, 204 U.S. 24, 30-31 (1907) (upholding agency action, in part because injunctive relief is inappropriate remedy to protect citizen against wrongful government act). Notably, in McGrath, Ashwander, and other cases, a majority of the Supreme Court rejected the Brandeis-Frankfurter position and allowed standing in cases that plausibly amounted to taxpayer suits. These and other aspects of the development of standing limitations are illuminatingly discussed in Winter, supra note 8. rise of regulation-technocratic expertise, flexibility, and political accountability-argued strongly against judicial interference. 2 5 This view has enjoyed a kind of renaissance in recent years, though from judges with a quite different political orientation. In two basic steps, courts abandoned this model. The first was the conclusion that interests protected by statute were also judicially cognizable.2 7 If the interest of a prospective litigant in freedom from compe inadequate as regulatory scheme); Sunstein, supra note 21, at 440-42 (describing New Deal attack on common law and on traditional notions of separation of powers); Winter, supra note 8, at 1455-57 (discussing use of standing by Brandeis and Frankfurter to protect legislative sphere); supra note 20 (same). Under this framework, it was not always necessary for Congress expressly to confer a right to bring suit on the plaintiff. The existence of an interest protected by statute was sufficient. Courts treated the congressional desire to protect a statutory interest as an implicit grant of a right to bring suit. The requirements for an implicit cause of action were thus quite lenient.31 Moreover, the existence of an interest protected at common law was sufficient to confer standing, even if there was no particular evidence of congressional intent to allow the action to go forward. This conclusion reflected a background understanding, not traceable to statute, that the objects of regulation should ordinarily be permitted to raise the question whether there was legal authorization for intrusion on common-law interests. This understanding, part of the private-law model and emphasized in the New Deal period, was probably a product of a constitutional concern. If those seen as the objects of regulation were prohibited from seeking judicial review to protect liberty or prop In contrast, no similar question was thought to be raised by a measure preventing statutory beneficiaries from seeking judicial relief. Their interests were legal gratuities."3 In the modern period, however, serious constitutional problems might also be raised by congressional efforts to deny standing to those seeking governmental assistance in preventing illegality by third parties.3 4 Despite these complications, there was in this period a close association between the existence of an implied cause of action and the existence of standing. The question of standing turned on whether Congress had explicitly or implicitly granted the plaintiff a right to bring suit, at least if the notion of implicit grant is understood with the foregoing qualifications.35 That question was in turn informed largely by background understandings about the circumstances in which judicial relief should be available. harm to common-law, statutory, and constitutional interests; in the setting of administrative law, the first two were by far the most important. The "adversely affected or aggrieved" language was designed to allow for surrogate standing if the organic statute provided such standing. 37 There was no clear indication, in the text or history of the APA, whether and when the beneficiaries of regulation might have standing to vindicate legal requirements 3 8-though they too could easily be thought to suffer from a legal injury in the form of harm to their statutorily protected interests. reading. Committee on Administrative Procedure: The standing may be conferred by statute; but it frequently is not so conferred in specific terms. The question is then whether the person has otherwise a private right not to have the administrative body act in the allegedly unlawful manner.... Whether a particular person shall have the right to contest adminis a question of law and policy dependent on a number of istrative action ... variable factors. Consideration, though not conclusive, has been given, for example, to the nature and extent of the person's interest, and the character of the administrative act, whether it commands conduct by the person, permits conduct by his rival, withholds a service or benefit which the Government is free to withhold, and so forth.... Except in special cases, when special considerations require a contrary holding,judicial review within the usual limits is appropriate whether the applicant seeks protection of a constitutional right or of a statutory or common-law right, privilege, or bounty. Three particular ideas played a role in this shift. The first was an understanding that congressional purposes could be defeated not only by overzealous regulation, but also by unlawful failure to regulate or agency hostility to statutory programs. 45 If conformity to law was a goal of administrative law, there was no reason to distinguish between the beneficiaries and the targets of regulation. Far from being incompatible with the administrative process, some measure ofjudicial supervision appeared to be a means of promoting agency fidelity to statutory purposes. 43. These baselines were rejected elsewhere as well. See J. Vining, supra note 1; Stewart, supra note 1; Sunstein, supra note 2. [T]he problem of whether the administrator's refusal to take action is reviewable still remains.... In some instances review may be unavailing because the determination of whether or not action should be taken in the circumstances may have been committed to the exclusive judgment of the administrator as to the public interest and convenience. But if the denial is based on an erroneous interpretation of law, judicial review is available to remove at least that barrier. The conclusion that statutory and common-law interests should not be sharply distinguished seemed irresistible if importance was assessed by reference to the beliefs of Congress, which, after all, created the statutory programs. The limitation of standing to those having traditional common-law interests at stake appeared to depend on an anachronistic conception of legal rights traceable above all to the discredited jurisprudence of Lochner v. New York. 4 9 The attack on common-law baselines thus merged with an attack on the belief that administrative autonomy was the most promising institutional mechanism for producing the appropriate level of regulatory control. Schlozman &J. Tierney, Organized Interests and American Democracy 341-46 (1986); Stewart, supra note 1, at 1684-87. A particular difficulty here stems from the collectiveaction problems that impose severe transaction-cost barriers to organization on the part of beneficiaries. See R. Hardin, Collective Action 53-54 (1982); M. Olson, The Logic of Collective Action 22 (1971). The "arguably within the zone of interests" requirement responded to some of the same concerns as the legal-interest test, and it too called for a degree of entanglement between standing and the merits; but the requirement was, by design, quite lenient, and involved only a brief examination of the statute to see if the plaintiff's interests were entirely far afield from the statutory purposes. 56 Notably, however, Data Processing was styled as an interpretation of the APA. As such, it 50. There is evidence that those responsible for the APA contemplated standing on the part of regulatory beneficiaries. The influential and contemporaneous Attorney General's Committee noted that judicial review "is adapted chiefly to curbing excess of power, not toward compelling its exercise." Att'y Gen. Rep., supra note 37, at 76. But it added that "if the denial[of action] is based on an erroneous interpretation of law, judicial review is available to remove at least that barrier." Id. at 86; see also supra note 37 (legislative history of APA). Note also that the APA defines "agency action" to include "failure to act," 5 U.S.C. § 551(13)(1982), and authorizes courts to "compel agency action unlawfully withheld or unnecessarily delayed," Id. § 706(1). The contrary position is presented in Scalia, supra note 5, at 887-88, but the position is insufficiently attentive to the context and history of the APA. Cf. Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821, 828-35 (1985) (holding agency inaction presumptively unreviewable, but apparently allowing review to overcome errors of law). ing is different."). 54. Id. 55. See id.; Currie, supra note 35, at 44 (discussing Data Processing). 56. See Clarke v. Securities Indus. Ass'n, 107 S. Ct. 750, 757 (1987) ("[T]he test denies a right of review if the plaintiff's interests are so marginally related to or inconsistent with the purposes implicit in the statute that it cannot reasonably be assumed that Congress intended to permit the suit."). The Supreme Court has never denied standing for failure to meet the "arguably within the zone" test. Data Processing responded to a belief that the private-law model no longer worked in public-law cases. 59 Why this is so is a complex matter.6 0 A principal reason was that the private-law inquiry into whether A has violated a duty owed to B does not quite capture the dynamics of public-law cases, in which disputes cannot so readily be understood in terms of clear rights and duties. Often administrative disputes do not have a bipolar structure: there may be many people on one or both sides of the dispute, and the agency may be authorized to consider numerous factors, no one of which is controlling. Since a number of factors are relevant, and none decisive, the right-duty relationship between the government and any particular legal complainant is not crisp and bilateral. It is important not to overstate this point. In public-law cases, there are rights and duties too. The failure to consider a relevant factor, or the consideration of an irrelevant factor, might well be thought of as a breach of a legal duty owed by the government to the complainant. But the inquiry into consideration of relevant factors does not have a clear parallel in private-law actions. 57. See Currie, supra note 35, at 43-44 (contrasting standing grant in Data Processing with grant implied by legislative history of APA); supra notes 36-37 and accompanying text (legislative history of APA). In addition, and more generally, the injury-in-fact requirement it Processing as an "unredeemed disaster"). 67. See L. Tribe, supra note 15, at 1571; Tushnet, The Sociology of Article III: A Response to Professor Brilmayer, 93 Harv. L. Rev. 1698 (1980). On the ahistorical character of the injury-in-fact test, see Berger, supra note 8, at 827; see also Jaffe, supra note 8, at 1035-37, 1047 (Anglo-American courts not restricted by requirement of Hohfeldian plaintiff, and courts should explicitly recognize this and the importance of individual conscience). development that would "impair the enjoyment of the park for future generations"). A principal goal of the Data Processing approach was to achieve a large degree of clarity and predictability. And for a period, the injuryin-fact requirement seemed to operate in a reasonably straightforward fashion. It should be clear, however, that an assessment of whether the plaintiff has suffered injury in fact could not be the only question for purposes of standing. In an integrated economy, an enormously wide variety of people are affected by an agency's decision to act or not to 75. SeeJ. Vining, supra note 1, at 39-42. 76. Some asymmetry remains, however, since scarce prosecutorial resources provide a legitimate reason for agency inaction. The fact that agencies must allocate their limited resources to those problems that seem most pressing, however, has implications for reviewability rather than for standing. See Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821, 831 (1985); Sunstein, Reviewing Agency Inaction After Heckler. v. Chaney, 52 U. Chi. L. Rev. 653, 683 (1985). In Data Processing, the Court could not have meant to suggest that all affected workers, employers, and consumers could challenge all EPA decisions. In order to produce sensible results, courts had to build into the new framework some distinction between direct and indirect consequences of agency decisions, or between legally cognizable injuries and harms that Congress could not have intended to be vindicated in court.8 1 In this sense, the injury-in-fact test was (and is) quite malleable, and the standing determination inevitably depends on a range of considerations that the notion of injury in fact, by itself, cannot capture. test, though appearing unwieldy, served in practice as a lenient and workable threshold inquiry, capturing the understanding that those whose interests were entirely afield of statutory purposes could not bring suit. The test thus operated as a check against suits brought by people with interests unrelated to the statutory scheme.8 2 And the injury-in-fact test itself, in its early period, appeared to allow suits by regulatory beneficiaries and by adversely affected competitors, but not to allow standing for those whose interests were only indirectly and incidentally affected.8 3 Thus, the new standing doctrine seemed as if it might serve the function, intended by the Court in Data Processing, of ensuring that jurisdictional inquiries were reasonably simple and crisp,8 4 and did not unduly complicate the case before courts reached the merits. Data Processing was part of a set of developments that began to point the way toward an independent public law.8 5 Such developments able to invoke "public values"). that: [i]n cases where the plaintiff is not itself the subject of the contested regulatory action, the test denies a right of review if the plaintiff's interests are so marginally related to or inconsistent with the purposes implicit in the statute that it cannot be reasonably assumed that Congress intended to permit the suit. 84. Cf. Currie, Venue and the Sagebrush Rebellion, in Venue at the Crossroads 65, 77 (S. Schlesinger ed. 1982) (emphasizing importance of simplicity in determining venue). were a natural product of the skepticism about common-law ordering that gave rise to regulatory regimes in the first instance.8 6 Upon a showing of harm, fidelity to law, rather than protection of the objects of regulation, became the purpose of judicial review. At the same time, Data Processing contributed to a set of innovations that attempted to synthesize the rise of administrative regulation with the continuing existence of legal constraints on governmental processes and outcomes. With these innovations, courts placed statutory rights on the same level as common-law interests and supervised a wide range of agency decisions, including to ensure legality.8 7 inaction and deregulation, in order A. The Doctrinal Trajectory: Injury, Nexus, and Causation After Data Processing, the Supreme Court employed several principles to limit free access to judicial review.8 8 None of these principles was, however, of particular importance to administrative law, and most of them were supported by at least plausible reasons.8 9 Much more 89. Thus, the prohibition on citizen or taxpayer standing might be understood as a response to the possibility that the political process would afford sufficient protection: if all citizens are affected, there should be political checks on official illegality. It would be possible, however, to respond that the political checks have not worked in the circumstances; that the constitutional prohibition is not otherwise enforceable; and that the original decision to constitutionalize the prohibition reveals that it was intended to operate even in the face of political acquiescence. The citizen and taxpayer standing cases are best understood as rulings that the relevant constitutional provisions do not create self-executing causes of action on behalf of plaintiffs. See infra note 208 (discussing implicit constitutional grants of cause of action). Understood in the abstract and properly applied, the requirements are natural and entirely unobjectionable corollaries of the injury-in-fact requirement of Data Processing-not to mention the article III ban on advisory opinions. If the plaintiffs cannot show that a decree in their favor will remedy their injury or that the defendant was responsible for that injury, why should they be entitled to seek judicial relief at all? At the outset, however, it is revealing that the recent requirements have proved important principally in cases in which statutory beneficiaries are challenging as legally inadequate the government's regulation of third parties. In such cases standing has been denied because it is said to be uncertain that government regulation would actually help any particular private plaintiff. And it is in such cases that one can find a partial return to a private-law model of public law. One problem with this view is that the very existence of the criminal law attests to the seemingly obvious assumption-held by the legislature and the public at large-that criminal penalties influence The requirement of causation was more fully elaborated in subsequent decisions.10 0 In Simon v. Eastern Kentucky Welfare Rights Organization 10 t (EKWRO), the Court denied standing to indigents who were 96. [lIt is hard to take seriously the claim that enforcement of legal rules does not affect bystanders.... I suffer an injury if the police announce that they will no longer enforce [the rule against murder] in my neighborhood.... Only a judge who secretly believes that the law does not influence behavior would find no injury in fact. gesting that enforcement policies can produce injury in fact). The EKWRO decision might be treated as an exceptionally broad ruling, having the effect of barring many suits brought by regulatory beneficiaries on the ground that it is uncertain whether a particular benefit will come to them as a result of government action against third parties. The decision could be understood, however, as a quite narrow response to the well-established idea that one taxpayer should not ordinarily be permitted to litigate the tax liability of another.'0 5 In this sense, the causation requirement, as applied in EKWRO, can operate as a surrogate for a belief that Congress implicitly precluded standing of this kind in most tax cases. 10 6 Perhaps the most important decision in this line of cases is Allen v. Wright,1' 7 in which the parents of children attending schools undergoing desegregation challenged, on statutory and constititutional grounds, the IRS' failure to deny tax deductions to segregated private schools. The plaintiffs claimed that the tax deductions increased the 102. Id. at 32-33. 103. Id. at 42-43. For criticism of this decision, see Currie, The Supreme Court and Federal Jurisdiction: 1975 Term, 1976 Sup. Ct. Rev. 183, 183-85 (describing Court's approach as "unnecessarily stingy" and arguing that devision "impose[s] a highly restrictive notion of what it takes to satisfy the injury requirement"). Here too, it is important and revealing that the hospitals in question would undoubtedly have had standing to challenge an IRS decision increasing hospitals' obligations to provide medical care to the indigent. See L. Tribe, supra note 15, § 3-18, at 131. Two recent . cases involving regulation of fuel economy in °1 0 Both cases involved a statuautomobiles presented similar issues. tory provision allowing "[a]ny person who may be adversely affected" by an agency rule passed under the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 to seek review.1 1 1 In both cases, it was assumed that Congress intended to permit the plaintiffs to bring suit; the only question was whether article III permitted the action to go forward. In Center for Auto Safety v. NHTSA, l l2 a membership association, including prospective purchasers of trucks, challenged a regulatory decision to reduce minimum fuel-economy standards for light trucks. The plaintiffs contended that the vehicles available for purchase would have reduced fuel efficiency as a result of this decision.1 1 3 The court of appeals held that the requirements for standing were satisfied: the injury consisted of the diminished opportunity to purchase the trucks in question, that injury was a product of the agency's decision, and a reversal of that decision would remedy the injury.1 14 Judge Scalia, in dissent, complained that "petitioners make no effort to identify any particular types of fuel-efficient light truck or any particular fuel-saving model options that their 108. Allen, 468 U.S. at 743-45. 109. Id. at 758-59. The Court stated: [I]t is entirely speculative ... whether withdrawal of a tax exemption from any particular [private] school would lead the school to change its policies. It is just as speculative whether any given parent of a child attending such a [private] school would decide to transfer the child to public school as a result of any changes in educational or financial policy made by the [private] school once it was threatened with loss of tax-exempt status. In Center for Auto Safety v. Thomas," 7 organizations representing purchasers of automobiles challenged an EPA rule that compensated manufacturers retroactively for changes in testing procedures used to measure the fuel economy of each manufacturer's sales fleet. The EPA concluded that the previous testing procedures were inadequate. The retroactive compensation gave General Motors and Ford credits that were worth hundreds of millions of dollars. The resulting credits could be used to offset penalties incurred in previous years or to produce a cushion against future deficiencies in fuel-economy standards.' 18 The plaintiffs alleged that as a result of this decision, automobile manufacturers would fail to develop and use technologies that would improve the fuel efficiency of their vehicles. In the plaintiffs' view, their members would be less likely to be able to purchase fuel-efficient cars. Their injury consisted of the diminished availability and increased price of the relevant cars. No individual person could show, however, that the EPA's decision would affect a particular purchasing decision. 1 9 A panel of the court of appeals held that the requirements for standing were satisfied,' 20 and an en banc court affirmed by an equally divided vote. 12 1 Five judges concluded that the original panel decision was correct. The injury consisted of the increased price and diminished availability of fuel-efficient cars, and invalidation of the agency's decision would redress that injury. 12 2 Five other judges contended that "it is not likely that" the plaintiffs' injury, even if it occurred, "will be caused by the challenged action, or be redressed by a favorable decision."' 2 3 According to the five judges, a change in the mix of products was not a suffi In an elaborate separate opinion, Judge Silberman contended that the injury recognized by the five judges finding standing "stretches beyond recognition the limits the Supreme Court has articulated for the types of harm sufficient to confer Article III standing."' 25 In his view, the entire concept of consumer standing must be rejected. "So long as consumers have available virtually interchangeable products, a reduction in supply-indeed even the actual cessation-of one brand cannot constitute an Article III injury."' 26 All that is at stake here is "a political or ideological interest in seeing a federal law enforced against a third party."' 2 7 Consumer standing should be treated like taxpayer standing; in both cases, article III requires that "redress is to be found under our constitutional system at the polls-not in Federal courts." 1 28 Adoption of ideas of the sort expressed by the five judges arguing against standing in Thomas would have enormous consequences for the law, the same is even more emphatically true of the views expressed by Judge Silberman and Judge Scalia. Indeed, such views would move the doctrine sharply in the direction of the private-law model as it existed well before the original cases that extended the category of legally cognizable interests to include statutory beneficiaries.' 29 In those cases too, the injury, narrowly defined, would not necessarily be alleviated by action from the governmental defendant.' 30 By restricting the requirement of an injury to a nineteenth century private right, a strong version of the causation requirements would replicate ideas last seen in public law more than two decades ago, when the legal culture had only begun [A] company cannot be expected to mount a comparable research and 124. development effort as a short-term response to an unanticipated penalty. It is not credible that a manufacturer will attempt, let alone achieve, the necessary advances in time to incorporate them in its third year's production. The more likely alternative is that a company faced with substantial penalties will first review the available alternatives, including payment of the penalties and changes in model mix, and then pursue the least costly of them.... B. Separation of Powers EKWRO and Allen might be understood as narrow decisions about the standing of one taxpayer to litigate the tax liability of another. In such cases, it is plausible to infer that Congress foreclosed a general right to bring suit.1 3 7 As pure standing cases, however, some of the causation decisions are not easy to defend. In particular, EKWRO and especiallyAllen seem wrongly decided.1 38 There can be little doubt that the decisions are informed by norms of separation of powers, quite apart from ideas about causation. In the absence of other doctrinal avenues for restricting standing, the causation requirements are being used to do work that has little to do with causation. 139 The separation of powers norms were made explicit in Allen v. Wright,140 in which the Court said that the "idea of separation of powers that underlies standing doctrine explains" the conclusion in the case. 14 ' The Court wrote that a decision to allow standing in All",n would pave the way generally for suits challenging, not specifically identifiable Government violations of law, but the particular programs agencies establish to carry out their legal obligations. Such suits, even when premised on allegations of several instances of violations of law, are rarely if ever appropriate for federal-court adjudication. "Carried to its logical end, [respondents'] approach would have the federal courts as virtually continuing monitors of the wisdom and soundness of Executive action.1 42 In this view, the causation requirements are a means of ensuring against certain sorts of actions against governmental defendants, actions that raise serious questions of judicial role. 136. Indeed, that understates the matter. See infra notes 164-72 and accompany ing text. tory beneficiaries to require greater regulatory protection attempt to vindicate injuries that ought to be cognizable politically but not through the judiciary. There is in this respect a clear connection between the causation requirements and certain conceptions of judicial restraint and separation of powers. The recent cases might be understood as an effort to narrow the judicial role in actions brought by statutory beneficiaries-often having numerous members-to compel government action against private parties. The causation requirements are one of several devices by which to accomplish this goal. 144 The underlying concern, captured in Allen v. Wright, 14 5 is that while courts should protect the objects of regulation, they should be reluctant to compel the executive branch to undertake enforcement action to vindicate the general or societal interests of regulatory beneficiaries. In this view, suits brought to challenge "the particular programs agencies establish to carry out their legal obligations"1 4 6 should not bejudicially cognizable. The distinctive judicial role is the protection of traditional or individual rights against governmental overreaching. 147 This claim purports to derive strength from the constitutional provision, invoked in this way in Allen and another recent decision of the Court, 148 that confers on the President, not the judiciary, the authority to "take Care that the laws be faithfully executed."' 49 The recent standing requirements belong in the same category as other recent decisions restricting judicial intrusions into administration, with respect to both substance' 5 0 and procedure.i 5 1 They reflect a form of judicial skepticism about both government regulation and decision not to bring enforcement proceedings against unauthorized use of approved drug); Block v. Community Nutrition Inst., 467 U.S. 340, 352 (1984) (refusing to recognize standing for consumers under Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act); Laird v. Tatum, 408 U.S. 1, 15 (1972) (refusing to allow standing to challenge data-gathering system used by Army at riots). endorsed this general view. deference to agency interpretations of law). There is a commonality between the New Deal approach and still tentative developments in current law, and it lies in the belief that administrative regulation, grounded as it is in technocratic expertise and political accountability, is incompatible with judicial oversight. The difference is that the New Deal view was rooted in hospitality toward regulatory intervention and fear of politically motivated invalidation, by the courts, of desirable administrative programs, whereas the modern developments are based on hostility to intervention and fear of judicially compelled regulation. But in either case, the doctrine of standing serves to minimize the occasions for legal intervention into the regulatory process, and thus to limit the strain between what are regarded as, two distinct mechanisms for social ordering. Understood against this background, the causation requirements are a means of ensuring against the perceived excesses of Data Processing in allowing judicial redress of what might be seen as essentially political grievances.' 53 That rationalization, however, is ultimately unpersuasive. A. The Appropriate Role of Standing Limitations As a general rule, the question for purposes of standing is whether Congress has created a cause of action.' 5 4 A congressional resolution of the standing issue is almost always authoritative. It is in this sense, 152. Thus, in the 1930s, skepticism about the judiciary generally accompanied enthusiasm about regulation; among conservatives, a minority in that period, skepticism about regulation led to enthusiasm for the judiciary; and in the 1960s, liberal judges combined hospitality toward regulation with enthusiasm for an aggressive judicial role. See Sunstein, supra note 21, at 437-41. The general phenomenon is remarked on in Note, Intent, Clear Statement, and the Common Law: Statutory Interpretation in the Supreme Court, 95 Harv. L. Rev. 892, 910-12 (1982). See generally Sunstein, Statutes and the Regulatory State (Sept. 1988) (unpublished manuscript on file at the Columbia Law Review). and only this sense, that standing limitations are part of the "case or controversy" requirement of article III; and it is in this sense that standing doctrine serves an important separation-of-powers function. and standing). In some cases, moreover, the issue is whether the Constitution itself creates a right to bring suit. See infra note 208. The causation requirements present different issues. Standing by themselves, they are natural corollaries of the injury-in-fact requirement and unobjectionable as such. But aside from their manipulability, the central problem is that in the suits in question here, the relevant harms are quite generally probabilistic or systemic. The purpose of the regulatory program is to redress harms of precisely that sort.' 5 8 It would be a large mistake to conclude that such harms are not judicially cognizable. Nineteenth century conceptions of injury should not be used to resolve standing issues in administrative law. Those conceptions have no place in regimes in which the legal injury is often of a different order. A system in which regulatory harms were not judicially cognizable would tend to allow regulated industries, but not regulatory beneficiaries, to have access to court-thus imposing a perverse set of incentives on administrative actors by inclining them against regulatory implementation when it is legally required. 5 9 Such a result would tend to defeat congressional purposes. 160 Nothing in article III, the APA, or the governing statutes justifies this result. B. Cognizable Injuries and the Appropriate Role of Causation It should come as no surprise that the causation requirements are highly manipulable. Judgments about whether or not causation is speculative depend on no clear metric. It is difficult to make systematic the inquiry into whether government action against a third party is likely to affect behavior in ways that will help a particular class of plaintiffs. Thus, the Court has found that the causation requirements were met when the connection between the injury, the defendant's conduct, and could therefore reject the outcome in Sierra Club by granting standing if it so chose; and the best argument against the result in Sierra Club would be that the relevant statutes should have been interpreted to create a cause of action for the plaintiffs. suits by beneficiaries). sation as a limiting requirement). In particular, the causation requirements, as sometimes applied, threaten to make standing issues turn on considerable discovery, factfinding, and, worst of all, judicial speculation on the precise effects of regulatory initiatives. All this is a significant disadvantage over the pre-Data Processing approach, which depended on legal issues that could be resolved on the basis of the pleadings without complex factual inquiries. The new law of standing has in this respect come to be less crisp and certain than the previous regime-precisely the opposite of what the Data Processing Court intended. The manipulable nature of the inquiry into causation appears in a less obvious and more important place as well. The central problem in the causation cases is not whether there is a causal nexus among injury, remedy, and illegality; it is how to characterize the relevant injury. Whether the injury is due to the defendant's conduct, or likely to be the Supreme Court has given little or no guidance for resolving the problem of characterization. But the Data Processing Court interpreted the APA to confer a cause of action on those harmed by agency behavior, thus separating the issues of standing and the merits; 1 74 and this interpretation was intended precisely to allow a brisk threshold determination, one that would not call for elaborate statutory construction. On the other hand, it is impossible in the hardest cases to decide standing issues without asking whether the governing substantive statute is designed to protect the plaintiffs; in those cases, some such inquiry is necessary because by itself, the injury-in-fact test is too open-ended and malleable in an integrated economy. Insofar as they act as crude surrogates for this inquiry, the causation requirements confirm this proposition. To say this is hardly to suggest that courts should abandon the causation requirements and the instincts that underlie them. Standing should be denied in three categories of cases brought under the APA. The first includes cases in which even broadly characterized injuries do not meet the causation requirements. Suppose, for example, that the plaintiffs are able to characterize their injuries in probabilistic or systemic terms, but those injuries are not likely to be redressed by a ruling against the defendant. 17 7 A denial of standing in such cases is a natural implication of the injury-in-fact requirement that the Court has found in the APA. If the harm, however characterized, is not likely to be redressed by a ruling for the plaintiffs, it is appropriate to conclude that there is no injury in fact. Judicial relief should be unavailable on the same theory as in Sierra Club v. Morton,17 8 in which the plaintiffs did not allege that they were actual or prospective users of the park in question. The second category includes cases in which the injury, once 176. See supra notes 105-06 and accompanying text. 177. United States v. SCRAP, 412 U.S. 669 (1973), is an illustration here. Even as recharacterized, the connection between the relief sought and the plaintiffs' injury was extremely loose. For other possible examples, see Community for Creative NonViolence v. Pierce, 814 F.2d 663, 666-70 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (denying standing to homeless people seeking to challenge a report on the homeless); American Legal Found. v. FCC, 808 F.2d 84, 89-92 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (denying standing to organization, which, although having no members but only supporters, attempted to challenge FCC failure to investigate network broadcasting concerning the CIA); California Ass'n of the Physically Handicapped v. FCC, 778 F.2d 823, 825-27 (D.C. Cir. 1985) (denying standing to association challenging transfer of ownership of television network stock on grounds that stock transfer was unconnected with network's employment of physically handicapped or network's failure to use methods of making broadcasts accessible to the hearing impaired). 179. The Court's decision in SCRAP may be incorrect because the case falls in this category. SCRAP, 412 U.S. at 686-88. In Diamond v. Charles, 476 U.S. 54 (1986), the Court properly denied standing to a doctor who attempted to defend a state statute limiting abortion. The doctor claimed, in relevant part, that his injury consisted in a smaller number of children available for his medical practice. Id, at 66. But if injuries of this sort sufficed, all or almost all citizens could defend restrictive abortiQn statutes, Notably, however, the Diamond Court recognized that the Illinois legislature might grant standing even in such cases. Id. at 65 n.17; see also Clarke v. Securities Indus. Ass'n, 107 S. Ct. 750, 754 n.7 (1987) (recognizing that Congress may either grant or withhold standing); EKWRO, 426 U.S. 26, 41 n.22 (1976) (legislature may grant standing, but "'plaintiff still must allege a distinct and palpable injury to himself, even if it is an injury shared by a large class of other possible litigants' ") (citations omitted). The recent standing decisions are rooted in part in views about separation of powers. These views are quite distinct from notions of causation, standing by themselves. Three central ideas support the separation-of-powers concerns. The first is a belief that courts should protect individual rights rather than general social interests; the second invokes the "take Care" clause to argue against judicial interference with executive implementation; the third emphasizes the availability of the political process to protect interests in regulatory enforcement. These ideas are interrelated. None of them, however, supplies a sufficient reason for a refusal to treat probabilistic or systemic harms as judicially cognizable, or indeed for a general reluctance to hear actions brought by beneficiaries to bring about regulatory intervention. consider, for example, a carcinogen regulation that affects numerous industries and plants. No one would argue that, in cases of this sort, affected industries should be deprived of access to judicial review to test the question of legality. Such a result would mean quite generally that the rulemaking activity of federal agencies could not be subject to challenge from the objects of regulation. For this reason, the claim that courts should protect only traditional or individual rights cannot be made in terms of numbers alone.' 8 2 It is quite plausible to suggest that citizen or taxpayer standing ought to be unavailable, certainly in the absence of clear congressional authorization.18 3 A rule of that sort can be supported by the basic consideration that underlies the injury-in-fact requirement. People ordinarily treated as bystanders ought not to be allowed to disrupt mutually advantageous relations, 8 4 and in any case political remedies are most reliable when all citizens are affected in the same way. This assumption is part of the set of prudential limitations on standing' 8 5-judge-made clear statement principles that are subject to congressional override. l8 6 To say that citizen or taxpayer standing should be unavailable is not, however, to say that when large numbers of people are affected by agency action, they should be remitted to political remedies, whether they are beneficiaries or objects of regulation. In both cases, the plaintiffs are seeking to require administrators to comply with statutory requirements; in both cases, the plaintiffs represent a subcategory of the citizenry; and in both cases, judicial relief should be available to bring about conformity to the law. i8 7 Nothing in article III argues against 182. On this score, the analysis in SCRAP is correct. See SCRAP, 412 U.S. at 686-88 ("To deny standing to persons who are in fact injured simply because many others are also injured, would mean that the most injurious and widespread government actions could be questioned by nobody. We cannot accept that conclusion."). limitations subject to congressional override). this view, and the APA is best interpreted to grant standing in both cases, even if the class of plaintiffs is quite large. If administrative action is legally inadequate or if the agency has violated the law by failing to act at all, there is no usurpation of executive prerogatives in ajudicial decision to that effect.' 92 Such a decision is necessary in order to vindicate congressional directives, as part of the 9 3 The "take Care" clause judicial function "to say what the law is.' deny standing to the objects of carcinogen regulation because the relevant industry has many members-or because the ultimate objects of regulation are consumers in that setting as well. and concerns of separation of powers argue in favor of rather than against a judicial role when statutory beneficiaries challenge agency behavior as legally inadequate. 3. Political Redress. that the quotation from Allen v. Wright, see supra note 142 and accompanying text, is largely a muddle. The question in that case was not whether courts should be " 'continuing monitors of the wisdom and soundness of Executive action,' "Allen, 468 U.S. at 760 (quoting Laird v. Tatum, 408 U.S. 1, 15 (1972)); it was whether the agency's policies violated the governing statute. See id. at 784 (Stevens, J., dissenting). available for reducing inappropriate judicial intrusions in such cases, including, most prominently, deference on the merits. dards are often ambiguous and suggest that in the absence of injury to an object of regulation, outcomes should be the product of the political process, as reflected in informal interactions involving the executive branch, legislative authorities, and affected groups. This argument is, however, hard to defend when there is an injury in fact to a regulatory beneficiary who is within the zone of protected interests. See supra notes 182-88 and accompanying text (criticizing distinction between objects and beneficiaries of regulation). involve suits brought by regulatory beneficiaries. to believe that is D. Injury, Causation, and Article III: An Excursus Because references to article III have played a prominent role in recent standing decisions, it is useful to conclude with a brief treatment of the relationship between the causation requirements, the characterization of injuries, and the case or controversy requirement of article 111.205 The connection between standing limitations and article III is far from clear. Article III limits federal 'courts to cases or controversies, but this limitation does not explicitly require that plaintiffs have a particular stake in the outcome. A case or controversy might exist quite apart from whether there is an injury, legal or otherwise, to the complainant. To explore the problem, it is useful to distinguish among three conceptions of the relationship between article III and standing requirements. The first view would allow Congress to create judicially cognizable injuries whenever it chooses; the second would interpret article III to require a traditional private right; the third would impose some limitations on congressional power to create judicially enforceable rights, but would allow courts to redress regulatory harms of the sort involved in the Center for Auto Safety and similar cases. 205. See generally Berger, supra note 8, at 827 (questioning the historical accuracy of the "personal stake" element of the article III "case or controversy" requirement in Flast v. Cohen); Currie, Judicial Review Under Federal Pollution Laws, 62 Iowa L. Rev. 1221, 1225-47 (1980) (surveying requirements for judicial review under Glean Air Act and Federal Water Pollution Control Act); Currie, supra note 103, at 183-85 (criticizing Court as "unnecessarily stingy" in denying plaintiffs standing in EKWRO); Fallon, supra note 5, at 47-59 (arguing in favor of broad congressional power to create legal rights and therefore standing);Jaffe, supra note 8, at 1037-39 (arguing for a broader definition of "case or controversy"). controversy" is not answered by article III, but instead by Congress and the Constitution in creating legal rights and obligations. power over these requirements as well. What is distinctive about standing is that its existence depends on the creation of a legal right. While there may be some limitations on congressional power to create standing, those limitations, if they exist, are quite insubstantial. See infra notes 221-32 and accompanying text. In all of these settings, however, the New Deal reformation has large implications; but the general relationship between justiciability and the rise of the administrative state is beyond the scope of the present discussion. The second implication is that if Congress has granted such a right, there is no problem under article III. tion permits Congress to create a cause of action, not with the quite distinct question whether the Constitution creates a cause of action of its own force. validity of congressional grant of standing in FOIA cases). For the most part, the question of standing therefore involves the meaning of congressional enactments. 2 18 The Data Processing requirement of "injury in fact" has confused this point. But it is notable that the Supreme Court has also said that this requirement is a creation of Congress in enacting the APA, emphasizing that the APA generally creates standing for those whb are harmed, and that there need be no separate indication of congressional intent to create a cause of action.2 1 9 The downfall of the legal interest test in Data Processing is thus an interpretation of the APA, 220 and the problem of standing in this sense remains within congressional control. of Fair Housing Act of 1968 "establishes an enforceable right to truthful information concerning the availability of housing"); Trafficante, 409 U.S. at 212 (Civil Rights Act of 1968 creates right to protection against housing discrimination). ing text. tively unimportant one in practice, 223 on the claim that the question of standing is for congressional resolution. determination of the tax to a subordinate body, taxpayer has due process right to a hearing). ever, quite ambiguous on this point. See supra note 208. In this respect, the question whether an injury is merely ideological or instead legal is one of positive law; there is no pre- or post-legal metric for distinguishing between the two. This view draws support from the original understanding of the case-or-controversy requirement.2 29 It also draws support from the view, prominent in the postNew Deal period as well as in the founding era, that whether there is a case or controversy, or a legal injury and legal right, cannot be understood independently of what the law provides. The modem network of legal rights may or may not closely resemble the sorts of interests protected at common law, and nothing in the Constitution requires that they do so. There is much to be said, then, in favor of the view that article III does not limit Congress' power to grant standing, and that the only limitations, grounded in article III and the due process clause, are those that prohibit Congress from denying standing in certain cases. The contrary position is based on a peculiar and quite modem revisionist reading of the Brandeis-Frankfurter effort-itself revisionist-to immunize administrative regulation from judicial control. 23 0 Like the second view, and unlike the first, the third approach reads article III as imposing substantive limitations on the sorts of injuries that plaintiffs may invoke; but it would allow courts to redress injuries that do not in any sense resemble those recognized at common law. On this view, Congress could not enact a statute providing, for example, that all citizens may bring suit to redress all official illegality. The requirement of an injury in fact is thus constitutional in status; it is not solely an interpretation of the APA; and merely ideological or law enforcement interests cannot be converted into legal harm by legislative text. The rise of administrative regulation was a deliberate rejection of common-law principles. In particular, regulatory regimes often repudiated common-law baselines for distinguishing between inaction and action, or neutrality and partisanship. In these circumstances, it is not surprising that the principles governing legal control of administrative behavior have largely abandoned common-law categories, allowing courts to remedy violations of statutorily protected interests.