University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1988 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Beyond the Republican Revival 
Beyond the Republican Revival 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Beyond the Republican Revival," 97 Yale Law Journal 1539 (1988). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Beyond  the  Republican  Revival

Cass  R.  Sunsteint

In  this  Article, Professor Sunstein  describes those  aspects of  republicanism
that have  the strongest claim  to  contemporary support, outlines  the  role of
republican thought in  the founding period, and explores some of the implica-
tions of republicanism for modern public law. Sunstein claims  that the basic
republican commitments  involve  (1) deliberation in government; (2) political
equality; (3) universality, or agreement as a regulative ideal; and (4) citizen-
ship.  Professor Sunstein  contends that all  of  these  commitments  played  an
important role during the founding period, generating a  distinctive concep-
tion of governance. In his view,  the common opposition between  liberalism and
republicanism is  a false one; the founders were  liberal republicans-a posi-
tion  that, Sunstein argues, is  superior to  its principal competitors. Sunstein
claims that republican ideas suggest reformation of a number of current areas
of modern public law,  encompassing such contexts as statutory construction,
campaign finance regulation, federalism, and discrimination. Professor Sun-
stein  concludes with  a  discussion of recent proposals for group or propor-
tional representation, arguing that such proposals can be  supported by  refer-
ence to  the republican belief in  deliberative democracy.

For  modern  republicans,  the task  is  not  simply  one  of  excavation.  His-
tory  does  not  supply  conceptions  of  political  life  that  can  be  applied
mechanically  to  current  problems.  Circumstances  change;  theoretical  com-
mitments  cannot  be  wrenched  out  of  context  without  great  risk  of distor-
tion;  contemporary  social  and  legal  issues  can  never  be  resolved  merely
through  recovery  of features,  however  important  and  attractive,  of the  dis-
tant  past.  Difficulties  of  this  sort  severely  complicate  modern  efforts  to
revive  principles  of  classical  republicanism.

In addition,  much  in traditional  republican  thought gives  little cause  for
celebration.  Various  strategies  of exclusion-of  the nonpropertied,  blacks,
and  women-were  built  into the  republican  tradition.  The  republican  be-
lief  in  deliberation  about  the common  good  was  closely  tied  to  these  prac-
tices  of exclusion;  it  cannot  be  neatly  separated  from  them.  In  some of  its

t  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  Law  School  and Department  of Political  Science,
University  of  Chicago.  Earlier  versions  of  this  paper  were  presented  at  the  annual  meeting  of the
American  Philosophical  Association  and  at  the  legal  theory  workshop  at  McGill  University.  Bruce
Ackerman,  Akhil Amar,  Drucilla  Cornell,  Richard  Craswell,  Jon Elster, William  Eskridge,  Richard
Fallon,  Philip  Frickey,  J.  David  Greenstone,  Stephen  Holmes,  Larry  Kramer,  Catharine  MacKin-
non,  Michael  McConnell,  Frank  Michelman,  Martha  Minow,  Richard  A.  Posner,  Stephen
Schulhofer,  Richard  B. Stewart,  Kathleen  Sullivan,  Allan  Sykes,  Mark  Tushnet,  Robin  West,  and
Iris  Young  provided  valuable  comments.

1539

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1539 1987-1988

1540

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

manifestations,  moreover,  the  republican  tradition  has  been  highly  mili-
taristic,  indeed  heroic-exalting,  as  the  model  for public  life,  the  fraternity
of  soldiers  during  wartime.'  Equally  important,  the  republican  belief  in
the  subordination  of  private  interests  to  the  public  good  carries  a  risk  of
tyranny  and  even  mysticism.  The  belief  is  also  threatening  to  those  who
reject  the  existence of a  unitary  public  good,  and who  emphasize  that con-
ceptions  of the  good  are plural,  and  dependent  on  perspective  and  power.'
In  spite  of  all  this, republican  theories  of politics  have  a  tenacious  hold
on  political  actors  and  observers,  inside  and  outside  of the judiciary.  The
characteristically  republican  belief  in  deliberative  democracy  continues  to
influence  both  legal  doctrine  and  contemporary  evaluations  of the  political
process.  Political  advantages  are  generally  sought  through  appeals  to  the
public good,  however  cynical  and transparent  such  appeals  may sometimes
appear.

One  of the  largest  accomplishments  of modern  historical  scholarship  has
been  the  illumination  of  the  role  of  republican  thought  in  the  period
before,  during,  and  after the  ratification  of the  American  Constitution.3  It
is no  longer  possible  to  see  a  Lockean  consensus 4 in  the  founding  period,
or  to  treat  the  framers  as  modern  pluralists  believing  that  self-interest  is
the  inevitable  motivating  force  behind  political  behavior.5  Republican
thought played  a central  role in the  framing  period,  and  it offers  a  power-
ful  conception  of  politics  and  of  the  functions  of  constitutionalism.

Recent  work  in  law  has  started  to  explore  the place  of  republican  the-
ory  in  the  American  constitutional  tradition.6  The  republican  revival  is

1.  See  H.  PITKIN,  FORTUNE  IS  A  WOMAN:  GENDER  AND  POLITICS  IN  THE  THOUGHT  OF  Nic-
COLO  MACHIAVELLI  (1984);  J. WITHERSPOON,  THE  DOMINION  OF  PROVIDENCE  OVER  THE  PAS-
SIONS  OF  MEN,  A SERMON  34  (1778);  P. PAYSON,  A  SERMON  PREACHED  BEFORE THE  HONOURABLE
. OF  THE  STATE  OF  MASSACHUSETTS  BAY  32  (1778).  See  generally  Bloch,  The
COUNCIL 
Gendered Meanings of Virtue in Revolutionary America,  13  SIGNS  37,  44-47  (1987).

. .

2.  This  criticism  comes  from  those  with quite diverse  political  views.  See,  e.g.,  Young,  Impartial-
ity  and the  Civic Public: Some  Implications of Feminist Critiques of Moral and Political Theory, 5
PRAXIS  INT'L 381  (1986);  Young,  Social Movement  Challenges to the Idea of Universal Citizenship,
ETHICS  (forthcoming  1989)  [hereinafter  Young,  Social Movement  Challenges]; S.  HOLMES,  BENJA-
MIN  CONSTANT  AND  THE  MAKING  OF  MODERN  LIBERALISM  148  (1984);  K.  Sullivan,  Against  Re-
publicanism  (1988)  (unpublished  manuscript  on  file  with  author);  Herzog,  Some  Questions for
Republicans, 14  POL.  THEORY  473  (1986).

3.  See,  e.g.,  T.  PANGLE,  THE SPIRIT  OF  MODERN  REPUBLICANISM  (1988);  J.G.A. POCOCK,  THE
MACHIAVELLIAN  MOMENT  (1975);  G.  WOOD,  THE  CREATION  OF  THE  AMERICAN  CONSTITUTION
1776-1787,  at 46-90,  430-67  (1969);  Appleby,  Republicanism in Old  and New  Contexts, 43  WM.  &
MARY  Q. 20  (1986);  Appleby,  The  Social Origins of American Revolutionary Ideology, 64  J.  AM.
HisT.  935  (1977-78);  Banning, Jeffersonian Ideology Revisited: Liberal and Classical Ideas in  The
New  American  Republic,  43  WM.  &  MARY  Q.  3  (1986);  Banning,  Republican Ideology  and the
Triumph  of the  Constitution, 1789  to  1793,  31  WM.  &  MARY  Q.  167  (1974);  Kramnick,  The
"Great National Discussion": The  Discourse of Politics in  1787,  45  WM.  &  MARY  Q.  3  (1988);
Shalhope,  Republicanism  and Early American Historiography, 39  WM.  &  MARY  Q. 334  (1982).

4.  At  least  not  if  Locke  is  understood  in  the  familiar  fashion.  See  L.  HARTZ,  THE  LIBERAL
TRADITION  IN  AMERICA  (1955).  For a different  view,  see,  for  example, J. ASHCRAFT,  JOHN  LOCKE
AND  THE  REVOLUTIONARY  TRADITION  (1986).

5.  See  R.  DAHL,  A  PREFACE  TO  DEMOCRATIC  THEORY  (1956).
6.  See  Michelman,  Supreme  Court,  1985  Term-Foreword: Traces  of Self-Government,  100
HARV.  L.  REV.  4  (1986);  Sherry,  Civic Virtue  and The  Feminine Voice  in Constitutional Adjudica-

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1540 1987-1988

19881

Beyond  the  Revival

1541

now  firmly  in  place, in  legal  scholarship  if not  in legal  doctrine.  The tasks
for  the  immediate  future  are  twofold.  The  first  is  to  spell  out, with  some
particularity,  those  aspects  of  republican  thought  that  have  the  strongest
claim  to  contemporary  support.  The  second  is to  describe  institutional  ar-
rangements  and  doctrinal  shifts,  inside  and  outside  the  courts,  that  might
serve  to  implement  the  most  attractive  features  of  the  republican  vision.
This Article  has two  principal  parts.  The  first is  relatively  abstract.  Its
goal  is  to  outline  and  defend  a  particular  version  of  republican  thought,
one  that  avoids  some  of  the  difficulties  associated  with  competing  concep-
tions  of  public  life,  both  republican  and  antirepublican.  This  version  of
republicanism,  I  argue,  is  not  antiliberal  at  all;"  it  incorporates  central
features  of the  liberal  tradition.  Liberal  republicanism  is characterized  by
commitments  to  four  central  principles.  These  principles  are  related  to
one  another;  each  republican  commitment  serves  to  inform  and  define  the
others.  All  of  the  principles  derive  from  the  republican  understanding  of
individual  and  political  freedom.  All  of  them  provide  distinctive  ways  of
controlling  and  limiting  governmental  power.

The  first  principle  is  deliberation  in  politics,  made  possible  by what  is
sometimes  described  as  "civic  virtue."'  In the  deliberative  process,  private
interests  are  relevant  inputs  into  politics;  but  they  are  not  taken  as  pre-
political  and  exogenous  and  are  instead  the  object  of  critical  scrutiny.

The  second  principle  is  the  equality  of  political  actors,  embodied  in  a
desire  to  eliminate  sharp  disparities  in  political  participation  or influence
among  individuals  or  social  groups.  Economic  equality  may, but  need  not,
accompany  political  equality;  in this  sense,  as  in  others,  the  political  pro-
cess  has  a  degree  of autonomy  from  the  private  sphere.

The  third  principle  is  universalism, exemplified  by the notion  of a com-
mon  good,  and made  possible  by  "practical  reason."  The  republican  com-
mitment  to  universalism,  or  agreement  as  a  regulative  ideal,  takes  the
form  of  a  belief  in  the  possibility  of  settling  at  least  some  normative  dis-
putes  with  substantively  right  answers.

The  fourth  and  final  principle  is  citizenship,  manifesting  itself  in
broadly guaranteed  rights  of participation.  Those  rights  are  designed  both
to  control  representative  behavior  and to  afford  an opportunity  to  exercise

tion, 72  VA.  L.  REv.  543  (1986);  Sunstein,  Interest Groups in American Public Law,  38  STAN.  L.
REv. 29  (1985);  see also Ackerman,  The  Storrs Lectures: Discovering the Constitution, 93 YALE  L.J.
1013  (1984)  (discussing  conceptions  of "normal"  and  "constitutional"  politics  in  framing  period).

7.  Many  recent  writers  have  described  republicanism  as  an  alternative  to  liberalism.  See,  e.g.,
to

Horwitz,  History  and  Theory,  96  YALE  L.J.  1825,  1831-35 
republicanism).

(opposing  liberalism 

(1987) 

8.  Some  of those who value  civic virtue  emphasize  the improvement  of individual  character-as  in
the classical  formulation-while  others  understand  it  as  a  precondition  for  the  achievement  of  social
justice.  On  the  second  view,  civic  virtue  is  necessary  for  participation  in  public  deliberation,  and  it is
instrumental  to  a  well-functioning  deliberative  process.  The  second  view  is  the  principal  object  here.
See infra text  accompanying  notes  55-56.  For an  emphasis  on  character,  see  A.  Kronman, The  Coo-
ley  Lectures  (unpublished)  (on  file  with  The  Yale  Law Journal).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1541 1987-1988

1542

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

and  inculcate  certain  political  virtues.  Citizenship  often  occurs  in  nomi-
nally  private  spheres,  but  its  primary  importance  is  in  governmental
processes.

The  second  part  of  this  Article  is  quite  concrete.  Its  goal  is  to  describe
some  of the  implications  of republicanism,  thus  conceived,  for a  number of
controversies  in modern  public  law. I suggest  that  republican  understand-
ings  call  for  a  reformulation  of  many  current  legal  rules,  inside  and
outside  the  courts.  For example,  republican  themes  would  affect  governing
principles  in  such  contexts  as  campaign  finance  regulation,  federalism,
statutory  construction,  and  discrimination  law.  Recent  proposals  for  pro-
portional  or  group  representation  raise  especially  interesting  issues  here.
While  posing  serious  risks,  such  proposals  raise  important  issues  about
republican  theory,  and  hold  out  considerable  promise.  Efforts  to  ensure
group  representation  can  be  closely  connected  both  with  institutions in  the
original  Constitution  and with  the republican  belief  in deliberative  democ-
racy.  In  all  of these  areas,  the  tasks  of spelling  out  the  contemporary  ap-
peal  of  republican  thought,  and  of  exploring  its  implications  for  tradi-
tional  institutional  arrangements  and  legal  rights,  make  it necessary  to  go
well  beyond  classical  republicanism.

I.  CONCEPTIONS  OF  POLITICS

American  public  law  might  be  understood  as  a  set  of  conflicts  among
competing  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  American  political  life.  Elements
of these  conceptions  played  a role  at the  time  of the  framing;  they  continue
to  influence  modern  disputes.

A.  Pluralism

The first  view,  which  takes  both  descriptive  and normative  forms,  might
be  described  as  pluralist.9  Under  this  view,  politics  consists  of  a  struggle
among  interest  groups  for  scarce  social resources.  Laws  are  a kind of com-
modity,  subject  to  the  forces  of  supply  and  demand.  Various  groups  in
society  compete  for  loyalty  and  support  from  citizens.  Once  they  are  or-
ganized  and  aligned,  they  exert  pressure  on  political  representatives,  who
respond,  in  a  market-like  manner,  to  the  pressures  thus  exerted.  The  ulti-
mate  result  is  political  equilibrium.

9.  As  used  here,  the  term refers  to  interest-group  theories of politics.  For examples,  see  A.  BENr-
LEY,  THE  PROCESS  OF  GOVERNMENT  (1908);  R.  DAHL,  supra note 5;  D.  TRUMAN,  THE  GOVERN-
MENTAL  PROCESS  (1951);  Becker,  A  Theory  of Competition Among  Pressure Groups for Political
Influence, 98  Q.J.  ECON.  371  (1983);  Stigler,  The  Theory of Economic Regulation, 2  BELL J.  ECON.
& MGMT.  Sci.  3  (1971).  For  general  discussion,  see  D.  HELD,  MODELS  OF  DEMOCRACY  186-220
(1987);  Farber  & Frickey,  The Jurisprudence of Public Choice, 65  TEx.  L.  REV.  873  (1987).  I  do
not  use  the  word  "pluralism"  to  refer  to  conceptions  of  politics  and  society  as  involving  different
groups  pursuing  divergent  conceptions  of the  good  life.  See N.  ROSENBLUM,  ANOTHER  LIBERALISM
155-60  (1987).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1542 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1543

The  pluralist  approach  takes  the  existing  distribution  of  wealth,  ex-
isting  background  entitlements,  and  existing  preferences  as  exogenous
variables.  All  of  these  form  a  kind  of  prepolitical  backdrop  for  pluralist
struggle."0  The  goal  of the  system  is  to  ensure  that the  various  inputs  are
reflected  accurately  in  legislation;  the  system  is  therefore  one  of  aggregat-
ing  citizen  preferences.  This  understanding  carries  with  it  a  particular
conception  of  representation,  in  which  officials  respond  to  constituent
desires  and  exercise  little  or  no  independent judgment."1

The  appeal  of the  pluralist  understanding-if  used  normatively-stems
from  its utilitarian  underpinnings,  its  effort  to  respect  current preferences,
and  its  desire  to  avoid  the  risks  of tyranny  that  are  associated  with  active
and  self-conscious  preference-shaping  by  public  officials.  The most  objec-
tionable  exercises  of  governmental  power  are  often  associated  with  ap-
proaches  that  see  character  formation  as  an  end  of  politics.  In  these  re-
spects,  pluralism  is  committed  to  familiar  conceptions  of  majority  rule12
and  to  a  healthy  revulsion  to  regimes  that  take  citizen  preferences  as  an
object  of collective  control.  But  several  risks  threaten  to  undermine  a plu-
ralist  system.  In the  aggregate,  they suggest  that pluralism  is  an altogether
unattractive  conception  of politics.

1.  Bad Preferences and Problems of Unequal Power

The  case  for  pluralism  becomes  much  weaker  if  some  preferences  can
be  shown  to  be  objectionable  or  the product  of unjust  background  institu-
tions.1 3  A  significant  purpose  of  politics  may  be  to  reveal  objectionable
preferences  as  such  through  processes  of political  discussion  and  debate. 4

10.  Existing entitlements  are,  of course,  the  product  of positive  law;  in  this  sense  they  cannot  be
understood  as prepolitical.  See Hale,  Coercion and Distribution in a Supposedly Non-coercive State,
38  POL.  ScI.  Q. 470  (1923).

11.  See H.  PITKIN,  THE CONCEPT  OF  REPRESENTATION  144-67  (1967)  (discussing  this view  and

its  competitors).

12.  This  understanding  seems  implicit,  for  example,  in  Plott, Axiomatic Social Choice Theory: An
Overview and Interpretation, in  RATIONAL  MAN  AND  IRRATIONAL  SOCIETY?  229  (B.  Barry  & R.
Hardin  eds.  1982); see also C.  OFFE, Legislation Through Majority Rule?,  in  DISORGANIZED  CAPI-
TALISM  259  (1985)  (discussing  weaknesses  in  traditional justifications  for  majority rule  and suggesting
reform).  A  different  view  is  presented  in  E.  SPITZ,  MAJORITY  RULE  198-216  (1984)  (defending
majority  rule  in  part  by  reference  to  improvements  in  social  deliberation).

13.  An  external  standard  is  of course  necessary  to  explain why  preferences  are  objectionable  and
to identify  unjust  background  institutions.  Usually  such judgments  depend  on  a  belief that  the conse-
quences  of certain  preferences  are  to  subordinate  social  groups  or  that  preferences  are  partly  a  func-
tion  of social  institutions  that restrict  available  opportunities.  See  infra notes  18-20,  49-52.

14.  Objectionable  preferences  may of course  play a part  in  political  debate,  and they  have resulted
in  laws  based  on  (for  example)  racist  premises;  the  republican  hope  is  that  deliberative  processes  will
reduce  their  incidence.  See  Goodin,  Laundering Preferences, in  FOUNDATIONS  OF  SOCIAL  CHOICE
THEORY  75  (J. Elster  & A.  Hylland  eds.  1986).  Pluralists,  of course,  believe  in  legal  constraints on
private  behavior,  as represented  by  criminal  law and  by  some  aspects  of the common  law  of property,
tort,  and  contract.  To the  extent  that legal  constraints  impose  limits  on  force  and  fraud,  they do  not
take  private  preferences  as exogenous  variables:  The  target  of such  laws is  character as well  as behav-
ior.  The  point  in  the  text  is  that  pluralism  might  be  objectionable  to  those  who  see  a  function  in
"laundering  preferences"  through  discussion  quite  outside  of the  context  of  force  and  fraud.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1543 1987-1988

1544

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

Consider  laws  prohibiting  discrimination  on  the  basis  of  race  or  gender.
Such  laws  owe  their  origin,  at  least  in part,  to  a  perception  that  the  pref-
erences  that  give  rise  to  discrimination  are  objectionable  or  distorted  by
unjust  social  institutions. 15  Preferences  of  that  sort  may  be  objectionable
because  of  their  effects  in  subordinating  a  social  group.  They  may  also
derive  from  various  distortions,  including  the  phenomenon  of  adaptive
preferences  on  the  part  of  victims-preferences  that  are  based  on  the  ab-
sence  of available  opportunities. 6  Preferences  may be  distorted  as  well  by
interest-induced  beliefs  on  the  part  of  the  beneficiaries  of  existing  prac-
tice. 17  A  pluralist system  is  indifferent  among  preferences,  so long  as force
and fraud  are not  involved;  because  it disregards  the sources  and  effects  of
bad  preferences,  such  a  system  will  produce  unacceptable  results.

The  existence  of  objectionable  or  distorted  preferences  suggests  that
politics  should  not  simply implement  citizen  desires,  but  should  also  allow
for  a measure  of critical distance  from  and scrutiny  of those  desires,  bring-
ing new  information  and  different  perspectives  to  bear."  In this sense,  the
political  sphere  should have  a  degree  of autonomy.  The difficulties  of plu-
ralism  in  this  regard  are  compounded  by  the  fact  that  pluralism  tends  to
ignore  the  power  of some  groups  to  limit the  number  and  nature  of issues
set  for  democratic  resolution, 9  or, most generally,  the  fact that  preferences
are  formed  against  the backdrop  of disparities  in  power  and  limitations  in
both  opportunities  and  information."

2.  Countering "Deals": Deliberation More Generally

The  pluralist understanding  increases the  likelihood  of undesirable  law-
making  for  another  reason.  Under  republican  approaches  to  politics,  laws
must be supported  by  argument  and reasons;  they  cannot simply  be fought
for  or  be  the  product  of self-interested  "deals."  Private-regarding  reasons
are  an  insufficient  basis  for  legislation.  Political  actors  must justify  their
choices  by  appealing  to  a  broader  public  good.  This  requirement  has  a

15.  See, e.g.,  Gewirtz,  Choice in the  Transition: School Desegregation and the Corrective Ideal,

86  COLUM.  L.  REV.  728,  745-48  (1986)  (discussing  effects  of segregation  on  preferences).

16.  See J. ELSTER,  SOUR  GRAPES  109-11,  125-40  (1983).
17.  This  idea  is  a prominent  strand  of the  social  contract  tradition.  See J.  RAWLS,  A  THEORY  OF
JUSTICE  136-42  (1971)  (using  device  of  original  position  to  eliminate  distorting  effects  of this  sort).
For  further  elaboration  of  the  role  of self-interest  in  political  attitudes,  see  Akerlof  & Dickens,  The
Economic Consequences of Cognitive Dissonance, 72 AM.  ECON.  REV.  307  (1982);  J.  ELSTER,  MAK-
ING  SENSE  OF  MARX  459-61  (1985);  R.  GEUSS,  THE  IDEA  OF  A  CRITICAL  THEORY  12-22  (1981).
18.  This  idea  is associated  with a  Kantian  idea of individual  autonomy  and  an analogous  concep-
tion of political  freedom.  As  individual  freedom  is seen  in  private  self-determination,  political  freedom
is seen  as  the collective  choice  of ends.  For discussion,  see  H. PrrKIN,  supra note  1, at  7,  240, 281-82,
315-16,  324-25;  T.  NAGEL,  THE  VIEW  FROM  NOWHERE  113-20,  130-37,  166-71  (1986).  On  the
differences  between  politics  and  markets,  see,  for  example,  Manin,  On Legitimacy and Political De-
liberation, 15  PoL  THEORY  338  (1987);  Elster,  The  Market and the  Forum: Three  Varieties of
Political Theory, in  FOUNDATIONS  OF  SOCIAL  CHOICE  THEORY,  supra note  14,  at  103.

19.  See  Bachrach  & Baratz,  The  Two  Faces of Power, 56  AM.  POL.  SCI.  REV.  947  (1962).
20.  See  S.  LUKES,  POWER  (1974);  J.  ELSTER,  supra note  16,  at  125-40.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1544 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1545

disciplining  effect  on  the  sorts  of measures  that  can  be  proposed  and  en-
acted.  The requirement  of appeal  to  public-regarding  reasons  may make  it
more  likely  that  public-regarding  legislation  will  actually  be  enacted.2"

The  central  idea  here  is  that  politics  has  a  deliberative  or  transforma-
tive  dimension.  Its  function  is  to  select  values,  to  implement  "preferences
about  preferences,'
22  or  to  provide  opportunities  for  preference  formation
1
rather  than  simply  to  implement  existing  desires.23  The  point  is  a  quite
general  one,  extending  beyond  discrimination  law  to  environmental  mea-
sures,  regulation  of  broadcasting,  welfare  expenditures,  and  many  other
areas.  Under  the  pluralist  understanding,  there  is  reason  for  skepticism
about  such  laws;  they might appear  to  be impermissible  "rent-seeking,"  or
illegitimate  wealth  transfers. 2  Indeed,  on  pluralist  assumptions  it  is  un-
clear  why laws  should  not  be  bought  and  sold  like  commodities  in  a mar-
ketplace;  such  a  process  of  sale  might  accurately  aggregate  preferences.
But  for  those  who  believe  in  a  deliberative  function  for  politics,  the  mar-
ketplace  metaphor  will  be  misguided,  and  laws  of these  sorts  must  be  un-
derstood  in  nonpluralist  terms.

3.  Utilitarian Malfunctions

Much  of the  appeal  of pluralism  stems  from its  connection  with  utilita-
rianism. 25  But  even  if one  believes  that an  entirely  utilitarian  approach  to
politics  is desirable,  it is by  no  means  clear  that  ordinary majoritarianism,
understood  in  pluralist  terms,  should  be  accepted.

First,  accurate  aggregation  of preferences  through  politics  is  unlikely  to
be  accomplished  in light  of the  conundrums  in developing  a  social  welfare
function.2 6  Public  choice  theory  has  shown  that cycling  problems,  strategic
and  manipulative  behavior,  sheer  chance,  and  other factors  prevent  major-
itarianism  from  providing  an  accurate  aggregation  of  preferences. 27  Sec-

21.  Tocqueville  so  suggested.  See  A.  de  Tocqueville,  Democracy  in America,  in  JOHN  STUART
MILL  ON  POLITICS  AND  SOCIETY 186,  222-23  (G.  Williams  ed.  1976);  see  also W.  NELSON,  ON
JUSTIFYING  DEMOCRACY  94-130  (1980)  (emphasizing  public  deliberation  as  a  value  of  democracy);
J. ELSTER,  supra note  16,  at  35-42  (critically  discussing  this  view).

It  would  of course  be  a mistake  to  exaggerate  the  extent  of this  effect.  Self-interested  motivations
may  merely  be concealed;  the requirement  of deliberation  can  be an  invitation  to  hypocrisy  and deceit.
22.  See  Sunstein,  Legal Interference with Private Preferences, 53  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  1129,  1140

(1986).

23.  Cf Stewart,  Regulation in a  Liberal State: The  Role  of Non-Commodity  Values,  92  YALE
L.J.  1537  (1983)  (discussing  noncommodity  values  in  regulation  and  criticizing  efforts  to  understand
statutes  as  "deals");  Kelman,  On Democracy-Bashing, 74  VA. L.  REV.  199,  224-35  (1988)  (arguing
that  political  choices  involved  in  regulation  must  be  evaluated  according  to  criteria  other  than  "rent-
seeking").

24.  A  framework  of this sort  underlies  some of the  normative  aspects  of the economic  approach  to
regulation.  Almost  every  issue  of  the Journal of Law  and Economics has  at  least  one  contribution
confirming  this  point.

25.  See  Becker,  supra note  9.
26.  See K.  ARROW,  SOCIAL  CHOICE  AND  INDIVIDUAL  VALUES  (2d  ed.  1963);  W.  RIKER,  LIBER-
ALISM  vs.  POPULISM:  A  CONFRONTATION  BErWEEN THE THEORY  OF  DEMOCRACY  AND  THE THE-
ORY  OF  PUBLIC  CHOICE  (1982).

27.  See  W.  RIKER,  supra note  26.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1545 1987-1988

1546

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

ond,  majority  rule  is  indifferent  to  variations  in  intensity  of preferences,2"
and  it is  fanciful  to  think  that  the  various  supplements  to  majoritarianism
in  a  pluralist  democracy-different  levels  of  participation  and  financial
contribution,  for  example-will  take  up  the  slack.

Even  if  these  problems  might  be  surmounted,  one  would  have  to  be
optimistic  indeed  to  believe  that  there  is  an  identity  between  the  result
that  would  be reached  by  the  considered  utilitarian  and  that  which  would
be  reached  by  a  legislature  responding  to  constituent  pressures  as  they  are
generally  imposed.  In  any  representative  democracy,  there  is  simply  too
much  slippage  between  legislative  outcomes  and  constituent  desires. 9
These  various  considerations  converge  on  a  single  conclusion:  Although
pluralist  approaches  are  often  defended  as  a  means  of  ascertaining  the
"public  will,"  that  concept  is  an  incoherent  one  within  pluralist  theory.30
Sometimes  republicans  and  others  invoke  considerations  of  this  sort  in
order  to  support  constitutional  protections  against  the  operation  of  the
public  sphere.  In  particular,  some  observers,  often  drawing  on  public
choice  theory  and  purporting  to  follow  Locke,  argue  in  favor  of  rigid
property  rights  and  severe  restrictions  on  collective  interference  with  the
existing  distribution  of  wealth  and  entitlements."'  But  this  strategy  disre-
gards  the  other  failings  of pluralism.  As  we  will  see,  it also  depends  on an
undefended  belief  in  a  prepolitical  or  exogenous  private  sphere,  greatly
overstates  the  real-world  failings  of  deliberative  government,  and  ignores
the  ways  in  which  existing  distributions  and  preferences  are  a  product  of
law.3 2

4.  Absence  of Participation

Pluralist  approaches  place  no  premium  on  political  participation.  In-
deed,  for  pluralists  the  absence  of political  participation  is  an  affirmative
good, suggesting  general  contentment  with  the  status  quo and  proximity  to
the  equilibrium  point.3  Pluralists  will therefore  be  unwilling to  take  steps

28.  This  is  a  standard  economic  objection.  For  recent  discussion,  see  J.  Elster,  Nuts  and  Bolts

(1987)  (unpublished  manuscript  on  file  with  author).

29.  This  is  the  foundation  of  the  economic  critique  of interest-group  politics.  See,  e.g.,  R.  HAR-

DIN,  COLLECTIVE  ACTION  (1982);  M.  OLSON,  THE  LOGIC  OF  COLLECTIVE  ACTION  (1965).

30.  See Riker  & Weingast,  Constitutional Regulation of Legislative Choice: The  Political Conse-
quences of Judicial Deference to Legislatures, 74  VA.  L.  REV.  373,  381-88  (1988).  One  should  not,
however,  overstate  this  conclusion  by  denying  that  there is  a  connection  between democratic  outcomes
and  the  public  will,  or  by  suggesting  that  nondemocratic  institutions  would  be  as  accurate  as demo-
cratic  ones in  capturing public  desires.  Historical  evidence  suggests  precisely  the  contrary,  as do  recent
developments  in public  choice  theory. See  Farber & Frickey,  Legislative Intent and Public Choice, 74
VA.  L.  REV.  423,  429-37  (1988);  Sen,  Social Choice  and Justice: A  Review  Article, 23  J.  ECON.
LITERATURE  1764,  1770-74  (1985).

31.  See J.  BUCHANAN  & G.  TuLLOCK,  THE  CALCULUS  OF  CONSENT  (1962);  R.  EPSTEIN,  TAK-

INGS:  PRIVATE  PROPERTY  AND  THE  LAW  OF  EMINENT  DOMAIN  (1985).

32.  See  infra notes  49-62  & 221-25.
33.  See,  e.g.,  L.  MILBRATH,  POLITICAL  PARTICIPATION:  How  AND  WHY  Do  PEOPLE  GET  IN-
VOLVED  IN  POLITICS?  (1965);  B.  BERELSON,  P. LAZARSFELD,  & W.  McPHEE,  VOTING:  A  STUDY  OF
OPINION  FORMATION  IN  A  PRESIDENTIAL  CAMPAIGN  (1954).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1546 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1547

to  promote  political  activity.  But  the  absence  of  participation  may  reflect
instead  a  collective  action  problem"'  or  an adaptation  to  practices  that  are
believed  intractable;3 5  and  in  any  case,  a  system  lacking  widespread  par-
ticipation will  suffer  from the failure  to  cultivate  the various  qualities  that
may  accompany  political  life-self-development,  feelings  of  empathy,  so-
cial  solidarity,  and  so forth.36  One need  not  believe  that the political  life  is
uniquely  valuable,  or that  a  system  lacking  widespread  and  frequent  citi-
in order  to  conclude  that po-
zen  participation  is  necessarily  oppressive '3 
litical  activity  is  often  an  important  individual  and  collective  good.

There is  considerable  doubt  about  the descriptive  power  of pluralist  un-
derstandings  for  contemporary  political  life; 8  but  it  would  be  hard  to
deny  that elements  of pluralism  provide  a  central  feature of modern  polit-
ics.  And  in  light  of  the  multiple  failings  of  pluralism,  critics  have  often
pointed  to  republican  conceptions  of  politics  as  possible  alternatives.  Such
conceptions  appear,  at  every  turn,  to  oppose  pluralist  approaches.  Aspects
of  classical  republicanism  found  an  American  home  in  the  work  of  the
antifederalists;  and  antifederalist  thought  has  exerted  a  continuing  influ-
ence  on  American  public  law.  But  elements  of republican  thought  can  be
found  in  the  views  of  the  federalists  as  well.

B.  The  Republican Alternative

Republican  conceptions  of  politics  diverge  substantially  from  one  an-
other;  there  is  no unitary  approach  that  can be  described  as  republican. 9
Classical  republicans  emphasized  the  role  of  the  polis  as  the  locus  for
achieving  freedom  through  active  citizenship.  On  this  view,  political  par-
ticipants  were  to  subordinate  their  private  interests  to  the  public  good
through  political  participation  in  an  ongoing  process  of  collective  self-

34.  See  R.  HARDIN,  supra note  29.
35.  See J. GAVENTA,  POWER AND  POWERLESSNESS  (1980);  J. EISTER,  supra note 16,  at  125-33;
Boudon,  The  Logic of Relative Frustration, in  RATIONALITY  AND  REVOLUTION  245  (M.  Taylor  ed.
1988).

36.  See C.  PATEMAN,  PARTICIPATION  AND  DEMOCRACTIC  THEORY  (1970);  cf. J. EISTER,  supra

note  16  (showing  that such  effects  are "essentially  by-products").

37.  Some  republican  approaches  are  premised  on the  idea,  traceable  to Aristotle,  that political  life
is  the  best  life  for  human  beings  (or  at  least  for  certain  classes  of them).  See,  e.g.,  H.  ARENDT,  ON
REVOLUTION  215-82  (1963);  Frug,  The  City  as a Legal Concept,  93  HARV.  L.  REV.  1059  (1980).
This  view  also  appears  to  underlie  M.  SANDEL,  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  LIMITS  OF  JUSTICE  (1982).
But  modern  republicanism  respects  other  conceptions  of the  good  life  as  well.

38.  Compare  M.  DERTHIcK  &  P.  QUIRK,  THE  PoLrrIcs  OF  DEREGULATION  8-27,  237-58
(1985)  (arguing  that  congressional  behavior cannot  be  explained  by  reference  to  interest-group  pres-
sures)  and S.  KELMAN,  MAKING  PUBLIC  POLICY  44-66  (1987)  (same)  and A.  MAASS,  CONGRESS
AND  THE  COMMON  GOOD  (1983)  (same)  with  Becker,  supra note  9 (discussing  interest-group  power
over  legislative  outcomes)  and Peltzman,  Toward a More General Theory  of Regulation, 19  J.L. &
ECON.  211  (1976)  (same).

39.  For  general  discussion,  see  Pangle,  Civic Virtue:  The  Founders' Conception and the  Tradi-
tional Conception, in  CONSTITUTIONALISM  AND  RIGHTS  (G.  Bryner  &  N.  Reynolds  eds.  1987);
J.G.A.  POCOCK,  supra note  3; Kloppenberg,  The  Virtues of Liberalism: Christianity, Republicanism
and  Ethics in Early American Political Discourse, 74  J.  AM.  HisT. 9  (1987).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1547 1987-1988

1548

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

determination. 40  Civic  virtue  was  thus  a  central  organizing  principle  of
classical  politics.

Many  of those  in the  framing  period defined  republicanism  much  more
generally,  opposing  it  to  monarchy,  aristocracy,  and  despotism.  Madison,
for  example,  defined  a  republic  as  "a  government  which  derives  all  its
powers  directly  or  indirectly  from  the  great  body  of  the  people;  and  is
administered  by  persons  holding  their  offices  during  pleasure,  for  a  lim-
ited  period,  or  during  good  behavior." '

Despite  the  differences  among  various  forms  of  republicanism,  republi-
can  theories  tend  to  be  united  by  four  central  commitments,  and  in  any
event  it is  in  these  commitments  that the  contemporary  appeal  of republi-
can  thought  can  be  located.  The  elaboration  of those  commitments  will  be
necessarily  abstract.  It  would  be  possible  to  describe  versions  of  republi-
canism  that  are  quite  concrete  but  far  less  attractive  to  modern  observ-
ers;42  and  as  we  will  see,  the  republican  commitments,  as  characterized
here,  have  important  implications  for  a  number  of controversies  in modern
public  law.  All  of these commitments  are united  by the republican  concep-
tion  of individual  autonomy  as  involving  selection  rather  than  implemen-
tation  of  ends,  and  the  republican  conception  of political  freedom,  which
prizes  collective  self-determination.43

1.  Deliberation

Many  republican  conceptions  treat  politics  as  above  all  deliberative; 4
and  deliberation  is  to  cover  ends  as  well  as  means.  Although  elements  of
this  idea  can  be  found  in  Aristotle  and,  even  more,  in  Harrington,  the
belief  in  political  deliberation  is  a  distinctly  American  contribution  to  re-
publican  thought."5  The  function  of politics,  on  this  view,  is  not  simply to
implement  existing  private  preferences.  Political  actors  are  not  supposed
to  come  to  the  process  with  preselected  interests  that  operate  as  exogenous
variables.  The  purpose  of  politics  is  not  to  aggregate  private  preferences,
or  to  achieve  an  equilibrium  among  contending  social  forces.  The  republi-
can  belief  in  deliberation  counsels  political  actors  to  achieve  a  measure  of

40.  See  H.  ARENDT,  supra note  37,  at  248-55;  D.  HELD,  supra note  9.
41.  Madison  continued:  "It  is  essential to  such  a  government  that  it  be  derived  from  the  great
body  of the  society,  not  from  an  inconsiderable  proportion,  or  a favored  class of it .... It  is  sufficient
for such  a government  that  the persons  administering  it  be  appointed,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  by
the  people ...." THE FEDERALIST  No.  39,  at 241  (J.  Madison)  (C. Rossiter ed.  1961)  (emphasis  in
original).

42.  See  infra  notes  136-46  and  accompanying  text  (describing  various  forms  of  republican

thought).

43.  See infra text  accompanying  notes  95-100.  On  some  of the conundrums  here, see  T.  NAGEL,

supra note  18,  at  113-20,  130-34,  166-71.

44. 

J.G.A.  POCOCK,  supra note  3,  at 287-90; H.  PITmIN, supra note  11,  at 300-04;  see infra text

accompanying  notes  104-18  (discussing  Madison  and  anti-federalists).

45.  By  contrast,  Rousseau,  an  important  inspiration  for  many  republicans,  did  not  believe  in  de-
liberation  among  the citizenry.  See  J.  RoUssAU,  The  Social Contract, in JEAN  JAcQuES  RouSSEAu:
POLITICAL  WRITINGs  29-30  (F.  Watkins  trans.  1986).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1548 1987-1988

19881

Beyond  the  Revival

1549

critical  distance  from  prevailing  desires  and  practices,  subjecting  these
desires  and  practices  to  scrutiny  and  review.4"

To  say  this  is  not  to  suggest  that  deliberation  calls  for  some  standard
entirely  external  to  private  beliefs  and  values  (as  if  such  a  thing  could  be
imagined).47  The  republican  position  is  instead  that  existing  desires
should be  revisable  in  light  of collective  discussion  and  debate,  bringing  to
bear  alternative  perspectives  and  additional  information.  Thus, for  exam-
ple,  republicans  will  attempt  to  design  political  institutions  that  promote
discussion  and  debate  among  the  citizenry;  they  will  be  hostile  to  systems
that promote  lawmaking  as  "deals"  or  bargains  among  self-interested  pri-
vate  groups;  they  may  well  attempt  to  insulate  political  actors  from  pri-
vate pressure;  and they  may  also  favor judicial review  designed  to  promote
political deliberation  and  perhaps  to  invalidate  laws  when  deliberation  has
not  occurred.

48

A  central  point  here  is  that  individual  preferences  should  not  be  taken
as exogenous  to  politics.' 9  They  are  a function  of existing  practice,  includ-
ing  legal  rules; such  rules  cannot,  without  circularity,  be justified  by refer-
ence  to current  preferences.  As  we  have  seen,  private  preferences  may  be a
product  of  adaptation  by the  disadvantaged"  and  interest-induced  beliefs
on  the  part  of the  relatively  well-off. 1  Republicans  are  thus  unlikely  to
take  existing  preferences  and  entitlements  as  fixed.  Both  are  permissible
objects  of political  deliberation.  In  the  republican  view,  for  example,  the
distribution  of wealth  is a  matter  for  political  disposition;  there  is  no hos-
tility  to redistributive  measures.  Republicans  believe  that if used  as a  term
of opprobrium,  the  notion  of  "rent-seeking"  is  badly  misdirected.

The  republican  belief  in  deliberation  is  aspirational  and  critical  rather
than  celebratory  and  descriptive.  It is  a  basis  for  evaluating  political  prac-
tices.  Modern  republicans  do  not  claim  that  existing  systems  actually  em-
body  republican  deliberation.  The  republican  commitments  may  reveal
that  actual  deliberation,  and  purportedly  deliberative  processes,  are  badly
distorted.  On the  republican  view,  moreover,  the  requirement  of  delibera-

46.  Here  there  is  a connection  between  republicanism  and  conceptions  of politics  associated  with
Kant.  See  I.  KANT,  GROUNDWORK  OF  THE METAPHYSICS  OF  MORALS  114  (H.  Paton trans.  1984).
47.  See M.  NUSSBAUM,  THE FRAGILITY  OF  GOODNESS:  LUCK  AND  ETHICS  IN  GREEK  TRAGEDY
AND  PHILOSOPHY  (1986)  (contrasting  Platonic  belief  in  foundations  with  Aristotelian  practical  rea-
son);  H.  PUTNAM,  THE  MANY  FACES  OF  REALISM  (1987)  (arguing  against  foundationalism);  M.
WALZER,  INTERPRETATION  AND  SOCIAL  CRITICISM  (1987)  (discussing  interpretation  as mode  of so-
cial  evaluation).

48.  See  infra text  accompanying  notes  216-20  & 229-48  (describing  statutory  construction  and

constitutional  controls);  Sunstein,  supra note  6,  at  49-79.

49.  See Manin,  On Legitimacy and Political Deliberation, 15  POL  THEORY  338  (1987);  H.  PIT-
KIN,  supra note  11,  at  93-97;  J.  Rawls,  The  Priority  of  the  Right  (unpublished  manuscript  on  file
with  author);  Beer,  The Strengths of Liberal Democracy, in  A  PROSPECT  OF  LIBERAL  DEMOCRACY
(W.  Livingston  ed.  1979).  On  government  by  discussion  and the  liberal  tradition,  see  infra note  155.
50.  See J. ELSTER,  supra note  16,  at  105-11,121-31; see also K.  BUMILLER,  THE  CIVIL RIGHTS
SOCIETY:  THE  SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION  OF  VICTIMS  26-30  (1987)  (discussing  mechanisms  by  which
victims  of discrimination  decide  not  to  complain  or  to  drop  complaints  once  initiated).

51.  See  supra note  17  and  accompanying  text.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1549 1987-1988

1550

The  Yale  Law  Journal

(Vol.  97:  1539

tion  is not  purely  formal.  The  antonym of deliberation  is  the  imposition  of
outcomes  by  self-interested  and politically  powerful  private  groups;  repub-
licans  emphasize  that  deliberative  processes  are  often  undermined  by  in-
timidation,  strategic  and manipulative  behavior,  collective  action  problems,
adaptive  preferences,  or-most  generally-disparities  in  political  influ-
ence.  The  requirement  of deliberation  is  designed  to  ensure  that  political
outcomes  will  be  supported  by reference  to  a  consensus  (or  at  least  broad
agreement)  among  political  equals.

Thus  understood,  the  requirement  disciplines  political  outcomes,"  car-
rying  with it  constraints  that  exclude  some  results  and  compel  others.  The
requirement  of  deliberation  embodies  substantive  limitations  that  in  some
settings  lead  to uniquely  correct  outcomes.53  Modern  examples  include  the
protection  of  freedom  of  speech  and  the  prohibition  of  discrimination
In  this  respect,  the  republican  commitment
against  blacks  and  women.' 
to  deliberation  is  closely  allied with  the  republican  beliefs  in  equality  and
universalism,  taken  up  below.  The  commitment  to  deliberation  is  particu-
larly  controversial  to  those  who  believe  either  that  its  role  is  inevitably
minimal  in  modern  politics  or  that  even  as  an  aspiration,  deliberation,
standing  by  itself,  is  of little  assistance  in  generating  desirable  outcomes.
The  emphasis  on  deliberation  in  republican  thought  is  closely  allied
with  the  republican  beliefs  that  the  motivating  force  of  political  behavior
should  not  be  self-interest,  narrowly  defined,  and  that  civic  virtue  should
play  a  role  in  political  life.  There  is  no  mystery  to  this  claim;  it  refers
simply  to  the  understanding  that  in  their  capacity  as  political  actors,  citi-
zens  and  representatives  are  not  supposed  to  ask  only  what  is  in  their
private  interest,  but  also  what  will  best  serve  the  community  in  gen-
eral 5'-understood  as  a  response  to  the  best  general  theory  of  social  wel-
fare.  Thus  understood,  the  requirement  accommodates  a  wide  range  of
possible  positions;  but  it  is  a constraint  nonetheless.  Sometimes  the  appeal
to  civic  virtue  is  designed  to  improve  individual  character-a  particularly
important  theme  in  classical  republican  thought.  But  modern  republicans

52.  See  Pitkin, Justice: On  Relating Public to  Private, 9  POL.  THEORY  327,  346-47  (1981).
53.  Whether  and  to  what extent  these  outcomes  are  culturally  specific is  beyond  the scope  of this
discussion.  See,  e.g.,  M.  WALZER,  SPHERES  OF  JUSTICE:  A  DEFENSE  OF  PLURALISM  AND  EQUITY
(1982);  Rawls,  The  Idea of an Overlapping Consensus, 7  OXFORD  J.  LEGAL  STUD.  1 (1987).  The
republican  conception  of political  truth  is, moreover,  better  thought  of as pragmatic  than  foundational-
ist.  See  infra text  accompanying  notes  79-81.

54.  The  idea  here  is  that  in  its  meaning  in  ordinary  language,  the  term  "deliberation" 

includes
constraints  on  inputs  and  outcomes;  as a  consequence,  certain  results  could  not  be  the  product  of a
genuine  deliberative  process.

It  is  important  to  note  as  well  that  antidiscrimination  measures  are  a  product  of a  wide  range  of
social  developments,  not  of deliberation  alone.  Exercises  of social  power  on  the  part  of the  disadvan-
taged,  changing  economic  conditions,  technical  advances,  and other  factors  play an  important  role.  (It
is  ironic  in  this  regard  that  the  prohibition  of sex  discrimination  was  added  by  the  opponents  of  title
VII  and was  adopted  without  deliberation.)

55.  See, e.g.,  J.G.A.  POCOCK,  supra note  3,  at  209  (noting  that political  actors should  look  "to  the
public  good");  see  also J. RAWLS,  supra note  17,  at  361  ("Each  rational  legislator  is  to  vote  his
opinion  as  to  which  laws  and  policies  best  conform  to  principles  of justice.").

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1550 1987-1988

19881

Beyond  the  Revival

1551

invoke  civic  virtue  primarily  in  order  to  promote  deliberation  in the  ser-
vice  of social  justice,  not  to  elevate  the  character  of  the  citizenry.

Republican  approaches  are  often  said  to  be  antagonistic  to  private
rights 5 6-an  understanding  traceable  to  the  fact  that  republicans  see  the
private  sphere  as the  product  of public  decisions,  and  deny  the existence  of
natural  or  prepolitical  entitlements.  Republican  theories  are not,  however,
hostile  to  the  protection  of individual  or  group  autonomy  from  state  con-
trol.  Indeed,  legal  rights  have  quite  consistently  accompanied  republican
systems.57  What  is  distinctive  about  the  republican  view  is  that  it  under-
stands  most  rights  as  either  the  preconditions  for  or  the  outcome  of  an
undistorted  deliberative  process.5 8  Thus,  for  example,  the  principle  of  de-
liberation  argues  in  favor  of  liberty  of  expression  and  conscience  and  the
right to  vote;  these  are  the  basic preconditions  for republican  deliberation.
Liberal  systems  could  be,  and  have  in  fact  been,  founded  on  premises  of
this  sort;5 9  but understandings  that point to  prepolitical  or natural  rights"0
are  entirely  foreign  to republicanism.  On  the republican  point of view,  the
existence  of realms  of private  autonomy  must be justified  in public  terms.
The  difference  is illustrated  by different  approaches  to  private  property.
Republicans  have  historically  believed  in  the  importance  of  property
rights as  a shield  against the state  and  as a  guarantor  of security,  indepen-
dence,  and  virtue.6"  Modern-day  republicans  might  well  share  that  view;
but because  of the  republican  emphasis  on  the social  construction  of prop-
erty  rights,  republicans  are  hardly  hostile  to  redistribution  or to  collective
efforts  to  reassess  the  existing  distribution  of  wealth  and  entitlements.6
Indeed,  because  of  the  republican  emphasis  on  the  social  conditions  for
republican  deliberation,  republican  commitments  point  powerfully  in  the
direction  of equalizing  political  influence-a  point  to  which  I  now  turn.

56.  See, e.g.,  Sandel,  The Procedural Republic and the Unencumbered Self, 12  POL. THEORY  81

(1984).
57. 

It is  noteworthy  here  that it was  the  antifederalists,  closely  associated  with republican  thought,

who  were  most  strongly  in  favor  of  a  bill  of  rights  during  the  framing  period.

58.  Notions of this  general  sort are  at work  in J.  RAWLS,  supra note  17,  and J. HABERMAS,  THE
PHILOSOPHICAL  DISCOURSE  OF  MODERNITY  294-326  (1987).  See also D.  HELD,  supra note  9,  at
182,  298-99  (discussing  "ideal  normative  agreement").

59.  See J. RAWLS,  supra note  17,  at  205-21  (discussing  liberty  of  conscience);  B.  ACKERMAN,
SOCIAL  JUSTICE  IN  THE  LIBERAL  STATE  4-10,  357-59  (1980).  Both  of these  efforts  have  much  in
common  with  republican  understandings  as  set  out here.  See  also J. HABERMAS,  supra note  58,  at
294-326  (suggesting  nondistorted  communicative  action  as  regulative  ideal  for  politics).

60.  For  modem  examples,  see  R.  EPSTEIN,  supra note  31,  at  3-18;  R.  NOzIcK,  ANARCHY,

STATE,  AND  UTOPIA  (1974).

61. 

See J.G.A.  POCOCK,  supra note  3,  at  386-87,  390  (discussing  Harrington);  Pocock,  Oceana;
Its Argument and Character, in  THE POLITICAL  WORKS  OF  JAMES  HARRINGTON  43, 68  [hereinaf-
ter Pocock,  Argument and Character] (J.G.A.  Pocock  ed.  1977);  Pocock,  The History of the Ideology:
Harrington's Ideas After  His  Lifetime,  in  id. at  150-51  [hereinafter  Pocock,  Harrington's Ideas]
(discussing  Jefferson).

62.  See  Dahl,  On  Removing  Certain Impediments  to  Democracy in the  United States, in  THE

MORAL  FOUNDATIONS  OF  THE  AMERICAN  REPUBLIC  (R.  Horwitz  ed.  1985).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1551 1987-1988

1552

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

2.  Political Equality

Many  republican  writers  have  placed  a  high  premium  on  political
equality.  Political  equality,  in  republican  terms,  is  understood  as  a  re-
quirement that  all individuals  and  groups  have  access  to  the  political  pro-
cess;  large  disparities  in  political  influence  are  disfavored. 3  Republicans
are  likely  to  be  highly  receptive,  for  example,  to  measures  designed  to
reduce  the  effects  of wealth  in the  political  process6 4 or  to furnish  access  to
the  media.6"  On  at  least  some  versions  of  the pluralist  conception  of  poli-
tics,  such  measures  point  in  exactly  the  wrong  directions.  Government  is
inevitably  the  enemy  of  freedom  of expression;  the  distribution  of private
power  is  off limits  to  politics.6 6  By  contrast,  many  republican  writers  em-
phasized  the  close  connection  between  republican  systems  and  economic
equality.  Dramatic  differences  in  wealth  and  power  are,  in  this  view,  in-
consistent  with  the  underlying  premises  of  a  republican  polity.  Montes-
quieu  was  particularly  insistent  on  this  point,  envisioning  equality  as  a
necessary  precondition  for  republicanism. 7  Even  for  republicans  who  ac-
cept  a  large  degree  of  economic  inequality,  sharp  disparities  in  political
influence  are  a  severe  source  of  concern. 68

63.  For  Madison's  view,  see  supra note  41;  infra note  75.  On  this  score,  there  is  a  connection
between  the republican  belief  in  political  equality  and  some  pluralist  efforts  to  promote  access  to  the
political  process,  see,  e.g.,  J. ELY,  DEMOCRACY  AND  DisTRusT  (1980),  but  the  pluralist  view places
little  premium  on  deliberation  or  citizenship.

Of  course  the  republican  aspiration  to  political  equality  was  violated  by important  features  of re-
publican  practice.  The  relationship  between  the  republican  belief  in  political  equality  and republican
social  hierarchies  was  quite  complex;  republicans  saw  political  equality  in  surprising  places.  See
J.G.A.  POCOCK,  supra note  3,  at  467-70;  H.  PITKIN,  supra note  11,  at  23-90.

64.  See  infra notes  204-07.
65.  See  infra note  206.
66.  Buckley  v.  Valeo,  424  U.S.  1  (1976);  52  Fed.  Reg.  31,768  (1987)  (decision  by  FCC  to repeal
fairness  doctrine).  It  is  important  to  note  in  this  connection  that  some  pluralists,  growing  out  of the
utilitarian  tradition,  seek  to  minimize  side-constraints  on  government  in  order  not  to  interfere  with
political  struggle.  See,  e.g.,  Easterbrook,  The  Supreme Court,  1983  Term-Foreword: The  Court
and the Economic System,  98  HARV.  L. REv.  5  (1984).  Other commentators,  believing in  pluralism  as
an  accurate  description  of  politics,  fearful  of  "rent-seeking,"  and  purporting  to  be  associated  with
Locke,  attempt  to  create  rigid,  property-based  barriers  to  government  action.  See  R.  EPSTEIN,  supra
note  31.  Both  of these  views  are  at  odds  with  republicanism.

67.
Love  of the  republic  in  a  democracy,  is  a  love  of the  democracy;  love  of the  democracy  is  that
of equality.  Love  of the  democracy  is  likewise  that  of  frugality.  As  every  individual  ought  to
have  here  the  same  happiness  and  the  same  advantages,  they  ought  consequently  to  taste  the
same  pleasures  and  to  form  the  same  hopes;  which  cannot  be  expected  but  from  a  general
frugality.  The  love  of equality  in  a  democracy  limits  ambition  to  the  sole  desire,  to  the  sole
happiness  of doing greater  services  to  our  country  than  the  rest of  our  fellow  citizens .... 
A
true  maxim  it  is  therefore,  that  in  order  to  love  equality  and  frugality  in  a  republic,  these
virtues  must  have  been  previously  established  by  law.

MONTESQUIEU,  THE  SPIRIT  OF  LAWS  bk.  V,  chs.  iii-iv  (D.  Carrithers  ed.  1977).

68.  See infra note  75  (discussing  Madison);  see also H.  PrrKIN,  supra note  1, at  88-90;  J.G.A.
POCOCK,  supra note  3,  at  258  (discussing  political  equality  amid  economic  disparities),  467-70,  537
(distinguishing  equality  of  position  from  republican  idea  of political  equality);  Pocock,  Oceana: Its
Ideological Context, in  THE  POLITICAL  WORKS  OF  JAMES  HARRINGTON  15,  18  [hereinafter  Pocock,
Ideological Context]  (J.G.A.  Pocock  ed.  1977)  (describing  republican  inequality  as  "relations  of de-
pendence  among  citizens  who  should  be  equally subject  to none  but the  public power");  cf. S.  VERBA
& G.  ORREN,  EQUALITY  IN AMERICA:  THE  VIEW  FROM THE ToP 7-20  (1985)  (discussing  American

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1552 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1553

Some  of  the  American  antifederalists  emphasized  the  threats  of  com-
mercialism  and  argued  in  favor  of material  equality.  Thus Centinel  wrote
that  a  "republican,  or  free  government,  can  only  exist  where  the  body  of
the  people  are  virtuous,  and  where  property  is  pretty  equally  divided;  in
such  a  government  the  people  are  the  sovereign  and  their sense  or  opinion
is  the  criterion  of  every  public  measure;  for  when  this  ceases  to  be  the
case,  the  nature  of the  government  is  changed,  and  an aristocracy,  monar-
chy  or  despotism  will  rise  on its  ruin." 9  Thus  Cato  wrote  that "Domin-
. . An  Equality  of Estate  will  give  an  Equality  of
ion  follows  Property  .
Power;  and  an  Equality  of  Power  is  a  Commonwealth,  or  Democracy,"
. that
and feared  that  "Very  great  Riches  in  private  Men  .
0
Balance  of  Property  and  Power,  which  is  necessary  to  a  Democracy. 1
7
Captain  Welton  claimed  that  for  a  popular  or  democratic  system  "an
equal  distribution  of  property  was  necessary. 11   It  should  not  be  surpris-
ing that  a  disproportionate  number  of those  in  favor  of paper  money  and
debtor  relief  legislation  fell  within  the  antifederalist  camp. 2

. . destroy  .

.

The  republican  belief  in  political  equality  is  itself highly  controversial,
as  the  debate  over  campaign  finance  regulation  reveals.73  The notion  that
political  equality  depends  on  economic  equality  is  even  more  so,  and  has
hardly  been  shared  by all  republican  theorists."4  But  many  of the  Ameri-
can  framers,  including  Madison,  expressed  concern  about  both  political
and  economic  inequality. 5

commitment  to  political  equality  but  ambivalence  about  economic  equality);  S.  VERBA,  ELITES  AND
THE  IDEA  OF  EQUALITY  264-65  (1987)  (noting that  many people not  committed  to  economic  equality
believe  in  political  equality).

69.  THE  ANTI-FEDERALIST  16  (H.  Storing  ed.,  M.  Dry  abr.  1985).
70.  CATO'S  LETTERS  113,  161,  207.
71.  Middlesex  Gazette  (Middletown,  Conn.), June  18,  1787.
72.  See  J.T. MAIN,  THE  ANTI-FEDERALISTS:  CRrrIcs  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION  1781-1788,  at

162-67,  261-70  (1981).

73.  See  Buckley  v.  Valeo,  424  U.S.  1  (1976).
74.  See  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  10  (J.  Madison)  (including  equal  distribution  of  wealth  as  "an
improper  and  vicious  project").  Burke of  course  believed  in  political  deliberation  but  not in  equality;
for  a  modern  illustration  of a  similar  view, see  A.  Kronman, supra note  8.  On  some  of  the  risks  in
such  approaches,  see  infra  text  accompanying  notes  249-65  (discussing  value  of  proportional
representation).

75.  Consider  these  excerpts  from  Madison's  list of the  means  of combating  the  "evil  of  parties":
1. By  establishing  a  political  equality  among  all. 2.  By  withholding  unnecessary opportunities
from a  few, to  increase  the inequality  of property, by  an immoderate,  and especially  an  unmer-
ited,  accumulation  of riches.  3.  By  the  silent  operation  of  laws,  which,  without  viblating  the
rights  of  property,  reduce  extreme  wealth  towards  a  state  of  mediocrity,  and  raise  extreme
indigence  towards  a  state  of comfort.

14  J.  MADISON,  THE  PAPERS  OF  JAMES  MADISON  197-98  (R.A.  Rutland  ed.  1983)  (emphasis  in
original).

See  also  Jefferson's  suggestion:
I  am conscious  that an equal  division  of property  is  impracticable.  But the  consequences  of this
enormous  inequality  producing  so  much  misery  to  the  bulk  of  mankind,  legislatures  cannot
invent  too  many  devices  for  subdividing  property,  only  taking  care  to  let  their  subdivisions go
Another  means  of  silently
hand  in  hand  with the  natural  affections  of  the  human  mind .... 
lessening  the inequality  of property  is to  exempt all  from  taxation  below a certain  point,  and to
tax  the  higher  portions  of property  in  geometrical  progression  as  they  rise.  Whenever  there  is
[sic)  in  any  country,  uncultivated  lands  and  unemployed  poor,  it  is  clear  that  the  laws  of

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1553 1987-1988

1554

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

3.  Universalism: Agreement as  a Regulative Ideal

Republican  thought  is  characterized  by  a  belief  in  universalism,  a  term
that I  will  use in  a somewhat  idiosyncratic  sense.  The  republican  commit-
ment  to  universalism  amounts  to  a  belief  in  the  possibility  of  mediating
different  approaches  to  politics,  or  different  conceptions  of  the  public
good,  through  discussion  and  dialogue. 6  The  process  of  mediation  is
designed  to  produce  substantively  correct  outcomes,  understood  as  such
through  the  ultimate  criterion  of agreement  among  political  equals.  It  is
because  of the  belief  in  universalism  that republican  approaches  posit  the
existence  of a  common  good,  to  be found  at  the  conclusion  of a well-func-
tioning  deliberative  process."  Republicans  thus  reject  ethical  relativism
and  skepticism,  and  believe  that  different  perspectives  are  sometimes  sub-
ject  to  mediation  both  in  theory  and  in  the  real  world.  The  institutional
consequence  is  that  republicans  will  be  hostile  to  bargaining  mechanisms
in  the  political  process 8  and  will  instead  seek  to  ensure  agreement  among
political  participants.  The  republican  belief  in  agreement  as  a  regulative
ideal,  and  the  republican  conception  of  political  truth,  are  pragmatic  in
character.  They  do  not  depend  on  a  belief  in  ultimate  foundations  for
political  outcomes.7 9

Under  pluralist  assumptions,  the  notion  of  a  common  good  is  alterna-
tively  mystical  or  tyrannical.8"  Republican  theories,  on  the  other  hand,

property  have  been  so  far  extended  as to  violate natural  right.  The  earth is given  as a common
stock  for  man  to  labor  and  live  on.

8  T. JEFFERSON,  THE  PAPERS  OF  THOMAS  JEFFERSON  681-82  (J. Boyd  ed.  1953).

See  also  T.  PAINE,  Dissertation on  the  First Principles of Government,  in  5  LIFE  OF  THOMAS
PAINE 221  (1795)  ("The true and only  true basis  of representative  government  is  equality of rights.");
4  J.  ELLIOTT, DEBATES  OF  THE  SEVERAL  STATE  CONVENTIONS  ON  THE  ADOPTION  OF  THE  FED-
ERAL  CONSTITUTION 320-23  (1888)  ("mediocrity  of  fortune  is  a  leading  feature  in  our  national
character  .
. we  may with  safety  assert  that  the great  body  of national  wealth  is  nearly  equally  in
the  hands of the  people,  among  whom  there  are  few  dangerously  rich  or  few  miserably  poor;  that we
may  congratulate  ourselves  with  living  under  the  blessings  of  a  mild  and  equal  government,  which
knows  no distinctions  but those of merits or  talents-under a government whose  honors  and duties  are
equally  open  to  the  exertions  of all  her  citizens")  (remarks  of Pinckney).

.

76.  See  J.G.A.  POCOCK,  supra note 3,  at  255  (discussing  republican  "function  of  universalizing
decision,  of ensuring  that  it was  free  from  corrupting  particular  interests.  The  role  of  the many  was
less  to  assert  the  will  of  the  non-elite  than  to  maximize  the  impersonality  of government.");  see also
infra notes  108-17  (discussing  Madison).

77.  See J.G.A.  POCOCK,  supra note 3,  at  132-36;  H. PITKIN,  supra note  11,  at  85-87.  Of course

this  process  occurs  within  cultural  limits.

78.  See,  for  example,  the critical  discussion  of regulatory  negotiation  in  Funk, When  Smoke  Gets
in  Your  Eyes:  Regulatory Negotiation and  the  Public Interest-EPA's Woodstove  Standards, 18
ENVTL.  L.  55  (1987).

79.  For  the  pragmatic  view,  see  J. DEWEY,  THE  QUEST  FOR  CERTAINTY  259,  265,  272-73
(1929)  (claiming that  there  is a  need  for critical  reflection  on  the "conditions  under  which  objects  are
enjoyed"  and  "the  consequences  of  esteeming  and  liking  them"  and  arguing  that  'judgments  about
values are judgments about that which  should regulate the formation of our desires, affections and
enjoyments"  (emphasis  in  original));  H.  PUTNAM,  supra note  47;  C.  PEIRCE,  Pragmaticism in Retro-
spect:  A  Last  Formulation, in  PHILOSOPHICAL  WRITINGS  OF  PEIRCE  (J.  Buhler  ed.  1955);
Michelman,  Law's Republic, 97  YALE  L.J.  1493  (1988).

80.  See  J.  SCHUMPETER,  CAPITALISM,  SOCIALISM,  AND  DEMOCRACY  (1976).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1554 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1555

rely  on the  deliberative  functions  of politics  and  on practical  reason," x and
embrace  the  notion  of  the  common  good  as  a  coherent  one.  To  some  de-
gree  this  belief depends  on  a commitment  to  political  empathy, 2  embodied
in  a  requirement  that  political  actors  attempt  to  assume  the  position  of
those who  disagree.  Political  outcomes  are,  on this  view, not  limited  to the
achievement  of  Pareto  improvements  or  to  the  supply  of  collective  goods.
Measures  that  attempt  to  select  and  pronounce  values-embodied  in,  for
example,  broadcasting  regulation,  environmental  measures,  or  antidis-
crimination  law-attest  to  the  republican  belief  in  universalism.  Such
measures  represent  the  outcome  of a  deliberative  process  among  political
equals;  they  do  not  take  existing  preferences  and  practices  as  exogenous.
To say  this is  not to  suggest  that republicans  believe  in a  unitary  public
good,  or  that  they  deny  that  differently  situated  individuals  and  groups
will  frequently  be unable  to  resolve  their disagreements  through  conversa-
tion.8 3  Sometimes  compromises  are  necessary;""  sometimes  there  will  be
political  losers;  some  issues-religion  is  a  familiar  example-should  be
entirely  off-limits  to  politics.8 3  It would  be  fanciful  to  suggest  that  differ-
ent  conceptions  of the  good  life  can  or  should always  be  mediated through
politics.  The republican  position  is  not that  every  issue  is subject  to  politi-
cal  resolution;  it  is  instead  that  some  questions  can  yield  general  agree-
ment  through  deliberation.  A  conception  of  politics  that  disregards  this
fact  will  be  doomed  to  repeat  the  failings  of  pluralism.

4.  Citizenship

Republican  approaches  place  a  high  premium  on  citizenship  and  par-
ticipation,88  and  thus  seek  mechanisms  both  for  citizen  control  of national

81.  See  Michelman,  supra note  6,  at 24-36.
82.  See Okin, Reason and Feeling in Thinking about Justice, in ETHICS  (forthcoming  1989); see
also J.  RAWLS,  supra note  17,  at 358  ("In everyday  life the  exchange of opinion  with others  checks
our  partiality  and  widens  our  perspective;  we are  made  to  see  things  from  their  standpoint  and  the
limits  of our  vision  are  brought  home  to  us.").

[U]niversalism  .

83. 
. . plays  a part  [in politics],  but it is  not  assumed at the  start. It seems  to
be  the  ideal  term  of  the  process.  In  truth,  no  party  will  ever  become  an  actually  universal
party;  there will always  remain  opponents;  this  is the  core  of political  pluralism. Nevertheless
the structure  of the  deliberative  system  usually  makes  the  protagonists  strive  to  enlarge  their
points of view and  propose more  and more  general positions.  There is  a sort of competition  for
generality.

Manin,  On Legitimacy and Political Deliberation, 15  PoL  THEORY  338,  358-59 (1987);  see also S.
WHITE,  THE  RECENT  WORK  OF  JtURGEN  HABERMAS  75-77 (1988)  (discussing role  of compromise);
E.  SprTz,  MAJORITY  RULE  211-16  (1984)  (discussing  compromise,  deliberation,  and  majority  rule).

84.  See  S.  WHITE,  supra note  83,  at 75-77.
85.  This  exclusion  of religion from  politics has  been  based  both  on  the notion  that religious  con-
viction  is  a matter  of private  right and  on the  view  that removal  of religion from  the  political  agenda
protects  republican  politics  by ensuring  against  stalemate  and  factionalism.  In  this  somewhat  ironic
latter sense,  rights  are  preconditions  for  republican  deliberation.  See Holmes,  Gag Rules and Democ-
racy, in  CONSTITUTIONALISM  AND  DEMOCRACY  (J. Elster  ed.  1988).

86.  See  Pocock,  Harrington's Ideas, supra note  61,  at 4,  142-44,  393-94  (describing  Harring-
ton's  effort  to  construct "a  scheme of participation  for all citizens,  based on  the  frequent assemblies  of
local  communities").

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1555 1987-1988

1556

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

institutions  and  for  decentralization,  local  control,  and  local  self-determi-
nation.  A large  purpose  of participation  is  to monitor  the  behavior  of rep-
resentatives  in  order  to  limit  the  risks  of  factionalism  and  self-interested
representation.  But  on  the  republican  view,  political  participation  is  not
only  instrumental  in  the  ordinary  sense; it is also  a vehicle  for  the  inculca-
tion  of  such  characteristics  as  empathy,  virtue,  and  feelings  of  commu-
nity8' 7  (and this  is  so  even  if the  motivation  for participation  is  instrumen-
tal"').  The  belief  in  citizenship  is  part  of  the  republican  antipathy  to
certain  versions  of  political  individualism.  It  repudiates  approaches  that
place  no  premium  on  political  participation  as  an  independent  good;
republicans 
to  provide  outlets  for  the  exercise  of
citizenship.

therefore  attempt 

According  to  the  antifederalists,  for  example,  representation  was  at  best
a  necessary  evil,  and  its  risks  were  to  be  limited  by  ensuring  that  public
officials  would  be  tightly controlled  by  the  citizenry.  It was  for  this reason
that  in  evaluating  the  institutions  of  the  proposed  Constitution,  the  anti-
federalists  were  least  suspicious  of  the  House  of  Representatives  and  re-
garded  the  President  and  the judiciary  with  most  alarm;  the  Senate  was
an  intermediate  case.8"

Allied  with  this  idea  is  the  familiar  belief  that  republican  systems
should  be  small  and  decentralized.  A  large  republic  threatens  to  diminish
the  connection  between  rulers  and  ruled  and  decrease  opportunities  for
participation.  "[T]he  civic  humanist  ideal  had  originated  in  a  re-assertion
of the  vita activa, and  it was  the  ultimate  goal  of  the citizen  to  assert  his
virtue  in  action,  of which  the republic  was  the  frame."9  A  large  republic
would  thus  tend  to  produce  corruption,  the  greatest  obstacle  to  a  well-
functioning  republican  system.  Moreover,  and  equally  important,  the  re-
publican  belief  in  deliberation  about  the  common  good  is  most  easily  sus-
tained  when  there 
is  homogeneity  and  agreement  about  foundations.
Where  such  agreement  is entirely  absent,  deliberative  processes  may  break
down."1  A  belief  in  decentralization  and  a  fear  of the  diversity  of a  large
republic  naturally  accompany  this  concern.  This  point  raises  important
difficulties  for  efforts to  revive  republican  thought  in  a large  and  heteroge-
neous  nation.

At  the  same  time,  traditional  republican  thought  was  hostile  to  com-

87.  See  supra  note  36.
88.  See  J.  ELSTER,  supra note  16,  at 91-100,  which  shows  that these  effects  cannot  plausibly  be
the motivating  force  for political  participation;  they  must instead  be  "essentially  by-products"  of activ-
ity  engaged  in  for  instrumental  purposes.

89.  See  J.T.  MAIN,  supra note  72,  at  135-42.
90.  See  Pocock,  Ideological  Context, supra note  68,  at  18.
91.  The  antifederalist  Brutus emphasized  this  point:  "In  a republic,  the  manners,  sentiments,  and
interests  of the  people  should  be  similar. If  this  be  not  the  case,  there  will  be  a  constant  clashing  of
opinions;  and  the representatives  of one  part  will be  continually  striving  against those  of the other."  2
THE  COMPLETE  ANTIFEDERALIST  369  (H. Storing  ed.  1980).  But see infra text  accompanying  notes
126-27,  201-02  (discussing  importance  of  disagreement  to  republican  deliberation).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1556 1987-1988

1988] 

Beyond  the  Revival 

1557

merce  and  luxury.92  Commercial  development  tends,  in  this  view,  to  pro-
duce  avarice  and  to  weaken  the  attachment  to  the  public  good  on  which
republican  systems  depend.  Other  forms  of republicanism  approach  com-
merce  quite  differently,  regarding  it as  a  means  of  achieving  cordial  rela-
tions  among  potential  adversaries  and  thus  of  softening  social  tensions.9"
The  four  basic  republican  principles  are  closely  related  to  one  another.
For  example,  the  commitment  to  political  equality  is  allied with  the belief
in  deliberation.  The  norm  of  equality  constrains  both  inputs  and  outputs
of  the  deliberative  process;  particular  groups  may  not  be  excluded  from
the  process,  and  results  that  subordinate  politically  weak  groups  are  pro-
scribed.94  The  belief in universalism  and agreement  as  a regulative  ideal is
a natural  consequence  of the  republican  faith  in deliberation  and  political
equality.  Citizenship  is a  predicate  for  political deliberation,  and  the norm
of  political  equality  has  consequences  for  the  desirable  forms  of  citizen-
ship.  The  various  republican  commitments  thus  help  to  qualify  and  in-
form  each  other.

The  commitments  are in  turn  traceable  to  the  republican  conception  of
individual  and  political  freedom.  On this  view, individual  freedom  consists
not  in  the  implementation  but  instead  in  the  selection  of  ends.9 5  Such  a
process  emphasizes  the  existence  of  second-order  preferences,9 6  the  value
of overcoming  weakness  of the  will, 
the  possibility  that private  ends  have
been  distorted  by  unjust  social  institutions,  and  the  importance  of increas-
ing  available  opportunities  and  information.  The  republican  commitment
to  political  freedom  is  a  generalization  of  these  ideas. 98  Although  alert  to
possible  malfunctions  in  the  governmental  process,  republicans  envision
that  process  as  a  forum  in  which  alternative  perspectives  and  additional
information  are  brought  to  bear,  problems  are  occasionally  revealed  to  be
systemic  rather  than  individual,99  second-order  preferences  may  be  vindi-

92.  MONTESQUIEU,  THE  SPIRIT OF  LAWS,  bk.  XX,  ch.  ii  (spec. ed.  1984)  (Dublin  1751)  ("We
see  that  in  countries  where  the  people  are  actuated only by  the spirit of commerce,  they  make a  traffic
of all  the  humane,  all  the  moral  virtues;  the  most  trifling  things,  those  which  humanity  would  de-
mand,  are  there  done,  or  there  given,  only  for  money.").

93.  See  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  12  (A.  Hamilton);  T.  PAINE,  Rights  of Man,  in  7  LIFE  OF
THOMAS  PAINE  6-7  (1792)  ("I  have been an  advocate  for commerce,  since  I  am a friend  to its  effects.
It is  a  pacific  system,  operating  to unite  mankind  by  rendering  nations,  as  well  as  individuals,  useful
to  each  other.").  See generally A.  HIRSCHMAN,  THE  PASSIONS  AND  THE  INTERESTS  (1973)  (discuss-
ing  softening  effects  of commerce).

94.  See  Goodin,  supra note  14,  at 93-96  (discussing  role  of deliberation  as  a  constraint  on  racist

preferences);  supra note  41  (Madison's  view).

95.  For  recent  discussion,  see  J.  ELSTER,  supra note  16,  at  15-26;  R.  LINDLEY,  AUTONOMY
63-70  (1980);  R.  YOUNG,  PERSONAL  AUTONOMY:  BEYOND  NEGATIVE  AND  POSITIVE  LIBERTY
49-62  (1986).

96.  See supra text accompanying  notes  22-25;  Frankfurt, Freedom of the Will and the Concept of

97.  See  generally Elster,  Weakness  of the  Will  and the Free Rider Problem,  1 ECON.  & PHIL.

98.  Cf. D.  HELD, supra note  9,  at 270-73  (discussing  centrality of autonomy  to seemingly  diverse

a Preference, 68  J.  PHIL.  5  (1971).

264  (1985).

conceptions  of  democracy).

99.  See  H.  PITKIN,  supra note  11,  at  347-49.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1557 1987-1988

1558

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

cated,  and  collective  action  problems  and  weakness  of  the  will  may  be
overcome.  As  we  will  see,  these  ideas  have  powerfully  influenced  the  lib-
eral  tradition  as  well. 00

C.  American Constitutionalism

There can  be  little  doubt that elements  of both  pluralist  and  republican
thought  played  a  role  during  the  period  of  the  constitutional  framing.
John Adams,  for  example,  was  at times  quite  skeptical  about  the  idea  that
anything  other  than  self-interest  could  be  the  basis  for  political  behav-
ior.101  Noah  Webster  wrote  that  "the  system  of  the  great  Montesquieu"
might  be  improved  by  removing  the  word  "virtue"  whenever  it  appears  in
The  Spirit of Laws  and  replacing  it  with  "property  or  lands  in  fee  sim-
ple."102  Patrick Henry  said that the "real  rock of political  salvation  is  self-
love,  perpetuated  from  age  to  age  in  every  human  breast,  and  manifested
in  every  action ....  When  we  consult  the  common  good,  we  consult  our
own."103

More  important,  much  of Madison's  own  work,  most  notably  Federal-
ist No.  10,  reflects  skepticism  about  important  elements  of classical  repub-
lican thought.  Thus Madison  believed  that a  small  republic would  be  torn
by  factional  warfare,  endangering  both  private  rights  and  the  public
good.10  Hamilton  expressed  similar  views.1 5  Indeed,  central  features  of
the  framers'  thought  consisted  of  fears  about  the  consequences  of  decen-
tralization  and  widespread  citizen  participation, 0"  lack  of  enthusiasm  for
material  equality,107  belief  in  the  social  and  economic  advantages  of  a
commercial  republic,  and  a  thoroughly  modern  recognition  that  self-inter-
est  is  often  the  mainspring of political  behavior.  In  such  ideas  one  can  find
a  rejection  of  central  features  of  traditional  republicanism.

At  the  same  time,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  elements  of  republican
thought  played  an  important  role  in  the  framing  period. 0  For  example,

100.  See  infra text  accompanying  notes  154-60.
101. 

See J.  ADAMS,  Defence  of the  Constitution of Government of the United States, in  6  WORKS

OF  JOHN  ADAMS  130-31,  206-08  (C.F.  Adams  ed.  1851).

102.  See Webster,  An  Examination into the Leading Principles of the Federal Constitution, in
PAMPHLETS  ON  THE  CONSTrItrrION OF  THE  UNITED  STATES  59  (P.  Ford ed.  1888).  But see Letter
of Richard  Henry  Lee to  Henry  Laurens,  in  2 LETTERS  OF RICHARD  HENRY  LEE  62-63  (J. Ballagh
ed.  1914)  (criticizing  "Mandevilles  among  you  who laugh at  virtue, and with vain  ostentatious  display
of  words  will  deduce  from  vice,  public  good!").

103.  3 J. ELLIOT,  THE  DEBATES  IN  THE  SEVERAL  STATE  CONVENTIONS  ON  THE  ADOPTION  OF

THE  FEDERAL  CONSTITUTION  164,  232  (1888);  see id. at  536-37.

104.  See  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  10  (J.  Madison).
105.  THE  FEDERALIST  Nos.  9,  12  & 71  (A.  Hamilton).
106.  Note  Madison's  claim  that the  distinguishing  mark  of  the  American  governments  was  "the
total exclusion of the people in their collective capacity" from  governmental  processes.  THE  FEDERAL-
IST  No.  63,  at  387  (J. Madison)  (C.  Rossiter  ed.  1961)  (emphasis  in  original).

107.  See THE  FEDERALIST  No.  10 (J.  Madison);  J.T.  MAIN,  supra note  72,  at  261-63.
108.  The  account  offered  in  the text  is  controversial.  For  general  discussions,  often  from  compet-
ing  perspectives,  see  J.G.A.  POCOCK,  supra note  3; G.  WOOD, supra note  3; Ackerman,  supra note  6;
R.  DAHL,  supra note  5;  Diamond,  Ethics and Politics: The American Way,  in  THE  MORAL  FoUN-

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1558 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1559

the  framers  did  not  abandon  the  traditional  republican  belief  in  delibera-
tive  government  and  the  need  for  civic  virtue.  First,  and  probably  fore-
most,  the  framers  stressed  that  their  system  was  likely  to  attract  and  pro-
duce  representatives  who  would  have the virtue  associated  with  republican
citizens.  Above  all,  Madison's  conception  of  representation  incorporated
important  features  of traditional republican  thought.  Thus  The Federalist
No.  10  emphasized  the  capacity  of  a  large  republic  to  obtain  public-spir-
ited  representatives,  operating  above  the  fray  of  constituent  pressures.
Madison  wrote  that in  a large  republic,  representation  would  "refine  and
enlarge  the  public  views by  passing  them  through the medium  of a  chosen
body  of citizens,  whose  wisdom  may best  discern  the true  interest  of their
country  and  whose  patriotism  and  love  of justice  will  be  least  likely  to
sacrifice  it  to  temporary  or partial  considerations." 0 9

for 

the  President, 

The  belief  in  deliberative  representation  led  to  particular  enthusiasm
for  indirect  elections.  In  describing  the  electoral  process,  Madison  argued
that  state  legislatures  should choose  "those  men  only who have  become  the
most distinguished  by  their abilities  and  virtue." 1 0  And Publius  expressed
particular  enthusiasm 
"a  constant
probability"  that  the presidency  would  be filled  by  characters  "preeminent
for  ability  and  virtue." '  Significantly,  the  electoral  college  was  to  be  a
deliberative  body. 2  And  in  a  remarkable  series  of  debates  after  the
founding,  early  Congresses  rejected  a  constitutional  amendment  that
would  entitle  constituents  to  "instruct"  their  representatives  about  how  to
vote.  In  those  debates,  Madison  and  others  made  it  clear  that  the  repre-
sentatives'  task called  for  deliberation,  and  that task was  inconsistent  with
a  right  to  instruct.11 3

suggesting 

DATIONS  OF  THE  AMERICAN  REPUBLIC  75  (R.  Horwitz  ed.  1986).  Consider  also  the  view  that  the
"debates  of the  Philadelphia  Convention  are  notoriously  the highest  power  ever  reached  by civic  hu-
manist  theory  in  practice."  Pocock,  Cambridge Paradigms and Scottish  Philosophers, in  WEALTH
AND  VIRTUE  239  (I.  Hont  & M.  Ignatieff  eds.  1983).

109.  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  10,  at  82  (J.  Madison)  (0.  Rossiter  ed.  1961).  This  idea  of  course

Id. at  412.

confined  deliberative  aspirations  by  limiting  the  category  of political  deliberators.
110.  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  64,  at  391  (.  Madison)  (C.  Rossiter  ed.  1961).
111.  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  68,  at  414  (A.  Hamilton)  (C.  Rossiter  ed.  1961).
112. 
113.  Consider  Sherman's  statement:  "[Tihe  words  are calculated  to mislead the  people,  by convey-
ing an  idea that they  have a  right to control  the  debates of the  Legislature.  This cannot  be admitted  to
be just, because  it  would  destroy  the object  of their  meeting.  I  think,  when  the  people  have  chosen  a
representative,  it is  his  duty  to  meet  others  from  the  different  parts  of the  Union,  and  consult,  and
agree  with them to such  acts  as are for  the general  benefit of the whole  community.  If they  were  to  be
I." 1 ANNALS  OF  CONG.  733-45  (J.
guided  by  instructions,  there  would  be  no use in deliberation 
Gales  ed.  1789).

.

There  was  in  this  debate  a  struggle  between  two  conceptions  of republicanism.  The  first,  repre-
sented  by  the New  England  towns, borrowed  from  the classical  tradition and saw  local  self-determina-
tion  as  an argument  for  the  right  to  instruct.  The  second,  based  on  Madisonian  principles,  saw  the
national  government  as the  locus of republican  deliberation,  and regarded  a local  right to  instruct  as a
serious threat.

All  this  is  consistent  with  Madison's  view  that  "[I]n  our  Governments  the  real  power  lies  in  the
majority  of the  Community,  and  the  invasion  of private  rights is  chiefly  to be  apprehended,  not  from
acts of Government  contrary to  the sense  of its constituents,  but from  acts  in which  the  Government  is

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1559 1987-1988

1560

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

The  framers'  conception  of  representation,  in  short,  incorporated  the
traditional  republican  faith  in the value  of virtue  and deliberation  in  polit-
ics,  with  an  accompanying  belief  in  agreement  of  a  regulative  ideal.114
Madisonian  republicanism  calls  for  substantial  autonomy  on  the  part  of
representatives.  They  are  charged  not  with  implementing  what  their  con-
stituents  "want,"  though  that  is  of  course  relevant;  the  deliberative  task
requires  a  measure  of independence.  Thus  Madison  favored  large election
districts  and  long  length  of  service,  in  order  both  to  limit  factionalism  by
separating  representatives  from constituents  and  to  encourage  deliberation
on  the  general  good.  Thus  it  was  that  the  framers  had  especially  high
hopes  for  the  Presidency  and  the  Senate,  showed  little  fear  of an  insulated
judiciary,  and  were  modest  in  their  expectations  for  the  House  of Repre-
sentatives-precisely 
the  reverse  of  the  expectations  and  fears  of  the
antifederalists.1 1 5

But  classical  republican  thought  did  not  have  its  exclusive  locus  in  the
Madisonian  conception  of  representation.  The act  of  creating  a  Constitu-
tion was itself supposed to  depend  on the capacity  of the public  as  a whole
to behave  in  the  common  interest. The decision  to  write  and accept  a Con-
stitution serving  the  long-term  interest  called for a  large degree  of republi-
can  virtue;  and  that  decision  involved  the  citizenry  in  general."'

The  framers  stressed  more  generally  the need  for  virtue  among  the  citi-
zenry  as  a  whole.  Thus  in  the  Virginia  Ratifying  Convention,  Madison
stated:  "I  go  on  this  great  republican  principle,  that  the  people  will  have
virtue  and  intelligence  to  select  men  of  virtue  and  wisdom.  Is  there  no
virtue  among  us?  If  there  be  not,  we  are  in  a  wretched  situation.  No
theoretical  checks,  no  form  of  government,  can  render  us  secure.  To  sup-
pose that  any  form of government  will secure  liberty  or happiness  without

the  mere instrument  of the major number of the constituents."  Madison  to Jefferson,  Oct.  17,  1788,  in
11  J.  MADISON,  PAPERS  OF  JAMES  MADISON  298  (R.  Rutkind  & C.  Hobson  eds.  1977).

114.  See  Meyers, Beyond  the Sum of the Interests, in  THE  MIND  OF THE  FOUNDER:  SOURCES  OF
THE  POLITICAL  THOUGHT  OF  JAMES  MADISON  xxiv-xxxiii  (M.  Meyers  rev.  ed.  1981)  [hereinafter
THE MIND  OF THE  FOUNDER].  Jefferson said  in a similar vein  that with  respect  to the  Senate, "I  had
two  things  in  view:  to  get  the  wisest  men  chosen,  and  to  make  them  perfectly  independent  when
chosen."  I  PAPERS  OF  THOMAS  JEFFERSON  503  (J. Boyd  ed.  1950).  For  a  recent  discussion,  see
Thompson,  Representatives in the  Welfare  State, in  DEMOCRACY  AND  THE  WELFARE  STATE  (A.
Gutman  ed.  1988).

115.  See  R.  LERNER,  THE  THINKING  REVOLUTIONARY  122-28  (1987).  Note  that  Madison  de-
scribed  the Senate  as  the "great  anchor  of the government."  Madison  to Jefferson,  Oct.  24,  1787. This
institutional  understanding  was  closely  allied  with  a controversial  substantive  position:  the  desire  to
protect  against  certain  forms of redistribution  of wealth.  In  the  framers'  thought,  the  belief in  deliber-
ation,  the  fear  of  factionalism,  and  the  protection  of existing  property  rights  were  tightly  connected.
See  Madison,  Property and Suffrage: Second  Thoughts on  the  Constitutional Convention, in  THE
MIND  OF  THE  FOUNDER,  supra note  114,  at  501.  But  the  alliance  is  only  contingent.  In  the  New
Deal  period,  for  example,  the  belief  in  deliberative  representation  was  associated  with  an  altogether
different  substantive  understanding.  See  Sunstein,  Constitutionalism After  the New  Deal, 101  HARV.
L.  REV.  421  (1987)  (discussing  New  Deal  belief  in  deliberation  and  novel  institutional  and substan-
tive  theories).

116.  The  point  is  emphasized, perhaps  too  strongly, in  Ackerman,  The  Storrs Lectures: Discover-
ing the Constitution, 93  YALE  L.J.  1013  (1984).  It would  of course  be  a mistake  to overemphasize  the
democratic  character  of the  ratification  process,  which  excluded  large  categories  of  the  citizenry.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1560 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1561

any  virtue  in  the  people,  is  a chimerical  idea.  If there  be  sufficient  virtue
and  intelligence  in  the  community,  it  will  be  exercised  in  the  selection  of
these  men;  so  that we  do  not  depend  on their  virtue,  or  put  confidence  in
our rulers,  but in  the  people  who are to  choose  them."'  Even more  strik-
ingly,  Madison  suggested  that  republican  government  calls  for  more virtue
from  the  citizenry  than  "any  other  form."""  In  this  sense,  the  very  belief
in  virtuous  representation 
from  some  optimism  about  the
citizenry.

resulted 

What  emerged  is  in  several  respects  a  hybrid.  A  number  of  elements
competed  in the  theory  of politics  embodied  in the American  Constitution.
First,  the  framers'  conception  of  human  nature  synthesized  elements  of
classical  republicanism  with  its  emerging  interest-group  competitor.  Thus
Publius  wrote  that  "[tihe  supposition  of universal  venality  in  human  na-
ture  is  little  less  an  error  in  political  reasoning  than  the  supposition  of
universal  rectitude."" 9  In  the  same  vein,  he  claimed  that  "[a]s  there  is  a
degree of depravity  in mankind which  requires  a certain  degree  of circum-
spection  and  distrust,  so  there  are  other qualities  in human  nature,  which
justify  a  certain  portion  of  esteem  and  confidence."' 2 0  In  these  respects,
purely  pluralist readings  of the  founding period 12'  are badly  off the mark.
Second,  the  federalist  conception  of  representation  steered  a  middle
course  between  Burkean  and pluralist  approaches.  A critical  feature of the
thought  of the  founding  period  is  a  belief  in the  deliberative  capacities  of
representatives  and  the  need  to  insulate  public  officials  from  constituent
pressures  in  order  to  promote  the  performance  of  their  deliberative  tasks.
At  the  same  time,  however,  the  framers  were  well  aware  of the  need  to
ensure  a measure  of  accountability  to  the  public,  and  thus  they  built  into
the  system  mechanisms  of  electoral  control.' 22

Third,  the  base  institutions  of  the  Constitution-checks  and  balances,
bicameralism,  federalism,  and  legal  rights-continued the  fusion of repub-
lican and  pluralist  elements.  The  system  of checks  and  balances  permitted
"ambition  . . . to  counteract  ambition"; 23  thus  The  Federalist No.  51
suggests  that self-interest  will  be channeled  in such  a way  as  to  protect the
citizenry  as  a  whole.  Checks  and  balances  would  also  increase  the  likeli-
hood of deliberation  in government.  The  requirement  of agreement  among

117.  3 J. ELLIOT,  THE  DEBATES  IN THE  SEVERAL  STATE  CONVENTIONS  ON  THE  ADOPTION  OF

THE  FEDERAL  CONSTITUTION  536-37  (1888).

118.  See  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  55,  at  346  (J.  Madison)  (C.  Rossiter  ed.  1961).
119.  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  76,  at  458  (A.  Hamilton)  (C.  Rossiter  1961).
120.  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  55,  at  346  (J.  Madison)  (C.-Rossiter  1961).
121. 

See, e.g.,  R.  DAHL, supra note  5,  at  4-32  (1956);  Bork, Neutral Principles and Some First

Amendment  Problems, 47  IND.  L.J.  1, 2-3  (1971).

122.  See  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  57,  at  351  (J.  Madison)  (C.  Rossiter  ed.  1961)  (the  "elective

mode  of obtaining  rulers  is  the  characteristic  policy  of republican  government").

123.  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  51,  at  322  (J.  Madison)  (C.  Rossiter  ed.  1961);  see  also Amar,  Of

Sovereignty  and Federalism, 96  YALE  L.J.  1425  (1987).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1561 1987-1988

1562

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

the  three  branches 24  would  operate  as  a  check  on  factionalism  and  self-
interested  representation,  on  instability,  and  on  the  risk  that  government
would  seek  a  particular  course  without  having  fully  considered  the
consequences.

Similarly,  the  federal  system  was  designed  to  ensure  that  "[t]he  differ-
ent  governments  will  control  each  other."'12 5  Their mutual jealousy  would
operate  to  protect  the  citizenry  against  government  invasions.  At  the  same
time, the  federal  system would guarantee  an arena  for  citizen  self-determi-
nation  and  promote  diversity  and  responsiveness.  The  considerable  role
for  the  states  provided  a  locus  in  which  to  satisfy  the  traditional  republi-
can  belief  in  small  republics.  To  be  sure,  much  of  federalist  thought  was
based  on  a  rejection  of the  traditional  republican  belief  in local  democra-
cies;  but  the  Constitution  that  emerged  furnished  a  secure  place  for  self-
determination  through  the  federal  system,  supplementing  and  comple-
menting  national  institutions.

Moreover,  the systems  of checks  and  balances,  bicameralism,  and  feder-
alism  responded  to  the  central  republican  understanding  that  disagree-
ment  can  be  a  creative  force.'  National  institutions  were  set  up  so  as  to
ensure  a  measure  of  competition  and  dialogue;  the  federal  system  would
produce  both  experimentation  and  mutual  controls.  In  all  of these  ways,
the  constitutional  framework  created  a  kind of deliberative  democracy,  in-
cluding  Madisonian  representation  at 
level,  safeguards
against  factionalism  and  self-interested  representation,  and  opportunities
for  local  self-determination  through  the  federal  system.'1 7

the  national 

The  rights  created  by  the  Constitution  share  similar ambiguities.  Many
of the  original  constitutional  rights  provide  spheres  of private  autonomy  to
be insulated  from  government  interference;  such  rights  can  be justified  in
republican  fashion,  but  some  of  them  are  more  easily  understood  as  an
outgrowth  of Lockean  ideas.  Other rights  can  be read  as straightforwardly
republican  in  inspiration.  The  right  to  a jury  trial  is  a  good  example; 2 s

124.  See Sunstein,  supra note  115,  at  434-37.
125.  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  51,  at  323  (J.  Madison)  (C.  Rossiter  ed.  1961).
126.  See THE FEDERALIST  No.  70,  at 426-27  (A.  Hamilton)  (C.  Rossiter  ed.  1961)  ("differences
of  opinion  . . .promote  deliberation");  2  J.  STORY,  COMMENTARIES  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION
547-58  (1833)  (emphasizing  ways  in  which  bicameralism  promotes  deliberation  and  diminishes  fac-
tionalism);  J.  WILSON,  Lectures on Law, in  1 THE  WORKS  OF  JAMES  WILSON  290-92, 414-15  (R.
McCloskey  ed.  1967)  (emphasizing  how  bicameralism  improves  deliberation  and  multiplies  points  of
access  to  government);  cf  Michelman,  supra note  6  (emphasizing  dialogue  and  plurality  as  republi-
can  commitments).

127.  See  Bessette,  Deliberative Democracy: The  Majority Principle in Republican Government,
in  How  DEMOCRATIC  IS  THE  CONSTITUTION?  102  (R.  Goldwin  & W.  Schambra  eds.  1980).  Con-
troversial  understandings  of private  property  were  of course a  part of this  system.  See Hofstadter,  The
Founding Fathers: An  Age  of Realism,  in THE  MORAL  FOUNDATIONS  OF  THE AMERICAN  REPUB-
uc (R.  Horwitz  ed.  1986).  But  it would be  fully  possible to  accept  the  basic institutional  understand-
ings  of the original  regime  while  accommodating  a belief that  redistribution  of property  was  desirable
in  a  wide  range  of settings.  Indeed,  the  New  Deal  did  some  of  this. See  Sunstein,  supra note  115.
128.  The  civic  tradition,  placing  a  premium  on an  educated  citizenry,  valued  the jury as  a means

of  inculcating  virtue  and  promoting  participation.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1562 1987-1988

1988] 

Beyond  the  Revival 

1563

the  right  to  protection  against  takings  of  private  property  can  be  under-
stood  in  both  pluralist  and  republican  terms."2 9  The  right  to  assembly
falls  in  this  category  as  well. 30

In a number  of respects,  then,  the American  constitutional  tradition  was
influenced  at  its  inception  by features  of republican  thought.  But  it is  not
immediately  clear  why  this  fact  should  matter  to  contemporary  constitu-
tional  controversies.  Questions  about  the  future  of American  constitution-
alism  might  be  approached  straightforwardly  as  issues  of  political  theory.
The  emphasis  on republican  and  pluralist  elements  in the founding  period
would,  under  this view,  be  treated  as a  species  of ancestor  worship, carry-
ing  with  it  many  of  the  risks  of  reliance  on  the  framers'  intent  to  solve
constitutional  problems. 13
1  Use  of Madison  might be justified  if Madison's
thought  turns  out  to  be  helpful;  but his  status  as  a  constitutional  founder
would  be  beside  the  point.  Madison's  views  would,  in  this  understanding,
carry  no  more  weight  than  those  of,  say,  Hegel.

But  the  importance  of  Madison  for  current  constitutional  controversy
does  not depend  solely on the  quality  of Madison's  thought.  The fact  that
the  American  constitutional  regime  at  its  outset  owed  a  great  deal  to  re-
publican  thought  is  an  important  corrective  to  approaches  that  purport  to
speak  for  the  American  constitutional  tradition,  but proceed  from  pluralist
premises...  or  invoke  prepolitical  rights."3  Decisions  about  the  nature
and  direction  of a constitutional  democracy  cannot be  made  in  the abstract
and  acontextually;  they  must  appeal  to  reasons.  Interpretation  of  the
meaning  of the  relevant  tradition  is  always  an important  method  of social
criticism;' 3
4  an  understanding  of  inherited  beliefs  is  an  inevitable  part  of
the  project  of  constitutionalism.  The  future  of  American  public  law  de-
pends  in  significant  part  on  the  way  that  its  tradition  is  understood-a
theme  highly  congenial  to  republicanism.  And  the  republican  elements  of
the  framers'  thought  deserve  credit  for  helping  to  launch  many  reforms
that  were  in  retrospect  highly  desirable.

To  say  this  is  not  to  insist  that  American  public  law  would  have  to
adhere  to  republican  thought  if republicanism  were  without  contemporary
relevance  or  appeal.  Other  aspects  of  the  thought  of  the  founding  pe-
riod-its  incorporation  of  Calvinism,  for  example,  and  of slavery  and  ra-
cism' 35-should 
not  be  revived  even  if  historians  were  able  to  show  the

129.  See supra  notes  61-62  (discussing  place  of property  within  republican  tradition).
130.  See  A.  Amar,  The  Bill  of Rights:  One  View  of  the  Cathedral  (unpublished  draft  1988).
131. 
(1981).

See,  e.g.,  Brest,  The  Mistaken Quest for the  Original Understanding, 60  B.U.L.  REv.  204

132.  See,  e.g.,  R.  DAHL,  supra note  5,  at  4-32;  Bork,  supra note  121,  at  2-3.
133.  See,  e.g.,  R.  EPSTEIN,  supra note  31,  at  3-18.
134.  See  A.  MACINTYRE,  WHOSE  JUSTICE?  WHICH  RATIONALITY?  349-69  (1988)  (discussing
ways  in  which  moral  reasoning  takes  place  within  traditions);  Amar,  supra note  123,  at  1426  n.9
(discussing  notion  of  a  "usable  past");  M.  WALZER,  supra note  47.

135.  See  D.  BELL,  AND  WE  ARE  NOT  SAVED  (1987);  A.  NORTON,  ALTERNATIVE  AMERICAS

(1987).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1563 1987-1988

1564

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

tenacity  of  those  commitments  during  and  after  the  framing  period.  But
the  presence  of  a  historical  pedigree,  one  that  has  accomplished  consider-
able  good,  adds  force  to  the  case  for  a  republican  revival.

II.  THE  VARIETY  OF  REPUBLICAN  APPROACHES

A.  A  Catalogue

I  have  presented  a  set  of  commitments  with  which  republicanism  is
often  associated.  But  republican  thought  has  had  numerous  manifesta-
tions,  and  there  are  large  divergences  among  them.  In  its  most  classical
versions,  republican  thought  drew  a  sharp  distinction  between  public  and
private  interests,  and  saw  in  public  life  an  opportunity  to  abandon  or
subordinate  private  interests  in  order  to  promote  the  public  good.  Such
understandings  draw  the  most  rigid  of  distinctions  between  private  inter-
ests  and  public  good;"3 6  prepolitical  differences  are  an  inadmissible  basis
for  resolution  of political  controversy.  Understandings  of this  kind  depend
on  an  expectation  that  citizens  should  entirely  abandon  their  private  iden-
tities  when  they  come  to  politics.  This  expectation," built  on  an  under-
standable  desire  to  ensure  against  the  distortion  of politics  by interest,  is  of
course  unrealistic.  But  the  difficulty  goes  deeper.  The  notion  that,  for  ex-
ample,  disadvantaged  groups  must  put  their  interests  to  one  side  in  the
political  process  hardly  seems likely  to  lead  to just  outcomes.  Universalism
ought  not  to  be  understood  as  a  desire  to  obliterate  social  differences  in
politics.  Deliberation  is  undermined,  not  promoted,  by an  expectation  that
differently  situated  individuals  and  groups  will  say  the  same  thing.

In other  forms,  republican  thought  is  militaristic  and  heroic,  associating
political  behavior  with  warfare,  and  valuing  in  politics  the  characteristics
prized  during  times  of  battle.13 7  Political  life  is  in  this  formulation  ap-
proved  as a  means  of escaping  the  routine  of ordinary  life  and  obtaining  a
species  of immortality. 3  Here  one  can  see  the close  association,  both met-
aphorical  and  literal,  between  republican  thought  and  militarism,  and  at
several  levels.  It  is  in  times  of  war  that  republican  virtue,  understood  in
this  fashion,  is  most  powerfully  displayed;  it is  war  that  tends  to  unite  the
citizenry  in dedication  to the  public good;  and  it is war  that might  serve  as
the  model,  even in times  of peace,  for  the  subordination  of private  interests
to  the  general  good.  The  use  of  metaphors  of  that  sort,  as  a  device  for

136.  See  e.g.,  H.  ARENDT,  supra note  37,  at  250-55; J.G.A.  PoCOCK,  supra note  3,  at  67-71,

199-211,  431-32.

137.  See  H.  ARENDT,  THE  HUMAN  CONDrION  (1963);  H.  PrrKiN,  supra note  1  (discussing
Machiavelli);  J.G.A.  POCOCK,  supra note  3,  at  201;  Pocock,  Ideological Context, supra note  68,  at
18-19  ("[tlhe  rigorous  equation  of  arms-bearing with  civic  capacity  is  one  of Machiavelli's  most  en-
during  legacies  to  later  political  thinkers");  Pocock,  Argument  and Character, supra note  61,  at
54-55.

138.  Pocock,  Argument and  Character, supra note  61,  at  54.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1564 1987-1988

1988] 

Beyond  the  Revival 

1565

rallying  and  unifying  the  citizenry,  is  familiar  in  modern  political  life.1" 9
But  efforts  to  assimilate  politics  to  war  will  often  lead  in  undesirable
directions.

140

In  addition,  classical  republicanism  was  comfortable  with  firm  social
hierarchies,  placed  a  large  emphasis  on  the  role  of  tradition,  and  was
sometimes  built  on  organic  conceptions  of  the  state  that  found  common
interests  among  members  of  different  social  classes. 41  Understandings  of
this  sort  are  of course  incompatible  with modern  beliefs  in eliminating  (at
least  some)  status  hierarchies;  indeed,  they  coexist  awkwardly  with  the
republicans'  own  commitment  to  political  equality.

Other  forms  of  republicanism  are  highly  rationalistic,  even  Carte-
sian. 42  Here  the emphasis  on  deliberation  is  designed  to  enable citizens  to
transcend  bodily  drives,  to  eliminate  affective  ties  or empathy,  and  to  en-
sure  the  dominance  of reason,  narrowly  understood,  in  politics.1 43  Forms
of republican  thought  that  value  militarism  and  the  overcoming  of physi-
cal  drives,  and  that  devalue  the  private  sphere  as  part  of  "nature,"  are
often  accompanied  by  misogyny.1 44 The  exclusion  of women  from  politics,
a  familiar  part  of republican  regimes,  is  an outgrowth  of ideas of this  sort.
But  an understanding  that  attempts  to  eliminate  affective  ties,  or even  an-
ger,  from  the  political  process will  likely  be  self-defeating,  and  in any  case
will  lead  in  undesirable  directions.  Thus  other  versions  of  republican
thought  are  far  less  Cartesian  and  also  attempt  to  develop  conceptions  of
politics  unaffected  by  gender  and  other  unjust  hierarchies.1 45  Some  mod-
ern  forms  of republicanism  furnish  no sharp  split between  public  and  pri-
vate  interests,  and  attempt  to  channel  self-interest  in  such  a  way  as  to
promote  the  common  good.1 4

1

139.  President  Johnson's  War on  Poverty  and  President  Carter's response  to  the  energy  crisis  are

conspicuous  recent  examples.

140.  There  is also  an  issue of gender  here:  the military metaphor  traditionally  operated  to  exclude
women.  See  H.  PrrxIN,  supra note  1,  at  4  (suggesting  that Machiavelli  was  "both  a  republican  and
something  like  a  protofascist").

141.  See  the discussion  of Aristotle  in J.G.A.  POCOCK,  supra note  3,  at  66-80;  see also J.  MANS-

BRIDGE,  BEYOND  ADVERSARY  DEMOCRACY  5  (1982).

142.  See  H.  ARENDT,  supra  note  137,  at  86-110  (discussing  the  social  question);  see also Pitkin,
supra note  52,  at  334-38  (criticizing  Arendt);  R.  BERNSTEIN,  PHILOSOPHICAL  PROFILES  (1985)
(same);  compare J. HABERMAS,  REASON  AND  THE  RATIONALIZATION  OF SOCIm-Y  273-338  (1985)
(emphasizing  possible  role  of  reason  in  generating  social  norms)  with  I.  BALBUS,  MARXISM  AND
DOMINATION  (1983)  (criticizing  Habermas  as  excessively  rationalistic).

143.  This  view  is  of course  associated  with one  reading  of Kant. See  C.  TAYLOR,  Kant's Theory

of Freedom, in  PHILOSOPHY  AND  THE  HUMAN  SCIENCES  318  (1985).

144.  See  supra note  140;  H.  PrrKIN,  supra note  1,  at  5  ("From  the  political  ideals  of ancient
Athens  to  their  recent  revival  by  Hannah  Arendt,  republican  activism  seems  to  be  linked  to  'manly'
heroism  and military  glory,  and to  disdain  for  the  household,  the  private,  the  personal,  and  the  sen-
sual.");  G.  LLOYD,  THE  MAN  OF  REASON  (1984);  J.  ELSHTAIN,  PUBLIC  MAN,  PRIVATE  WOMAN
(1981).

145.  See  B.  BARBER,  STRONG  DEMOCRACY  198-203,  233-44  (1984);  H.  PrrsuN,  supra note  1,

at  300-04.

146.  See  also Ackerman,  supra note  6;  Skinner,  The Idea of Negative Liberty: Philosophical and
Historical Perspectives, in  PHILOSOPHY  IN  HISTORY  193  (R.  Rorty,  J.B. Schneewind  & Q. Skinner
eds.  1984).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1565 1987-1988

1566

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

B.  Liberal Republicanism

Much  of recent  writing  on  constitutional  history  has  focused  on  a sup-
posed  tension  between  liberalism  and  republicanism. 4"  The  basic  claim
here  is  that  before  the  framing  of  the  Constitution,  republican  principles
predominated.  The  framing  period  reflected  a  conflict  between  the  two
ideologies,  out  of which  liberalism  emerged  victorious;  after  the  Constitu-
tion  was  enacted,  the  nation  entered  into  a  period  of  liberalism  in  which
republican  principles  played  at  most  a  subordinate  role.""8  There  is  con-
siderable  dispute  about  the  precise  extent  and  timing of the  victory  of lib-
eralism  over  republicanism,'4 9  but this  basic  chronology  captures  much  of
the  current  historical  consensus.

The  position  has something  to  be said in  its  favor.  Some  forms  of liberal
thought  are  inconsistent  with  the  basic  tenets  of republicanism.  They  see
freedom  only  as  protection  from  the  public  sphere;  limit  the  role  of gov-
ernment  to  the  prevention  of  force  and  fraud;  regard  existing  preferences
and entitlements  as  exogenous  to  politics;  place  little  premium on  political
or  economic  equality;  downplay  the  role  of  deliberation  and  virtue;  and
view  the  protection  of  individual  self-interest,  narrowly  defined,  as  the
goal  of the  state.'8 0  Views  of  this  sort  are  at  the  opposite  pole  of  the  re-
publicanism  found,  for  example,  in  Benjamin  Rush,  and  Rush's  views
conflict  with  the  species  of republicanism  outlined  here.'  The  hierarchi-
cal  characteristics  of classical  republicanism  are also  in severe  tension with
liberal  thought,  which  places  a  premium  on  individual  capacity  to  break
out  of traditional  roles.

Moreover,  antifederalist  thought  was  united,  albeit  somewhat  loosely,
by fears  of commercial  development, 152 belief in  civic virtue,  and  desire  for
equality  and  local  self-determination.  On  all of these  scores,  their federal-
ist  opponents  were  sharp  opponents.'  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
basic  program  of  the  federalists  was  ultimately  vindicated.

147.  See,  e.g.,  Horwitz,  Republicanism and Liberalism in American Constitutional Thought, 29
WM.  &  MARY  L.  REV.  57  (1987).  But see Kloppenberg,  supra note  39  (arguing  that  framers  were
both  liberals  and  republicans).

148.  See G.  WOOD,  supra note  3;  see  also J.  APPLEBY,  CAPITALISM  AND  A NEW  SOCIAL  OR-

DER:  THE  REPUBLICAN  VISION  OF  THE  1790's  (1984).

149.  See J.  DIGGINS,  THE  LOST  SOUL  OF  AMERICAN  POLITICS  (1984);  J.G.A.  POCOCK,  supra
note  3,  at  333-552;  G.  WOOD,  supra note  3;  Kramnick,  Republican Revisionism Revisited, 87  AM.
HisT.  REv.  629  (1982);  Banning,  supra note  3.

150.  Some of these  ideas can be  traced  to T.  HOBBES,  LEVIATHAN  (M.  Oakeshott  ed.  1946).  This
presentation  of liberalism  is,  however,  offered  much  more  often  by  critics  of liberals  than  by  liberals
themselves.  See  M. SANDEL,  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  LIMITS  OF  JUSTICE  (1982);  R. UNGER,  KNOWL-
EDGE  AND  POLITICS  (1975).

151.  See  Rush, A  Plan for the  Establishment of Public Schools and the Diffusion of Knowledge
in  Pennsylvania (Philadelphia  1786),  in  1 AMERICAN  WRITING  DURING  THE  FOUNDING  ERA
1760-1805  (C.  Hyneman  & D.  Lutz  eds.  1983).

152. 

It is  important  to  note,  however,  that  at  its inception  the  belief  in  commercial  development
and  private  markets  was  self-consciously  an  attack  on  aristocratic  rule.  See  A.  HIRSCHMAN,  supra
note  93.

153.  See  J.T. MAIN,  supra note  72,  at  10-11,  132,  170,  249-81.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1566 1987-1988

19881

Beyond  the  Revival

1567

The  opposition  between  liberal  and republican  thought  in the context  of
the  framing  is,  however,  largely  a  false  one.  Only  through  a  caricature  of
the  tradition154  can liberalism  be  thought  to  be the  antonym  of the  species
of republicanism  that  operated  during  the constitutional  period.  The  cari-
cature  singles  out  relatively  marginal  species  of liberalism-possessive  in-
dividualism  or  modern  neo-Lockeanism-and  treats  them  as  representa-
tive  and  central.  But  most  of  the  great  liberal  thinkers  did  not  take
interests  as  prepolitical.  Indeed,  they  placed  a  high  premium  on  delibera-
tion  and  discussion,ES  and  on the  capacity  of  political  dialogue  to  improve
outcomes  and  to  undermine  unjustified  disparities  in  power.  It  is  a  simi-
larly  large  mistake  to  suggest  that liberal  thinkers believed  that threats  lay
only  in  government  intrusions  and  that  there  was  no  right  to  protection
from  private  power. 5  Liberal  thinkers  have  been  alert  to  the  threats
posed  by  both  public  and private  power  and  have  sought to  design systems
to  limit  both  threats.1 57  It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  original  pur-
pose  of the  social  contract  was  to  redistribute  security.15  Certain  aspects
of Rawls'  A  Theory ofJustice 9  speak  powerfully for  these features  of the
liberal  tradition,  and  embody  much  of the  contemporary  appeal  of repub-
lican  thought.16 0

Some  elements  of  the  liberal  tradition  are  highly  congenial  to  republi-
can  conceptions  of politics.  In their  emphasis  on  the possibility  of forming
public  policy  through  deliberation,  on  political  equality,  on  citizenship,

154.  C.  MACPHERSON,  THE  POLITICAL THEORY  OF  POSSESSIVE  INDIVIDUALISM  (1975);  see Si-
mon,  The New Republicanism: Generosity of Spirit in Search of Something to Say, 29  WM.  &  MARY
L. REV  83  (1987);  White,  The  Studied Ambiguity  of Horwitz's Legal History, 29  WM.  &  MARY  L.
REV.  101  (1987);  cf  Herzog,  As  Many  As  Six  Things Before  Breakfast, 75  CAUF.  L.  REV.  609
(1987)  (criticizing  various  caricatures  of  liberalism).

155.  See,  e.g.,  J. MILL,  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT  (1861);  J.  MILL,
PRINCIPLES  OF  POLITICAL  ECONOMY  (1848  & photo.  reprint  1965);  J.  Rawls,  supra note  17;  W.
BAGEHOT,  PHYSICS  AND  POLITICS  (J.  Barzun  ed.  1948)  (dealing  with "government  by  discussion");
E.  BARKER,  REFLECTIONS  ON  GOVERNMENT  67-68  (1942);  J.  DEWEY,  THE  PUBLIC  AND  ITS
PROBLEMS  143--84  (1946);  S.  HOLMES,  supra note  2,  at  141-44.

156.  This  is  suggested  by  many  critics  of  liberalism,  including,  for  example,  C.  MACKINNON,
FEMINISM  UNMODIFIED  32-45  (1987)  and  M.  KELMAN,  A  GUIDE  TO  CRITICAL  LEGAL  STUDIES
(1987).

157.  See  J.  RAWLS,  supra note  17;  Holmes,  Liberal Guilt: Some  Theoretical Reflections on the

Welfare State, in  RESPONSIBILITY,  RIGHTS  AND  WELFARE  (D.  Moon  ed.  1988).

158.  See  Holmes,  supra note  157.
159.  See J.  RAWLS,  supra note  17; see  also N. ROSENBLUM,  supra note  9,  at  152-86  (discussing
ability  of  liberalism  to  incorporate,  among  other  things,  some  goals  of  communitarian  critics  of
liberalism).

160.  The  requirements  of  Rawls'  original  position,  see J.  RAWLS,  supra note  17,  thus  overlap
with  the  basic  republican  tenets  described  above.  The  veil  of  ignorance  ensures  that  self-interest,  as
ordinarily  understood,  is  not  the motivating  force  of political  judgment;  since  political  actors  represent
everyone,  the  distorting  force  of  interest  is  removed.  The  purpose  of  the  original  position  is  not  to
ensure  that  political  actors  are  disembodied,  but  to enable  them  to  see  from  multiple  perspectives.  See
Okin, supra note  82.

The  veil  of  ignorance  also  ensures  a  degree  of political  equality,  and  beliefs  in  universalism  and
citizenship  lie  at  the  core  of  Rawls'  theory.  Consider  section  54  of  A  THEORY  OF  JUSTICE,  where
Rawls  discusses majority  rule  in strikingly  Madisonian  terms  and offers  a straightforward  rejection of
interest-group  pluralism.  J.  RAWLS,  supra, at  356-62.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1567 1987-1988

1568

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

and  on  the  salutary  effects  of  publicity,  republicanism  and  liberalism  are
as  one.  All  four  of the  basic  republican  commitments  find  a  home  within
the  liberal  tradition.  In both  systems,  moreover,  a  requirement  of neutral-
ity  or  impersonality,""1  meant  in  a  particular  way,  plays  an  important
role.  The  notion  of neutrality  is  easily  misunderstood,  and  criticism  of the
notion  has  become  quite  fashionable. 62  Such  criticisms  are justified  when
the  notion  is  based  on  an  unarticulated  substantive  theory  that  denies  its
status  as  such,16 3  implies  unreflective  preservation  of  the  existing  set  of
preferences  or  the  existing  distribution  of wealth  and  entitlements,  or sug-
gests  the  possibility  of developing  an  elaborate  social  theory  without  mak-
ing  value  choices.1 6  But  the  notion  seems  more  plausible  if  it  is  under-
stood  more  modestly  as  requiring  (a)  that  certain  considerations  not  be
taken  into  account  and  (b)  that  political  actors  offer  public-regarding  jus-
tifications  for  social  outcomes,  or  for  deviations  from  ordinary  norms. The
requirement  of  abstraction  from  certain  considerations-like  religion  or
political  affiliation-is  the  most familiar  example  of the  first  requirement;
much  of  constitutional  law  is  a  product  of  the  second."6 5

On  this  view,  republican  neutrality  calls  for  the  consistent  application
of the  correct  substantive  theory,  or even  the  consistent  application  of the
speaker's  own  substantive  theory.  This  idea  is  closely  associated  with  the
republican  belief  in  political  equality.  The  requirement  of consistency  or
generalization  that  lies  at  the heart  of notions  of neutrality  is  a  prominent
equal  protection  principle. 6  The  degree  of  constraint  imposed  by  this
requirement  is  of  course  a  controversial  and  difficult  question;  but  it
would  be  a  large mistake  to  abandon  the  idea  altogether,  or  to  attempt  to
eliminate  its  antonym,  partiality  or  bias.  If such  notions  were  eliminated,
similar  ideas  would  undoubtedly  arise  with  slightly  different  verbal  for-
mulations. 67  Consider  the  idea  that  theories  of  moral  development  are
partial  because  they  are based  on male  models, 168  or that much  of the  law
of  sex  discrimination  embodies  a  male  referent. 6 9

161. 

See  J.G.A.  PococK,  supra note  3,  at  226-27  (the  term  liberta both  "denotes  a  state  of
affairs  in  which  every  citizen  participates  as  fully  as  possible  in  decision-making,  and  . . . one  in
which  laws,  not  men,  are  supreme  and  the  individual  receives  his  social  benefits  from  impersonal
public  authority  and  not  at  the  hand  of individuals").

162.  See,  e.g.,  C.  MAcKINNON,  supra note  156,  at  164-66. See  generally Minow,  The  Supreme

Court, 1986 Term-Foreword: Justice Engendered, 101  HARV.  L.  REv.  10  (1987).

163.  See  Lochner  v.  New  York,  198  U.S.  45  (1905);  Plessy  v.  Ferguson,  163  U.S.  537  (1896);

Wechsler,  Toward Neutral Principles of Constitutional Law,  73  HARV.  L.  REV.  1  (1959).

164.  See  Sunstein,  Lochner's Legacy,  87  COLuM.  L.  REV.  873  (1987).
165.  See  Sunstein,  Naked Preferences and the  Constitution, 84  COLUM.  L.  REV.  1689  (1984).
166.  See  Railway  Express  Agency  v.  New  York,  336  U.S.  106,  111-15  (1949)  (Jackson,  J.,

concurring).

167.  Cf J.  HABERMAS,  supra note  58,  at  336,  294  (criticizing  approaches  that  stress  the inevita-
ble  relations  between  knowledge  and  power  for  giving  "no  account  of their  own  position,"  and  for
becoming  "compelled  to a  relativist  self-denial"  and an  inability  to  give  an  "account  of the  normative
foundations  of  [their]  own  rhetoric").

168.  C.  GILLIGAN,  IN  A DIFFERENT  VOICE  (1982).
169.  See,  e.g.,  C.  MACKINNON,  supra note  156,  at  32-45.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1568 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1569

In  both  liberal  and  republican  systems,  moreover,  self-interest  is  an  in-
sufficient  basis  for  political  outcomes.  In  both  systems,  "rights"  are  not
prepolitical  givens,  but  the  products  (sometimes  given  constitutional  sta-
tus) of a  well-functioning  deliberative  process.  In  both  systems,  social jus-
tice  requires  one  "not  to  be  a disembodied  nobody,"  but instead  to  attempt
"to  think  from  the  point  of  view  of  everybody." 17 0  The  most  collectivist
forms  of republican  thought1 7
'  are  of course  at  odds  with  the most  atomis-
tic  versions  of  liberalism; 172  republican  thinkers  who  endorse  traditional
hierarchies  reject  the  liberal  emphasis  on  political  and  social  freedom  for
the  individual;  but  in  numerous  respects  republicanism  and  liberalism  are
hardly  antonyms.  Republican  thought,  understood  in  a  certain  way,  is  a
prominent  aspect  of  the  liberal  tradition.

The  elaboration  and  defense  of  liberal  republicanism  is  a  large  task
indeed,  but  it  is  possible  to  describe  some  of  the  sources  of  its  appeal.
Liberal  republicanism  is  responsive  to  an  understanding  of  freedom  as
including  critical  distance  from  and  scrutiny  of ends.  Republican  thought
treats  this  as  a  plausible  conception  of both  individual  and  collective  free-
dom;  it  sees  political  liberty  in  collective  self-determination;' 73  while  it
does  not  regard  political  participation  as  the  sole  good  life  for human  be-
ings,  it  attempts  to  provide  outlets  for  citizen  control  and  local  self-
determination.

At  the  same  time,  liberal  republicans  are  fearful  of public  power,  and
impose  numerous  constraints  on  the  operation  of  the  public  sphere.  Both
private  rights  and  institutional  arrangements  are  understood,  however,  as
the  outcome  of a well-functioning  deliberative  process.  Liberal  republican-
ism  is  simultaneously  responsive  to  possible  abuses  of both  public  and  pri-
vate  power;  it  understands  that the  private  sphere  is  constituted  by public
decisions,  but  treats  that  unsurprising  insight  as  a  reason  for  preservation
rather than  obliteration  of constraints  on government.  Liberal  republican-
ism  attempts  to  limit  disparities  in  political  influence  among  various
groups,  including  blacks  and  whites  and  rich  and  poor.  In  this  respect,
American  republicanism  must  be  understood  not  only  in  terms  of  the
framing  period,  with  its  occasional  strategies  of  exclusion,  but  also  in
terms  of the  Civil  War  amendments  and  the  New  Deal,  with  their  more
inclusionary  approaches  to  public  life.  Endorsing  the  modern  belief in  in-
dividual  rights,  liberal  republicanism  is  able  to  incorporate  powerful  and
widely-held  conceptions  of both  freedom  and  equality.  And  it is  antagonis-
tic  to  approaches  that  see  politics  as  a  replication  of the  existing  distribu-

170.  Okin, supra  note  82;  ef. City  of  Cleburne  v.  Cleburne  Living  Center,  473  U.S.  432,  455
(1985)  (Stevens,  J.,  concurring)  ("I cannot  believe that  a rational  member  of this  disadvantaged  class
could  ever  approve  of the  discriminatory  application  of  the city's  ordinance  in  this case.").

171. 
See infra notes  184-89.
172.  See  supra  notes  149-50,  154.
173.  See H.  PrlsuN,  supra  note  1,  at  7,  300-04.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1569 1987-1988

1570

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

tion  of  social  power,  that  take  existing  preferences  for  granted  or  down-
play  the  deliberative  functions  of  politics,  and  that  deny  the  possibility  of
mediating  social  disputes  in  ways  that  are  generally  acceptable.

To  outline  these  points,  or  to  suggest  that  political  actors  should  "think
from  the  point  of view  of  everybody,"  is  not  sharply  to  limit  the  category
of  permissible  approaches,  let  alone  to  solve  particular  problems.  A  large
task for  the  future  is  to be  quite  concrete  about  the  consequences  of repub-
licanism,  properly  understood,  for  social  theory  and  legal  reform.  That
task  has  three  components.  The first  is to  generate  the appropriate  device,
or  standpoint,  from  which  to  develop  principles  of  social justice;  the  sec-
ond  is  to  describe  those  principles,  having  carried  out  the  first  task;  the
third  is  to  describe  institutions  and  rights  with  which  to  implement  the
relevant  principles.

A  number  of prominent  efforts  draw  on one  or  more of the principles  to
which  republicanism  is  committed.  Thus  utilitarian  understandings,  com-
mitted  to  universalism,  attempt  self-consciously  to  take  account  of  every-
one's  point  of  view.""'  Other  theories,  making  deliberation  and  political
equality  central,  attempt  to derive  substantive  constraints  from  the ideas of
neutral  dialogue17 5  and  undistorted  communication.17   Rawls'  own  ap-
proach  of  course  relies  on  the original  position,  attempting  to  ensure  that
those  developing  principles  of justice  are not  influenced  by  factors  that  are
irrelevant  from  the  moral  point  of  view.1 7 7

It  would  be  foolish  to  attempt  in  this  space  to  evaluate  these  various
approaches,  which,  for  all  their  diversity,  overlap  in  important  ways  with
liberal  republicanism  as  set  out  here.  From  the  republican  standpoint,
however,  some  of  the  difficulties  in  these  approaches  are  apparent.  In
many  forms,  utilitarian  understandings  take  existing  preferences  as exoge-
nous  variables-an  approach  entirely  foreign  to  republicanism. 17 8  More-
over,  on republican  grounds  it is unclear  that "neutrality"  among  compet-
ing  conceptions  of  the  good  life  is  always  desirable 179  even  if  it  were
possible  for  governmental  institutions'8 0 
to  achieve  it.  It  is  also  quite
doubtful  that the  notion of  neutrality,  at  least  as  understood  by  some,  can
generate  powerful  substantive  constraints  on  political  outcomes.181  Enor-

174.  See,  e.g.,  R.  HARE,  MORAL  THINKING:  ITS  LEVELS,  METHOD  AND  POINT  107-16  (1981).
175.  See B.  ACKERMAN,  SOCIAL  JUSTICE  IN  THE  LIBERAL  STATE  10-12,  327-48  (1980).
176.  Habermas  has so  suggested  in  numerous  places.  See, e.g.,  J.  HABERMAS,  supra note  58,  at

294-326.
177. 
178.  See J.  ELSTER,  supra note  16,  at  109-40.  It  is possible,  however,  to  have  forms  of utilitari-

See  J.  RAwLS,  supra note  17,  at  17-22.

anism  that do  not  do  this.  See,  e.g.,  J. RILEY,  LIBERAL  UTILITARIANISM  (1988).

179.  See Sunstein,  Legal Interference with Private Preferences, 53  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  1129  (1986).
The  "neutrality"  endorsed  supra notes  160-69  and  accompanying  text  is  a  much weaker  constraint.
180.  See  West,  Liberalism Rediscovered: A  Pragmatic Definition of the  Liberal Vision,  46  U.

Prrr. L.  REV.  673  (1985)  (discussing  Dewey's  liberalism).

181.  Fishkin,  Can  There  Be  a  Neutral Theory  of Justice?,  93  ETIcs  348  (1983)  (arguing

against  use  of neutrality  as  basis  of social  theory).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1570 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1571

mous  work  is  necessary  to  unpack  the  notion  of "distortion"  in  communi-
cation  and  to  explain  its  role  in  developing  theories  of  social  justice." 2
Standing  by  itself,  the  concept  depends  on a highly  ambiguous  ideal  case.
For  republicans,  the  problem  with  the  original  position  as  a  guide  to
political  institutions  or  as  a  political  ideal18 
is  that  it  is  too  solitary  and
insufficiently  dialogic.  The  task  for  political  actors  is  to  generate  institu-
tions  that  will  produce  deliberation  among  those  differently  situated,  not
to  mimic  the  decisions  that  would  be  made  by  the unsituated-a  problem
taken  up  below.

We  may  therefore  suggest  that  the  basic  republican  commitments  will
tend  in  the  direction  of  guarantees  of  political  deliberation,  including  the
basic  rights  of  political  participation;  the  republican  beliefs  in  political
equality  and  citizenship  will generate  strong  antidiscrimination  norms;  re-
publicanism  is  likely  as well  to  furnish  basic guarantees  of security,  in the
form  of both  private  property  and  minimum  welfare  entitlements;  and  re-
publican  approaches  will  attempt  to  promote  deliberation  among  multiple
voices  in  the  political  process.

C.  Antirepublicanism

In  all  of its  various  forms,  republican  conceptions  of politics  have  been
subject  to  vigorous  criticism.  Some  observers  have  suggested  that the belief
in  deliberative  government  is  romantic  and  anachronistic-incompatible
with  the  inevitably  self-interested  character  of  modern  political  life." 4  In
this  view,  efforts  to  ensure  civic  virtue  on  the  part  of  citizens  and  repre-
sentatives  are  simply  impractical-a  diversion  from  more  promising  strat-
egies  for  reform.  A  related  objection  would  suggest  that  deliberation  is
purely  formal,  imposing  no  substantive  constraints  on  political  outcomes;
on  this view,  any  such  constraints  are  the product  of  something  other  than
deliberation.

Others  stress  the  dangers  of totalitarianism  that  are built into  the  tradi-
tional  republican  belief  in  the  subordination  of  private  interests  to  the
common good.185  Consider  in this  regard  Benjamin  Rush's  suggestion  that
each  citizen

should  be  taught  that  he  does  not  belong  to  himself,  but  that  he  is
public  property.  Let him  be  taught  to  love  his  family,  but let  him  be

182.  Lukes,  Of Gods and Demons: Habermas and Practical Reason,  in  HABERMAS:  CRITICAL
DEBATES  219,  234-37  (J.  Thompson  & D.  Held  eds.  1982)  (criticizing  Habermas  for  failing  to  do
that  work).

183.  This is  not, of course, the  way Rawls  intended  the original  position  to  be understood.  Institu-
tions  of  the  sort  described  below  might  be  necessary  in  order  to  generate  real-world  processes  and
outcomes  that  the  original  position  is  designed  to  produce  as  an  analytical  tool.

184.  Posner,  The  DeFunis  Case and the  Constitutionality of Preferential Treatment of Racial

Minorities, 1974  Sup.  CT.  REV.  I  (discussing  self-interested  character  of  legislative  process).

185.  See  Herzog,  supra note 2;  K.  Sullivan,  supra note  2.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1571 1987-1988

1572

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

taught  at  the  same  time  that  he  must  forsake  and  even  forget  them
when  the  welfare  of  his  country  requires  it ....  From  the  observa-
tions that  have  been  made  it  is  plain that  I  consider  it as  possible  to
convert  men  into  republican  machines.  This  must  be  done  if we  ex-
pect  them to  perform  their parts  properly  in  the great  machine  of the
government  of the  state.1"'

In  the  same  vein,  Rousseau  suggested  that the  "newly-born  infant,  upon
first opening  his  eyes,  must  gaze  upon  the  fatherland,  and  until his  dying
day  should  behold  nothing  else."' 187  Such  understandings  of republicanism
allow  and  indeed  encourage  the  imposition  of  a  comprehensive  view  of
social  life  on  the  nation  as  a  whole.188  From  this  point  of  view,  interest-
group  pluralism  seems  quite  attractive  in  its  willingness  to  allow  pursuit
of  divergent  conceptions  of  the  good.  Pluralism  understood  in  quite  an-
other  sense-as  respect  for  diverse  social  groups,  public  and  private,  living
different  lives-appears  to  be  an  especially  desirable  alternative.

Some  of the most interesting  criticisms  of republican  theories  have  come
from  those  who  have  little  sympathy  for  interest-group  pluralism  as  it  is
conventionally  understood. The  basic point  here is that  some  of the  central
notions  of republican  politics-deliberative  politics,  universalism,  and citi-
zenship-ignore  the  persistence  of  differences  and  oppositions  among
groups  in  society. 89  In  a  large  and  diverse  nation,  there  is  no  common
good  to be  mediated  through discussion;  there  is  no unitary  political  truth;
there  are  instead  irreducibly  opposed  perspectives  and  interests.  In  this
view,  the  problem  of  modern  politics  is  emphatically  not  that  political  ac-
tors  have  been  disabled  from  bringing  prepolitical  interests  to  the  process.
Above  all,  social  groups-especially  the  disadvantaged-should  not,  in
this  view,  be  prevented  from  invoking  their  private  interests  in  the  politi-
cal  process.  A  central  purpose  of  political  discourse  is  to  enable  such
groups  to  bring  about  reform  by  doing  precisely  that.  The conception  of a
civic  public  thus  depends  on  a  denial  of  difference  and  a  belief  in  tran-
scendence  of context-unrealistic  aspirations  that  threaten  to  forestall  de-
sirable  change.  An  approach  to  politics  that  seeks  to  remove  such  issues
from  politics,  to  operate  on  the  basis  of  a  myth  of  commonness,  and  to
remove  prepolitical  interests,  leads  in  unproductive  directions.  What,  in
such  a  system,  will  politics  be  about? 9'

This view  stresses  the  difficulties  of basing  a modern  political  system  on
beliefs  in  deliberation,  common good,  and universalism.  A related  problem
with republican  understandings  is that they  put a  high premium  on delib-

186.  See  Rush,  supra note  151,  at  684,  687.
187.  J. ROUSSEAU,  THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  POLAND  21  (W.  Kendall  trans.  1972).
188.  See J. Rawls,  The Priorty of the Right  (1987)  (unpublished  manuscript  on file  with author).
I draw  heavily  here on  Sullivan,  supra note  2, and  Herzog, supra note  2. See  also Minow,
189. 

supra note  162  (discussing  problems  of differentiating  among  various  social  groups).

190.  Cf. Pitkin, supra note  52  (arguing  against  Arendt's conception  of politics  on  this ground).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1572 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1573

eration  through  public  processes  and  through  the  state,  and  undervalue
the  need  for  intermediate  organizations,  often  nominally  private,  that
serve  both  as  checks  on  government  and  as  arenas  for  the  cultivation  and
expression  of  republican  virtues.'  The  most  powerful  statement  of  this
position  can  be  found  in  Tocqueville.' 9 2

Citizenship,  understood  in  republican  fashion,  does  not  occur  solely
through  official  organs.  Many  organizations-including  labor unions,  reli-
gious  associations,  women's  groups  of various  sorts,  civil  rights  organiza-
tions,  volunteer  and  charitable  groups,  and  others,  sometimes  marking
themselves  outside  of  and  in  opposition  to  conventional  society-serve  as
outlets  for  some  of  the  principal  functions  of  republican  systems.  These
functions  include  the  achievement  of critical  scrutiny  of existing  practices,
the  provision  of  an  opportunity  for  deliberation  within  collectivities,  the
chance to  exercise  citizenship  and  to  obtain  a  sense  of community,  and  the
exercise  of civic  virtue,  understood  as  the  pursuit  of goals  other  than  self-
interest,  narrowly  conceived.  The  problem  with  at  least  some  forms  of
republicanism  is  that  they  tend  to  ignore  or  devalue  groups  of  this  sort.
What  is  needed,  on  this  view,  is  a  more  differentiated  approach  to  the
relationship  between  citizen  and  state  than  that  afforded  by  republican
theories.

Antirepublicans  of this  sort  do  not rely  on possessive  individualism,  and
they  are  at  pains  to  distinguish  themselves  from  pluralists.  Many  of  them
are  dissatisfied  with  the  existing  distribution  of  resources  and  opportuni-
ties.  Interest-group  deals,  under  the  pluralist  conception,  are  no  more  at-
tractive  to them  than to republicans,  and for the same  reasons;  they simply
replicate  the  existing  distribution  of  social  power.  But  there  is  considera-
ble overlap between  the  view  of antirepublicans  of this  sort and that of the
pluralists.  In both  approaches,  interests  are seen  as  largely  exogenous  and
prepolitical;  in both,  politics  in governmental  processes  is  a  matter  of self-
interests,  and  largely  of  deals;  in  both,  it  is  normal  and  legitimate  for
political  actors  to  seek  goods  or  opportunities  solely  on the  ground  that it
is  in their  interest  to  do  so;  in both,  there  is  reason  for  considerable  suspi-
cion  about  the  state,  and  in  particular  about  measures  that  purport  to
reflect  a  unitary  public  good;  in  both,  spheres  of  individual  and  group
autonomy  are highly  valued;  in both,  the  notion  of mediation  among  con-
flicting  conceptions  of  the  good  seems  fanciful.  The republican  belief  in  a
disjunction  between  prepolitical  interests  and  political  behavior  is  the
principal  object  of  attack  as  an  ideal  that 
is  both  unrealistic  and
undesirable.

These  challenges  to  republican  approaches  correctly  emphasize  the  im-

191.  See  N.  ROSENBLUM,  supra  note  9,  at  143-47,  155-60.
192.  See  A.  DE  TocQuEviLLE,  DEMOCRACY  IN  AMERICA  68-70,  189-93,  242-43,  520-24  (.

Mayer  ed.  1969).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1573 1987-1988

1574

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

portance  of  private  association  and  the  difficulties  in  some  conceptions  of
universalism.  The  task  of  incorporating  into  republican  theories  the  need
for  intermediate  organizations  to be  insulated  from the  state  is  a large  and
critical  one.  But antirepublicanism  of this  sort  carries  serious  risks  as  well.
Intermediate  organizations  serve  a variety  of important  functions,  but rec-
ognition  of that  point does  not  eliminate  the need to  describe  the  appropri-
ate  role  of the  state  and  national  governments.  One  must,  in short,  explain
what  it is  that  the  government  should  do,  and  here  the  reference  to  inter-
mediate  organizations  is  inadequate.

This  is  so  for  two  principal  reasons.  First,  an  approach  that  sees  the
locus  of  republican  virtues  exclusively  in  private  institutions  undervalues
the  distinctive  capacities  of the  state.  In  view  of those  capacities,  political
deliberation  and  citizenship  must occur  within  public  institutions  as well.
It  should  be  a  familiar  point  that  the  government  is  uniquely  able  to
undertake  a  wide  range  of tasks,  including  (for  example)  the  elimination
of discrimination,  the  regulation  of broadcasting,  and the  protection  of the
environment.  Tasks  of that  sort  cannot  be  undertaken  entirely  by  private
actors.

Second,  multiple  threats  are  posed  by  private  power,  including  that
wielded  by  intermediate  organizations,  which  are  themselves  a  source  of
oppression.'  Government  must therefore  play  a role  in limiting the pow-
ers  of  such  organizations 9 " without  denying  the  importance  of their  con-
tinued  existence.  A  system  that  allowed  intermediate  organizations  to  pro-
ceed  without  regulation  would  lead  to  intolerable  results.

The  unifying  theme  of  antirepublican  arguments  is  an  attack  on  the
ideals  of  universalism  and  impartiality;  the  relevant  arguments  stress  the
importance  of situatedness  and perspective,  but  it is  here  that  the attack  is
itself  most  vulnerable.  Properly  understood,  the  principle  of  universal-
ism' 9 5  does  not deny  the existence  of different  perspectives,  and  it does  not
assert  that  political  participants  must  put  their  private  complaints  to  one
side  when  they  come  to  politics.  The belief  in universalism  affirms  instead
that  some  perspectives  are  better  than  others,  and  that  that  claim  can  be
vindicated  through  discussion  with  those  initially  skeptical.  Republican
theories  do  not  claim  that  there  is  a  standpoint  unsituated  in  the  world;
they  do  not impose  a particular,  parochial  perspective  in  the  guise  of neu-

193.  On  the  latter  point,  see  C.  TAYLOR,  HEGEL  AND  MODERN  SOCIETY  116-18  (1979);  N.

ROSENBLUM,  supra note  9,  at  155-60.

194.  Recent  examples  include  Board  of  Directors  of Rotary  Int'l v.  Rotary  Club  of Duarte,  481
U.S.  537  (1987)  and Roberts  v.  United  States Jaycees,  468 U.S.  609  (1984); see also Village  of Belle
Terre  v.  Boraas,  416  U.S.  1  (1974).  The  issue  has  arisen  most  frequently  in  efforts  to  use  norms
prohibiting  sex  discrimination  against  all-male  organizations,  see  Rhode,  Association and Assimila-
tion,  81  Nw. U.L.  REV.  106  (1986),  and  here  there  is good  reason  for  a  governmental  role  in  coun-
tering  practices  by  intermediate  associations.

195.  The  idea  is  distinct  from  impartiality.  It  would  be  possible  to  reject  impartiality  as an  un-
realistic aspiration  but  at  the same time  to believe  in the  possibility  of mediating  different claims  about
social  norms.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1574 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1575

trality.  Instead  they  require  public-regarding  justifications  offered  after
multiple  points  of  view  have  been  consulted  and  (to  the  extent  possible)
genuinely  understood.1 9  Such  an  approach  is  the  foundation  of contempo-
rary  republicanism.  It  is  for this  reason  that republican  conceptions  treat
an  understanding  of the  partiality  of one's  own  perspective  as  a regulative
ideal  for  politics,  and  are  highly  suspicious  of  approaches  that  see  pre-
political  interests  as  the  exclusive  determinants  of  political  participation.
The  antirepublican  critique  rejects  this  approach  as  unrealistic  and
misguided.  But  the  categories  to  which  it refers  and  the commitments  that
it embodies  are highly  likely  to  reflect  republican  understandings.  For  ex-
ample,  spheres  of  autonomy  for  individuals  and  groups  must  be  defended
on  some  ground;  they  cannot be justified  as prepolitical;  and  if the defense
is  to  be persuasive,  it will  have  to  incorporate  republican  notions  of delib-
eration  and  universalism.  Indeed,  the  very  conception  of  a  disadvantaged
group-central  to  some  attacks 1 7  on  republican  notions  of  universal-
ism-depends  on a  commitment  to  an  understanding  of what disadvantage
amounts  to,  and  a belief  that  the understanding  can  be  vindicated  through
discussion  with  those  initially  skeptical. 9  The  antirepublican  critique,
like  many  arguments  of  this  sort,  "can  give  no  account  of  the  normative
foundations  of  its  own  rhetoric." '19 9  Arguments  that  reject  universalism
tend  to  disable  themselves  from supporting  their  own  descriptive  and  nor-
mative  commitments;  arguments  that  reject  neutrality  eliminate  a  possible
source  of  argument  that  is  not  only  strategically  useful,  but  an  accurate
description  of what  is  sometimes  at  work. 0 0

Republicans  do  not  insist  that  political  actors  must  forget  their  private
concerns,  or  that  differences  and  disagreement  are inadmissible  in politics.
A  belief  in  universalism  need  not  be  accompanied  by  a  desire  to  erase
differences.  Indeed,  republicans  see  disagreement  as  a  creative  and  pro-
ductive  force,  highly  congenial  to  and  even  an  indispensable  part  of  the
basic  republican  faith  in  political  dialogue.2 0 1  Discussion  and  deliberation

196.  See  Okin,  supra note  82.  Of course  this  idea,  standing  by  itself, will  not  resolve  particular
problems-a  difficulty  that  also  infects  attempts  to  use  "empathy"  as  a  tool  for  solving  political  or
legal  problems.

197.  See  Young,  supra note  2.
198.  The  attack  on  universalism,  if it  is  to  be  successful,  will  work  not  only  interpersonally,  but
also  intrapersonally.  Deliberation  occurs  within  the self as  well  as among  different  people.  Theories
that incorporate  notions  of situated  selves so as  to criticize  universalism  and to  celcbrate  differences  in
perspective  ultimately  threaten  to  produce  solipsism,  or  highly  disaggregated  conceptions  of the  per-
son.  Cf  D.  PARFIT,  REASONS  AND  PERSONS  219-44  (1984)  (exploring  different  conceptions  of  the
person  over  time).

Problems  of the  sort  discussed  in  the  text  severely  complicate  efforts  to  describe  and  value  a  per-
spective  without  claiming  its  status  as  truth,  understood  pragmatically  or  in  some  other terms.  See J.
HABERMAS,  supra note  58,  at  294,  336-37.

199.  Id. at  294.
200.  See  supra notes  161-69.
201.  See  THE  FEDERAUasT  No.  70,  at  427  (A.  Hamilton)  (C.  Rossiter  ed.  1961)  (arguing  that
"differences  of opinion"  and "jarring of parties"  can "promote  deliberation");  H.  PrrKIN,  supra note
1, at  90  ("A  plurality  of classes  and  interests  is  necessary  to  the  Citizen  vision  not  merely  because

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1575 1987-1988

1576

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

depend  for  their  legitimacy  and  efficacy  on  the  existence  of  conflicting
views.20 2  The  basic  constitutional  institutions  of  checks  and  balances  and
federalism  should  be  understood  at  least  partly  in  this  light.  Modern  re-
publicanism  is  thus  not  grounded  in  a  belief  in  homogeneity;  on the  con-
trary, heterogeneity  is  necessary  if republican  systems  are  to  work.  As  we
shall  see,  this  understanding  will  call  for  institutional  innovations.20 3

It  would  be  extraordinarily  foolish  to  suggest  that  disparities  in  per-
spective  and power  do  not  complicate  and  distort  deliberative  processes,  or
to  claim  that  exhortations  to  citizens  and  representatives  to  consult  the
common  good  are  sufficient  to  bring  about desirable  results.  And  it  would
be  a mistake to  suggest  that the  republican  commitments  as described  here
lead directly  to a  particular  social theory  or a particular  set  of institutional
arrangements.  Large  questions-having  to  do  with  the  appropriate  con-
ception  of rights,  institutions,  and  groups-remain  to  be  resolved.  But  the
question  is  one  of  governing  ideals;  and  here  liberal  republicanism  is  su-
perior  to  its  competitors.

III. 

IMPLICATIONS

Republican  thought,  thus  understood,  furnishes  the  basis  for  approach-
ing  a  variety  of  issues  in  modern  public  law  in  somewhat  different  ways.
To  be  sure,  one  cannot  simply  "apply"  republican  ideas  as  if  they  pro-
vided  self-evident  solutions  to  contemporary  legal  problems;  there  will  be
room  to  contest  any  particular  application.  But  many  contemporary  con-
troversies  look  quite  different  if viewed  through  the lens  of the  republican
tradition.  Some  of  these  controversies  involve  public  law  doctrine  in  the
courts;  most  of  them  call  for  initiatives  from  nonjudicial  bodies.  For  the
most  part,  the  discussion  of  particular  areas  will  be  brief  and  summary,
attempting  to  suggest  how  republicans  would  approach  a  variety  of
problems  rather  than  to  examine  those  problems  in  detail.

A.  Campaign  Finance  Regulation;  Marketplaces  and  Freedom  of

Expression

Consider,  for  example,  the  problems  raised  by  modern  campaign
finance  regulation.  Such  regulation  has  often  been  challenged  on  the
ground  that  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  "marketplace  of  ideas"-indeed,
that  it  effects  a  kind  of  First  Amendment  taking  from  rich  speakers  in

each  has  its  unique  perspective  and  spirit  to  contribute  to  the  community,  but  also  because  internal
conflict  is  an  essential  and  healthy  phenomenon  in  its  own  right.");  id. at  82  ("Citizen  virtue is  not
the  product  of a  uniform  solidarity  of identification  or  obedience.  Indeed,  in  the  Citizen  vision,  pre-
cisely  plurality,  competition,  diversity,  rather than  uniformity,  are  the source  of  . . .strength."  (em-
phasis  in  original));  id. at  300-04;  cf. Michelman,  supra note  6.

202.  See  the discussion  of "Machiavelli  at his  best"  in  H. PsmsIN,  supra note  1, at  285-327.  See

also Manin,  supra note  83,  at  360-61.

203.  See  infra notes  249-65  (discussing  proportional  representation).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1576 1987-1988

19881 

Beyond  the  Revival 

1577

order  to  help  poorer  ones.  It  was  under  this  rationale  that  the  Supreme
Court  invalidated  campaign  finance  regulation  in  Buckley  v.  Valeo.2 4
There  the  Court  said  that  "the  concept  that  government  may  restrict  the
speech  of  some  elements  of  our  society  in  order  to  enhance  the  relative
voice  of others  is  wholly  foreign  to  the  First  Amendment."2 0 5 The  Court
did  not  hold  that the  effort  to  promote  deliberation  among  political  equals
was  insufficiently  weighty,  or inadequately  promoted  by the  legislation  at
issue;  the  Court  held,  much  more  sweepingly,  that that effort  was  illegiti-
mate  under  the  First Amendment.

Under  a  republican  approach  to  the  First  Amendment,  campaign
finance  regulation  would  be  treated  far  more  hospitably.  At  least  some
forms  of  regulation  would  be  seen  as  plausible  efforts  to  promote  rather
than  to  undermine  First  Amendment  purposes,  by  counteracting  the  dis-
tortions brought  about  by  expenditures  on  political  campaigns. A  delibera-
tive  conception  of the  First  Amendment,  incorporating  a  norm  of  political
equality,20 8  would  lead  to  a  quite  different  analysis  from  the  marketplace
model,  which  has  significant  pluralist  overtones.  Above  all,  the  Buckley
Court's  hostility  to  redistributive  rationales  for  regulation  would  dissipate.
To  be  sure,  there  are  large  difficulties  in  designing  a  system  of  cam-
paign  finance  regulation  that  achieves  its  intended  purposes  and  that does
not  serve  as  an  incumbent  protection  measure.2"7  But  republican  under-
standings  would  point  toward  large  reforms  of the  electoral  process  in  an
effort  to  improve  political  deliberation  and  to  promote  political  equality
and  citizenship.

For  similar  reasons,  republican  ideas  offer  reasons  to  reject  recent  at-
tacks  on the  fairness  doctrine  in the  broadcast  and  print media.  Such  ideas
suggest  that  efforts  to  promote  access  to  sources  of  public  deliberation
should  be  treated  quite hospitably;  and  that the  exclusive  use  of  the  eco-
nomic  market  to  regulate  such  access  is  undesirable.  It  is  for  this  reason
that  on  the  republican  view  a  principal  current  threat  to  a well-function-
ing  system  of  free  expression  lies,  not  in  government  regulation,  but  in

204.  424  U.S.  1  (1976).
205.  Id.  at  48-49.
206.  See A.  MEIKLEJOHN,  FREE SPEECH  IN AMERICA  (1946);  see also Rawls, Basic Liberties and
Their  Priority, in  3  THE  TANNER  LEcrTUES  ON  HUMAN  VALUES  76  (S. McMurrin  ed.  1982).
According  to  Rawls:

IT]he  Court fails  to recognize  the  essential  point  that the  fair-value  of the  political  liberties  is
required  for  a just  political  procedure,  and  that  to  insure  their  fair-value  it  is  necessary  to
prevent  those  with  greater  property  and  wealth,  and  the  greater  skills  of organization  which
accompany  them,  from  controlling  the  electoral  process  to  their  advantage.  .
. .On  this  view,
democracy  is a  kind of regulated  rivalry  between  economic classes  and interest  groups in  which
the outcome  should  properly  depend  on  the ability  and  willingness of  each  to  use its  financial
resources  and  skills,  admittedly  very  unequal,  to  make  its  desires  felt.

207.  See,  e.g.,  PARTIES,  INTEREST  GROUPS  AND  CAMPAIGN  FINANCE  LAWS  (M.  Malbin  ed.

Id.

1981).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1577 1987-1988

1578

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

government  "inaction"  that  allows  the  political  process  to  be  excessively
influenced  by  disparities  in  private  wealth  and  private  access. 08

B.  Federalism and Intermediate Organizations

A  critical  feature  of  the  learning  of  the  New  Deal  period-one  with
continuing  influence  on  American  law-is  that  the  original  constitutional
structure  of  dual  sovereignty  was  a  large  mistake,  allied  with  anachronis-
tic goals  of limited  government  and inconsistent  with the  need  for  continu-
into  marketplaces.20 9  But  one  of  the  great
ing  national  intervention 
strengths  of the  original  constitutional  system  was  its  simultaneous  provi-
sion  of deliberative  representation  at  the national  level  and self-determina-
tion  at  the  local  level,  furnishing  a sphere  for  traditional  republican  goals.
A  central  lesson  of the  republican  revival  is the  need to  provide  outlets  for
self-determination  in  the  public and  private  spheres. 10  The  Tocquevillian
understanding  of  a  variety  of groups,  some  in  local  government,  some  in
purely  private  organizations,  furnishes  an  alternative  understanding,  far
superior  to  the  New  Deal  model.

Understandings  of this sort  lead  in a variety  of directions.  In the  area  of
labor  law,  collective  bargaining  appears  superior  to uniform  national  stan-
dards.2 '  "Reconstitutive  law"-reforms  that  allow state  and  local  flexibil-
ity  by  restructuring  markets  rather than  imposing  inflexible  national  com-
mands-should  be  viewed  hospitably. 12  Proposals  to  loosen  restrictions  in
federal  grant  programs  are  an  example.  From  the  republican  point  of
view,  efforts  to  promote  workplace  democracy  also  hold  out  considerable
promise."' 
Interpretations  of  the  establishment  clause  should  recognize
the  role  of  religious  organizations  in  the  cultivation  of  republican  vir-
tues;" 4  approaches  to  the  clause  that end  up  disfavoring  religion21 5  under-
value  the  role  of  intermediate  organizations  in  a  pluralistic  society.

208.  See  also Michelman,  Law's Republic, 97  YALE  L.J.  1493  (1988).
209.  See  G.  MCCONNELL,  PRIVATE  POWER  AND  AMERICAN  DEMOCRACY  101-10  (1966);  Sun-

stein,  supra note  115,  at  440-43.

210.  See  B.  BARBER,  supra note  145;  McConnell,  Federalism: Evaluating the Framers' Design,

54  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  1484,  1493-1511  (1987);  Sunstein,  supra note  115,  at  504-08.

211.  Thus  the  proposals  in  Fried,  Individual and Collective Rights in  Work Relations: Reflec-
tions on the Current State of Labor Law and its Prospects, 51  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  1012  (1984),  point  in
precisely  the  wrong  direction.  See  P.  WEILER,  THE  FUTURE  OF  LABOR  AND  EMPLOYMENT  LAW:
REFLECTIONS  ON  WRONGFUL  DISMISSAL  WITHIN THE  MARKET,  THE  LAW,  AND  COLLECTIVE  BAR-
GAINING  (temp.  ed.  Oct.  1987).

212. 

See  R.  STEWART,  FEDERALISM  AND  POLITICAL  ECONOMY 

IN  THE  GREAT  REPUBLIC

(forthcoming  1989).

213.  See  R.  DAHL,  A  PREFACE  TO  ECONOMIC  DEMOCRACY  (1985);  E.  GREENBERG,  WORK-
IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

PLACE  DEMOCRACY  (1986);  C.  GUNN,  WORKERS'  SELF-MANAGEMENT 
(1984).

214.  See  McConnell,  Accommodation  of Religion, 1985  SuP.  CT.  REV.  1.  There  is  no  inconsis-
tency  between  the desire  to remove  religious  issues  from  politics,  see supra text accompanying  note  85,
and  the claim  that accommodation  of religion  will  be  desirable  in  the  interest of neutrality.  Measures
that  accommodate  religion  may  be  necessary  in  order  to  avoid  disfavoring  religion  through  facially
neutral  statutes  that  exclude  religious  organizations;  accommodation  is  thus  not  inconsistent  with  a
general  desire  to  remove  religious  controversy  from  the  political  agenda.
215.  See,  e.g.,  L.  PFEIFFER,  CHURCH,  STATE  AND  FREEDOM  (1975).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1578 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1579

C.  Rationality Review

Courts  review  statutes  for  "rationality"  under  a variety  of constitutional
provisions,  including  the due  process,  contracts,  takings,  and  equal  protec-
tion clauses.216  To  some,  the idea  that  statues  must  be "rational"  is incon-
sistent  with  the  nature  of  the  political  process,  which  consists  of  "deals"
among  self-interested  actors.2 1  But  the  requirement  of  rationality  is  best
understood* as  a  requirement  of  deliberation  by  political  officials.  The
Constitution  requires  some  showing  that a  burden  was  imposed,  or a  ben-
efit  denied,  for  a  reason  other  than  the  exercise  of political  power  by  the
advantaged  class.  In its  requirement  of an element  of deliberation  in  polit-
ics,  rationality  review  recalls  republican  themes,  indeed it is  closely  associ-
ated  with  Madisonian  theories  of representation."'  Whether  or  not  con-
stitutional  courts  should  enforce  the  rationality  norm  more  vigorously,21 9
the  norm  does  have  constitutional  status,  and  its  continuing  existence
reveals  the  tenacity  of  deliberative  conceptions  of  politics. 2 0

D.  The  Lochner  Era

The  republican  tradition  also  furnishes  a  different  angle  from  which to
understand  the  lesson  of the Lochner period.  In  that  period,  the  Supreme
Court  invalidated  a  wide  range  of regulatory  measures,  frequently  by  in-
voking  libertarian  conceptions  of  private  rights.  The  Lochner period  is
frequently  understood  as  a  lesson  in  institutional  role,  revealing  the  risks
of an aggressive judicial  function  in overseeing  the political  process.221  But
a  different  understanding  would  stress  issues  of  substance  as  well  as  of
institutional  competence.

Such  an  understanding  would  emphasize  the  extent  to  which  the Loch-
ner  Court  posited  the  existence  of  a  natural  and  prepolitical  private
sphere,  one  that  served  as  a  brake  on  legislation.  The  creation  of  such  a
sphere,  based  on  a theory  of natural  rights, coexists  uneasily  with  republi-
can  conceptions  of politics.  Republicans  do  of course  believe  in  rights,  un-
derstood  as  the  outcome  of  a  well-functioning  deliberative  process;  hence
republicans  enthusiastically  endorse  the use  of constitutionalism  as  a check

216.  See,  e.g.,  Exxon  Corp.  v.  Eagerton,  462  U.S.  176  (1983);  Schweicker  v.  Wilson,  450  U.S.
221  (1981);  United  States  R.R.  Retirement  Bd.  v.  Frit  ,  449  U.S.  166  (1980);  Williamson  v.  Lee
Optical,  348  U.S.  483  (1955).

217.  See,  e.g.,  Linde, Due Process of Lawmaking, 55  NEB.  L.  REv.  197  (1976);  Posner, supra

note  184,  at 27-31.

218.  See Sunstein,  supra note  6.
219.  See  id.
220.  See  Sager,  Fair Measure: The  Legal Status  of Underenforced Constitutional Norms, 91

HARV.  L. REV.  1212  (1978)  (discussing constitutional  norms  not enforced  by  courts).

221.  See,  e.g.,  J.  ELY,  supra note  63  (arguing  that courts  should protect  rights of process  rather
than  substance). But see Sunstein, supra note  164 (arguing  that lesson of Lochner lies in common law
or  staus  quo  baselines);  Horwitz, supra note  7,  at  1827-30  (suggesting  that  Lochner was  rooted  in
conception  of rights  as  prepolitical).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1579 1987-1988

1580

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

on  popular  majorities.  But  republicans  are  skeptical  of  approaches  to
politics  and  constitutionalism  that  rely  on  rights  that  are  said  to  antedate
political  deliberation.

On  this  view,  the  problem  with  the  Lochner Court  was  its  reliance  on
common  law  and  status  quo  baselines;  the  Court  was  unable  to  see  the
ways  in  which  those  baselines  were  implicated  in,  indeed  a  product  of
law.2 22  The  heirs  of Lochner, understood  through  a  republican  lens,  are
not  cases  like  Roe  v.  Wade, 2 3  but  instead  such  decisions  as  Bowers  v.
Hardwick2 24  and  Washington  v.  Davis.2 2 5  Both  decisions  rely  on  status
quo  baselines  and  downplay  the  role  of  law  in  creating  existing  practice.
Thus  Hardwick relies  on  the  fact  that  gays  and  lesbians  have  not  been
permitted  to  marry,  when  marriage  is  in  fact  a  creature  of  the  legal  sys-
tem;  thus  Washington v. Davis disregards  the  fact  that  the existing  distri-
bution  of benefits  and  burdens  between  blacks  and  whites  is  a function  of
the  legal  system,  and  not  exogenous  to  it.  On  the  republican  view,  Loch-
ner, Hardwick, and  Washington v.  Davis share  the  same  defect:  they  ig-
nore  the  constitutive  functions  of  law  and  the  ways  in  which  existing
practices  are  dependent  on  past  and  present  choices  of the  legal  system.

E.  Disadvantaged Groups

Republican  thought  might  also  provide  a  basis  for  understanding  that
the  role  of  constitutionalism  is  countering  classifications  in  such  areas  as
race,  sex,  sexual  orientation,  and  poverty.  A  central  concern  here  is  that

222. 

In  Lochner itself, the  problem  was  that the  Court  took  as natural  and  prepolitical  a  sphere
whose  origins  lay  in  the common  law  itself. On this view,  there  is a close  association  between Lochner
and  Plessy  v.  Ferguson,  163  U.S. 537  (1896).  In Plessy, the  Court  said  that the  plaintiff's  argument
assumes  that social  prejudices  may  be  overcome  by  legislation,  and  that  equal  rights  cannot  be
secured  to  the  negro  except  by  an  enforced  commingling  of  the  two  races.  We  cannot  accept
this  proposition.  If  the  two  races  are  to  meet  upon  terms  of  social  equality,  it  must  be  the
result  of natural  affinities,  a mutual  appreciation  of  each  other's  merits  and  a voluntary  con-
sent of individuals.  .
. . Legislation  is  powerless  to eradicate  racial  instincts  or  to abolish  dis-
tinctions  based  upon  physical  differences  ....

Id. at  551.  Arguments of this sort would  be at  least  coherent  in the  context of a  forced  integration law;
they  are  plausible in  the  setting of Plessy only if the segregative  status  quo  is treated  as prelegal.  Both
Plessy and  Lochner acted  as  if  the  law  is  facilitative  rather  than  constitutive  or-to  put  the  point
slightly  differently-as  if there  is  perfect  transparency  between  individual  will  and  legal  constraints,
and the  latter  has no impact  on  the former-a  belief  that infects  much  of current  law,  and  that would
be  impossible  to  sustain  under  republican  premises. See  infra notes  224-25.

223.  410 U.S.  113  (1973).
224.  478  U.S.  186  (1986).  The central  point here  is that the  Court decided the  case by noting  that
it did  not  involve  marriage.  But  marriage  is hardly  prepolitical  or  prelegal;  it is  the state  that decides
who  may marry  whom.  The  fact  that gays and  lesbians  may not  marry should  not,  on the republican
view,  be  taken  as  a prepolitical  barrier  to  the  plaintiff's claim,  but  instead  as  part  of  a range  of data
that  support  an  equal  protection  challenge  to  measures  discriminating  on  the  basis  of sexual  orienta-
tion.  See  Sunstein,  Sexual  Orientation and the  Constitution: A  Note  on  the  Relationship Between
Due Process and Equal Protection, 55  U.  CH.  L.  REv.  1161  (1988).

225.  426  U.S.  229  (1976).  To criticize  the  Court's  reason  on  this ground  is  not  to  deny  the  diffi-

culties  in  developing  a  workable  alternative  to  an  "intent"  test.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1580 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1581

the  values  supporting  such  classifications  are  the  product  of  social  power;
they  must  therefore  be  subject  to  scrutiny  and  review.22 6

In  this  view,  judicial  decisions  that  take  a  skeptical  approach  to  such
classifications  are consistent  with  the  rejection  of the  Lochner decision,  not
with  Lochner  itself.  Republican  premises  might  eventually  serve  as  the
foundation  of  a  theory  of  social  subordination  to  undergird  constitutional
hostility  to  discrimination  against  various  social  groups.  The  republican
beliefs in  political equality  and deliberation  would  function  as the defining
notions.  The  argument  here  would  have  to  be quite  elaborate,  but some  of
its  foundations  can  be  found  in  current  law. 227

There  is  an  irony  here.  Republican  thought  has  traditionally  been  al-
lied  with  exclusionary  practices.  It is  thus  odd  to  invoke  republicanism  as
a  basis  for  rejecting  those  same  practices.  But  the  premises  of  republican
thought  furnish  an aspiration  that  turns  out  to  provide  the  basis  for  criti-
cism  of republican  traditions.  There  is  nothing  especially  unusual  in  this
phenomenon.  Frequently  cultural  commitments  are used  to  revise  cultural
practices;  indeed  those  who  attempt  to  revise  existing  practice  inevitably
draw  on  traditional  commitments. 22 8  The  use  of republican  aspiration  to
counteract  republican  practice  is  simply  an  illustration  of  this  general
proposition.

F.  Statutory Construction

In  recent  years,  there  has  been  something  of  a  revival  of  interest  in
theories  of statutory  construction.  It  should not  be  controversial  to  suggest
that  approaches  to  construction  are  informed  by  theories  of  the  political
process.  Thus  it  is  suggested  that  courts  should  understand  statutes  as
"deals"  among  self-interested  actors  and  enforce  them  as  such.229  Sugges-
tions of this sort  of course are  an outgrowth  of interest-group  pluralism. 230
The  idea  that  the  role  of  the  court  is  solely  to  implement  congressional
purposes  in  the  particular  case  is  also  congenial  to  pluralist  understand-
ings.  On  the  republican  view,  by  contrast,  one  of  the  tasks  of  statutory
construction  is  to  promote  actual  deliberation  in  the  lawmaking  process
and  to  interpret  statutes,  within  the  appropriate  confines  of  the judicial
role,  so  as  to  minimize  the  pathologies  of  pluralism.2 3 1

226.  This  point  has been emphasized  above  all in  the gender  cases.  See, e.g.,  Mississippi  Univ.  for

Women  v.  Hogan,  458  U.S.  718  (1982).

227.  See  Fiss,  Groups and the Equal Protection Clause, 5  PHIL.  &  PUB.  AFFAIRS  107  (1976).
228.  See  P.  RICOEUR,  LECTURES  ON  IDEOLOGY  AND  UTOPIA  (1987);  M.  WALZER,  INTERPRE-

TATION  AND  SOCIAL  CRITICISM  (1987).

229.  See,  e.g.,  Easterbrook,  The  Supreme  Court, 1983  Term-Foreword: The  Court and the
Economic System,  98  HARv.  L.  REV.  4  (1984);  Easterbrook,  Statutes' Domains, 50 U.  CHI.  L.  REV.
533  (1983).

230.  Easterbrook,  Statutes' Domains, supra note  229,  at  553,  is  an  obvious  example;  it  also  in-

yokes  a Lochner-like  presumption  in  favor  of private  ordering  as  a  tool  of construction.

231.  See,  e.g.,  Macey,  Promoting Public-Regarding Legislation Through Statutory Interpreta-

tion: An  Interest Group Model,  86  COLUM.  L.  REv.  223  (1986).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1581 1987-1988

1582

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

The  basic  defense  of  canons  of  statutory  construction  is  that  they  are
literally  unavoidable.  In hard  cases,  statutory  construction  is  impossible in
the  absence  of  understandings  about  the  background  against  which  Con-
gress  legislates.  Moreover,  it  is  possible  to  understand  and  defend  some
canons  of statutory  construction  as a  straightforward  outgrowth  of repub-
lican  conceptions  of  politics.  Many  such  canons  appear  alert  to  possible
malfunctions  in  the  legislative  process,  and  attempt  to use  interpretation  to
guard  against  or  limit  those  malfunctions.2 32  In  these  canons,  or  "clear
statement"  principles,  one  can  find  the  foundations  of  a  republican  ap-
proach  to  statutory  construction,  an approach  that repudiates  the  idea that
the  only  role  of the  courts  is  to  ascertain  legislative  intent  in  the  particular
case.

Consider,  for  example,  the  idea  that  appropriations  measures  should
not  readily  be  thought to  amend  substantive  statutes. 23 3  Such  a  rule  might
be  defended  on  the  ground  that  the  appropriations  process  is  compara-
tively  likely  to  be  dominated  by  well-organized  private  groups,  that  it
lacks  visibility,  and  that  the  outcomes  of that  process  should  be  narrowly
construed.  One  might on  similar  lines  defend  the  notion  that  federal  stat-
utes  should  not  easily  be  thought  to  preempt  state  law. 234  The  central
ideas  here  are  that  from  the  founding  period,  the  federal  system  has  fur-
nished  an  opportunity  for  state  and  local  self-determination,  and  that  the
national  government  should  not  be taken  to  have  interfered  with that  goal
unless  Congress  deliberated  on  the  express  point.  Finally,  courts  some-
times  suggest  that  statutes  will  be  understood  as  an  integrated  whole; 235
one  part  of  a  statute  will  not  lightly  be  taken  to  undermine  the  general
statutory  structure.  This approach  to statutes  is  controversial  to  those  who
believe  that  statutes  tend  to  be  unprincipled  trade-offs  among  private
groups.  But  the  idea  becomes  more  understandable  if  it  is  understood  as
an effort  to  ensure  that  statutes  are  not undermined  by  "deals"  that serve
as  largely  invisible  qualifications  of basic  statutory  purposes.

These  approaches  to  statutory  construction  might  be  defended  straight-

232.  Some  canons  of construction  attempt  to  discern  the  intent  of the  legislature;  others,  by  con-
trast,  operate as  a kind  of tie-breaker  when  legislative  intent is  unclear,  and frequently  invoke  proce-
dural  or  substantive  goals  that  are  sometimes  constitutionally  inspired.  The  notions  that  statutes
should be  construed  so as to  promote  state autonomy,  see  Pennhurst  State School  & Hosp.  v.  Halder-
man, 451  U.S.  1  (1981),  or  to avoid  harming  Indian  tribes, see  Montana v.  Blackfeet  Tribe,  471  U.S.
759  (1985),  are  examples  of substantive  canons;  the  claims  that  deference  should  be  given  to agency
interpretations  of  statutes,  see  Chevron  USA  Inc.  v.  NRDC,  467  U.S.  837,  865-66  (1984),  or  that
courts should  not  lightly  find that appropriations  statutes amend  substantive  statutes, see TVA  v.  Hill,
437  U.S.  153  (1978),  are  examples  of process-oriented  statutes.  For general  and  more  detailed discus-
sion  of  these  devices,  see  Sunstein,  Statutes  and  the  Regulatory  State  (1988)  (unpublished  manu-
script);  Eskridge,  Public  Values  in  Statutory  Construction  (1987)  (unpublished  manuscript  on  file
with  author).

233.  See TVA  v.  Hill,  437  U.S.  153  (1978);  see also Devins,  Regulation of Government Agencies

Through Limitation Riders, 1987  DUKE  L.J. 456.

234.  See,  e.g.,  Ray  v.  Atlantic  Richfield  Co.,  435  U.S.  151,  157-58  (1978).
235.  See  Philbrook  v.  Glodgett,  421  U.S.  707,  713-15  (1975)  (discussing  intersectional  harmony).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1582 1987-1988

19881

Beyond  the  Revival

1583

forwardly  on  republican  grounds.  The  narrow  construction  of appropria-
tions  statutes  is  designed  to  restrict  the  effect  of  measures  likely  to  re-
present  interest-group  deals;  protection  of state  and  local  autonomy  recalls
the  republican  belief in local  self-determination;  in interpreting  statutes  as
integrated  wholes,  courts  minimize  the  pathologies  of  pluralism.

In  light  of  massive  changes  in  the  nature  of  the  national  government
since  the  founding,  however,  it  would  be  surprising  if existing  canons  of
construction  were  sufficient.  And  it is  possible  to  outline  a series  of canons
of construction  that  are  designed  to  promote  republican  goals  in  a  differ-
ent institutional  environment.  All  of these  canons,  to be  noted briefly  here,
have  some  basis  in  current  law;  all  of  them  have  been  used  by  courts  in
the  interpretive  process.  The  suggestion  here  is  that  they  ought  to  be
adopted  as  self-conscious  guides  to  statutory  construction.

1.  Proportionality

Some  cases  suggest  a  judicial  perception  that  statutes  should  be  con-
strued  so  that  the  aggregate  social  benefits  are  proportionate  to  the aggre-
gate  social  costs.28  This  principle,  implicit  in  some  of the  recent  cases,2""
recognizes  the  risk  that  well-organized  groups  might  be  able  to  obtain
legislation  that  would  likely  not  be  the  outcome  of  a  well-functioning
Madisonian  process.  On  this  view,  moreover,  regulatory  statutes  should
ordinarily  be understood  to  contain  de minimis  exceptions.  Administrators
should  generally  be  authorized  to  refuse  to  impose  costly  regulations  for
highly  speculative  or  de  minimis  gains." 8

236.  See Asbestos  Information  Ass'n  v.  OSHA,  727  F.2d  415,  423  (5th  Cir.  1984).
237.  See, e.g.,  Industrial  Union  Dep't  v.  American  Petroleum  Inst.,  448  U.S.  607  (1980).
238.  See Coming  Glass  Works  v.  United  States  Int'l Trade  Comm'n,  799  F.2d  1559,  1565  (Fed.
Cir.  1988);  Public  Citizen  v.  Young,  831  F.2d  1108  (D.C.  Cir. 1987);  Center for  Auto Safety  v.  Peck,
751  F.2d  1336,  1342  (D.C.  Cir.  1985);  Monsanto  v.  Kennedy,  613  F.2d  947  (D.C.  Cir.  1979).  See
generally Gilhooley,  Plain Meaning, Absurd Results and the Legislative Purpose: The Interpreta-
tion  of the  Delaney Clause, 40  ADMIN.  L.  REv.  267  (1988);  Mumpower,  An  Analysis  of the  De
Minimis Strategy for Risk Management, 6  RISK  ANALYSIS  437  (1981).

The  difficulty  with  a  proportionality  principle  or  a  de  minimis  exception  stems  from  the  fact  that
there  is  no  uncontroversial  metric  with  which  to  measure  social  costs  and  social  benefits.  If  courts
understand  benefits  and  costs  technically-as  in  the  economic  formulation-and  make  the  assessment
turn  on  private  willingness  to pay,  they  will  be  relying on  a highly  controversial  approach,  one  that is
likely  to  have  been  repudiated  by  the  legislature  that  enacted  the  program  in  question.  An approach
that  measures  costs and benefits  in terms of private  willingness  to  pay  is  hardly consistent  with repub-
lican  tenets;  it  would  be  quite  odd  to  invoke  republicanism  in  order  to  support  such  an  approach.
Many  statutes are  designed  to  transform  rather than  implement  preferences,  to  redistribute  resources,
or  to  reflect  the outcome  of a deliberative  process  about  relevant  public  values.  Moreover,  there may
be  symbolic benefits  in  a statute  that protects  (for example)  endangered  species.  Noncommodity  values
of various  sorts  are  served  by  regulatory  programs,  and  republican  understandings  treat those  values
quite  hospitably.  The  proportionality  principle  becomes  workable  on  the  assumption  that  in  some
cases,  it will  be  relatively  clear  that the  social  benefits  are small  in  comparison  to  the social costs,  and
that  in  some  cases  statutes  should  be  construed  so  as  not  to  permit  or  require  the  action  at  issue.  In
order  to make  the principle  operational,  it will  therefore  be  necessary  to  make a  typology of statutes in
terms  of  redistributive,  efficiency,  and aspirational  functions.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1583 1987-1988

1584

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

2.  Narrow Construction of Procedural Qualifiers

An  analogous  principle,  also  implicit  in  the  cases,  counsels  courts  nar-
rowly to  construe  procedural  limitations on substantive  rights. Many  cases
involve,  for  example,  the  question  whether  to  imply  a  private  right  of
action  to  enforce  a  regulatory  statute;23 
the  appropriate  procedures  for
adjusting  or  eliminating  a  substantive  benefit,  as  in  a  claimed  right  to  a
hearing  before  elimination  of  welfare  benefits;24 0  and  the  availability  of
judicial  review  to  test  enforcement  or  nonenforcement.2 4 1  Constitutional
questions  are  of  course  implicated  here.  But  the  constitutional  issues  are
avoided  if courts  construe  procedural  qualifications  narrowly  in  the  belief
that  the  procedures  are  less  likely  to  be  the  product  of a  deliberative  pro-
cess  than  the  substance,  and  from  fear  that  procedural  qualifications
might  enable  well-organized  groups  to  defeat  substantive  programs.

3.  Consistency and Coordination

Courts  have  also  employed  clear  statement  principles  of  statutory  con-
struction  so  as  to  help  bring  about  consistency  and  coordination  in  the
law.24 2  Such  a  role  has  clear  precedent  in  the  context  of  administrative
law.  Courts  have,  for  example,  aggressively  construed  statutes  of  the
1920's  and  1930's  so  as  to  require  old-line  agencies  to  consider  environ-
mental  concerns.24  The Bob Jones case 2"  might  best  be understood  as an
effort  to  ensure  that  the  I.R.S.  takes  account  of the  widespread  social  an-
tagonism  toward  racial  discrimination,  as  part  of  the  general  thrust  of
"public  policy."  Some  cases  limiting  agency  authority  to  impose  signifi-
cant  costs  for  speculative  benefits  can  be  understood  in  similar  terms. 2 45
Decisions  of this  sort  might  be justified  on republican  grounds,  as  part  of
the  integration  of statutory  systems  into a  coherent  whole  that  could  plau-
sibly  be  understood  as  the  outcome  of deliberative  processes.

4.  Promoting Accountability

Finally,  republicans  would  urge  that  principles  of statutory  construction
be  designed  to  ensure  that  decisions  are  made  by those  who  are  politically
accountable  and  highly  visible.  If the  issue  is  one  of allocation  of institu-

239.  See  Stewart  & Sunstein,  Public Programs and Private Rights, 95  HARV.  L.  REv.  1193,

1206-07,  1289-1316  (1982).

240.  See,  e.g.,  Goldberg  v.  Kelly,  397  U.S.  254  (1970).  For  a  recent  example  as  a  matter  of

statutory  construction,  see  Bartlett  v.  Bowen,  816  F.2d  695  (D.C.  Cir.  1987).

241.  See,  e.g.,  Heckler  v.  Chancy,  470  U.S.  821  (1985).
242.  Cf  G.  CALABRESI,  A  COMMON  LAW  FOR  THE  AGE  OF  STATUTES  82  (1983)  (arguing  that
courts  should  be  allowed  to  treat  statutes  as precedents  to  ensure  against  statutory  obsolecence);  Es-
kridge,  Dynamic  Statutory Interpretation, 135  U.  PA.  L.  REv.  1479  (1987)  (arguing  that  courts
should  interpret  statutes  so  as  to  allow  for  changing  social  conditions).

243.  See,  e.g.,  Scenic  Hudson  Preservation  Conference  v.  FPC,  354  F.2d  608  (2d  Cir.  1965).
244.  Bob  Jones  Univ.  v.  United  States,  461  U.S.  574  (1983).
245. 

Industrial  Union  Dep't  v.  American  Petroleum  Inst.,  448  U.S.  607  (1980).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1584 1987-1988

1988]

Beyond  the  Revival

1585

tional  authority,  courts  should  construe  statutes  in  such  a  way  as  to  pro-
mote  political  accountability.  An  example  is the  Supreme  Court's  decision
in  Hampton v.  Mow  Sun Wong,24 
in which  the Court  held-as  a matter
of due  process-that  if aliens  were  to  be  prevented  from  serving  as federal
employees,  the  decision  must be  made  by  Congress  or  the  President rather
than  by  the  Civil  Service  Commission.  In other  cases  the  Court,  and  indi-
vidual  Justices,  have  suggested  that  the  Constitution  requires  that  certain
disabilities  may  not  be  visited  on  certain  groups  unless  an  accountable
actor  has  so  decided.247  Decisions  of this  sort  might  be  understood  as  in-
volving  a  kind  of  clear  statement  principle.

These  examples  are  designed  simply  to  illustrate  some  of the directions
in  which  statutory  construction  might  move  if  republican  understandings
were  taken  seriously.2 48  Aspects  of  republican  approaches  account  for
some  otherwise  surprising  practices  here,  and  they  might  spur further  de-
velopments  as  well.

G.  Proportional or Group Representation

In  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  revival  of  interest  in  systems  of  pro-
portional  or  group  representation.  Blacks,  women,  the  handicapped,  gays
and  lesbians,  and  other  disadvantaged  groups  have  often had  little  success
in the  ordinary  electoral  process.  In particular,  the  problem  of racial  block
voting  has  sometimes  made  it impossible  for  blacks  to  elect  anyone  in  cer-
tain  election  districts.149  This  problem-sometimes  described  as  minority
vote  dilution-produces  a  system in which  blacks  and  other groups  have  a
much  lower  percentage  of  representatives  than  of  the  population. 5 '  Be-

246.  426  U.S.  88  (1976).
247.  See  New  York  City  Transit  Auth.  v.  Beazer,  440  U.S.  568,  597-611  (1979)  (White,  J.,
dissenting);  Regents  of the Univ.  of Cal.  v.  Bakke, 438  U.S. 265  (1978)  (Powell, J.); see also Gewirtz,
The  Courts, Congress, and Executive Policy-making, 40  LAW  & CONTEMP.  PRoas.  46, 65-83  (1976)
(arguing  in  favor  of clear  statement  principles  to  limit  executive  power).

248.  There  are  other  possibilities  as well.  First, statutes  should  be  construed  so as to  ensure  that
collective  action  problems  will  be  overcome.  See supra notes  25-31  (discussing  failure  of pluralism  to
solve  collective  action  problems);  Eskridge,  Politics Without Romance: Implications of Public Choice
Theory for  Statutory Interpretation, 74  VA.  L.  REV.  275,  323-24,  330-34  (1988)  (same).  Second,
statutes should  be  construed  favorably  to  traditionally  disadvantaged  groups. See supra text  accompa-
nying  notes  62-75  (discussing  republican  norm  of  political  equality); supra text  accompanying  notes
13-20  (discussing  adverse  impact  of interest-group  pluralism  on  such  groups).  Note  that  this  latter
idea  has  roots  in  current  law.  See  Cannon  v.  University  of Chicago,  441  U.S.  677  (1979)  (implying
private  cause  of action  to  redress  sex  discrimination);  Allen  v.  State  Bd.  of  Elections,  393  U.S.  544
(1969)  (implying  private  cause  of action  under Voting  Rights  Act).  Note  also  that the  canon  in  favor
of construing  statutes  favorably  to Indian  tribes is  an  explicit  example.  A  more  detailed  discussion  of
statutory  construction  can  be  found  in  Sunstein,  supra note  232.

249.  See  Davidson  &  Korbel, At  Large Elections and Minority-Group Representation: A  Reas-
sessment of Historical and Contemporary Evidence, 43  J.  POL.  982  (1981);  Frickey,  Majority Rule,
Minority Rights,  and  the Right  to  Vote:  Reflections  Upon a Reading of Minority Vote  Dilution, 3
LAW  &  INEQUALITY  209  (1985);  Note,  The  Constitutional Imperative of Proportional Representa-
tion,  94  YALE  L.J.  163  (1984).

250.  See  Note,  supra note  249,  at  163  n.1.  For  a discussion  of group representation  of blacks,  see
generally  S.  WELCH  &  A.  KARNIG,  BLACK  REPRESENTATION  AND  URBAN  PoLIcY  (1980);  S.
WELCH  &  T.  BLEDSOE,  URBAN  RETURN  AND  ris  CONSEQUENCES  (1987).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1585 1987-1988

1586

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

cause  proportional  representation  might  be  justified  on  pluralist  and  re-
publican  grounds,  and  because  it  holds  out  such  substantial  promise  and
risk,  it  will  be  useful  to  discuss  the  problem  in  some  detail  here.

There  is  a  solid  constitutional  pedigree  for  group  representation,  not-
withstanding  the  constant  and  emphatic  rejections  of  constitutionally-
based  arguments  for  representation  of  members  of  racial  minority
groups."5'  Despite  the rigidity  of the  one  person-one  vote  formula,2 52  with
its  majoritarian  and  individualistic  overtones,  group  representation  has  al-
ways  been  an  important  feature  of  American  constitutionalism.  At  the
time  of the framing,  for  example,  geography  was  thought  to define  distinct
communities  with  distinct  interests;  representation  of  the  states  as  such
seemed  only  natural. 5 '  It  would  not  be  difficult  to  argue  that  racial  and
ethnic  groups  (among  others)  are  the  contemporary  analogue  to  groups
that  were  defined  in  geographical  terms  during  the  founding  period.

Moreover,  the  basic constitutional  institutions  of  federalism,  bicamera-
lism,  and  checks  and  balances  share  some  of  the  appeal  of  proportional
representation,  and  owe  their origins  in  part  to notions  of group  represen-
tation.2 54  These  institutions  proliferate the  points  of access  to  government,
increasing  the  ability  of  diverse  groups  to  influence  policy,  multiplying
perspectives  in  government,  and  improving  deliberative  capacities.2 55  In
this  respect,  they  ensure  something  in  the  way  of  group  representation,  at
least  when  compared  with  unitary  systems.  Of course  both  the  separation
of powers  and  bicameralism  grow  in  part  out  of efforts  to  promote  repre-
sentation  of  diverse  groups;  bicameralism  allowed  representation  of  the
wealthy  and  the  masses;  the  notion  of separation  derived  from  notions  of
mixed  government,  which  was  designed  to  ensure  a  measure  of  represen-
tation  of  groups  defined  in  social  and  economic  terms. 256

Proportional  representation  might  be  designed  to  ensure  representation
in  the  legislature  of all  those  groups  that  are  able  to  attain  more  than  a
minimal  share  of the  vote.  Such  a  system  has  variants  in  Germany,  Israel,
Italy,  and  many  other  countries.2 57  In  another  form,  the  system  might  be
designed  to  ensure  that  members  of  disadvantaged  groups  are  given  the

251. 

See,  e.g.,  City  of  Mobile  v.  Bolden,  446  U.S.  55  (1980);  ef. A.  THERNSTROM,  WHOSE

VOTES  COUNT?  (1987)  (criticizing  Voting  Rights  Act  for  producing  proportional  representation).

252.  Reynolds  v.  Sims,  377  U.S.  533  (1964).
253.  See  THE  FEDERALIST  Nos.  45  &  46  (J. Madison).
254.  See  W.  GWYN,  THE  MEANING  OF  THE  SEPARATION  OF  POWERS  (1965)  (discussing  mixed

government).

255.  See  supra note  201.
256.  See  J.  ADAMS, Defence of the  Constitutions of Government of the United States, in  4  WORKS
OF  JOHN  ADAMS  290-91  (C.F.  Adams  ed.  1851)  (emphasizing  role  of  Senate  in  representing  the
"rich,  the well-born,  and the  able"  and the  House in  representing  "the  mass");  D.  HELD,  supra note
9,  at  55-61.  The  American  system,  however,  dramatically  departed  from  these  origins.

257.  See A.  LIJPHART,  DEMOCRACIES  150-68  (1985).  Note,  however,  that the  public  choice  and
Arrow problems  referred  to  in  connection  with pluralist  systems  must also  be  taken  into  account  here.
See  Riker,  Electoral Systems and Constitutional Restraints, in  CHOOSING  AN  ELECTORAL  SYSTEM:
ISSUES  AND  ALTERNATIVES  (A.  Lijphart  & B.  Grofman  eds.  1984).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1586 1987-1988

1988] 

Beyond  the  Revival 

1587

power  to  exert  influence  on  political  outcomes.2 5  Rather  than  exhorting
political  participants  to  seek  the  common  good,  advocates  of proportional
representation  claim that the  political  process  should be structured  so as to
encourage  the  expression  and  affirmation  of  diverse  perspectives  and
interests.

There  is  a  large  literature  on  various  voting  schemes  designed  to  serve
the  end  of  proportional  representation.2 59  But  whatever  the  scheme,  the
simple  point  is  this:  If  interests  are  irreducibly  opposed,  the  remedy  for
political  life  consists  in  providing  mechanisms  for  group  representation,
not  in  arguing  in  favor  of  pursuit  of  the  common  good.

Various  risks,  however,  threaten  to  undermine  systems  of  proportional
representation.  Proportional  representation  may  marginalize  rather  than
help  disadvantaged  groups;  it  may  also  increase  the  risk  of  factionalism
and  political  paralysis.  The  risks  of  marginalization  may  be  greater  in  a
system  in  which  disadvantaged  groups  have  one representative  who  speaks
for  their  interests,  rather  than  many  representatives  who  are  at  least  to
some  degree  beholden  to  them.28 0  The  dangers  of factionalism  and paraly-
sis  threaten  to  undermine  the  political  process  quite generally.2"1  A princi-
pal  function  of proportional  representation  is  to  shift the  process  of  coali-
tion  building  from  the  electoral  process  to  the  representative  assembly
itself. In  so  doing,  such  systems  may  impair  governmental  outcomes.  This
conclusion  may  follow  whether  one  is  looking  from  the  standpoint  of po-
litically  weak  groups  or  the  system  as  a  whole.

From  the  republican  point  of  view,  however,  the  most  significant
problems  with  proportional  representation  are  that  it threatens  to  ratify,
perpetuate,  and  encourage  an  understanding  of the  political  process  as  a
self-interested  struggle  among  "interests"  for  scarce  social  resources,  that
it  may  discourage  political  actors  from  assuming  and  understanding  the
perspectives  of  others,  and  that  it  downplays  the  deliberative  and  trans-
formative  features  of  politics.  Indeed,  in  some  incarnations,  proportional
representation  tends  to  accept  the  basic  premises  of  pluralist  politics;  it
simply  reallocates  the  distribution  of  power  that  underlies  interest-group
(even  racial)  struggle.  The reallocation  of power  is in  some  settings  highly
desirable,  but  the  improvement  in  politics  is  only  partial.

258.  See  Young, Social Movement  Challenges, supra note  2.  The  Voting  Rights  Act  of  1982  is
based  on  this idea.  See  42  U.S.C.    1973(2)  (1982).  Here  of course  there  are  problems  in  deciding
which groups  to treat as disadvantaged  and  in determining  which  people should  be  permitted to  speak
for  such  groups;  ordinary  proportional  representation  eliminates  these  difficulties.

259.  See, e.g.,  Rokowski,  Representation in Political Theory and in Law,  91  ETHICS  395  (1981);
W.  LAKEMAN,  How  DEMOCRACIES  VOTE:  A  STUDY  OF  ELECTORAL  SYSTEMS  (4th  ed.  1974);  D.
RAE,  THE  POLITICAL  CONSEQUENCES  OF  ELECTORAL  LAWS  (rev.  ed.  1971);  F.A.  HERMENS,  DE-
MOCRACY  OR  ANARCHY?  A  STUDY  OF  PROPORTIONAL  REPRESENTATION  (1972);  CHOOSING  AN
ELECTORAL  SYSTEM:  ISSUES  AND  ALTERNATIVES  (A.  Lijphart  & B.  Grofman  eds.  1984).

260.  See  generally Schuck,  The  Thickest Thicket: Partisan Gerrymandering and Judicial Regu-

lation of Politics, 87  COLuM.  L.  REV.  1325  (1987).

261.  On  the  extent  of  the  risk,  see  sources  cited  supra note 259.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1587 1987-1988

1588

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  97:  1539

These  considerations  offer  powerful  arguments  against  prominent  mod-
ern  defenses  of  proportional  representation;  they  also  offer  reasons  for
skepticism  about  systems  of group representation  as  a solution  to  the  mul-
tiple  problems  of modern  political  life.  The  skepticism  is  especially  appro-
priate  in  national  institutions,  for  which  Madisonian  mechanisms  may  be
better  suited.

Ironically,  however,  efforts  to  ensure  proportional  representation  be-
come  much  more  plausible  if  they  are  justified  on  republican  grounds.
The  basic  argument  here  would  be  that  deliberative  processes  will  be  im-
proved,  not  undermined,  if mechanisms  are  instituted  to  ensure  that  mul-
tiple  groups,  particularly  the  disadvantaged,  have  access  to  the  process. 26 2
Group  representation,  precisely  by  having  this  effect,  would  ensure  that
diverse  views  are  expressed  on an  ongoing  basis  in  the  representative  pro-
cess,  where  they  might  otherwise  be  excluded.  In this  respect,  group  rep-
resentation  would be  a kind  of second-best  solution  for  the  real-world  fail-
ures  of  Madisonian  deliberation.  And  the  purpose  of  access 
is  not
primarily  to  allow  each  group  to  have  its  "piece  of  the  action"-though
that  is  not  entirely  irrelevant-but  instead  to  ensure  that  processes  of de-
liberation  are  not  distorted  by  the  mistaken  appearance  of  a  common  set
of  interests  on  the  part  of  all  concerned. 6 3  In  this  incarnation,  propor-
tional  representation  is  designed  to  increase  the  likelihood  that  political
outcomes  will  incorporate  some  understanding  of  the  perspective  of  all
those  affected. 2 4  For  this  reason  proportional  representation  may  be  the
functional  analogue  to the  institutions  of checks  and  balances  and  federal-
ism,  recognizing  the  creative  functions  of disagreement  and  multiple  per-

262.  Cf  Michelman,  supra note  6,  at  76-77  (arguing  for  "plurality"  on  courts).  Aristotle  sup-
plied  the  basic  underpinnings  of the  argument,  suggesting  that  when  diverse  groups  "all  come  to-
gether  . . . they  may surpass-collectively  and  as  a  body,  although  not  individually-the  quality  of
the  few  best.  .
. . When  there are  many who  contribute  to the  process of deliberation,  each  can bring
his  share  of  goodness  and  moral  prudence;  . . . some  appreciate  one  part,  some  another,  and  all
together  appreciate  all."  ARmSToTtLE,  POLrrICS  123  (E.  Barker  trans.  1972).  See  the  discussion  of
Aristotle  in  J.G.A.  POCOCK,  supra note  3,  at  72-73  (suggesting Aristotelian  effort  to  work  "out  the
theory  of  society  in  which  every  conceivable  individual  and  social  type  had  its  appropriate  role  in
decision-making").

Consider  also  J.  RAWLS,  supra  note  17,  at  358-59  (1971)  ("In  everyday  life  the  exchange  of
opinion  with  others  checks  our  partiality  and widens  our  perspective;  we  are  made  to see  things  from
the standpoint  of others  and  the limits  of our  vision  are  brought  home  to  us.  .
. . The  benefits  from
discussion  lie  in  the fact  that even  representative  legislators  are  limited  in  knowledge and  the ability  to
reason.  No  one  of them  knows  everything  the  others  know,  or  can make  all  the same  inferences  that
they  can  draw  in  concert.  Discussion  is  a  way  of  combining  information  and  enlarging  the  range  of
arguments.").

263.  See  Young, Social Movement  Challenges, supra note  2  (arguing  for  group  representation  on
this  ground);  Pitkin,  supra note  1,  at  90  (noting  that  on  the  republican  view,  a  "plurality  of classes
and  interests  is necessary"  partly  because  "internal  conflict  is  an  essential  and  healthy phenomenon  in
its  own  right").

264.  See  Hamilton's  discussion  in  The  Federalist No.  70  of the  creative  role  of disagreement  in
political  deliberation:  "The  differences  of opinion,  and  the jarrings  of parties  in  [the  legislative]  de-
partment  of the  government  . . . often  promote  deliberation  and  circumspection;  and  serve  to  check
the  excesses  of  the  majority."  THE  FEDERALST  No.  70,  at  426-27  (A.  Hamilton)  (C.  Rossiter  ed.
1961).

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1588 1987-1988

19881

Beyond  the  Revival

1589

spectives  for  the  governmental  process. 65  In  this  sense  there  is  continuity
between  recent  proposals  for  proportional  representation  and  the  republi-
can  elements  of  the  original  constitutional  regime.

The  formal  or  functional  exclusion  of important  categories  of the  citi-
zenry  has  often  been  an  ingredient  in  republican  systems;  contemporary
politics  furnishes  several  illustrations.  For  this  reason,  proportional  or
group  representation  may,  in  some  contexts,  be  a highly  desirable  reform.
Perhaps  surprisingly,  it  is  desirable  above  all  from  the  standpoint  of  re-
publican  premises that its  supporters  are often  at  such  pains  to  deny.  Dis-
tinctly  non-Madisonian  institutions  may  be  necessary 
the
Madisonian  goal  of  deliberative  democracy.

to  achieve 

IV.  CONCLUSION

Republican  conceptions  of politics  have taken  many  forms;  only  some  of
them  are  attractive.  I  have  suggested  that  the  most  powerful  versions  of
republicanism  are not antiliberal  at all. Instead  they borrow  from a signif-
icant  strand  of  the  liberal  tradition,  emphasizing  political  equality,  the
need to  provide  outlets  for  self-determination  by  the  citizenry,  the impossi-
bility  of maintaining  democracy  without  a  degree  of citizen  mobilization,
the  value  of institutional  and  rights-based  constraints  on  factionalism  and
self-interested  representation,  and  the  deliberative  functions  of  politics.
Above  all,  republican  theories  stress  the  importance  of dialogue  and  disa-
greement  in  the  governmental  process;  they  are  designed  to  ensure,  not
that  political  actors  are  disembodied,  but  that  to  the  extent  possible  they
look  through  the  eyes  of  all  those  affected." 6'

It would  be  a mistake  to  suggest  that by  itself,  an  approach  of this  sort
could  lead  to  a  particular  set  of institutional  arrangements  or a  particular
specification  of public  and private  rights.  But if understood  in this  fashion,
republican  theories  have  played  a  central  role  in  American  public  law.
The  task  for  modern  republicanism  is  not,  however,  one  of  excavation.
Contemporary  republicanism  is  more  to  be  made  than  found,  even  if his-
torical  commitments  can  illuminate,  in somewhat  surprising ways,  the na-
ture  of American  constitutionalism  at  its  inception.

One  of  the  principal  tasks  for  modern  constitutional  theory  is  to  move
beyond  the  republican  revival  by  integrating  aspects  of traditional  republi-
can  thought  with  the  rise  of the  modern  regulatory  state,  emerging  theo-
ries  of social  subordination  of various  groups,  and  the need  for  intermedi-
ate  organizations,  public  and  private,  to  satisfy  republican  goals.  I  have
suggested  that  many  areas  of modern  legal  controversy  are  illuminated  by
republican  understandings,  and  that  some  such  areas  would  be  pushed  in

265.  See  J.  BURNHEIM,  IS  DEMOCRACY  POSSIBLE?  (1985);  D.  HELD,  supra note  9,  at  286;

Young,  Sodal Movement Challenges, supra note  2.

266.  See  Okin, supra note  82.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1589 1987-1988

1590 

The  Yale  Law  Journal 

[Vol.  97:  1539

different  directions  if republican  understandings  were  taken  seriously.  In
particular,  proposals  for  group  or  proportional  representation  hold  out
considerable  promise  as  well  as  risk.  The  basic  idea  here  is  that  the
Madisonian  ideal-representative  processes  operating  to  filter  particular
points  of view-might  in  some  settings  fail  to  serve  its  intended  purposes;
and  distinctly  non-Madisonian  institutions  may  be  necessary  to  serve  re-
publican  goals.

The  republican  revival  is  designed,  above  all,  as  a  response  to  under-
standings  that  treat  governmental  outcomes  as  a  kind  of  interest-group
deal,  and  that  downplay  the  deliberative  functions  of  politics  and  the  so-
cial  formation  of  preferences.  The  basic  republican  commitments-to  po-
litical  equality,  deliberation,  universalism,  and  citizenship-have  played  a
prominent  role  at  central  points  in  American  constitutionalism.  The  con-
temporary  tasks  are  to  give  content  to  these  commitments  and  to  spell  out
their  implications  for  modern  legal  reform.  To  carry  out  these  tasks,  it
will  be  necessary  to  go  well  beyond  the  republican  revival.

HeinOnline  -- 97 Yale L.J. 1590 1987-1988

