University of Chicago Law School ersity
Cass R. Sunstein
FEMINISM AND LEGAL THEORY By Catharine A. MacKinnon.I Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. 1987. Pp. 315.
Reviewed by Cass R.
Occasionally an intellectual or political movement disrupts existing categories, throws into question practices and conceptual structures that had previously been accepted or even invisible, and eventually produces substantial changes in legal rules. How and why this happens is quite mysterious. The abolitionist movement of the 1850's is one example. Another is the New Deal, which grew out of an understanding that the common law was neither natural nor prepolitical and failed to provide a neutral baseline for decision. The most prominent recent illustration is the civil rights movement of the 1950's and i96o's, which challenged practices of racial exclusion. Thus the Supreme Court rejected Plessy v. on the ground that an understanding of the purposes and effects of school segregation revealed that racial separation was hardly neutral. In all of these contexts, practices that had for a long period been taken as natural and inviolate, sometimes even as based on biological differences, were revealed as socially created and subject to criticism and change.
The women's movement is the most powerful contemporary development of this sort feminism provides its theoretical foundation. Despite its and its recent impact on the law, the feminist movement has hardly run its course. Nonetheless, the basic claims of feminist theory are in many circles denied credibility and respect, or even a fair hearing. Ironically, those circles include many observers
strongly committed to perceptions associated with the New Deal and the civil rights movement.
Feminist legal theory has had three principal strands, which for convenience may be called the "difference," "different voice," and "dominance" approaches. The least controversial, associated with the movement for the Equal Rights Amendment, is the "difference" approach, which argues that women should be permitted to compete on equal terms with men in the public world. In this view, characteristics legally and socially attributed to women - passivity, weakness, irrationality - are inaccurate or overbroad generalizations and at most the product of anachronistic social practices. Thus, feminists attack distinctions on the basis of gender - for example, laws excluding women from "male" jobs - as reflecting prejudice rather than reality and as perpetuating women's second-class citizenship. This strand of feminism, sometimes represented by the National Organization for Women, has achieved widespread acceptance in legal doctrine.8 A more controversial aspect of the same strand is the claim that, just as women should participate on equal terms with men in the professional world, so too should men participate on equal terms with women in the domestic sphere. A basic point here is that the domestic sphere has been devalued and used as a major arena for the subordination of women. The difference approach, if accepted, would produce significant changes in the employment market and in the care of children.
The "different voice" strand of feminist theory, associated most visibly with the work of Carol Gilligan, asserts that there is a distinctly female way of approaching moral and legal dilemmas and that that way has been ignored or downplayed in legal doctrine and scholarship.' In this view, women tend to value relationships and con1988]
premium on abstraction, rights, autonomy, separation, formality, and neutrality - an "ethic of justice."" A centerpiece of this position is that prevailing theories of moral development and morality in general have taken a partial perspective and supposed it to be universal, ignoring alternative perspectives or treating them as primitive.12 The "different voice" approach assumes both descriptive and normative form, often contending that the legal system unduly emphasizes rules and abstraction and attends insufficiently to context and reciprocal responsibility. Sometimes this approach draws on psychoanalytic theory.14 The approach has significant consequences for a wide range of legal rules and practices, as well as for legal and social theory, both inside and outside the area of sex discrimination.
A third strand of feminist theory - the "dominance" approach describes gender inequality not in terms of arbitrary or irrational differentiation but in terms of the social subordination of women. The problem is not that those similarly situated have been treated differently it is instead that one group has dominated the other, in part through sexual practices. A wide range of issues that are not normally thought to involve sex discrimination - including sexual harassment, prostitution, reproductive freedom, rape, and pornography - thus raise questions of inequality. More broadly, these feminists see inequality in patterns of interaction between men and women that are normally taken as unobjectionable and even as intrinsic to traditional gender roles. Rape and prostitution are, in this view, not isolated deviations from social norms they are extreme examples of the subordination of women that occurs in many places.16 The dominance approach joins the different voice approach's critique of partial perspective, but whereas the different voice approach embraces wom-
en's need for relationship and connectedness, the dominance approach claims that women need to be freed from practices that subordinate and invade them. The dominance view is thus sometimes skeptical of the different voice approach, claiming that women's capacity for empathy and need for relationship is in part the product of the social subordination of women.
Catharine MacKinnon is the most prominent and persistent advocate for the dominance strand of feminist theory. She is also the most important force behind the claim that sexual harassment is a form of sex discrimination. 17 That notion, for which MacKinnon is given too little credit, seemed bizarre and radical to many when initially put forward. Remarkably, MacKinnon's basic position was accepted in 1986 by every member of the Supreme Court - with a majority opinion written by then Justice Rehnquist.18 This development must count as one of the more dramatic and rapid changes in legal and social understanding in recent years. In addition, MacKinnon has supplied much of the underpinning for the current rethinking of both rape and prostitution her criticisms focus on the systemic effects of these practices, their parallels in more conventional forms of gender relations, and the partial perspectives found in the legal treatment of both. 19 MacKinnon has been perhaps the most important force behind the burgeoning theoretical literature in law on sex discrimination and feminist theory.20 With Andrea Dworkin, MacKinnon has developed what is probably her most controversial thesis: the idea that pornography is a form of sex discrimination. In these and other areas, MacKinnon's work has generated a dramatic shift in legal thinking and reoriented the terms of debate.
In all of these settings, MacKinnon's basic position is that the social and legal treatment of gender should be challenged today just as common law categories and racial exclusion were challenged during the New Deal period and the respectively. MacKinnon claims that gender relations, like the common law and racial practices, are 1988]
regarded as natural or prepolitical but are actually socially constructed, alterable, and unjust. Although few recent writers in law have been so creative or influential, there are important arenas in which her work is ignored and even ridiculed.
Feminism Unmodified is a collection of MacKinnon's speeches on sex discrimination over a six-year period, some of which have been published previously. The book is divided into three parts. The first is theoretical and general, setting out MacKinnon's distinctive approach to sex discrimination. The second, called "Applications," deals with rape, abortion, sexual harassment, and athletics. The third part of the book consists of six essays on pornography.
Each of the essays published in Feminism Unmodified stands on its own, making the book a collection of separate entries rather than one sustained argument. Because each essay was originally a speech, the discussions are lucid and dramatic, with the dynamism, immediacy, and sense of discovery of a live presentation they are also filled with irony, wit, and humor. On the other hand, the book has considerable repetition and overlap. The arguments are less tight, analytic, and systematic than they might be some of MacKinnon's other work is more careful and sustained. MacKinnon anticipates counterarguments only occasionally, and careful elaboration of implications is not one of the book's strengths the discussion is sometimes too polemical. Nevertheless, the book contains brilliant insights, genuine creativity, and rare originality. It should have a significant impact on thinking about sex discrimination and on social and legal thought more generally.
HI. MacKinnon's general treatment of sex discrimination, first set out in Sexual Harassment of Working Women, derives from her description and critique of the difference approach, which she claims is the most prominent in current law. The difference approach holds that the purpose of constitutional and statutory proscriptions is to ensure that laws reflect both real similarities and real differences and thus "track reality."
The difference approach endorses two paths to equality. The first is rooted in strict gender neutrality and insists that women are and should be treated "the same as men" (p. 33). Distinctions on the basis of gender, especially those that deny women opportunities available to men, are presumptively unlawful. Much of modern law under the
equal protection clause and title VII reflects this understanding. 24 The central premise is freedom of choice, often expressed in terms of equality of opportunity: people should be permitted to choose jobs and social roles in ways unaffected by irrelevant characteristics like gender.
The second path to equality under the difference approach qualifies this basic theme of sameness, recognizing that in some respects women are not similarly situated to men. This path is designed for "women who want equality yet find that [they] are different" (p. 33) and culminates in "the special benefit rule," which authorizes the state to recognize "real differences" between men and women. Thus, for example, courts will uphold laws or practices that recognize the distinctive physical characteristics of women. Sometimes such laws impose burdens on women, as in reproduction-related restrictions of employment opportunities sometimes they create "special benefits," as in leave policies for pregnant women.
MacKinnon is not entirely hostile to the difference approach she acknowledges that it has accomplished considerable good. In her view, however, it is inadequate for two reasons. First, the difference approach - precisely because it is based on a norm of formal equality or sex-blindness - does nothing about many existing structural inequalities between men and women. Those inequalities in wealth and power are taken for granted they are treated as the inevitable background conditions against which legal disputes must be resolved. "A poverty, financial dependency, motherhood, and sexual accessibility phasis in original). For a variety of reasons, women are not in fact situated similarly to men, and legal rules pretending that they are will sometimes reduce rather than increase the likelihood of obtaining equality. For example, the recent transformation of the law of custody and divorce, embodying a norm of formal equality, has harmed women and helped men. Under the difference approach, "society advantages [men] before they get into court, and law is prohibited from taking that preference into account because that would mean taking gender into account" (p. 35). 1988]
MacKinnon's critique addresses the same problem that underlay the controversy over Lochner v. New York:33 legal formality that assumes a particular and unarticulated baseline. Assumptions about baselines produce understandings of what is natural or constructed, neutral or partisan, and action or inaction. MacKinnon is in a long tradition of critics of social practices premised on status quo baselines, and her discussion here has implications not only for sex discrimination but also for legal and social theory more generally.
MacKinnon's attack on unarticulated baselines challenges some familiar analytic strategies in law. Her discussion of legal abstraction, formality, principle, and neutrality suggests that these terms often conceal a contested substantive understanding that denies its status as such. MacKinnon argues that the idea that justice is neutrality between abstract categories ignores social distinctions between those categories, as the Court did in Plessy v. Ferguson35 (pp. 165-66). In MatKinnon's view, similar understandings are at work in current law, including the attack on affirmative action: "[i]n the view that equates differentiation with discrimination, changing an unequal status quo is discrimination, but allowing it to exist is not" (p. Indeed, the very term "affirmative action" suggests that use of the market represents inaction and that efforts to compensate for the existing distribution of benefits and burdens between blacks and whites or women and men should be regarded as "affirmative." MacKinnon's claim also challenges one understanding of "neutral principles" - an understanding that was initially deployed to question the Court's reasoning in Brown v. Board of Education3 on the grounds that the case did not involve discrimination at all and that the Court had failed to show why the associational preferences of blacks should be favored over those of whites.
Although aspects of the general approach to sex discrimination in Feminism Unmodified were first set out in Sexual Harassment of Working Women, the emphasis has changed. Feminism Unmodified attributes gender inequality above all to sexuality and sexual practices: "I think the fatal error of the legal arm of feminism has been its failure to understand that the mainspring of sex inequality is misogyny and
of sex discrimination has neither the nature nor the magnitude that MacKinnon suggests, and the world she describes - one of widespread and objectionable gender hierarchy - is not the world in which they live. The forms of discrimination MacKinnon challenges are, in this view, largely a product of free choice or biology other, more invidious inequalities are already addressed or can be remedied by contemporary law. For such skeptics, the difference approach, the overriding goal of which is to free people to seek their own disparate goals, is preferable. Many women who find traditional roles satisfying and rewarding would find it intrusive and counterproductive for government to try to bring about MacKinnon's version of substantive
This critique of MacKinnon replicates earlier invocations of freedom of choice that have been roundly repudiated in modern law, including the attack on the New Deal (especially minimum wage and maximum hour legislation), and the critique of modern civil rights legislation. Such critiques ignore both problems of collective action and the ways in which apparently free choices are the product of the existing legal regime. Collective action problems make it extremely difficult for a dispersed and diffuse group to organize and seek reform. In the context of sex discrimination, moreover, the phenomenon of adaptive preferences - emphasized in recent rational choice theory - is especially important, for it undermines conventional understandings of free choice. Private preferences are not always autonomous they are in part a product of existing social practice, including social pressures and the absence of opportunities. If opportunities are unavailable, people often try to reduce cognitive dissonance by scal-
fact that many women are or seem content with the status quo is not
It is an advantage of MacKinnon's argument, however, that she tends to be highly contextual in her discussion, particularly in the areas of reproductive freedom, sexual harassment, and pornography.
MacKinnon proposes that statutes restricting reproductive rights be treated as forms of sex discrimination. Such laws are discriminatory, both in purpose and effect, because they are a product of traditional understandings of the role of women in bearing and raising children. Seen in this light, laws prohibiting public funding of abortions should be understood as grounded in the same discrimination that motivates laws forbidding abortion altogether.5
Sexual harassment and pornography present somewhat different problems, but their cultural context and practical effects also raise issues of discrimination. It is fanciful to deny that women are the principal victims of sexual harassment or that they are the principal objects of abuse in and as a result of pornography. Comparable worth raises still different issues. By increasing salaries in traditional female jobs, comparable worth remedies might reinforce women's preferences for those jobs or distort the employment market. These possibilities argue against such remedial proposals, even if countervailing factors make them justifiable. Practical considerations of this sort suggest that substantial work will be necessary to apply the dominance approach in particular contexts. Whatever the precise meaning of the approach, however, it is clear that its application would move the law further in the direction of gender equality.
B. The Problem of Means
Another challenge to MacKinnon's approach emphasizes the problem of means. MacKinnon does not specify which institutions would provide the locus for the changes she advocates. It is difficult to expect courts to undertake the relevant tasks there is no real parallel in public or private law for the sorts of departures MacKinnon seeks. Even in the area of racial discrimination, the judiciary has played a relatively narrow role. The lack of an available institution for implementing MacKinnon's proposals thus might argue against the dominance approach.
The institutional objections, however, are hardly insurmountable. Even if courts are inapt initiators, they might assist in achieving the measures sought by MacKinnon - for example, by recognizing sexual harassment as a form of sex discrimination, upholding at least some forms of antipornography regulation, or requiring the legislature to fund abortions if it funds the expenses of bringing a child to term. Consider also the possibility of constitutional or statutory attacks on
criminal enforcement policies that permit differential risks of violence
the issue as one involving privacy. That formulation suggests that the decision was partly responsive to "the interests of men as a group" (P. 97) in making women sexually available to men. MacKinnon argues that "under conditions of gender inequality, sexual liberation [as promoted by the Roe reasoning] does not free women it frees male sexual aggression" (p. 99).
MacKinnon speculates about why the legal system has structured the abortion issue in terms of privacy: "if inequality is socially pervasive and enforced, equality will require intervention, not abdication, to be meaningful. But the right to privacy is not thought to require social change. It is not even thought to require any social preconditions, other than nonintervention by the public" (p. ioo). If the Court had structured the issue in terms of gender inequality and resolved it under the dominance approach, the issue of federal funding61 might have come out differently. "[F]ramed as a privacy right, a woman's decision to abort would have no claim on public support" (p. ioi) but as a right to equality, such a claim would be much harder to deny. MacKinnon's principal application of the dominance approach is in the area of pornography - defined not as sexually explicit materials but as those that associate sex with violence. There is some repetition in the six relevant chapters, but the reader is given a good sense of the development of MacKinnon's thought. The early essays are tentative. The middle ones have a sense of discovery, developing MacKinnon's now well-known approach to the subject. The later essays deal harshly with the objections of some women to the antipornography campaign and with the judicial treatment of the subject.
MacKinnon's discussion of pornography is likely to be the most controversial part of Feminism Unmodified. It is important to understand the treatment within the context of her broader argument
of obscenity65 misconceives the problem because it is indifferent to the issue of harm - depending instead on offensiveness and because it is gender-neutral.
claim that feminism and pornography are compatible, that women enjoy (at least some forms of) pornography, and that the harms of pornography are gender-neutral. But these objections seem weak. There is mounting evidence that sexual violence occurs both in and as a result of pornography. Abuses within the pornography industry appear widespread. Considerable evidence from laboratory experiments and the real world also suggests a link between pornography and sexual violence. Of course, both laboratory and real world evidence suffer from serious methodological defects - the former because of the enormous difficulty of extrapolation, the latter because of possible confounding variables. Even if causation were clear and overwhelming, however, it would be hard to demonstrate, and in other areas of law, regulation is permitted on the basis of suggestive most sexual violence is a result of pornography or that sexual violence would disappear if pornography were eliminated. Moreover, some of MacKinnon's rhetoric is overstated. The evidence with respect to the harmful effects of pornography is, however, sufficiently powerful to justify regulation.
It is true that some women enjoy pornography, even if it is narrowly defined to include work that merges sex with violence. It is sometimes urged in this connection that female sexuality has only begun to express itself openly and voluntarily and that regulation of pornography, even when violent, would prevent the free development and expression of women's sexuality.70 MacKinnon responds that sexuality is to a large degree socially constructed for both men and women. In her view, it is entirely unsurprising that some women find cultural symbols that mesh violence with sexuality to be sexually arousing. We have seen that preferences and beliefs are socially formed. In light of the harmful effects of pornography as defined it is not a reason to do nothing about One need not take a position on MacKinnon's broadest claims about the relationship between sexuality and sexual inequality in order to agree that the fact 1988]
that some women associate sexuality and violence is not a sufficient reason to permit the distribution of every film that merges sexuality and violence.
Other critics claim that pornography cannot be a form of sex discrimination because it harms and degrades both women and men. This argument, reflecting fundamental resistance to MacKinnon's basic point, is difficult to take seriously: whether or not women are nominal victims, pornography generally treats them as the ultimate target of sexual violence and objectification. Indeed, the persistence of such claims reveals the strength of MacKinnon's critique, especially insofar as she suggests that pornography renders some forms of sexual inequality invisible.
All of this suggests that MacKinnon's analysis of the social meaning of pornography is persuasive. The question of legal control, however, is trickier. The conventional criticisms are that the problem of defining pornography is insurmountable and that the risks to freedom of speech outweigh any gains that would come from regulation. In these circumstances, the remedy, opponents claim, is "more speech," not government regulation. From a strategic perspective, critics argue that other problems facing women - also emphasized in Feminism Unmodified - are much higher priorities than government regulation of pornography.
The problems of definition are indeed considerable especially in light of the fact that materials with some of the characteristics of pornography can be found throughout modern culture. Moreover, parts of MacKinnon's own effort at definition might be faulted for overbreadth. The problems of definition are not, however, insurmountable. First amendment doctrine furnishes the building blocks for a quite conventional argument for regulation of pornography. First, most of the speech at issue is far afield from the central purposes of the first amendment under almost any view. Distinctions among categories of speech in terms of their centrality to first amendment purposes are well established in constitutional law, and a system of free expression could not sensibly ignore them. For example, conspiracies, bribes,
commercial advertising, and child pornography are regulable, largely because they do not promote the purposes associated with free speech, which involve public deliberation, broadly understood. The harms of pornography, canvassed above, are sufficient to justify regulation under the standards applied to low-value speech. Pornography, narrowly defined, does not present a weaker claim for regulation than many similar types of speech that are regulable under current law.
Those skeptical of MacKinnon's approach are undoubtedly concerned about the dangers of overinclusion and misapplication. These concerns are persuasive when the underlying harms are minimal and the risks of overinclusiveness or misapplication quite large. In the context of pornography, however, the risks of what some might see as "inaction" - involving harms to women in and as a result of pornography - are considerable. Further, there is little reason to doubt that a carefully worded statute, posing no greater threat to free expression than the other categories of regulable speech, could be drawn.
The final set of objections to MacKinnon's approach is largely strategic. Opponents suggest that pornography is a relatively minor factor in gender inequality8 compared to economic and other factors. The antipornography campaign is said to create an odd alliance with groups whose concerns conflict with feminism. And to the extent that the merger of violence-and sexuality is a social problem, it is also severe in mainstream advertising, television, and popular culture all of which sexualize violence, but none of which would be reached by the ordinance written by Dworkin and MacKinnon. Seen in this
context, the attack on the pornography industry might be thought misdirected.81
Such an attack would, however, do some good for some women, and a central point discussion and identification of the problem is likely to contribute to efforts to address the other problems as well. The fact that control of pornography would not bring about sexual equality by itself is hardly a persuasive reason not to initiate a measure that might do considerable good. In some circles, moreover, the antipornography movement has served as a powerful spur to changed attitudes on the part of both men and women.
MacKinnon's discussion of sexuality, however, has a deeper point, and this point underlies some of the resistance to the antipornography movement. Some observers suggest that MacKinnon's objections are in fact threatening to sexuality itself. MacKinnon's critics are correct here, for her argument bears on sexuality quite generally, even though it is possible to generate a defense of antipornography legislation that does not go so deep. In brief, MacKinnon suggests that we must reformulate "the problem of sexuality from the repression of drives by civilization to the oppression of women by men" (p. 98). In her view, the sexual revolution of the i96O's and neo-Freudian arguments in favor of removal of repression8 are part of the problem rather than its solution. Hence MacKinnon is reluctant to distinguish sharply between erotica and pornography.83 Her central claim is that "[s]exuality itself is a social construct gendered to the ground. Male dominance here is not an artificial overlay upon an underlying inalterable substratum of uncorrupted essential sexual being" (p. In short, there is no prepolitical, unmediated "sexuality" that law, or feminists, should attempt to uncover and translate into actual practice. Sexuality, as practiced currently and generally, is itself enmeshed in, a cause and a product of, sexual inequality. It is in this view that pornography, sexual harassment, rape, and prostitution are not marginal issues but instead at the core of the problem. In her emphasis on the centrality of sexuality, moreover, MacKinnon is in agreement with Freud - although her conception of the purposes and effects of sexuality is of course entirely different, because Freud treats sexuality
as essentially natural rather than socially constructed and does not regard it as a source of unjustified subordination of women.
MacKinnon's claims about sexuality raise large and difficult issues that cannot be properly evaluated in this space. The skepticism that has greeted some of MacKinnon's work is surely in part a product of the threat that this critique poses to practices that many think of as deeply personal and private. It is here that MacKinnon's claims sharply differ from other forms of social criticism, such as the New Deal and the civil rights movement: despite the analytic parallel, MacKinnon's argument enters an area that many men and women perceive as far more threatening and even dangerous. Moreover, the critique of sexuality is distinct from the dominance approach to sex discrimination, although in MacKinnon's formulation the two are merged. One might, for example, believe that issues of sex discrimination should be approached in terms of dominance rather than irrational differentiation without believing that sexuality itself is the source of the problem.
How would one evaluate MacKinnon's approach to sexuality? An enormous amount of theoretical and empirical work would be necessary to convince skeptics of her basic claim. The arguments that sexuality is a social construct, that sexual sadism is the mainspring of sexual inequality (p. 5), and that sexuality is built on male dominance raise several questions. First, the connections among sexuality, nature, law, and culture are extraordinarily complex indeed, it is not altogether clear what the claim that "sexuality" is "a social construct" means. Second, the relationship between sex discrimination and sexual sadism is hardly simple and clear cut. The term "sadism" is perhaps misleading in this context, for it connotes a kind of pleasure from pain that captures only a part of sexual inequality. Moreover, sexual inequality is sometimes rooted in things other than sexual sadism economic, domestic, and other advantages are also important. Women have been oppressed in nonsexual ways, and men receive much more from gender inequality than sex on their own terms. Third, the claim that sexuality is based on male dominance is in some tension with the presence of affirmative descriptions of sexuality from women, descriptions that are true to subjective experience. Indeed, MacKinnon herself emphasizes that unremittingly bleak depictions of sexuality are inconsistent with important elements of female as well as male
