 Occasionally an intellectual or political movement disrupts existing categories, throws into question practices and conceptual structures that had previously been accepted or even invisible, and eventually produces substantial changes in legal rules. How and why this happens is quite mysterious. The abolitionist movement of the 1850's is one example. Another is the New Deal, which grew out of an understanding that the common law was neither natural nor prepolitical and failed to provide a neutral baseline for decision. 3 The most prominent recent illustration is the civil rights movement of the 1950's and i96o's, which challenged practices of racial exclusion. Thus the Supreme Court rejected Plessy v. Ferguson4 on the ground that an understanding of the purposes and effects of school segregation reIn all of these vealed that racial separation was hardly neutral. contexts, practices that had for a long period been taken as natural and inviolate, sometimes even as based on biological differences, were revealed as socially created and subject to criticism and change. I Visiting Professor of Law, University of Chicago; Professor of Law, Osgoode Hall Law School. strongly committed to perceptions associated with the New Deal and the civil rights movement. an "ethic of care" - whereas men tend to place a higher nections premium on abstraction, rights, autonomy, separation, formality, and an "ethic of justice."" A centerpiece of this position is neutrality that prevailing theories of moral development and morality in general have taken a partial perspective and supposed it to be universal, ignoring alternative perspectives or treating them as primitive.12 The "different voice" approach assumes both descriptive and normative form, often contending that the legal system unduly emphasizes rules and abstraction and attends insufficiently to context and reciprocal responsibility. 13 Sometimes this approach draws on psychoanalytic theory.14 The approach has significant consequences for a wide range of legal rules and practices, as well as for legal and social theory, both inside and outside the area of sex discrimination. 15 A third strand of feminist theory the "dominance" approach describes gender inequality not in terms of arbitrary or irrational differentiation but in terms of the social subordination of women. The problem is not that those similarly situated have been treated differently; it is instead that one group has dominated the other, in part through sexual practices. A wide range of issues that are not normally thought to involve sex discrimination including sexual harassment, prostitution, reproductive freedom, rape, and pornography thus raise questions of inequality. More broadly, these feminists see inequality in patterns of interaction between men and women that are normally taken as unobjectionable and even as intrinsic to traditional gender roles. Rape and prostitution are, in this view, not isolated deviations from social norms; they are extreme examples of the subordination of women that occurs in many places.16 The dominance approach joins the different voice approach's critique of partial perspective, but whereas the different voice approach embraces wom I Gilligan does not attribute these characteristics to any particular biological or social source. See C. GILLIGAN, supra note 9. Okin attempts to dissolve the distinction between an ethic of care and an ethic of justice by incorporating empathy into Rawls' theory of justice. See Okin, Reason and Feeling in Thinking About Justice, 99 ETHICS en's need for relationship and connectedness, the dominance approach claims that women need to be freed from practices that subordinate and invade them. The dominance view is thus sometimes skeptical of the different voice approach, claiming that women's capacity for empathy and need for relationship is in part the product of the social subordination of women. regarded as natural or prepolitical but are actually socially constructed, alterable, and unjust. Although few recent writers in law have been so creative or influential, there are important arenas in which her work is ignored and even ridiculed. MacKinnon's general treatment of sex discrimination, first set out in Sexual Harassment of Working Women, 23 derives from her description and critique of the difference approach, which she claims is the most prominent in current law. The difference approach holds that the purpose of constitutional and statutory proscriptions is to ensure that laws reflect both real similarities and real differences and thus "track reality." The difference approach endorses two paths to equality. The first is rooted in strict gender neutrality and insists that women are and should be treated "the same as men" (p. 33). Distinctions on the basis of gender, especially those that deny women opportunities available to men, are presumptively unlawful. Much of modern law under the 22 See C. MacKinnon, Feminism, Marxism, Method, and the State (unpublished manuscript, equal protection clause and title VII reflects this understanding. 24 The central premise is freedom of choice, often expressed in terms of equality of opportunity: people should be permitted to choose jobs and social roles in ways unaffected by irrelevant characteristics like gender. phasis in original). For a variety of reasons, women are not in fact situated similarly to men, and legal rules pretending that they are will sometimes reduce rather than increase the likelihood of obtaining equality. For example, the recent transformation of the law of custody and divorce, embodying a norm of formal equality, has harmed women and helped men. 25 Under the difference approach, "society advantages [men] before they get into court, and law is prohibited from taking that preference into account because that would mean taking gender into account" (p. 35). The difference approach is also inadequate because it uses men as the baseline from which to measure difference. According to MacKinnon, legal rules that use men as the referent, and allow differential treatment of women when it is based on real differences from men, do not enshrine any obvious conception of gender equality. Instead, they amount to a false universalization that depends on a particular standpoint - men's biology and career patterns from which to assess "difference." Consider the legal treatment of women's distinctive reproductive capacities: to understand rules that accommodate those capacities as a "special benefit" is to apply a male baseline. "Men's physiology defines most sports, their needs define auto and health insurance coverage, their socially designed biographies define workplace expectations and successful career patterns .... For each of their differences from women, what amounts to an affirmative action plan is in effect" (p. 36). The use of male practices as the norm thus produces an inadequate law of sex discrimination; for MacKinnon, the problem is not one of abstract differences at all. the goal of sex discrimination law "is not to make legal categories trace the dominance approach and trap the way things are. It is not to make rules that fit reality. It is critical of reality" (p. 40).29 The problem is not whether and how much difference there is between men and women; it is instead how the legal system should respond to these differences. "The difference approach tries to map reality; the dominance approach tries to challenge and change it" (p. 44). "[S]ex inequality questions are questions of systematic dominance, of male supremacy, which is not at all abstract and is anything but a mistake" (p. 42). provision that made survivors' benefits payable to widows but not to widowers). MacKinnon's critique addresses the same problem that underlay the controversy over Lochner v. New York:33 legal formality that assumes a particular and unarticulated baseline. Assumptions about baselines produce understandings of what is natural or constructed, neutral or partisan, and action or inaction. MacKinnon is in a long tradition of critics of social practices premised on status quo baselines, and her discussion here has implications not only for sex discrimination but also for legal and social theory more generally. Although aspects of the general approach to sex discrimination in Feminism Unmodified were first set out in Sexual Harassment of Working Women, the emphasis has changed. Feminism Unmodified attributes gender inequality above all to sexuality and sexual practices: "I think the fatal error of the legal arm of feminism has been its failure to understand that the mainspring of sex inequality is misogyny and 33 198 U.S. 45 (1905). 34 Consider, for example, the "state action" doctrine in current constitutional law, which is not in fact a search for state action, but instead depends on background understandings about what government ordinarily or naturally does. See Sunstein, supra note 3, at 886-88. the mainspring of misogyny is sexual sadism" (p. 5). MacKinnon takes the sexual objectification of women, and current sexuality in general, as a central cause of sexual subordination an issue I take up below. It is for this reason that pornography, rather than, for example, occupational segregation or childcare responsibility, is MacKinnon's central target. And it is no doubt in part this aspect of MacKinnon's critique that has made her views so controversial. Her claims threaten areas thought to be personal and private, attack the neo-Freudian orthodoxy that urges the liberation of sexual drives from repression, and pointedly part company with certain aspects of mainstream liberalism. To summarize, MacKinnon's basic criticism is an attack on the understanding of sex discrimination as a problem of irrational differentiation. In her view, sexual harassment is a form of sex discrimination. Pornography is a participant in the construction and perpetuation of sexual hierarchy. Roe v. Wade40 turns out to be a case involving sex discrimination. 4 1 MacKinnon's argument cuts deeper still: state action limits, at least as conventionally conceived, become subject to challenge. The private sphere, in which widespread sex discrimination takes place, is hardly prepolitical and sacrosanct, as recent developments in family law have demonstrated. 42 It should be plain that MacKinnon's approach, because it expands and recasts the prohibition on sex discrimination, is radically different from much of current law. Hence MacKinnon's proposed substitute for the Equal Rights Amendment is a women's rights amendment providing: "the subordination of women to men is hereby abolished" (p. 28). Challenges to MacKinnon's approach come from several directions. The first challenge involves MacKinnon's ends. Many women today do not perceive the world in MacKinnon's terms; indeed, not a few are hostile to her depiction, and many do not seek the sorts of changes proposed in Feminism Unmodified. For these women, the problem 39 In Feminism Unmodified, MacKinnon identifies liberalism with conceptions of politics that see threats as coming exclusively from the public sphere or that take the existing set of preferences and the existing distribution of power as exogenous and natural. These ideas represent, however, a quite narrow aspect of the liberal tradition. See S. HOLMES, BENJAMIN CONSTANT AND THE MAKING OF MODERN LIBERALISM (1984). It is a mistake to reject the liberal tradition entirely simply because it has been distorted by some of its purported opponents. MacKinnon's remarks about "liberalism" are too casual in this regard. of sex discrimination has neither the nature nor the magnitude that MacKinnon suggests, and the world she describes one of widespread and objectionable gender hierarchy is not the world in which they live. The forms of discrimination MacKinnon challenges are, in this view, largely a product of free choice or biology; other, more invidious inequalities are already addressed or can be remedied by contemporary law. For such skeptics, the difference approach, the overriding goal of which is to free people to seek their own disparate goals, is preferable. 4 3 Many women who find traditional roles satisfying and rewarding would find it intrusive and counterproductive for government to try to bring about MacKinnon's version of substantive equality. This critique of MacKinnon replicates earlier invocations of freedom of choice that have been roundly repudiated in modern law, including the attack on the New Deal (especially minimum wage and maximum hour legislation), 4 5 and the critique of modern civil rights legislation. 46 Such critiques ignore both problems of collective action and the ways in which apparently free choices are the product of the existing legal regime. Collective action problems make it extremely difficult for a dispersed and diffuse group to organize and seek reform. In the context of sex discrimination, moreover, the phenomenon of emphasized in recent rational choice theory 47 adaptive preferences is especially important, for it undermines conventional understandings of free choice. 48 Private preferences are not always autonomous; they are in part a product of existing social practice, including social pressures and the absence of opportunities. 4 9 If opportunities are unavailable, people often try to reduce cognitive dissonance 50 by scal cognitive dissonance and attempts to reduce it). ing back their aspirations. More generally, the phenomenon of adaptive preferences makes it difficult to contend that legal rules should always or necessarily be based on current preferences. 5 ' If preferences are a function of legal rules and social practices, those rules and practices cannot be defended by reference to the preferences without circularity.5 2 This basic point has especially powerful implications in the area of sexual inequality.5 3 Women's preferences have been formed against a background of limited opportunities. In these circumstances, the fact that many women are or seem content with the status quo is not a dispositive argument against social change. A system of formal equality leaves in place preferences and opportunities that are products of past discrimination. 54 It is a significant advantage of MacKinnon's approach that, unlike many purportedly feminist critiques, it does not evade the "freedom of choice" question but challenges it head on. It is an advantage of MacKinnon's argument, however, that she tends to be highly contextual in her discussion, particularly in the areas of reproductive freedom, sexual harassment, and pornography. Sexual harassment and pornography present somewhat different problems, but their cultural context and practical effects also raise issues of discrimination. It is fanciful to deny that women are the principal victims of sexual harassment or that they are the principal objects of abuse in and as a result of pornography. Comparable worth raises still different issues. 5 7 By increasing salaries in traditional female jobs, comparable worth remedies might reinforce women's preferences for those jobs or distort the employment market. These possibilities argue against such remedial proposals, even if countervailing factors make them justifiable. Practical considerations of this sort suggest that substantial work will be necessary to apply the dominance approach in particular contexts. Whatever the precise meaning of the approach, however, it is clear that its application would move the law further in the direction of gender equality. Another challenge to MacKinnon's approach emphasizes the problem of means. MacKinnon does not specify which institutions would provide the locus for the changes she advocates. It is difficult to expect courts to undertake the relevant tasks; there is no real parallel in public or private law for the sorts of departures MacKinnon seeks. Even in the area of racial discrimination, the judiciary has played a relatively narrow role. The lack of an available institution for implementing MacKinnon's proposals thus might argue against the dominance approach. criminal enforcement policies that permit differential risks of violence to be faced by men and women, both in and out of the home. Most measures directed toward what is currently conceived of as the private sphere would require executive or legislative action. In still other areas, coercive action in the form of legal requirements might be counterproductive or otherwise undesirable, 58 in which case private efforts would be preferable. A large portion of Feminism Unmodified is devoted to the exploration of particular topics. MacKinnon points out that the extent and nature of rape and sexual harassment are relatively recent discoveries (P. 5); the same is true of pornography. These topics were hardly on the legal agenda just a decade ago. Courts and commentators have begun to rethink all of them, and MacKinnon, who helped initiate that process, offers a number of useful observations in Feminism Unmodified. the issue as one involving privacy. That formulation suggests that the decision was partly responsive to "the interests of men as a group" (P. 97) in making women sexually available to men. 60 MacKinnon argues that "under conditions of gender inequality, sexual liberation [as promoted by the Roe reasoning] does not free women; it frees male sexual aggression" (p. 99). MacKinnon's discussion of pornography is likely to be the most controversial part of Feminism Unmodified. It is important to understand the treatment within the context of her broader argument (criticizing the Supreme Court's abortion funding decisions). Women who defend the pornographers are defending a source of their relatively high position among women under male supremacy, keeping all women, including them, an inferior class on the basis of sex, enforced by sexual force .... I want you to stop claiming that your liberalism, with its elitism, and your Freudianism, with its sexualized misogyny, has anything in common with feminism (p. 205). Of the judiciary, she argues: The Supreme Court just told us that it is a constitutional right to traffic in our flesh, so long as it is done through pictures and words, and a legislature may not give us access to court to contest it .... The struggle against pornography is an abolitionist struggle to establish that just as buying and selling human beings never was anyone's property right, buying and selling women and children is no one's civil liberty (p. 213). about sex discrimination and her general strategy for reform. A focus on the antipornography movement isolated from these broader themes will miss the basic point, regardless of one's ultimate conclusion about the issue of government control of pornography. MacKinnon makes three basic claims. First, she suggests that severe harms are done to women in the production of pornography and that regulation of the resulting material is necessary to prevent those harms. Second, MacKinnon contends that pornography has a causal connection to acts of sexual violence against women. Third, and most generally, MacKinnon claims that pornography influences the attitudes of both men and women in gender relations, attitudes that help produce unlawful discrimination and foster gender inequality. Her basic argument is that the creation of a cause of action on behalf of women harmed by pornography would reduce the amount of pornography, give relief to those directly harmed by it, and at the same time affect male and female attitudes toward it. Pornography sexualizes rape, battery, sexual harassment, prostitution, and child sexual abuse; it thereby celebrates, promotes, authorizes, and legitimates them. More generally, it eroticizes the dominance and submission that is the dynamic common to them all. It makes hierarchy sexy and calls that "the truth about sex" or just a mirror of reality (p. 17i) (citations omitted). 64 The argument has also been made by other feminists, including Andrea Dworkin, with whom MacKinnon has worked closely. See, e.g., A. DWORXIN, supra note 21. Similar arguments have been accepted in West Germany since the early 197o's, and West German courts have concluded that pornography is inconsistent with constitutionally guaranteed human dignity. See Rieman, Pornography and Human Dignity: A West German Perspective, MICH. L. QUADRANGLE NOTES, Fall 1986, at 1-2. of obscenity65 misconceives the problem because it is indifferent to the issue of harm and because it is gender-neutral. The recognition that many categories of speech are currently regulable adds power to MacKinnon's argument, as do her description of the abuses that are sexualized in pornography, her discussion of the harms to women in and as a result of pornography, and her highly plausible claims of a causal connection between pornography and violence. Having absorbed MacKinnon's point, one notices sexualized violence against women in numerous places in modern culture, severely weakening one's initial instincts against control of at least some speech that merges sex with violence. the well-known ordinance drafted by MacKinnon and Andrea Dworkin, which defines pornography as discrimination based on sex a civil rights violation. The ordinance defines pornography in part as "the graphic sexually explicit subordination of women, whether in pictures or in words" (p. 262). The ordinance is not aimed at sexually explicit materials in themselves. Its principal target is sexually explicit materials that also involve violence, either in their making or their use. Most of the provisions are directed at the production of pornography or abusive practices in or as a result of pornography; the most controversial provision authorizes women to sue traffickers in pornography. The ordinance denominates this general right to relief from pornographic practices a civil rights action. a civil rights action claim that feminism and pornography are compatible, that women enjoy (at least some forms of) pornography, and that the harms of pornography are gender-neutral. But these objections seem weak. There is mounting evidence that sexual violence occurs both in and as a result of pornography. Abuses within the pornography industry appear widespread. 67 Considerable evidence from laboratory experiments and the real world also suggests a link between pornography and sexual violence. 68 Of course, both laboratory and real world evidence suffer from serious methodological defects the former because of the enormous difficulty of extrapolation, the latter because of possible confounding variables. Even if causation were clear and overwhelming, however, it would be hard to demonstrate, and in other areas of law, regulation is permitted on the basis of suggestive evidence. 69 It would be absurd to suggest that most sexual violence is a result of pornography or that sexual violence would disappear if pornography were eliminated. Moreover, some of MacKinnon's rhetoric is overstated. The evidence with respect to the harmful effects of pornography is, however, sufficiently powerful to justify regulation. It is true that some women enjoy pornography, even if it is narrowly defined to include work that merges sex with violence. It is sometimes urged in this connection that female sexuality has only begun to express itself openly and voluntarily and that regulation of pornography, even when violent, would prevent the free development and expression of women's sexuality.70 MacKinnon responds that sexuality is to a large degree socially constructed for both men and women. In her view, it is entirely unsurprising that some women find cultural symbols that mesh violence with sexuality to be sexually arousing. We have seen that preferences and beliefs are socially formed. 7 1 In light of the harmful effects of pornography as defined here - with its focus on violence the fact that some women enjoy it is not a reason to do nothing about it. 7 2 One need not take a position on MacKinnon's broadest claims about the relationship between sexuality and sexual inequality in order to agree that the fact that some women associate sexuality and violence is not a sufficient reason to permit the distribution of every film that merges sexuality and violence. All of this suggests that MacKinnon's analysis of the social meaning of pornography is persuasive. The question of legal control, however, is trickier. The conventional criticisms are that the problem of defining pornography is insurmountable and that the risks to freedom of speech outweigh any gains that would come from regulation. In these circumstances, the remedy, opponents claim, is "more speech," not government regulation. 74 From a strategic perspective, critics argue that other problems facing women also emphasized in Feminism Unmodified are much higher priorities than government regulation of pornography. especially in light of the fact that materials with some of the characteristics of pornography can be found throughout modern culture. Moreover, parts of MacKinnon's own effort at definition might be faulted for overbreadth. 75 The problems of definition are not, however, insurmountable. 73 "The harm of pornography, broadly speaking, is the harm of the civil inequality of the sexes made invisible as harm because it has become accepted as the sex difference" (p. 178). unlawful contracts, false statements of fact, private libel, misleading commercial advertising, and child pornography are regulable, 7 7 largely because they do not promote the purposes associated with free speech, which involve public deliberation, broadly understood. 78 The harms of pornography, canvassed above, are sufficient to justify regulation under the standards applied to low-value speech. 79 Pornography, narrowly defined, does not present a weaker claim for regulation than many similar types of speech that are regulable under current law. words and acts. Thus, she asks, is a "Whites Only" sign the idea or the practice of segregation? (p. I56). is viewpoint based). context, the attack on the pornography industry might be thought misdirected.81 a central point Such an attack would, however, do some good for some women, and discussion and identification of the problem is likely to contribute to efforts to address the other problems as well. The fact that control of pornography would not bring about sexual equality by itself is hardly a persuasive reason not to initiate a measure that might do considerable good. In some circles, moreover, the antipornography movement has served as a powerful spur to changed attitudes on the part of both men and women. 81 See Flogging Underwear: The New Raunchiness of Anierican Advertising, THE NEW as essentially natural rather than socially constructed and does not regard it as a source of unjustified subordination of women. 8 MacKinnon states: In serious political analyses, say marxism, a worker can sometimes have a good day or even a good job. That does not mean the worker has false consciousness or the work is not exploited labor, structurally speaking .... Because sexism is basic and has been impervious to basic change, it makes sense that it would live in something socially considered basic, deceptively a part of the given, enshrouded with celebratory myth and ritual. Sex feeling good may mean that one is enjoying one's subordination; it would not Nevertheless, notions of sexual liberation and the removal of repression often have as their underlying purpose and effect the increased sexual availability of women to men. Elements of sexual sadism form an ingredient in sexual inequality; MacKinnon's position here is both original and confirmed by unmistakable aspects of modern culture. Moreover, the case for regulation of at least some pornographic materials is quite persuasive. Equally important, the antipornography movement has begun to affect both male and female thinking about sexuality, rendering visible many practices and issues formerly taken for granted. Sexualized violence toward women is pervasive in advertising, popular culture, and everyday life. It is difficult to see much of popular culture and some high art as well in quite the same way after reading Feminism Unmodified. MacKinnon's arguments furnish the tools with which to understand all of this and eventually to do something about it. This is in itself a considerable achievement. Feminism Unmodified is filled with novel, sometimes brilliant insights carrying broad implications for sex discrimination in particular and legal theory in general. Insights of this sort have begun to reorient legal understanding and social practices especially in the area of sexual harassment, where a minor revolution has already occurred. Feminism Unmodified is reminiscent of some of the arguments associated with the New Deal attack on the common law, the downfall of Lochner v. New York, and the civil rights movement. At the same time, Feminism Unmodified will be hard for skeptics to take; parts of it will appear polemical, one-sided, insufficiently empirical, and at times conclusory. Controversy will continue about the proper legal approach to pornography, comparable worth, abortion, and sexual violence and even more about the relationship between sexuality and sex discrimination. My suspicion, however, is that a decade from now, the central insights of Feminism Unmodified, and of MacKinnon's work generally, will be taken as substantially correct in the legal culture. If they are not, the fault will lie with the legal culture, not with the insights themselves.