University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1988 

Feminism Unmodified 
Feminism Unmodified 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Feminism Unmodified," 101 Harvard Law Review 826 (1988). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

BOOK  REVIEW

FEMINISM  AND  LEGAL  THEORY

FEMINISM  UNMODIFIED.  By Catharine  A.  MacKinnon.I  Cambridge,
Massachusetts:  Harvard  University  Press.  1987.  Pp.  315.  $25.00.
Reviewed  by  Cass R.  Sunstein2

I.  INTRODUCTION

Occasionally  an  intellectual  or political  movement disrupts  existing
categories,  throws  into  question  practices  and  conceptual  structures
that  had  previously  been  accepted  or  even  invisible,  and  eventually
produces  substantial  changes  in  legal  rules.  How  and  why  this  hap-
pens  is  quite  mysterious.  The  abolitionist  movement  of  the  1850's  is
one  example.  Another  is  the  New  Deal,  which  grew  out  of  an  un-
derstanding  that the  common  law  was  neither  natural  nor prepolitical
and  failed  to  provide  a  neutral  baseline  for  decision. 3  The  most
prominent recent  illustration  is  the  civil  rights  movement of the  1950's
and  i96o's,  which  challenged  practices  of racial  exclusion.  Thus  the
Supreme  Court  rejected  Plessy  v.  Ferguson4  on  the  ground  that  an
understanding  of  the  purposes  and  effects  of  school  segregation  re-
In  all  of  these
vealed  that  racial  separation  was  hardly  neutral. 
contexts,  practices  that  had  for  a  long  period  been  taken  as  natural
and inviolate,  sometimes  even  as  based  on  biological  differences,  were
revealed  as  socially  created  and  subject  to  criticism  and  change.

The  women's  movement  is  the  most  powerful  contemporary  de-
velopment  of  this  sort;  feminism  provides  its  theoretical  foundation.
Despite  its  longevity5  and  its  recent  impact  on  the  law,  the  feminist
movement  has  hardly  run  its  course.  Nonetheless,  the  basic  claims
of feminist  theory  are  in  many  circles  denied  credibility  and  respect,
or even  a fair hearing.  Ironically,  those  circles  include  many observers

I Visiting  Professor  of  Law,  University  of  Chicago;  Professor  of  Law,  Osgoode  Hall  Law

School.

2 Professor  of Law,  Law  School  and  Department  of Political  Science,  University  of Chicago.
The  author  would  like  to  thank  Mary  Becker,  Veronica  Dougherty,  Richard  Fallon,  Mary  Ann
Glendon,  Sara  Ketchum,  Larry  Kramer,  Michael  McConnell,  Frank  Michelman,  Geoffrey
Miller, Martha  Minow,  Richard  A.  Posner, Geoffrey  Stone,  David A.  Strauss,  Kathleen  Sullivan,
and Diane  Wood  for  valuable  comments  on  a  previous  draft.

3 See  West  Coast Hotel  Co.  v.  Parrish,  300  U.S.  379  (1937);  B.  ACKERMAN,  RECONSTRUCT-
ING  AMERICAN  LAW  (1984);  L.  TRIBE,  AMERICAN  CONSTITUTIONAL  LAW  6-8  (2d  ed.  1988);
Sunstein,  Lochner's Legacy, 87  COLUM.  L.  REv.  873  (1987).

4 x63 U.S.  537  (1896).
5 "The  first  unmistakably  feminist  voices  were  heard  in  England  in  the  17th  century."  A.

JAGGAR,  FEMINIST  POLITICS  AND  HUMAN  NATURE  3  (1983).

1988]

BOOK REVIEW

strongly  committed  to  perceptions  associated  with  the  New  Deal  and
the  civil  rights  movement.

Feminist  legal  theory  has  had  three  principal  strands,  which  for
convenience  may  be  called  the  "difference,"  "different  voice,"  and
"dominance"  approaches. 6  The least controversial,  associated  with  the
movement  for  the  Equal  Rights  Amendment,  is  the  "difference"  ap-
proach,  which  argues  that  women  should  be permitted  to  compete  on
equal terms  with men  in the public world.  In  this view, characteristics
legally  and  socially  attributed  to  women  -
passivity,  weakness,  ir-
rationality  -
are  inaccurate  or  overbroad  generalizations  and  at  most
the  product  of  anachronistic  social  practices.  Thus,  feminists  attack
distinctions  on  the  basis  of  gender  -
for  example,  laws  excluding
women  from  "male"  jobs -
as  reflecting  prejudice  rather  than  reality
and  as  perpetuating  women's  second-class  citizenship. 7  This  strand
of  feminism,  sometimes  represented  by  the  National  Organization  for
Women,  has  achieved  widespread  acceptance  in  legal  doctrine.8  A
more  controversial  aspect  of the  same  strand  is  the  claim  that, just  as
women  should  participate  on  equal  terms  with men  in the  professional
world,  so  too  should  men  participate  on  equal  terms  with  women  in
the  domestic  sphere.  A  basic  point  here  is  that  the  domestic  sphere
has  been  devalued  and  used  as  a  major  arena  for  the  subordination
of  women.  The  difference  approach,  if  accepted,  would  produce  sig-
nificant changes  in  the  employment  market  and in  the  care  of children.
The  "different  voice"  strand  of  feminist  theory,  associated  most
visibly  with  the  work  of  Carol  Gilligan, 9  asserts  that  there  is  a  dis-
tinctly  female  way  of approaching  moral  and  legal  dilemmas  and  that
that way  has  been  ignored  or downplayed  in  legal  doctrine  and  schol-
arship.' 0  In  this  view,  women  tend  to  value  relationships  and  con-

6 Other strands exist outside  of law.  See,  e.g.,  M. DALY,  PURE  LUST:  ELEMENTAL  FEMINIST

PHILOSOPHY  (1984);  M.  DALY,  GYN/ECOLOGY:  THE  METAETHICS  OF  RADICAL  FEMINISM  (1978);
A.  JAGGAR,  supra note  5.

7 See  generally  Brown,  Emerson,  Falk  &  Friedman,  The  Equal Rights  Amendment:  A
Constitutional Basis for Equal Rights for Women,  8o  YALE  L.J. 871,  888-91  (1971)  (arguing for
an  equal  rights  amendment  to  eliminate  most  classifications  on  the  basis  of sex).  Some  of  the
most  important  work  here  was  done,  in  and  out  of  the  courts,  by  then  Prof.  Ruth  Bader
Ginsburg.  See,  e.g.,  Ginsburg,  Sex  Equality and the Constitution, 52  TUL.  L.  REV.  451  (1978).
8 See,  e.g.,  Califano  v.  Goldfarb,  430  U.S.  199  (I977)  (social  security  benefits);  Frontiero  v.

Richardson,  411  U.S.  677  (1973)  (military  dependance  allowances).

9 See  C.  GILLIGAN,  IN  A  DIFFERENT  VOICE  (1982).
10 See,  e.g.,  Karst,  Woman's  Constitution,  1984  DUKE  L.J.  447,  48o-508  (discussing  the
possible  consequence  of  reconstructing  constitutional  law  to  include  women's  distinctive  moral-
ity);  Menkel-Meadow,  Toward  Another  View  of  Legal Negotiation: The  Structure of Problem
Solving,  31  UCLA  L.  REV.  754  (1984)  (applying  a  feminist  conception  of  dispute  resolution  and
transaction  planning  to  negotiation);  Scales,  The  Emergence  of  Feminist  Jurisprudence: An
Essay,  95  YALE  L.J.  1373  (1986)  (arguing  that  the  feminist  jurisprudence  abandons  prescribed
legalistic  terms);  Sherry,  Civic  Virtue  and the  Feminine Voice  in Constitutional Adjudication,
72  VA.  L. REv.  543  (1986) (arguing  that the feminine  jurisprudence that  relies  on a  vision  closely
aligned  with classical  republicanism  is  unlike  any  other  contemporary  jurisprudence).

HARVARD  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  ioi:826

an  "ethic  of  care"  - whereas  men  tend  to  place  a  higher
nections  -
premium  on  abstraction,  rights,  autonomy,  separation,  formality,  and
an  "ethic  of justice.""  A  centerpiece  of  this  position  is
neutrality  -
that  prevailing  theories  of moral  development  and  morality  in  general
have  taken  a  partial  perspective  and  supposed  it  to  be  universal,
ignoring  alternative  perspectives  or  treating  them  as  primitive.12  The
"different  voice"  approach  assumes  both  descriptive  and  normative
form,  often  contending  that  the  legal  system  unduly  emphasizes  rules
and  abstraction  and  attends  insufficiently  to  context  and  reciprocal
responsibility. 13  Sometimes  this  approach  draws  on  psychoanalytic
theory.14  The  approach  has  significant  consequences  for  a wide  range
of  legal  rules  and  practices,  as  well  as  for  legal  and  social  theory,
both  inside  and  outside  the  area  of sex  discrimination.  15

A  third  strand  of  feminist  theory -

the  "dominance"  approach

describes  gender  inequality  not  in  terms  of  arbitrary  or  irrational
differentiation  but  in  terms  of  the  social  subordination  of  women.
The  problem  is  not  that  those  similarly  situated  have  been  treated
differently;  it  is  instead  that  one  group  has  dominated  the  other,  in
part  through  sexual  practices.  A  wide  range  of  issues  that  are  not
normally  thought  to  involve  sex  discrimination  -
including  sexual
harassment,  prostitution,  reproductive  freedom,  rape,  and  pornogra-
phy -
thus  raise  questions  of  inequality.  More  broadly,  these  femi-
nists  see  inequality  in patterns  of interaction  between  men  and  women
that  are  normally  taken  as  unobjectionable  and  even  as  intrinsic  to
traditional  gender  roles.  Rape  and  prostitution  are,  in  this  view,  not
isolated  deviations  from  social  norms;  they  are  extreme  examples  of
the  subordination  of  women  that  occurs  in  many  places.16  The  dom-
inance  approach  joins  the different  voice  approach's  critique  of  partial
perspective,  but whereas  the  different  voice  approach  embraces  wom-

I  Gilligan  does not attribute  these  characteristics  to any  particular  biological  or social source.
See  C.  GILLIGAN,  supra note  9.  Okin attempts  to  dissolve  the  distinction  between  an  ethic  of
care  and  an  ethic  of justice  by incorporating  empathy  into  Rawls'  theory of justice.  See  Okin,
Reason and Feeling in  Thinking About Justice, 99 ETHICS  -

(forthcoming  Jan.  1989).

12 See  C.  GILLIGAN,  supra note  9.
13 See Minow,  The Supreme Court, 1986 Term - Foreword: Justice Engendered, xox  HARV.

L.  REv.  io (1987).

14  See,  e.g.,  N.  CHODOROW,  THE  REPRODUCTION  OF  MOTHERING  (1978);  D.  DINNERSTEIN,

THE  MERMAID  AND  THE  MINOTAUR  (1976).

Is See,  e.g.,  Menkel-Meadow,  supra note  io; Michelman,  The  Supreme Court, 1985  Term
Foreword: Traces  of  Self-Government,  ioo HARV.  L.  REv.  4,  17  n.68  (1986);  Minow,  When
Difference Has its Honze:  Group Hones for the Mentally Retarded, Equal Protection and Legal
Treatment of  Difference,  22  HARV.  C.R.-C.L.  L.  REv.  X1I  (1987);  Simon,  The  Invention and
Reinvention of Welfare Rights, 44  MD.  L.  REv.  I  (1985).

16 Examples  can  be  found  throughout  popular  culture.  Consider,  for  example,  the  familiar
forcible  taking  of  women  in  movies  and  television;  the  scenario  in  which  a  woman  initially
resists  aggressive  overtures  and  then  relents;  the  plot  in  which  a  woman  falls  in  love  with  her
rapist.

1988]

BOOK REVIEW

en's  need  for relationship  and  connectedness,  the  dominance  approach
claims  that  women  need  to  be  freed  from  practices  that  subordinate
and  invade  them.  The  dominance  view  is  thus  sometimes  skeptical
of  the  different  voice  approach,  claiming  that  women's  capacity  for
empathy  and  need  for  relationship  is  in  part the  product  of  the  social
subordination  of women.

Catharine  MacKinnon  is  the  most  prominent  and  persistent  ad-
vocate  for  the  dominance  strand  of  feminist  theory.  She  is  also  the
most  important  force  behind  the  claim  that  sexual  harassment  is  a
form  of  sex  discrimination. 17  That  notion,  for  which  MacKinnon  is
given  too  little  credit,  seemed  bizarre  and  radical  to  many  when
initially  put  forward.  Remarkably,  MacKinnon's  basic  position  was
accepted  in  1986  by  every  member  of  the  Supreme  Court  - with  a
majority  opinion  written  by  then  Justice  Rehnquist.18  This  develop-
ment  must  count  as  one  of  the  more  dramatic  and  rapid  changes  in
legal  and  social  understanding  in  recent  years. 
In  addition,  Mac-
Kinnon  has  supplied  much of the  underpinning  for  the current rethink-
ing of both  rape  and  prostitution;  her  criticisms  focus  on  the  systemic
effects  of  these  practices,  their  parallels  in  more  conventional  forms
of  gender  relations,  and  the  partial  perspectives  found  in  the  legal
treatment of both. 19  MacKinnon  has  been  perhaps  the most important
force  behind  the  burgeoning  theoretical  literature  in  law  on  sex  dis-
crimination  and  feminist  theory.20  With  Andrea  Dworkin,  Mac-
Kinnon  has  developed  what  is  probably  her  most controversial  thesis:
the  idea  that  pornography  is  a  form  of sex  discrimination. 21  In  these
and  other  areas,  MacKinnon's  work  has  generated  a dramatic  shift  in
legal  thinking  and  reoriented  the  terms  of  debate.

In  all  of  these  settings,  MacKinnon's  basic  position  is  that  the
social  and  legal  treatment  of  gender  should  be  challenged  today  just
as  common  law  categories  and  racial  exclusion  were  challenged  during
the  New  Deal  period  and  the  195o's,  respectively.  MacKinnon  claims
that  gender  relations,  like  the  common  law  and  racial  practices,  are

17 See  C.  MAcKINNON,  SEXUAL  HARASSMENT  OF  WORKING  WOMEN:  A  CASE  OF  SEX

DISCRIMINATION  (1979).

18 Meritor  Sav.  Bank,  FSB  v.  Vinson,  477  U.S.  57  (I986).  Justice  Marshall  wrote  a  con-
currence  joined  by  Justices  Brennan,  Blackmun,  and  Stevens.  Justice  Stevens  also  wrote  a
separate  concurrence.

19  See  MacKinnon,  Feminism, Marxism, Method and the State: Toward Feminist Jurispru-
dence,  8  SIGNS:  J.  WOMEN  IN  CULTURE  &  Soc'y  635,  643-55  (1983);  MacKinnon,  Feminism,
Marxism, Method,  and the  State: An  Agenda for Theory,  7  SIGNS:  J.  WOMEN  IN  CULTURE  &
Soc'Y  515,  529-42  (1982);  see  also S.  ESTRICH,  REAL  RAPE  (1987).

20  See  sources  cited  supra note  i4;  Finley,  Transcending Equality Theory: A  Way  Out of the
Maternity and the  Workplace  Debate, 86  COLUM.  L.  REv.  1118  (1986);  Scales,  supra note  io,
at  1374-75.

21 See  infra pp.  840-42;  see  also  A.  DWORKIN,  PORNOGRAPHY:  MEN  POSSESSING  WOMEN

(x981).

HARVARD  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  ioi:826

regarded  as  natural  or  prepolitical  but  are  actually  socially  con-
structed,  alterable,  and  unjust.  Although  few  recent  writers  in  law
have  been  so  creative  or  influential,  there  are  important  arenas  in
which  her  work  is  ignored  and  even  ridiculed.

Feminism Unmodified  is  a  collection  of  MacKinnon's  speeches  on
sex  discrimination  over  a  six-year  period,  some  of  which  have  been
published  previously.  The  book  is  divided  into  three  parts.  The  first
is  theoretical  and  general,  setting  out  MacKinnon's  distinctive  ap-
proach  to  sex  discrimination.  The second,  called "Applications,"  deals
with  rape,  abortion,  sexual  harassment,  and  athletics.  The third  part
of the  book  consists  of six  essays  on  pornography.

Each  of  the  essays  published  in  Feminism  Unmodified  stands  on
its  own,  making  the  book  a  collection  of separate  entries  rather  than
one  sustained  argument.  Because  each  essay  was  originally  a speech,
the  discussions  are  lucid  and  dramatic,  with  the  dynamism,  immedi-
acy,  and  sense  of  discovery  of  a live  presentation;  they  are  also  filled
with  irony,  wit,  and  humor.  On  the  other  hand,  the  book  has  con-
siderable  repetition  and  overlap.  The  arguments  are  less  tight,  ana-
lytic,  and  systematic  than  they  might  be;  some  of MacKinnon's  other
work  is  more  careful  and  sustained. 2 2  MacKinnon  anticipates  coun-
terarguments  only  occasionally,  and  careful  elaboration  of implications
is  not  one  of  the  book's  strengths;  the  discussion  is  sometimes  too
polemical.  Nevertheless,  the book  contains  brilliant  insights,  genuine
creativity,  and rare  originality.  It should  have  a significant  impact  on
thinking  about  sex  discrimination  and  on  social  and  legal  thought
more  generally.

HI.  SEX  DISCRIMINATION:  DIFFERENCES  AND  DOMINANCE

MacKinnon's  general  treatment  of sex  discrimination,  first  set  out
in Sexual Harassment of Working Women, 23  derives  from  her  descrip-
tion  and  critique  of  the  difference  approach,  which  she  claims  is  the
most  prominent  in  current  law.  The  difference  approach  holds  that
the  purpose  of  constitutional  and  statutory  proscriptions  is  to  ensure
that  laws  reflect  both  real  similarities  and  real  differences  and  thus
"track reality."

The  difference  approach  endorses  two  paths  to  equality.  The  first
is  rooted  in  strict  gender  neutrality  and  insists  that  women  are  and
should  be treated  "the  same  as  men"  (p.  33).  Distinctions  on  the  basis
of  gender,  especially  those  that  deny  women  opportunities  available
to  men,  are  presumptively  unlawful.  Much  of  modern  law  under  the

22  See  C.  MacKinnon,  Feminism,  Marxism,  Method,  and the State  (unpublished manuscript,

May  1987);  sources  cited  supra note  ig.
23  C.  MACKINNON,  supra note  17.

1988]

BOOK REVIEW

equal  protection clause  and title  VII  reflects  this understanding. 24  The
central  premise  is  freedom  of  choice,  often  expressed  in  terms  of
equality  of  opportunity:  people  should  be  permitted  to  choose  jobs
and  social  roles  in  ways  unaffected  by  irrelevant  characteristics  like
gender.

The second  path  to equality under  the difference  approach  qualifies
this basic  theme  of sameness,  recognizing  that in some  respects  women
are  not  similarly  situated  to  men.  This  path  is  designed  for  "women
who  want  equality  yet  find  that  [they]  are  different"  (p.  33)  and
culminates  in  "the  special  benefit  rule,"  which  authorizes  the  state  to
recognize  "real  differences"  between  men  and  women.  Thus,  for  ex-
ample,  courts  will  uphold  laws  or practices  that  recognize  the  distinc-
tive  physical  characteristics  of  women.  Sometimes  such  laws  impose
burdens  on  women,  as  in  reproduction-related  restrictions  of employ-
ment  opportunities;  sometimes  they  create  "special  benefits,"  as  in
leave  policies  for  pregnant  women.

MacKinnon  is  not  entirely  hostile  to  the  difference  approach;  she
In  her
acknowledges  that  it  has  accomplished  considerable  good. 
view,  however,  it  is  inadequate  for  two  reasons.  First,  the  difference
precisely  because  it is  based  on  a norm  of formal equality
approach -
does  nothing  about  many  existing  structural  in-
or  sex-blindness  -
equalities  between  men  and  women.  Those  inequalities  in wealth  and
power  are  taken  for  granted;  they  are  treated  as  the  inevitable  back-
ground  conditions  against  which  legal  disputes  must  be  resolved.  "A
the  fact  that  women's
gender-neutral  approach  ... 
poverty,  financial  dependency,  motherhood,  and  sexual  accessibility
substantively  make  up  women's  status  as  women"  (p.  73)  (em-
... 
phasis  in  original).  For  a  variety  of  reasons,  women  are  not  in  fact
situated similarly  to  men,  and  legal rules  pretending  that  they  are  will
sometimes  reduce  rather  than  increase  the  likelihood  of  obtaining
equality.  For example,  the  recent  transformation  of the  law of custody
and  divorce,  embodying  a  norm  of  formal  equality,  has  harmed
women  and  helped  men. 25  Under  the  difference  approach,  "society
advantages  [men]  before  they  get  into  court,  and  law  is  prohibited
from  taking  that  preference  into  account  because  that  would  mean
taking  gender  into  account"  (p.  35).

obscures  ... 

24  See  supra note  8;  see  also D.  KIRP,  M.  YUDOF  & M.  FRANKS,  GENDER  JUSTICE  (i986)
[hereinafter  GENDER  JUSTICE]  (arguing  for  equal  liberty  as  the  benchmark  in  governmental
treatment  of gender).

25 See Weitzman,  The Economics of Divorce: Social and Economic Consequences of Property,
Alimony  and  Child Support Awards,  28  UCLA  L.  REv.  ii8i  (ig81);  see  also  M.  GLENDON,
ABORTION  AND  DIVORCE  IN  WESTERN  LAW  86  n.67  (1987)  (noting  that  post-divorce  economic
burdens  fall  disproportionately  on  women).  See  generally Becker,  Prince Charming: Abstract
(forthcoming  x988)  (criticizing  formal  equality  as  a  constitu-
Equality,  1987  SuP.  CT.  REV.  -
tional  standard).

HARVARD  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  ix:826

The  difference  approach  is  also  inadequate  because  it uses  men  as
the  baseline  from  which  to  measure  difference.  According  to  Mac-
Kinnon,  legal  rules  that use  men  as  the  referent,  and  allow  differential
treatment  of  women  when  it  is  based  on  real  differences  from  men,
do  not  enshrine  any  obvious  conception  of  gender  equality.  Instead,
they  amount  to  a  false  universalization  that  depends  on  a  particular
standpoint  - men's  biology  and  career  patterns  -
from  which  to
assess  "difference."  Consider  the  legal  treatment  of  women's  distinc-
tive  reproductive  capacities:  to  understand  rules  that  accommodate
those  capacities  as  a  "special  benefit"  is  to  apply  a  male  baseline.
"Men's  physiology  defines  most  sports,  their  needs  define  auto  and
health  insurance  coverage,  their  socially  designed  biographies  define
workplace  expectations  and  successful  career  patterns ....  For  each
of  their  differences  from  women,  what  amounts  to  an  affirmative
action  plan  is in  effect"  (p.  36).  The  use  of male  practices  as  the  norm
thus  produces  an  inadequate  law  of  sex  discrimination;  for  Mac-
Kinnon,  the  problem  is  not  one  of  abstract  differences  at  all.

Of  recent  cases  addressing  states'  attempts  to  provide  pregnancy
leave  and  related  job  security,2 6  MacKinnon  remarks,  "Difference
doctrine  says  it  is  sex  discrimination  to  give  women  what  we  need,
because  only  women  need  it.  It  is  not  sex  discrimination  not  to  give
women  what  we  need  because  then  only  women  will  not  get  what  we
need"  (p.  36).  Under  the  difference  approach,  the  legal  system  does
nothing  about  preexisting  legal  and  social  disabilities  brought  about
by  past  discrimination  and  women's  reproductive  roles.  Examples
include  public  or  private  rules  that  forbid  employees  from  being  the
primary  caretaker  of  a  preschool  child,  rules  that  prohibit  fertile
women  from  taking  certain  jobs, 27  and  the  concentration  of  women
in  low-paying  jobs. 28  None  of  these  practices  is  unlawful  under  the
difference  approach.  The  claim  of  inequality  underlying  Feminism
Unmodified  is  not  the  relatively  narrow  argument  that  women  have
been  treated  "unequally  to  men";  it  is  instead  that  there  is  a  system
of  sexual  subordination  of  women  that  should  be  altered.  For
MacKinnon,  the  notion  that  the  similarly  situated  must  be  treated
similarly  is  an  inadequate  way  to  approach  issues  of  sex  discrimina-
tion.

Under  MacKinnon's  alternative  -

the
goal  of  sex  discrimination  law  "is  not  to  make  legal  categories  trace

the  dominance  approach  -

26  See,  e.g.,  General  Elec.  Co.  v.  Gilbert,  429  U.S.  125 (1976);  Geduldig  v.  Aiello,  417  U.S.
484  (1974).  But  see  California  Fed.  Say.  &  Loan  Ass'n  v.  Guerra,  107  S.  Ct.  683  (1987)
(adopting  a  perspective  similar  to  MacKinnon's).

27 See  Becker,  From Muller  v.  Oregon  to Fetal Vulnerability Policies, 53  U.  CHi.  L.  REV.

28  See  Weiler,  The  Wages  of Sex:  The  Uses  and Limits  of Comparable Worth,  99  HARV. L.

I219  (1986).

REV.  1728  (1986).

1988]

BOOK REVIEW

and  trap  the  way  things  are.  It  is  not  to  make  rules  that  fit  reality.
It  is  critical  of  reality"  (p.  40).29  The  problem  is  not  whether  and
how  much  difference  there  is  between  men  and  women;  it  is  instead
how  the  legal  system  should  respond  to  these  differences.  "The  dif-
ference  approach  tries  to  map  reality;  the  dominance  approach  tries
to  challenge  and  change  it"  (p.  44).  "[S]ex inequality  questions  are
questions  of  systematic  dominance,  of  male  supremacy,  which  is  not
at  all  abstract  and  is  anything  but  a  mistake"  (p.  42).

MacKinnon  is  impatient  with  biological  explanations  of  gender
inequality.  The  question  is  not  whether  such  differences  exist,  but
in  short,  their  legal  and  social  con-
what  society  does  with  them  -
sequences.  For  the  situations  relevant  here,  it is  the  legal  system  that
decides  when  and  how  biological  differences  are  relevant,  turning
differences,  which  might  be  treated  as  immaterial,  into  legal  disad-
vantages. 30  The  dominance  approach  thus  reads  difference  as  "in-
equality's  post  hoc  excuse,  its  conclusory  artifact,  its  outcome  pre-
sented  as  its  origin"  (p.  8).

In  some  circumstances,  the  dominance  approach  might yield  results
for  example,  by  invalidating
that  are  identical  to  current  law  -
statutes  that  make  employment  of  a  particular  sort  more  attractive
for  men  than  for  women. 3 1  Some  laws  would  be  upheld  under  both
approaches  but with  divergent  rationales.  A law  establishing  different
ages  for  statutory  rape  of  men  and  women  might  be  upheld  not  on
the  biological  ground  invoked  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  Michael
M.  case 3 2  but  on  the  theory  that  rape  of  young  girls  by  men  is  far
more  common  than  rape  of  young  boys  by  women.  Gender-specific
statutory  rape  laws  are  thus  sensible  safeguards  rather  than  under-
inclusive  reflections  of  prejudice.

At  the  same  time,  the  dominance  approach  would  challenge  many
It  would,  for
legal  practices  that  current  law  takes  for  granted. 
example,  treat  as  issues  of  sex  discrimination  questions  that  are  not
so  regarded  by  current  law,  including  reproductive  rights  and  abor-
tion,  battery  of  women,  rape,  prostitution,  sexual  assault  of  girls,  the
disproportionate  presence  of  women  in  low-paying  occupations,  and
female  poverty.  In  all  of  these  areas,  the  dominance  approach  would
not  treat  current  practices  as  the  inevitable  background  conditions
against  which  questions  of  sexual  equality  must be  measured;  it would
instead  require  changes  in  those  practices  in  order  to  bring  about
equality.

29  Here  the analogy  to  the  New  Deal  critique  of  the  common  law  is  particularly  clear.  See
Sunstein,  Constitutionalism After  the New  Deal, IOI HARv.  L.  REV.  421  (1987);  Sunstein,  supra
note  3.

3o See  C.  MAcKINNON,  supra note  17.
31 See,  e.g.,  Califano  v.  Goldfarb,  430  U.S.  199  (1977)  (invalidating  a  Social  Security  Act

provision  that  made  survivors'  benefits  payable  to  widows  but not  to  widowers).

32  Michael  M.  v.  Superior  Court,  450  U.S.  464  (ig8i).

HARVARD  LAW  REVIEW

[VOL.  101:826

MacKinnon's  critique  addresses  the  same  problem  that  underlay
the  controversy  over  Lochner  v.  New  York:33  legal  formality  that
assumes  a  particular  and  unarticulated  baseline.  Assumptions  about
baselines  produce  understandings  of  what  is  natural  or  constructed,
neutral  or  partisan,  and  action  or  inaction.  MacKinnon  is  in  a long
tradition  of critics  of social practices  premised  on status  quo  baselines,
and  her  discussion  here  has  implications  not  only  for  sex  discrimina-
tion  but  also  for  legal  and  social  theory  more  generally.

MacKinnon's  attack  on  unarticulated  baselines  challenges  some
familiar  analytic  strategies  in  law.  Her  discussion  of legal  abstraction,
formality,  principle,  and  neutrality  suggests  that  these  terms  often
conceal  a contested  substantive  understanding  that  denies  its  status  as
such. 34  MacKinnon  argues  that  the  idea  that  justice  is  neutrality
between  abstract  categories  ignores  social  distinctions  between  those
categories,  as  the  Court did  in  Plessy v.  Ferguson35  (pp.  165-66).  In
MatKinnon's  view,  similar  understandings  are  at work  in  current law,
including  the  attack  on  affirmative  action:  "[i]n  the  view  that  equates
differentiation  with  discrimination,  changing  an  unequal  status  quo  is
discrimination,  but  allowing  it  to  exist  is  not"  (p.  42). 
Indeed,  the
very  term  "affirmative  action"  suggests  that  use  of the  market  repre-
sents  inaction  and  that  efforts  to  compensate  for  the  existing  distri-
bution  of benefits  and  burdens  between  blacks  and  whites  or  women
and men  should be  regarded  as  "affirmative."  MacKinnon's  claim  also
challenges  one  understanding  of  "neutral  principles" '3 6  -
an  under-
standing  that  was  initially  deployed  to  question  the  Court's  reasoning
in  Brown v.  Board of Education3 7  on  the  grounds  that  the  case  did
not involve  discrimination  at  all  and  that the  Court  had  failed  to  show
why  the  associational  preferences  of  blacks  should  be  favored  over
those  of whites. 38

Although  aspects  of the  general  approach  to  sex  discrimination  in
Feminism  Unmodified  were  first  set  out  in  Sexual  Harassment of
Working  Women,  the  emphasis  has  changed.  Feminism  Unmodified
attributes  gender  inequality  above  all to  sexuality  and  sexual  practices:
"I think the fatal  error  of the  legal  arm  of feminism  has  been  its failure
to  understand  that  the  mainspring  of sex  inequality  is  misogyny  and

33  198  U.S.  45  (1905).
34  Consider,  for  example,  the  "state action"  doctrine  in  current  constitutional  law,  which  is
not  in  fact  a  search  for state  action,  but instead  depends  on  background  understandings  about
what government  ordinarily  or  naturally  does.  See  Sunstein,  supra note  3,  at 886-88.

35  163  U.S.  537  (1896).
36  See  Wechsler,  Toward  Neutral Principles of  Constitutional Law,  73  HARV.  L.  REV.  I

(1959).

3' 347  U.S.  483  (i954).
38 See  Wechsler,  supra note 36,  at 33-34;  cf. Strauss,  The  Myth  of Colorblindness, 1986  Sup.
CT.  REV.  99  (arguing  that  affirmative  action  is  logically  continuous  with  the  prohibition  of
discrimination  as  established  in  Brown v.  Board of Education).

1988]

BOOK REVIEW

the mainspring  of misogyny  is  sexual  sadism"  (p.  5).  MacKinnon  takes
the  sexual  objectification  of  women,  and  current  sexuality  in  general,
as  a  central  cause  of  sexual subordination  -
an issue  I  take up  below.
It 
is  for  this  reason  that  pornography,  rather  than,  for  example,
occupational  segregation  or  childcare  responsibility,  is  MacKinnon's
central  target.  And  it  is  no  doubt  in  part this  aspect  of MacKinnon's
critique  that has  made  her views  so  controversial.  Her claims  threaten
areas  thought  to  be  personal  and  private,  attack  the  neo-Freudian
orthodoxy  that  urges  the  liberation  of  sexual  drives  from  repression,
and  pointedly  part  company  with  certain  aspects  of  mainstream  lib-
eralism.

3 9

To  summarize,  MacKinnon's  basic  criticism  is  an  attack  on  the
understanding  of  sex  discrimination  as  a  problem  of  irrational  differ-
entiation.  In  her  view,  sexual  harassment  is  a  form  of  sex  discrimi-
nation.  Pornography  is  a  participant  in  the  construction  and  perpe-
tuation  of  sexual  hierarchy.  Roe  v.  Wade40  turns  out  to  be  a  case
involving  sex  discrimination. 4 1  MacKinnon's  argument  cuts  deeper
still:  state  action  limits,  at  least  as  conventionally  conceived,  become
subject  to  challenge.  The  private  sphere,  in  which  widespread  sex
discrimination  takes  place,  is  hardly  prepolitical  and  sacrosanct,  as
recent  developments  in family  law  have  demonstrated. 42  It  should  be
plain  that MacKinnon's  approach,  because  it  expands  and  recasts  the
prohibition  on  sex  discrimination,  is  radically  different  from  much  of
current  law.  Hence  MacKinnon's  proposed  substitute  for  the  Equal
Rights  Amendment  is  a  women's  rights  amendment  providing:  "the
subordination  of  women  to  men  is  hereby  abolished"  (p.  28).

A.  The  Problem of Ends

Challenges  to MacKinnon's  approach  come  from several  directions.
The  first  challenge  involves  MacKinnon's  ends.  Many  women  today
do  not  perceive  the  world  in  MacKinnon's  terms;  indeed,  not  a  few
are  hostile  to  her depiction,  and  many  do  not seek  the  sorts  of  changes
proposed  in  Feminism  Unmodified.  For  these  women,  the  problem

39  In  Feminism  Unmodified,  MacKinnon  identifies  liberalism  with  conceptions  of  politics
that  see  threats  as  coming  exclusively  from  the  public  sphere  or  that  take  the  existing  set  of
preferences  and  the  existing  distribution  of  power  as  exogenous  and  natural.  These  ideas
represent,  however,  a quite  narrow  aspect  of  the liberal  tradition.  See  S. HOLMES,  BENJAMIN
CONSTANT  AND  THE  MAKING  OF  MODERN  LIBERALISM  (1984). 
It  is  a  mistake  to  reject  the
liberal  tradition  entirely  simply because  it has  been  distorted  by some  of its purported  opponents.
MacKinnon's  remarks  about  "liberalism"  are  too  casual  in this  regard.

40  410  U.S.  113  (1973).
41 See  infra pp.  839-40;  see  also  Ginsburg,  Some  Thought  on Autonomy  and Equality in
Relation to  Roe  v.  Wade,  63  N.C.L.  REv.  375,  382-83  (1985)  (discussing Roe as  a  sex  discrim-
ination  case).

42  See sources  cited  supra note  25.

HARVARD  LAW  REVIEW

[VOL.  101:826

of  sex  discrimination  has  neither  the  nature  nor  the  magnitude  that
MacKinnon  suggests,  and  the  world  she  describes  -
one  of  wide-
spread  and  objectionable  gender  hierarchy  -
is not  the world in  which
they  live.  The  forms  of discrimination  MacKinnon  challenges  are,  in
this  view,  largely  a  product  of  free  choice  or  biology;  other,  more
invidious  inequalities  are  already  addressed  or  can  be  remedied  by
contemporary  law.  For  such  skeptics,  the  difference  approach,  the
overriding  goal  of which  is  to  free  people  to  seek  their  own  disparate
goals,  is  preferable. 4 3  Many  women  who  find  traditional  roles  satis-
fying and  rewarding  would find  it intrusive  and  counterproductive  for
government  to  try  to  bring  about MacKinnon's  version  of substantive
equality.

44

This  critique  of  MacKinnon  replicates  earlier  invocations  of  free-
dom  of  choice  that  have  been  roundly  repudiated  in  modern  law,
including  the  attack  on  the  New  Deal  (especially  minimum  wage  and
maximum  hour  legislation), 4 5  and  the  critique  of  modern  civil  rights
legislation. 46  Such  critiques  ignore  both  problems  of collective  action
and  the  ways  in  which  apparently  free  choices  are  the  product  of the
existing  legal  regime.  Collective  action  problems  make  it  extremely
difficult  for a dispersed  and  diffuse  group  to  organize  and  seek  reform.
In  the  context  of  sex  discrimination,  moreover,  the  phenomenon  of
emphasized  in  recent  rational  choice  theory 47
adaptive  preferences  -
-
is  especially  important,  for  it undermines  conventional  understand-
ings  of free  choice. 48  Private  preferences  are  not  always  autonomous;
they  are  in  part  a  product  of existing  social  practice,  including  social
pressures  and  the  absence  of  opportunities. 4 9  If  opportunities  are
unavailable,  people  often  try  to  reduce  cognitive  dissonance 50  by  scal-

43 See  GENDER  JUSTICE,  supra note  24,  at  12.
44 See  id. at  13-28.
45 For a  recent  example,  see  R.  EPSTEIN,  TAKINGS  274-82  (1985).
46  See  Bork,  Civil Rights - A  Challenge, THE  NEW  REPUBLIC,  Aug.  31,  1963,  at  21.
47 See  J. ELSTER,  SOUR  GRAPES  109-40  (1983);  J.  Roemer,  Optimal Endogenous  Preferences
(1985)  (unpublished manuscript on  file  with the author);  MacPherson,  Want Formation, Morality,
and Some  'Interpretive' Aspects  of Economic Inquiry, in  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  AS  MORAL  INQUIRY
96  (N. Haan,  R.  Bellah,  P.  Rabinow  & W. Sullivan  eds.  1983).  The  term  "adaptive  preferences"
is  preferable  to  "false  consciousness,"  because  the  latter  has  a  tendency  to  tautology  and  lacks
cognitive  foundations.

48  Serious  collective  action  problems  also  arise  here;  the  individual  costs of  organization  may
be  quite  high  in  comparison  to  the individual  benefits,  but the aggregate  benefits  may  outweigh
the  aggregate  costs.

49 Sometimes  the  phenomenon  of  adaptive  preferences  is  treated  as  a  preference  change
through  learning.  In  practice,  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  between  adaptive  preferences  and
preferences  modified  by  greater  information;  for  present  purposes,  we  may  treat  them  as  equiv-
alent.

50 See  generally L.  FESTINGER,  A  THEORY  OF  COGNITIVE  DISSONANCE  (1958)  (describing

cognitive  dissonance  and  attempts  to  reduce  it).

i988]

BOOK REVIEW

ing  back  their  aspirations.  More  generally,  the  phenomenon  of  adap-
tive  preferences  makes  it  difficult  to  contend  that  legal  rules  should
always  or  necessarily  be based  on  current preferences. 5 '  If  preferences
are  a  function  of  legal  rules  and  social  practices,  those  rules  and
practices  cannot  be  defended  by  reference  to  the  preferences  without
circularity.5 2

This  basic  point  has  especially  powerful  implications  in  the  area
of sexual  inequality.5 3  Women's  preferences  have  been  formed against
a  background  of  limited  opportunities.  In  these  circumstances,  the
fact that  many  women  are  or  seem  content  with  the  status  quo  is  not
a  dispositive  argument  against  social  change.  A  system  of  formal
equality leaves  in place  preferences  and  opportunities  that are products
of past  discrimination. 54  It  is  a  significant advantage  of  MacKinnon's
approach  that,  unlike  many  purportedly  feminist  critiques,  it  does  not
evade  the  "freedom  of  choice"  question  but  challenges  it  head  on.

Although  MacKinnon's  argument  responds  persuasively  to  a  fa-
miliar  argument  in  favor of the  difference  approach,  it  does  not supply
a  complete  affirmative  case  for  the  dominance  approach.  That  ap-
proach  is  difficult  to  evaluate  in  the  abstract,  and  it  is  not  fully
elaborated  in  Feminism  Unmodified.  Moreover,  the  notion  of  "dom-
inance"  is  somewhat  ambiguous  and  itself  depends  on  some  sort  of
baseline.  Any  judgment  about  the  dominance  approach  calls  for  an
evaluation  of  both  the  context  and  the  practical  impact  of  that  ap-
proach  on  the  lives  of  women  and  men.5s  Such  an  evaluation  will
also  depend  on  the  prospects  for  change  in  light  of  the  fact  that
preferences  and  practices  are  already  in  place  and  may  be  difficult  to
alter.  Indeed,  sometimes  efforts  at  alteration  are  counterproductive,
and Feminism Unmodified does  not  examine the  problem  of transition.

S  Consider  Montesquieu's  discussion  of  adaptive  preferences  on  the  part  of  women  in  the
harem,  Montesquieu,  Letter XXVI:  Usbek  to  Roxana, at  the  Seraglio at Ispahan, in  i  THE
PERSIAN  AND  CHINESE  LETTERS  6I  (J.  Davidson  trans.  1892)  (1721),  and  the  ambivalent
reactions  of  the newly  freed  slaves  as  discussed  in  L.  LITWACK,  BEEN  IN  THE  STORM  So  LONG
(1979).

52  See  Sunstein,  Legal Interference with Private Preferences, 53  U.  CHI.  L. REV.  1129  (1986).
Of  course,  it  is  important  to  be  careful  and  precise  with  rationales  of  this  sort,  for  there  are
risks  of  tyranny  in  approaches  that  tend  to  disregard  private  preferences.

53  Analogues  exist  in  the  racial  area,  see  L.  LITwAcK,  supra note  51,  and  in  the  judicial
reception  of  so-called  "freedom  of  choice"  plans  in  school  desegregation,  discussed  in  Gewirtz,
Choice  in the  Transition: School Desegregation and the  Corrective Ideal, 86  COLUM.  L.  REV.
728  (x986).

54  The  Supreme  Court  has  recognized  this  point  in  the  context  of  school  segregation.  See
Green  v.  County  School  Bd.,  391  U.S.  430,  441-42  (1968);  see  also Gewirtz,  supra note  53,  at
748-54.

55  Of  course,  difficult  epistemological  questions  lurk  here  on  the  issue  of  cultural  criticism.
See  P.  RICOEUR,  LECTURES  ON  IDEOLOGY  AND  UTOPIA  (1986);  M.  WALZER,  INTERPRETATION
AND  SOCIAL  CRITICISM  ch.  2  (1987).

HARVARD  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  101:826

It is  an  advantage  of MacKinnon's  argument,  however,  that she  tends
to  be  highly  contextual  in  her  discussion,  particularly  in  the  areas  of
reproductive  freedom,  sexual  harassment,  and  pornography.

MacKinnon  proposes  that  statutes  restricting  reproductive  rights
be  treated  as  forms  of  sex  discrimination.  Such  laws  are  discrimina-
tory,  both  in  purpose  and  effect,  because  they  are  a  product  of  tra-
ditional  understandings  of  the  role  of  women  in  bearing  and  raising
children.  Seen  in  this  light,  laws  prohibiting  public  funding  of  abor-
tions  should  be  understood  as  grounded  in  the  same  discrimination
that  motivates  laws  forbidding  abortion  altogether.5 6

Sexual  harassment  and  pornography  present  somewhat  different
problems,  but  their  cultural  context  and  practical  effects  also  raise
issues  of  discrimination.  It  is  fanciful  to  deny  that  women  are  the
principal  victims  of sexual  harassment  or  that  they  are  the  principal
objects  of abuse  in and  as  a result of pornography.  Comparable  worth
raises  still  different  issues. 5 7  By  increasing  salaries  in  traditional  fe-
male  jobs,  comparable  worth  remedies  might  reinforce  women's  pref-
erences  for  those  jobs  or  distort  the  employment  market.  These  pos-
sibilities  argue  against  such  remedial  proposals,  even  if  countervailing
factors  make  them  justifiable.  Practical  considerations  of  this  sort
suggest that substantial  work will  be necessary  to  apply the  dominance
approach  in  particular  contexts.  Whatever  the  precise  meaning  of  the
approach,  however,  it  is  clear  that  its  application  would  move  the
law  further  in  the  direction  of  gender  equality.

B.  The  Problem of Means

Another  challenge  to MacKinnon's  approach  emphasizes  the  prob-
lem  of means.  MacKinnon  does  not  specify  which  institutions  would
provide  the  locus  for  the  changes  she  advocates.  It  is  difficult  to
expect  courts  to  undertake  the  relevant  tasks;  there  is  no  real  parallel
in  public  or  private  law  for  the sorts  of departures  MacKinnon  seeks.
Even  in  the  area  of  racial  discrimination,  the  judiciary  has  played  a
relatively  narrow  role.  The  lack  of an  available  institution  for  imple-
menting  MacKinnon's  proposals  thus  might  argue  against  the  domi-
nance approach.

The  institutional  objections,  however,  are  hardly  insurmountable.
Even  if courts  are  inapt  initiators,  they  might  assist  in  achieving  the
measures  sought  by MacKinnon  -
for example,  by  recognizing  sexual
harassment  as  a  form  of  sex  discrimination,  upholding  at least  some
forms  of  antipornography  regulation,  or  requiring  the  legislature  to
fund  abortions  if  it  funds  the  expenses  of  bringing  a  child  to  term.
Consider  also  the  possibility  of  constitutional  or  statutory  attacks  on

s6  See  L.  TRIBE,  supra note  3,  at  1345-47.
s7  See  Weiler,  supra note  28.

1988]

BOOK REVIEW

criminal  enforcement  policies  that  permit  differential  risks  of violence
to  be  faced  by  men  and  women,  both  in  and  out  of  the  home.  Most
measures  directed  toward  what is  currently  conceived  of  as  the  private
sphere  would  require  executive  or  legislative  action. 
In  still  other
areas,  coercive  action  in  the  form  of  legal  requirements  might  be
counterproductive  or  otherwise  undesirable, 58  in  which  case  private
efforts  would  be  preferable.

It  is  important  to  recognize  that  the  dominance  approach  is  not
self-applying.  In  some  settings,  it  is  not  clear  whether  a  law  subor-
dinates  women  -
or,  more  importantly,  whether  a  change  in  the  law
would  reduce  social  subordination  or  reinforce  it.  These  considera-
tions  suggest  that  MacKinnon's  approach  needs  to  be  deepened  and
supplemented.  But  her  basic  critique  of the  law  of sex  discrimination
is  quite  powerful  in  its  exposure  of  issues  that have  traditionally  been
understood  in  gender-neutral  terms.  It  points  in  the  right  directions.

IlI.  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  DOMINANCE  APPROACH:
ABORTION,  PORNOGRAPHY,  AND  OTHER  PROBLEMS

A  large  portion  of Feminism  Unmodified is  devoted  to  the  explo-
ration  of  particular  topics.  MacKinnon  points  out  that the  extent  and
nature  of  rape  and  sexual  harassment  are  relatively  recent  discoveries
(P.  5);  the  same  is  true  of pornography.  These  topics  were  hardly  on
the  legal  agenda  just  a  decade  ago.  Courts  and  commentators  have
begun  to  rethink  all  of  them,  and  MacKinnon,  who  helped  initiate
that  process,  offers  a  number  of  useful  observations  in  Feminism
Unmodified.

In  a  provocative  essay  on  abortion,  MacKinnon  applies  her general
critique  of  the  notion  of  a  prepolitical  and  noncoercive  private  sphere
of  gender  relations  into  which  government  must  not enter.  She  argues
that the  Court's  decision  to  approach  Roe  v.  Wade5 9  as  a  case  involv-
ing  privacy  rather  than  equality  was  a  mistake,  based  on  a  disregard
for  the  sex-based  character  of  reproduction  and  the  tacit  assumption
that  women  have  equal  control  over  sex. 
In  MacKinnon's  view,
"[s]exual  intercourse,  still  the  most  common  cause  of  pregnancy,  can-
not  simply  be  presumed  coequally  determined"  (p.  94-95).  Women
often  fail  to  use  contraception  because  to  do  so  "means  acknowledging
and  planning  the  possibility  of  intercourse,  accepting  one's  sexual
availability,  and  appearing  nonspontaneous"  (p.  95).  In  light  of these
overlooked  facts,  MacKinnon  argues  that Roe  was  myopic  in  treating

58  This  is  the view  of some  in  the  area of  pornography.  See  American  Booksellers  Ass'n  v.
Hudnut,  771  F.2d 323  (7th  Cir.  I985),  aff'd men.,  475  U.S.  iooi (1986);  Stone, Anti-Pornography
Legislation as  Viewpoint-Discrimination, 9  HARv.  J.L.  & PUB.  POL'Y  461  (1986).  For  a  dis-
cussion  of  this view,  see  pages  842-46  below.

S9  410  U.S.  113  (1073).

HARVARD  LAW  REVIEW

[V/ol.  1oi:826

the  issue  as  one  involving  privacy.  That  formulation  suggests  that
the  decision  was  partly  responsive  to "the  interests  of men  as  a group"
(P.  97)  in  making  women  sexually  available  to  men. 60  MacKinnon
argues  that  "under  conditions  of  gender  inequality,  sexual  liberation
[as  promoted  by  the Roe  reasoning]  does  not  free  women;  it frees  male
sexual  aggression"  (p.  99).

MacKinnon  speculates  about  why  the  legal  system  has  structured
the  abortion  issue  in  terms  of  privacy:  "if  inequality  is  socially  per-
vasive  and enforced,  equality will  require  intervention,  not abdication,
to  be  meaningful.  But  the  right  to  privacy  is  not  thought  to  require
social  change.  It  is  not  even  thought  to  require  any  social  precondi-
tions,  other  than  nonintervention  by  the  public"  (p.  ioo).  If the  Court
had  structured  the issue  in  terms  of gender  inequality  and  resolved  it
under  the  dominance  approach,  the  issue  of  federal  funding61  might
have  come  out differently.  "[F]ramed  as  a  privacy  right,  a  woman's
decision  to  abort  would  have  no  claim  on  public  support"  (p.  ioi);
but  as  a  right  to  equality,  such  a  claim  would  be  much  harder  to
deny.

MacKinnon's  principal  application  of  the  dominance  approach  is
in  the  area of pornography -
defined  not  as  sexually  explicit materials
but  as  those  that  associate  sex  with  violence. 62  There  is  some  repe-
tition  in the  six  relevant  chapters,  but the  reader  is  given  a good sense
of  the  development  of  MacKinnon's  thought.  The  early  essays  are
tentative.  The  middle  ones  have  a  sense  of  discovery,  developing
MacKinnon's  now  well-known  approach  to  the  subject.  The  later
essays  deal  harshly  with  the  objections  of  some  women  to  the  anti-
pornography  campaign  and  with  the  judicial  treatment  of  the  sub-
ject. 63

MacKinnon's  discussion  of  pornography  is  likely  to  be  the  most
controversial  part  of  Feminism  Unmodified.  It  is  important  to  un-
derstand  the  treatment  within  the  context  of  her  broader  argument

60  See  A.  DWORKIN,  RIGHT  WING  WOMEN  95  (i983)  ("Getting  laid  was  at stake."),  quoted

in FEMINISM  UNMODIFIED  at 99.

61  See  Harris  v.  McRae,  448  U.S.  297  (i98o);  see  also  Ginsburg,  supra note  41,  at  383-86

(criticizing  the Supreme  Court's  abortion  funding  decisions).

62  See  American Booksellers,  771  F.2d  323;  Indianapolis  Code    16-3(q).
63  Of  female  opponents  of  pornography,  MacKinnon  writes:

Women  who  defend  the  pornographers  are  defending  a  source  of  their  relatively  high
position  among  women  under  male  supremacy,  keeping  all  women,  including  them,  an
inferior  class  on  the  basis  of  sex,  enforced  by  sexual  force  .... 
I  want  you  to  stop
claiming  that  your  liberalism,  with  its  elitism,  and your  Freudianism,  with  its  sexualized
misogyny,  has  anything  in  common  with  feminism  (p.  205).
Of the  judiciary, she  argues:
The  Supreme  Court just  told  us  that  it is  a  constitutional  right  to  traffic  in  our  flesh,  so
long  as  it is  done  through  pictures  and  words,  and  a  legislature  may  not  give  us  access
to  court  to  contest  it .... 
The  struggle  against  pornography  is  an  abolitionist  struggle
to  establish  that  just  as  buying  and  selling  human  beings  never  was  anyone's  property
right,  buying  and  selling  women  and  children  is  no  one's  civil  liberty  (p.  213).

1988]

BOOK REVIEW

about  sex  discrimination  and  her  general  strategy  for  reform.  A focus
on  the  antipornography  movement  isolated  from  these  broader  themes
will  miss  the  basic  point,  regardless  of one's  ultimate  conclusion  about
the  issue  of  government  control  of  pornography.

"What you  are  hearing  tonight,"  MacKinnon  asserts,  "is  something
that  has  not  been  said  before"  (p.  127).  She  believes  that  feminist
claims  about  the  meaning  and  effects  of  pornography  have  been  ob-
scured  by  the  sexual  revolution  of  the  196o's  and  by  the  power  of
Freudian  and  associated  antirepression  theories  of  sexuality  in  intel-
lectual  and  popular  circles.  MacKinnon's  argument  differs  sharply
from  other,  far less  persuasive  arguments  for the  regulation  of sexually
explicit  speech. 64

MacKinnon  makes  three  basic  claims.  First,  she  suggests  that
severe  harms  are  done  to  women  in  the  production  of  pornography
and  that  regulation  of  the  resulting  material  is  necessary  to  prevent
those  harms.  Second,  MacKinnon  contends  that  pornography  has  a
causal  connection  to  acts  of  sexual  violence  against  women.  Third,
and  most  generally,  MacKinnon  claims  that  pornography  influences
the  attitudes  of  both  men  and  women  in  gender  relations,  attitudes
that  help  produce  unlawful  discrimination  and  foster  gender  inequal-
ity.  Her  basic  argument  is  that  the  creation  of  a  cause  of  action  on
behalf  of  women  harmed  by  pornography  would  reduce  the  amount
of  pornography,  give  relief  to  those  directly  harmed  by  it,  and  at  the
same  time  affect  male  and  female  attitudes  toward  it.

In  MacKinnon's  view,

Pornography  sexualizes  rape,  battery,  sexual  harassment,  prostitution,
and  child  sexual  abuse;  it  thereby  celebrates,  promotes,  authorizes,
and  legitimates  them.  More  generally,  it eroticizes  the dominance  and
submission  that  is  the  dynamic  common  to  them  all.  It  makes  hier-
archy  sexy  and  calls  that  "the  truth  about  sex"  or  just  a  mirror  of
reality  (p.  17i)  (citations  omitted).

MacKinnon  claims  that  "pornography  is  neither  harmless  fantasy  nor
a  corrupt  and  confused  misrepresentation  of an  otherwise  natural  and
healthy  sexual  situation.  It  institutionalizes  the  sexuality  of  male  su-
premacy,  fusing  the  eroticization  of  dominance  and  submission  with
the  social  construction  of  male  and  female"  (p.  172).  MacKinnon
continues:  "What in  the  pornographic  view  is  love  and  romance  looks
a  great  deal  like  hatred  and  torture  to  the  feminist"  (p.  174).  The law

64  The  argument  has  also  been  made  by  other  feminists,  including  Andrea  Dworkin,  with
whom  MacKinnon  has  worked  closely.  See,  e.g.,  A.  DWORXIN,  supra note  21.  Similar  argu-
ments  have  been  accepted  in  West  Germany  since  the  early  197o's,  and  West  German  courts
have concluded  that pornography  is inconsistent  with  constitutionally  guaranteed  human  dignity.
See  Rieman,  Pornography and Human Dignity: A  West  German Perspective, MICH.  L.  QUAD-
RANGLE  NOTES,  Fall  1986,  at  1-2.

HARVARD  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  ioi:826

of  obscenity65  misconceives  the  problem  because  it  is  indifferent  to
the  issue  of  harm  -
and  be-
cause  it  is  gender-neutral.

depending  instead  on  offensiveness  -

The  recognition  that  many  categories  of  speech  are  currently  reg-
ulable  adds  power  to  MacKinnon's  argument,  as  do  her  description
of  the  abuses  that  are  sexualized  in  pornography,  her  discussion  of
the  harms  to  women  in and  as  a  result of  pornography,  and  her  highly
plausible  claims  of  a  causal  connection  between  pornography  and
violence.  Having  absorbed  MacKinnon's  point,  one  notices  sexualized
violence  against  women  in  numerous  places  in  modern  culture,  se-
verely  weakening  one's  initial  instincts  against  control  of  at least  some
speech  that  merges  sex  with  violence.

This  analysis  produced 

the  well-known  ordinance  drafted  by
MacKinnon  and  Andrea  Dworkin,  which  defines  pornography  as  dis-
crimination  based  on  sex  -
a  civil  rights  violation.  The  ordinance
defines  pornography  in  part  as  "the  graphic  sexually  explicit  subordi-
nation  of  women,  whether  in  pictures  or  in  words"  (p.  262).  The
ordinance  is  not  aimed  at  sexually  explicit  materials  in  themselves.
Its  principal  target  is  sexually  explicit  materials  that  also  involve
violence,  either  in  their  making  or  their  use.  Most  of  the  provisions
are  directed  at  the  production  of  pornography  or  abusive  practices  in
or  as  a  result  of  pornography;  the  most  controversial  provision  au-
thorizes  women  to  sue  traffickers  in  pornography.  The  ordinance
denominates  this  general  right to  relief from  pornographic  practices  a
civil  rights  action.

It  is  important  to  distinguish  positions  with  which  MacKinnon's
approach  is  sometimes  confused.  MacKinnon  does  not  argue  that
pornography  should  be  regulated  because  it is  offensive.  She  does  not
claim  that  the  community  has  a  right  to  censor  speech  that  does  not
conform  to its  moral  position.  Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  does  she  draw
a  sharp  distinction  between  pornography  and  erotica.  MacKinnon's
highly  controversial  claim  is  not  that  pornography  is  a  perversion  of
sexuality;  it is  instead  that  pornography  helps  to  constitute  sexuality.
MacKinnon's  analysis  raises  two  distinct  questions.  First,  is  her
description  of the  problem  posed  by  pornography  persuasive?  Second,
is  her  remedy  for  the  problem  -
a  desirable
one?  One  could  accept  her  view  about  the  social  meaning  of  porno-
graphy  but  simultaneously  oppose  control  of  pornographic  speech. 66
With  respect  to  the  first  question,  MacKinnon's  diagnosis  of  por-
nography  as  a  form  of sex  discrimination  has  been  criticized  from  two
perspectives.  Some. critics  deny  that  pornography  is  harmful.  Others

a  civil  rights  action  -

65  See Miller  v.  California,  413  U.S.  I5  (973).
66  See American  Booksellers Ass'n  v. Hudnut,  771  F.2d  323  (7th  Cir.  1985),  aff'd mere.,  475

U.S.  iooi  (1986);  Stone,  supra  note  58.

1988]

BOOK REVIEW

claim  that  feminism  and  pornography  are  compatible,  that  women
enjoy  (at least  some  forms  of)  pornography,  and  that  the  harms  of
pornography  are  gender-neutral.  But  these  objections  seem  weak.
There  is  mounting  evidence  that  sexual  violence  occurs  both  in  and
as  a  result  of pornography.  Abuses  within  the  pornography  industry
appear  widespread. 67  Considerable  evidence  from  laboratory  experi-
ments  and  the  real  world  also  suggests  a  link  between  pornography
and  sexual  violence. 68  Of  course,  both  laboratory  and  real  world
evidence  suffer  from  serious  methodological  defects  -
the  former
because  of the  enormous  difficulty  of extrapolation,  the  latter  because
of  possible  confounding  variables.  Even  if  causation  were  clear  and
overwhelming,  however,  it  would  be  hard  to  demonstrate,  and  in
other  areas  of law,  regulation  is  permitted  on  the  basis  of suggestive
evidence. 69  It  would  be  absurd  to  suggest that
-
most  sexual  violence  is  a result  of pornography  or that sexual  violence
would  disappear  if pornography  were  eliminated.  Moreover,  some  of
MacKinnon's  rhetoric  is  overstated.  The  evidence  with  respect  to  the
harmful  effects  of  pornography  is,  however,  sufficiently  powerful  to
justify  regulation.

but  inconclusive  -

It  is  true  that  some  women  enjoy  pornography,  even  if  it  is  nar-
rowly  defined  to  include  work  that  merges  sex  with  violence.  It  is
sometimes  urged  in  this  connection  that  female  sexuality  has  only
begun  to  express  itself  openly  and  voluntarily  and  that  regulation  of
pornography,  even  when  violent,  would  prevent  the  free  development
and  expression  of  women's  sexuality.70  MacKinnon  responds  that
sexuality  is  to  a  large  degree  socially  constructed  for  both  men  and
women.  In  her  view,  it is  entirely unsurprising  that some  women  find
cultural  symbols  that  mesh  violence  with  sexuality  to  be  sexually
arousing.  We  have  seen  that  preferences  and  beliefs  are  socially
formed. 7 1  In  light  of  the  harmful  effects  of  pornography  as  defined
here  - with  its  focus  on  violence  -
the  fact that  some  women  enjoy
it  is  not  a  reason  to  do  nothing  about  it. 7 2  One  need  not  take  a
position  on  MacKinnon's  broadest  claims  about  the  relationship  be-
tween  sexuality  and  sexual  inequality  in  order  to  agree  that  the  fact

67  See  I  ATTORNEY  GENERAL'S  COMMISSION  ON  PORNOGRAPHY,  FINAL  REPORT  767-835

68  See,  e.g.,  PORNOGRAPHY  AND  SEXUAL  AGGRESSION  (N.  Malamuth  & E.  Donnerstein  eds.

(x986).

1984).

69  Consider,  for example,  the uncertainties  involved  in  the regulation  of  carcinogens.  See  S.

BREGER,  REGULATION  AND  ITS  REFORMS  135-40  (1982).

70  See  Brief  Amici Curie  of  the  Feminist  Anti-Censorship  Taskforce  at  27-32,  American

Booksellers,  475  U.S.  iooi (1986)  (No.  85-1090).

71 See  supra pp.  836-37.
72  "[The defense  of  lesbian sadomasochism  would  sacrifice  all  women's  ability to walk  down
the street in  safety for  the freedom  to  torture  a  woman  in the  privacy of one's basement  without
fear  of  intervention,  in  the  name  of  everyone's  freedom  of  choice"  (p.  15).

HARVARD  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  101:826

that  some  women  associate  sexuality  and  violence  is  not  a  sufficient
reason  to  permit  the  distribution  of every  film  that  merges  sexuality
and  violence.

Other  critics  claim  that  pornography  cannot  be  a  form  of  sex
discrimination  because  it harms  and  degrades  both  women  and  men.
This  argument,  reflecting  fundamental  resistance  to  MacKinnon's
basic  point,  is  difficult  to  take  seriously:  whether  or  not  women  are
nominal  victims,  pornography  generally  treats  them  as  the  ultimate
target  of  sexual  violence  and  objectification.  Indeed,  the  persistence
of such  claims  reveals  the strength  of MacKinnon's  critique,  especially
insofar  as  she  suggests  that pornography  renders  some  forms  of sexual
inequality  invisible. 73

All  of this suggests  that MacKinnon's  analysis  of the social  meaning
of pornography  is  persuasive.  The  question of legal  control,  however,
is  trickier.  The  conventional  criticisms  are  that the  problem  of defin-
ing  pornography  is  insurmountable  and  that  the  risks  to  freedom  of
speech  outweigh  any  gains  that would  come  from  regulation.  In  these
circumstances,  the  remedy,  opponents  claim,  is  "more  speech,"  not
government  regulation. 74  From  a  strategic  perspective,  critics  argue
that  other  problems  facing  women  -
also  emphasized  in  Feminism
Unmodified -
are  much  higher  priorities  than  government  regulation
of pornography.

The  problems  of  definition  are  indeed  considerable  -

especially
in  light  of  the  fact  that  materials  with  some  of the  characteristics  of
pornography  can  be  found  throughout  modern  culture.  Moreover,
parts  of  MacKinnon's  own  effort  at  definition  might  be  faulted  for
overbreadth. 75  The  problems  of  definition  are  not,  however,  insur-
mountable.

First amendment  doctrine  furnishes  the  building  blocks  for  a quite
conventional  argument  for  regulation  of pornography.  First,  most  of
the  speech  at  issue  is  far  afield  from  the  central  purposes  of  the  first
amendment  under  almost  any  view.  Distinctions  among  categories  of
speech  in  terms  of  their  centrality  to  first  amendment  purposes  are
well  established  in  constitutional  law,  and  a system  of free  expression
could  not  sensibly  ignore  them. 76  For  example,  conspiracies,  bribes,

73  "The  harm  of  pornography,  broadly  speaking,  is  the harm  of  the  civil  inequality  of  the

sexes  made  invisible  as  harm  because  it has  become  accepted  as  the sex  difference"  (p.  178).

74  The  roots of the "more  speech"  approach  are  found  in Justice  Brandeis'  concurring  opinion

in  Whitney  v.  California,  274  U.S.  357,  377  (1927)  (Brandeis,  J.,  concurring).

75  For  example,  it might  be  desirable  to  exempt  at least  some  pornographic  material  having
significant  social  value,  at  least  when  there  was  no  illegality  in  the production.  See  generally
Sunstein,  Pornography and the  First Amendment,  1986  DUKE  L.J.  589,  624-26  (arguing  that
pornography  is  generally  "low-value"  speech  entitled  to  less  protection).

76  See  Sunstein,  Government Control of Information, 74  CALIF.  L. Rev.  889  (1986);  Sunstein,
supra note  75.  MacKinnon  attacks  the first amendment  logic  that  distinguishes  between  harmful

1988]

BOOK REVIEW

unlawful  contracts,  false  statements  of  fact,  private  libel,  misleading
commercial  advertising,  and  child pornography  are regulable, 7 7 largely
because  they  do  not  promote  the  purposes  associated  with free  speech,
which  involve  public  deliberation,  broadly  understood. 78  The  harms
of  pornography,  canvassed  above,  are  sufficient  to  justify  regulation
under  the  standards  applied  to  low-value  speech. 79  Pornography,
narrowly  defined,  does  not  present  a weaker  claim  for  regulation  than
many  similar  types  of speech  that  are  regulable  under  current law.

Those  skeptical  of  MacKinnon's  approach  are  undoubtedly  con-
cerned  about  the  dangers  of overinclusion  and  misapplication.  These
concerns  are  persuasive  when  the  underlying  harms  are  minimal  and
the  risks  of  overinclusiveness  or  misapplication  quite  large.  In  the
context  of  pornography,  however,  the  risks  of what  some  might  see
as  "inaction"  -
involving  harms  to  women  in  and  as  a  result  of
pornography  -
are  considerable.  Further,  there  is  little  reason  to
doubt  that  a carefully  worded  statute,  posing  no  greater  threat to  free
expression  than  the  other  categories  of  regulable  speech,  could  be
drawn.

The  final  set  of  objections  to  MacKinnon's  approach  is  largely
strategic.  Opponents  suggest  that  pornography  is  a  relatively  minor
factor  in  gender  inequality8   compared  to  economic  and  other  factors.
The  antipornography  campaign  is  said  to  create  an  odd  alliance  with
groups  whose  concerns  conflict  with feminism.  And to  the extent  that
the  merger  of  violence-and  sexuality  is  a  social  problem,  it  is  also
severe  in  mainstream  advertising,  television,  and  popular  culture  -
all  of which  sexualize  violence,  but  none  of which  would  be  reached
by  the  ordinance  written  by  Dworkin  and  MacKinnon.  Seen  in  this

words  and  acts.  Thus,  she  asks,  is  a  "Whites  Only" sign  the  idea or  the  practice  of segregation?
(p.  I56).

77 For  an  overview,  see  G.  STONE,  L.  SEIDMAN,  C.  SUNSTEIN  &  M.  TUSHNET,  CONSTI-

TUTIONAL  LAW  ch.  7  (1986).

78  This  is  of  course  a  controversial  view,  associated  with  Alexander  Meiklejohn.  See  A.
MEIKLEJOHN,  FREE  SPEECH  AND  ITS  RELATION  TO  SELF-GOVERNMENT  (1948).  But  on  any
plausible  view  of  the  central  function  of  free  expression,  pornography,  if  narrowly  defined,  is
likely  to  qualify  as  low-value  speech.

79 See  Sunstein,  supra note  75, at 609-17  (rejecting the claim  that  antipornography  legislation

is  viewpoint  based).

80  MacKinnon  responds:
Some  of  the  social  theorists  in  my  audiences  are  not  convinced  that  pornography  can  be
part  of  the  subordination  of  women  because  the  subordination  of  women  happens  in
places  where,  they  say,  there  is  no  pornography....  Pornography,  they  say,  is  effect
and  not  cause  because  the  oppression  of women  predates  pornography,  so  anything  done
about  pornography  will  do  nothing  about  the  oppression  of  women.  It  does  not  matter
that  racism  happens  in  specific  forms  all  over  the world  without  ceasing  to  be  racist.  It
does  not matter  that  these  people  think  something  should  be  done  about  the  Ku  Klux
Klan  even  though  white  racists  in  South  Africa  do  not  wear sheets  and burn  crosses....
They  do  not  say  apartheid  should  be  ignored  as  effect  rather  than  cause  because  white
racism  precedes  it and  happens  elsewhere  in  different  forms  (p.  222).

HARVARD  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  ioi:826

context,  the  attack  on  the  pornography  industry  might  be  thought
misdirected.81

a  central  point  -

Such  an  attack  would,  however,  do  some  good  for  some  women,
and  -
discussion  and  identification  of the  problem
is likely  to  contribute  to  efforts  to  address  the  other  problems  as  well.
The  fact  that  control  of  pornography  would  not  bring  about  sexual
equality by itself is hardly  a persuasive  reason  not to  initiate  a measure
that  might  do  considerable  good. 
In  some  circles,  moreover,  the
antipornography  movement  has  served  as  a powerful  spur  to  changed
attitudes  on  the  part  of both  men  and  women.

MacKinnon's  discussion  of sexuality,  however,  has  a deeper  point,
and  this  point underlies  some  of the  resistance  to  the  antipornography
movement.  Some  observers  suggest  that MacKinnon's  objections  are
in  fact  threatening  to  sexuality  itself.  MacKinnon's  critics  are  correct
here,  for her  argument bears  on  sexuality  quite  generally,  even  though
it is  possible  to  generate  a  defense  of antipornography  legislation  that
does  not  go  so  deep.  In  brief,  MacKinnon  suggests  that  we  must
reformulate  "the  problem  of sexuality  from  the  repression  of drives  by
civilization  to  the  oppression  of women  by  men"  (p.  98).  In  her  view,
the  sexual  revolution  of  the  i96O's  and  neo-Freudian  arguments  in
favor  of  removal  of  repression8 2  are  part  of the  problem  rather  than
its  solution.  Hence  MacKinnon  is  reluctant  to  distinguish  sharply
between  erotica  and  pornography.83  Her  central  claim 
is  that
"[s]exuality  itself  is  a  social  construct  gendered  to  the  ground.  Male
dominance  here  is  not  an  artificial  overlay  upon  an  underlying  inal-
terable  substratum  of uncorrupted  essential  sexual  being" (p.  173).  In
short,  there  is  no  prepolitical,  unmediated  "sexuality"  that  law,  or
feminists,  should attempt to uncover  and  translate into  actual practice.
Sexuality,  as  practiced  currently  and  generally,  is  itself  enmeshed  in,
a  cause  and  a  product  of,  sexual  inequality.  It  is  in  this  view  that
pornography,  sexual  harassment,  rape,  and  prostitution  are  not  mar-
ginal  issues  but instead  at the  core  of the  problem.  In  her  emphasis
on  the  centrality  of  sexuality,  moreover,  MacKinnon  is  in  agreement
with  Freud  -
although  her  conception  of the  purposes  and  effects  of
sexuality  is  of course  entirely  different,  because  Freud  treats  sexuality

81  See  Flogging Underwear:  The  New  Raunchiness of Anierican Advertising,  THE  NEW

REPUBLIC,  Jan.  18,  1988,  at  20.

82  Cf.  I  M.  FOUCAULT,  THE  HISTORY  OF  SEXUALITY  (R.  Hurley  trans.  1978)  (discussing
different  social  attitudes  toward  sexuality).  Astonishingly,  Foucault  fails  to  discuss  problems  of
sex  discrimination  and  gender  hierarchy.

83  MacKinnon  writes:
What  pornography  says  about  us  is  that  we  enjoy  degradation,  that  we  are  sexually
turned  on  by  being  degraded.  For  me  that  obliterates  the  line,  as  a  line  at  all,  between
pornography  on  one  hand  and  erotica  on  the  other,  if what  turns  men  on,  what  men
find  beautiful, 
It  is  pervasively  present  in  art,  also,  and
advertising.  But it  is  definitely  present  in  eroticism,  if  that  is  what  it is  (p.  91).

is  what  degrades  women. 

1988]

BOOK REVIEW

as  essentially  natural  rather  than  socially  constructed  and  does  not
regard  it  as  a  source  of unjustified  subordination  of women.

MacKinnon's  claims  about sexuality  raise  large  and  difficult  issues
that  cannot  be  properly  evaluated  in  this  space.  The  skepticism  that
has  greeted  some  of MacKinnon's  work  is  surely  in  part  a product  of
the  threat  that  this  critique  poses  to  practices  that  many  think  of  as
deeply  personal  and  private.  It  is  here  that  MacKinnon's  claims
sharply  differ  from  other  forms  of  social  criticism,  such  as  the  New
Deal  and  the  civil  rights  movement:  despite  the  analytic  parallel,
MacKinnon's  argument  enters  an  area  that  many  men  and  women
perceive  as  far  more  threatening  and  even  dangerous.  Moreover,  the
critique  of  sexuality  is  distinct  from  the  dominance  approach  to  sex
discrimination,  although  in  MacKinnon's  formulation  the  two  are
merged.  One  might,  for  example,  believe  that  issues  of  sex  discrimi-
nation  should  be  approached  in  terms  of  dominance  rather  than  ir-
rational  differentiation  without  believing  that  sexuality  itself  is  the
source  of the  problem.

How  would  one  evaluate  MacKinnon's  approach  to  sexuality?  An
enormous  amount  of  theoretical  and  empirical  work  would  be  neces-
sary  to  convince  skeptics  of  her  basic  claim.  The  arguments  that
sexuality  is  a social  construct,  that  sexual  sadism  is  the  mainspring  of
sexual  inequality  (p.  5),  and  that  sexuality  is  built on  male  dominance
raise  several  questions.  First,  the  connections  among  sexuality,  na-
ture,  law,  and  culture  are  extraordinarily  complex;  indeed,  it  is  not
altogether  clear  what  the  claim  that  "sexuality"  is  "a social  construct"
means.  Second,  the  relationship  between  sex  discrimination  and  sex-
ual  sadism  is  hardly  simple  and  clear  cut.  The  term  "sadism"  is
perhaps  misleading  in  this  context,  for it  connotes  a  kind  of  pleasure
from  pain  that  captures  only  a  part  of  sexual  inequality.  Moreover,
sexual  inequality  is  sometimes  rooted  in  things  other  than  sexual
sadism;  economic,  domestic,  and  other advantages  are  also  important.
Women  have  been  oppressed  in  nonsexual  ways,  and  men  receive
much  more  from  gender  inequality  than  sex  on  their  own  terms.
Third,  the  claim  that sexuality  is  based  on  male  dominance  is  in  some
tension  with  the  presence  of affirmative  descriptions  of  sexuality  from
women,  descriptions  that  are  true  to  subjective  experience. 
Indeed,
MacKinnon  herself  emphasizes  that  unremittingly  bleak  depictions  of
sexuality  are  inconsistent  with  important  elements  of  female  as  well
as  male  experience.8 4

8  MacKinnon  states:
In  serious  political  analyses,  say  marxism,  a  worker  can  sometimes  have  a  good  day  or
even  a  good job.  That  does  not mean  the worker  has  false  consciousness  or  the  work is
not  exploited  labor,  structurally  speaking  .... 
Because  sexism  is  basic  and  has  been
impervious  to  basic  change,  it  makes  sense  that  it  would  live  in  something  socially
considered  basic,  deceptively  a  part  of the  given,  enshrouded  with  celebratory  myth  and
ritual.  Sex  feeling good  may mean  that  one is  enjoying  one's subordination;  it would  not

HARVARD  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol,  ioi:826

Nevertheless,  notions  of  sexual  liberation  and  the  removal  of
repression  often  have  as  their  underlying  purpose  and  effect  the  in-
creased  sexual  availability  of  women  to  men.  Elements  of  sexual
sadism  form  an  ingredient  in  sexual  inequality;  MacKinnon's  position
here  is  both original  and  confirmed  by unmistakable  aspects  of modern
culture.  Moreover,  the  case  for  regulation  of  at  least  some  porno-
graphic  materials  is  quite  persuasive.  Equally  important,  the  anti-
pornography  movement  has  begun  to  affect  both  male  and  female
thinking  about  sexuality,  rendering  visible  many  practices  and  issues
formerly  taken  for  granted.  Sexualized  violence  toward  women  is
pervasive  in  advertising,  popular  culture,  and  everyday  life. 
It  is
difficult  to  see  much  of popular  culture  -
and  some  high  art  as  well
-
in  quite  the  same  way  after  reading  Feminism  Unmodified.
MacKinnon's  arguments  furnish  the  tools  with  which  to  understand
all  of  this  and  eventually  to  do  something  about  it.  This  is  in  itself
a  considerable  achievement.

IV.  CONCLUSION

Feminism  Unmodified is  filled  with  novel,  sometimes  brilliant  in-
sights  carrying  broad  implications  for  sex  discrimination  in  particular
and  legal theory in general.  Insights  of this sort have  begun  to  reorient
legal  understanding  and  social  practices  -
especially  in  the  area  of
sexual  harassment,  where  a  minor  revolution  has  already  occurred.
Feminism Unmodified is  reminiscent  -
of some
of the  arguments  associated  with the  New  Deal  attack on  the  common
law,  the downfall  of Lochner v.  New  York,  and  the  civil  rights  move-
ment.

and  deliberately  so  -

At  the  same  time,  Feminism Unmodified will  be hard  for  skeptics
to  take;  parts  of  it  will  appear  polemical,  one-sided, 
insufficiently
empirical,  and  at  times  conclusory.  Controversy  will  continue  about
the  proper  legal  approach  to  pornography,  comparable  worth,  abor-
tion,  and  sexual  violence  -
and  even  more  about  the  relationship
between  sexuality  and  sex  discrimination.  My  suspicion,  however,  is
that a decade  from  now,  the  central  insights  of Feminism Unmodified,
and  of  MacKinnon's  work  generally,  will  be  taken  as  substantially
correct  in  the legal  culture.  If they  are  not,  the  fault  will  lie  with  the
legal  culture,  not  with  the  insights  themselves.

be  the  first  time.  Or  it  may  mean  that  one  has  glimpsed  freedom,  a  rare  and  valuable
and  contradictory  event .... 
The  point  is,  the  possible  varieties  of  interpersonal  en-
gagement,  including  the  pleasure  of  sensation  or  the  experience  of  intimacy,  does  not,
things  being  as  they  are,  make  sex  empowering  for  women  (p.  218).

