 Cass R. Sunstein* The first amendment protects speech. But what activities qualify as "speech"? The distinction between speech and conduct usefully orients the inquiry, but it is incomplete. Some "conduct" has all or almost all of the characteristics that qualify speech for special protection; consider picketing, marching, perhaps draftcard-burning. Some "speech" has few such characteristics. Consider conspiracies to fix prices, consumer fraud, a letter discharging someone from employment on racial grounds, or a threatening telephone call. A large task for first amendment doctrine is to develop criteria for deciding what is constitutionally protected "speech"-criteria that enable judges and others to decide what activities are protected by the guarantee of freedom of speech. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Mary Becker, Geoffrey R. Stone, and David Strauss for valuable comments on an early draft. working, falling in love, and making friends do not usually count as speech. 1 In order to interpret the first amendment, it is necessary to decide what activities possess the characteristics of "speech" that call for special constitutional protection. That fact does not mean that activities without such characteristics are less valuable or less worthwhile. (3) If distinctions are to be drawn between categories of speech in terms of their centrality to the purposes of the free speech guarantee, it need not follow that government will be permitted to ban all "low-value" speech. One might, for example, conclude that some forms of expression I Of course government efforts to regulate the "speech" that might be involved in these activi ties would raise first amendment questions. of course take account of the constitutional tradition and of the relevant cases. 3 See Alexander, Low Value Speech, 83 Nw. U.L. REv. 547 (1989). 4 Id. at 553 (discussion of rock formation banned because government considers its "message" to be dangerous). Low Value Speech Revisited may be regulated only on the basis of an exceptionally powerful showing of harm; that others may not be regulated unless the government is able to meet a less severe but still significant burden; and that still others are not speech at all and may be regulated so long as the regulation is "rational." Indeed, an approach of this sort is followed in current law. To say that some speech is low-value-for example, libel of private persons-is emphatically not to say that it is automatically subject to government regulation. apart from harms-would be inconsistent with the generally salutary constitutional commitment to the prohibition of regulation of speech on the basis of its viewpoint. 7 At least as a general rule, government ought not to be in the business of saying which ideas should be heard and evaluated by the citizenry.8 Of course some things that qualify or might qualify as "ideas" should be regulable; both child pornography and private libel might well contain "ideas." But it is far more sensible to look at the issues of harm and value, rather than to authorize government to distinguish among ideas on their merits. 6 See Alexander, supra note 3. 7 See Stone, Content Regulation and the First Amendment, 25 WM. & MARY L. REV. 189 (1983). On some of the difficulties with the requirement of content neutrality in the context of pornography, see C. MAcKINNON, FEMINISM UNMODIFIED (1987); Sunstein, Pornography and the First Amendment, 1986 DUKE L.J. 589. question. cant difficulties, and the risks of abuse, involved in assessing the value of different kinds of expression. Low Value Speech Revisited But if it is even plausible to make distinctions between high- and lowvalue speech, such an approach appears preferable to the alternatives. 11 See Wright, A Rationale from J.S. Mill for the Free Speech Clause, 1985 Sup. CT. REV. 149. 12 In some cases, of course, they might be; and some kind of political message may be implicit in advertisements. In the first case, constitutional protection should attach at the highest level; in the second case, the fact of an implicit message is an insufficient reason to accord such protection. See Sunstein, supra note 7, at 607-08. ized private groups seeking to cartelize the industry. best that a system of free expression can do in light of the overwhelming likelihood that a less complex inquiry will produce significant errors.14 If it is necessary to develop a more concise and unitary test---one that is sensitive to the historic functions of the first amendment-perhaps speech should qualify as high-value if it expresses a point of view on a question of public importance. 15 Under this approach, expressionwhether speech or conduct-that sets out an intelligible position on a public subject is protected. On this view, Cohen v. California,16 for example, was rightly decided. Political speeches, whatever their contentdraftcard burning; racist or misogynist tracts-all these qualify for protection, unless there is an exceedingly powerful demonstration of harm. But ordinary conspiracies, contracts, bribes, threats, publication of the names of rape victims, commercial speech' 7-and pornography 8 -can usually be regulated on the basis of a lesser showing of harm. Of course there will be hard intermediate cases, and some situations will pose unusual difficulty. But it is inevitable for, and thus no embarrassment to, a sensible system of free expression that it is unable to avoid that problem. condition. in favor of the constitutional protection of pornography that pornographers tend to be misogynists and that pornography tends to inculcate misogyny; the act of pimping, or of engaging a prostitute, may involve the same characteristics as pornography, but it is not by virtue of that fact qualified to the highest protection accorded to political speech. Of course regulation of some forms of sexuality may raise serious constitutional questions under the due process and equal protection clauses. See, e.g., Sunstein, Sexual Orientation and the Constitution: A Note on the Relationship Between Due Process and Equal Protection, 55 U. CHI. L. REV. 1161 (1988). But it is doubtful that the control of pornography, as defined in Sunstein, supra, would do so. Low Value Speech Revisited proves of a point of view; 19 and a severe burden of justification is properly imposed on government whenever it attempts to regulate speech that bears on political affairs, broadly understood. But the constitutional commitment to free expression, and to the protection of dissent, cannot plausibly be taken to disable the government from controlling all activities that might qualify as speech. If taken to an extreme, the generally salutary antipathy to "censorship" would protect those who defraud consumers; who conspire, threaten, and bribe; who disclose to unfriendly countries plans to develop military technology; who use children to produce pornography; who disclose the names of rape victims; and who spread knowing falsehoods about private citizens. And if judges are unwilling to distinguish between high- and low-value speech, government will be unable to control these forms of expression without simultaneously lowering the burden of justification and thus endangering other speech that belongs at the center of constitutional concern. To draw such distinctions is not a simple task; but it is a task that a well-functioning system of free expression cannot refuse to undertake. complexities here.