 In this essay, I undertake three tasks. The first is to describe some of the difficulties of defining "benefits" in the setting of judicial review of administrative action. The second task is to offer reasons, though tentative and largely anecdotal ones, for an affirmative answer to the question whether aggressive judicial review has produced "net benefits." At the very least, I suggest, aggressive judicial review has had significant benefits in many settings. The third and final task is to outline some proposals by which to increase the benefits, and decrease the risks, of an aggressive judicial posture in administrative law. For those assessing the value of judicial review of administrative action, the first problem is one of definition. In this context, the criteria for evaluation are elusive, and shift dramatically with context. Even so, it is possible to identify at least four different sets of criteria, all of which have been invoked in recent discussion.' A. Legality. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This essay is a revised version of a talk delivered to the section on administrative law of the Association of American Law Schools in January 1989. If legality is the goal of judicial review, active judicial review might well be desirable. There are good reasons to believe that courts have a comparative advantage over agencies in deciding what the law is.4 But an increase in legality might not improve social welfare by, any measure. A statute might be foolish, for example; it might impose costs that outweigh any benefits. A possible example is the Delaney Clause,5 which forbids any carcinogens in food additives. The prohibition applies to carcinogens posing trivial risks, and for that reason it has the potential to impose costs-including harms to health resulting from the substitution of noncarcinogenic but risky substances for carcinogenic substances posing de minimis risks-that would dwarf its benefits.6 ' A court that required literal compliance with the Delaney Clause might increase legality but decrease net social benefits. 3. For criticism of this view, see Mashaw, Prodelegation: Why Administrators Should Make Political Decisions, 1 J.L. EcON. & ORG. 81, 91-99 (1985) (arguing for broad statutory delegation of authority to administrators). 10. See Stewart, Regulation in a Liberal State: The Role of Non-Commodity Values, 92 YALE capricious). This view places great emphasis on judicial independence, which serves as an important safeguard, providing both an ex ante deterrent and as an ex post check against the domination of administrative processes by irrelevant or illegitimate considerations. On this view, moreover, an aggressive judicial role is necessary in order to introduce some of the traditional virtues of Anglo-American law into the administrative process. Here, as with the goal of legality, the "benefits" of judicial review are not evaluated directly in terms of its consequences for the world. The goals of judicial review are of a more diffuse sort, and have no necessary or linear connection with good regulatory outcomes. Whatever the relevant criteria, it is difficult to make confident statements in the abstract, about the benefits and costs of aggressive judicial review of administrative action. It is surely imaginable, in certain times and places, that aggressive judicial review will both increase illegality and decrease social welfare on any view. Indeed, one could argue that this was precisely the pattern in the period immediately before and after the New Deal, when courts invoked a principle calling for narrow construction of regulatory power. 14 More recently, aggressive judicial review has produced regulatory irrationality in a variety of areas. Professor Mashaw has shown that the courts' simultaneous hospitality toward administrative recalls of defective vehicles and hostility toward ex ante motor vehicle regulation have pushed automobile safety regulation in peculiar directions. The net result tends toward regulation through random, ex post directives rather than through managerially coherent, ex ante controls.1 5 In the same vein, the courts' literal approach to the Delaney Clause has increased regulatory irrationality by imposing serious costs and in fact bringing about fewer rather than more improvements in safety and health.' 6 On the other hand, it is fully imaginable that aggressive judicial review will both increase legality and improve social welfare. Commentators can invoke considerations at a high level of generality that bear on this problem, and indeed such considerations form the staple of academic Pitched at this level of generality, however, considerations of this sort are unlikely to be conclusive. Much will depend on context-on the particular substantive area and on the incentives, good faith, and competence of judges and administrators at any particular time. An evaluation of how these considerations have in fact played out over the past, say, fifty years must await extensive empirical investigation. 17. See Diver, supra note 4, at 592-93 (finding that on whole agencies are better statutory interpreters than courts); Stewart, The Discontents of Legalisr: Interest Group Relations in Administrative Regulation, 1985 Wisc. L. REv. 655, 678-82 (litigation in administrative context causes delay and uncertainty). It is also possible to show that aggressive judicial review has often provided significant benefits both in bringing about desirable regulatory initiatives and in preventing unreasonable or unlawful regulation. Examples are numerous, and indeed on balance extraordinary. Judicial initiatives helped bring about regulation of DDT 23 and airborne lead 24; control of asbestos, beryllium, and mercury 25; regulation of atmospheric loading, which produces acid deposition, 26 disclosure requirements for hazardous chemicals 27; and regulation in the workplace of ethylene oxide and formaldehyde. 28 The federal courts also prevented the government from eliminating passive restraint rules. 29 The Supreme Court's invalidation of an extremely hasty and ill-considered decision to scrap those rules will ultimately save many lives. In the areas of communications and broadcasting, an aggressive judiciary has helped ensure high quality programming, diversity, local control, and sensitivity to the interests of minority groups.3 0 In addition, the Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) program--calling for, among other things, protection of pristine areas from environmental degradation-is a product of an aggressive federal court.3 1 Examples of this sort amount to little more than anecdotes. This can hardly dispose of the issue. But they are highly suggestive. They indicate that a world without aggressive judicial review might well suffer from increases in lawlessness, carelessness, overzealous regulatory controls, and inadequate regulatory protection. Aggressive judicial review has produced important ex ante and ex post benefits in numerous settings; and although the evidence is largely anecdotal and far from systematic, it must suffice absent a more sustained investigation into the issue. We have seen that it is difficult to say in the abstract whether aggressive judicial review of administrative action has produced, or will produce, significant advantages. In these circumstances, a major task is to develop principles of interpretation that will improve the situation. Public law thus far lacks a set of interpretive norms that are well-adapted to the purposes, operation, and occasional failures of regulatory legislation. For this reason, the area of statutory construction of administrative behavior remains undeveloped. In this section, I outline, in summary fashion, some principles that courts might bring to bear on regulatory agency for further explanation of basis for secondary air quality standard for sulfur oxides). 37. A much more detailed treatment of this problem can be found in a forthcoming article, Sunstein, Interpreting Statutes in the Regulatory State, 103 HARV. L. REv. (forthcoming 1989) and a forthcoming book, C. SUNSTEIN, THE REGULATORY STATE (1989 draft). Both deal with numerous interpretive principles with which to approach regulatory statutes. Both of these decisions can be understood as responsive to the fact that stringent statutory requirements tend to bring about a paradoxical regime of simultaneous over-regulation and under-regulation. When the statute does not contain a proportionality principle, agencies tend to over-regulate those substances that get on the agenda; but they are simultaneously reluctant to regulate many substances at all, which therefore go entirely uncontrolled. One consequence of draconian standards is thus to leave the marketplace unregulated in many settings.43 A proportionality principle is a useful corrective. ity in pristine areas). A partial solution would call on courts to employ clear statement principles of statutory construction so as to help bring about consistency and coordination in the law. A judicial role of this sort has clear precedent both in the old idea that statutes governing the same subject matter should be construed together5 8 and in contemporary administrative law. In Bob Jones University v. United States, for example, the Supreme Court held that the Internal Revenue Service could not grant tax deductions to private schools that discriminate on the basis of race.5 9 The source of the prohibition was a statute giving deductions to institutions serving charitable purposes, but with an implicit exception when "public policy" requires denial of the deduction. There is no doubt that, when the statute was initially enacted, "public policy" did not prohibit deductions to institutions that discriminated on the basis of race. Racial discrimination in education was common at the time, and it could not plausibly be suggested that the enacting Congress thought that discriminatory schools violated public policy. The Bob Jones decision is best understood as an effort to ensure that the IRS takes account of the widespread social antagonism toward racial discrimination, since that antagonism now forms a part of the general thrust of contemporary "public policy." The underlying idea was that the statute should be construed in a way that conforms to current views about racial discrimination in education. Some cases limiting agency authority to impose significant costs for uncertain or speculative benefits can be understood in similar terms, as an effort to bring about coherence in the law and conformity with current norms and practices.60 56. See REGULATORY PROGRAM OF THE UNITED STATES, supra note 22, at 259-60 (OSHA changes to Carcinogen Policy (29 C.F.R. 1990) in light of the "different approaches" to "regulatory requirements for research laboratories and the construction, agriculture, and maritime industries"). 57. See, eg., Huber, Electricity and the Environment: In Search of Regulatory Authority, 100 F. Obsolescence. justify a change In the areas of banking, broadcasting, and carcinogen regulation, judicial interpretation has sometimes been a straightforward response to changed circumstances. 61 Here it is implausible to resolve statutory ambiguities by asking how Congress would have answered the question at the time of enactment. In light of the changed nature of the relevant markets, such an approach would be a recipe for absurdity. At least if the language so permits, there is no alternative but to extrapolate purposes at a certain level of generality and to assess the changed circumstances in light of those purposes. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), invoking the changed character of scientific knowledge, says yes; a federal court has said no. 63 In the court's view, the provision said what it meant and meant what it said, and that was that. But read in its context, there was no such clarity in the Delaney Clause. Congress simply did not focus on the question of de minimis risks. Indeed, it could not have done so in light of the state of scientific knowledge with respect to carcinogenic substances. It was therefore a myth to say that the congressional enactment resolved the Dean Calabresi has argued that courts should have the power to invalidate obsolete statutes, returning them to the legislature for reconsideration. 6 6 A judicial role of this sort would be extremely controversial, and properly so. The principal problem posed by obsolescence or changed circumstances is that it makes interpretation in the ordinary sense far more difficult. Efforts to translate statutes into new settings cannot be made simply by asking what the statute meant when it was enacted. A principle that calls for courts to exercise some creativity here provides a far less intrusive function for the courts, and it has unmistakable foundations in current law. The question whether aggressive judicial review of administrative action has produced "net benefits" poses difficulty most notably because of the absence of clear criteria by which to make the assessment. Courts have the responsibility both to ensure legality and to prevent arbitrariness, and a decision to bring about compliance with the governing statute may or may not produce more sensible regulation. The absence of clear criteria and the lack of good empirical data make it exceptionally difficult to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of aggressive judicial review. In the abstract, one could imagine scenarios in which such review would be 64. See, eg., Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Comm'n, 354 F.2d 608 (2d Cir. 1965), cert. denied, 384 U.S. 941 (1966) (FPC licensing and related orders set aside for failure to support decision with sufficient evidence in the record and for ignoring relevant factors and failing to analyze possible alternatives to a hydroelectric power plant project).