REGULATORY STATE 
TABLE OF CONTENTS I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................ 
A. The Problem ........................................................... 
B. Interpretive Principles .................................................. PAGE V. CONCLUSION .............................................................. 
APPENDIX: INTERPRETIVE PRINCIPLES, OLD AND NEw ............................ 
that "if my fellow citizens want to go to Hell I will help them. It's my job."' 
that it understates the difficulty of interpretation,the indeterminacy of both the language and the will of the citizens, and the resulting discretion of the judge. Similarly, a vigorous debate continues over the proper role of the traditional sources of statutory interpretation- the text, the legislative history, the purpose of the enacting Congress, and the structure of the statute. Professor Sunstein suggests that both the conventional understandings of interpretationand the recent critiques are seriouslyflawed. Because interpretationinevitably involves the applicationof "backgroundnorms" - often controversial, value-laden, and not found in any text - the traditional theories are incomplete. These theories, however, properly stress the democratic primacy of Congress. When congressional instructions are clear and do not create absurdity, courts should follow them. Often, however, the instructions are ambiguous, and judges must choose from a number of possible background norms. 
Suggesting that many disputes over statutory meaning are in fact disagreements over appropriatebackground norms, ProfessorSunstein contends that the debate should center on whether the proposed norms express a good understanding of constitutional values; are properly responsive to contemporary institutional arrangements involving the making, monitoring, and enforcement of law; and are sensitive to the aspirationsand functions as * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to many colleagues and friends for their help with this essay. Bruce Ackerman, Akhil Amar, Douglas Baird, Jack Beermann, Frank Buckley, Frank Easterbrook, Jon Elster, Richard Epstein, William Eskridge, Richard Fallon, Philip Frickey, Stephen Gilles, Don Herzog, Stephen Holmes, Donald Horowitz, Benjamin Kaplan, Larry Kramer, John Langbein, Howard Latin, Larry Lessig, Jon Macey, Geoffrey Miller, Martha Minow, Richard Posner, Susan Rose-Ackerman, Frederick Schauer, Richard Stewart, Geoffrey Stone, David Strauss, Lloyd Weinreb, Robin West, James Boyd White, and John Wiley offered valuable comments on all or parts of the manuscript. I am also grateful to participants in helpful workshops at the University of California at Los Angeles, Harvard University, the University of Michigan, New York University, Princeton University, Tulane University, and the University of Virginia. D. Gordon Smith, Gamhk Markarian, and Catherine O'Neill provided research assistance and useful comments. Finally, I am grateful to the Law and Government Program of the University of Chicago for generous support. 
Some of the material in this Article is also included, in different form, as parts of chapters 4 and 5 in C. SUNSTEIN, AFTER THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION: CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT AND THE REGULATORY STATE (forthcoming I9go). 
1 I HOLMES-LASKI LETTERS 249 (M. Howe ed. 1953). ['9ol. 103:405 well as the shortcomings of regulatory statutes. Professor Sunstein concludes by outlininga series of norms - some based on current interpretivepractices, others reflecting his own normative vision. All the norms are designed to focus disputes over statutory meaning more sharply on the underlying issues and to deepen understandingof the regulatory state. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
TN the early part of the twentieth century, courts often treated Iregulatory statutes as foreign substances. 2 Starting from principles of laissez-faire, judges saw statutory protections of workers, consumers, and others as unprincipled interest-group transfers supported by theories that were at best obscure and often disingenuous. 3 By contrast, judge-made doctrines of property, contract, and tort seemed to create a system with integrity and coherence. 
The role of the courts in this period was one of damage control. The most important organizing principle for interpretation was that regulatory statutes should be construed narrowly - so as to harmonize as much as possible with principles of private markets and private rights. 4 This approach grew out of the idea that courts should narrowly construe statutes in derogation of the common law.5 
The New Deal period marked an enormous change in the size and character of the national government. 6 The decade between 193o and 2 See, e.g., B. CARDOZO, THE PARADOXES OF LEGAL SCIENCE 9 (1928) ("The truth is that many of us, bred in common law traditions, view statutes with a distrust which we may deplore, but not deny."). 
3 See, e.g., United States v. Elgin, J. & E. Ry., 298 U.S. 492 (1936); FTC v. Eastman Kodak Co., 274 U.S. 619, 623-25 (1927); FTC v. American Tobacco Co., 264 U.S. 298, 305o6 (1924); FTC v. Gratz, 253 U.S. 422, 427-28 (1920). 
4 See, e.g., cases cited supra note 3; F. FRANKFURTER & N. GREENE, THE LABOR INJUNCTION 165-82 (1930) (exploring the federal courts' nullification of the Clayton Act); see also Pound, Common Law and Legislation, 22 HARV. L. REV. 383, 387-88, 4o6-07 (I9o8) (criticizing use of interpretive principles that are out of touch with contemporary social and economic thought); Pound, Courts and Legislation, 7 AM. POL.-ScI. REV. 361, 374-75 (1913) (same). 
This principle of narrow construction, like many others of the past and present, was not always invoked explicitly. Often it operated invisibly or in the background. When interpretive principles are not referred to expressly, their use is often reflected in the court's treatment of the statutory language. See infra pp. 437-41; see also infra pp. 464-66 (discussing when controversial substantive and institutional norms should be applied). 
5 See, e.g., Shaw v. Railroad Co., 1oi U.S. 557, 565 (1879); Johnson v. Southern Pac. Co., 117 F. 462, 466 (8th Cir. 2902), rev'd, x96 U.S. I (1904); see also Fordham & Leach, Interpretation of Statutes in Derogationof the Common Law, 3 VAND. L. REV. 438, 450-5I & nn.7374 (i5o) (listing cases in which courts ignored statutes instructing them not to construe statutes narrowly). 
6 On the pre-New Deal developments, see S. SKOWRONEK, BUILDING THE NEw AMERICAN STATE: THE EXPANSION OF NATIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE CAPACITIES, 1877-1920 (1982). 1940 saw the creation of as many agencies - seventeen - as had been created in the entire period between the framing of the Constitution and the close of the nineteenth century. 7 During the "rights revolution" of the 196o's and 1970's, the national government substantially increased its regulatory responsibilities by moving to protect the interests of consumers, the national environment, and victims of discrimination. 8 The emergence of the regulatory state represents a shift in both the substance of law and the institutions through which law is made and enforced, 9 and the sheer volume of federal statutes and regulations has dramatically changed the business of the federal courts.' 0 In particular, the work of federal judges has increasingly involved the interpretation of federal enactments. 
The demands of the modern administrative state ultimately made it impossible for courts to sustain a theory of interpretation rooted in nineteenth-century common law. As a result, interpretive practices have changed. Courts have often repudiated private-law baselines for interpreting public law and have been less antagonistic to regulatory statutes.11 
In many respects, however, the theory and practice of public law have not outgrown the understandings that underlay the initial period of judicial antagonism. 12 That period is unmistakably recalled by 7 See FINAL REPORT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL'S COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE 7-I1 (1941). 
s For comparisons between the New Deal and the rights revolution, see R. HARRIS & S MILKIS, THE POLITICS OF REGULATORY CHANGE 53-96 (x989); and Vogel, The "New" Social Regulation in Historicaland Comparative Perspective, in REGULATION IN PERSPECTIVE 155 (T. McCraw ed. I98I). 
9 See generally Sunstein, ConstitutionalismAfter the New Deal, ioi HARV. L. REV. 421, 437-46 (1987) (discussing substantive and institutional reform in the New Deal period). 
10 The proliferation of statutes in modern law has been widely observed both on the bench, see, e.g., R. POSNER, THE FEDERAL COURTS 53, 83-84 (1985); Traynor, Statutes Revolving in Common Law Orbits, 17 CATH. U.L. REV. 401, 402 (1968) (observing that cases "increasingly involve the meaning or applicability of a statute"), and in academia, see, e.g., G. GILMORE, THE AGES OF AMERICAN LAW 95 (1977) (describing an "orgy of statute making"). Recent statistics confirm these intuitions. In 1985, for example, nearly 20% of all civil filings involved four regulatory areas - social security, labor, tax, and civil rights. See ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS, FEDERAL JUDICIAL WORKLOAD STATISTICS at a-16 to a-17 (1985) (table C-3). Moreover, because most commercial disputes have been absorbed into the regulatory arena through the Uniform Commercial Code, and because "contract cases" account for nearly 40% of all filings, see id., the federal courts probably hear many more statutory than common law claims. 
11 See, e.g., Switchmen's Union v. National Mediation Bd., 320 U.S. 297 (1943) (denying judicial review of agency decision); Gray v. Powell, 314 U.S. 402 (1941) (deferring to agency interpretation of law). 
12 Over 8o years ago, Roscoe Pound voiced similar complaints about the persistence of judicial adherence to common law principles. See Pound, Common Law and Legislation, supra note 4, at 385-86; accord Landis, Statutes and the Sources of Law, in HARVARD LEGAL ESSAYS 213, 213 (1934). recent suggestions that courts should indulge a presumption in favor of private ordering and should interpret regulatory statutes so as to intrude minimally on the private market. 13 The nineteenth-century view that regulatory statutes should be viewed against a background of common law property and contract rights and hence as naked wealth transfers also finds a modern home, in the increasingly prominent idea that statutes should be seen as unprincipled "deals" among self-interested private actors. 14 Similarly, those who emphasize the findings of public choice theory would treat statutes as lacking coherent normative underpinnings.' 5 
The initial judicial skepticism about the legitimacy and' coherence of statutory law is also recalled by both poles of the contemporary debate over the possibility of constrained or objective legal interpretation. At one extreme, some courts and observers see the text or "plain meaning" of statutory language as the exclusive or principal guide to meaning. 16 At the opposite extreme, other commentators claim that legal terms are quite generally indeterminate 7 or have the meaning that those with authority choose to impose on them.' 8 Despite their differences, the two camps share a number of assumptions. Both treat regulatory statutes as an undifferentiated and unprincipled whole, without distinct and accessible purposes. Because members of both camps see no way to mediate the sharp ideological disagreements that sometimes underlie interpretive disputes, some are driven to the 13 See, e.g., J. RABKIN, JUDICIAL COMPULSIONS: How PUBLIC LAW DISTORTS PUBLIC POLICY (1989); Easterbrook, Statutes' Domains, 5o U. CHI. L. REV. 533, 544-5I (1983). Many recent decisions appear to respond to a principle in favor of private ordering. See, e.g., Independent Fed'n of Flight Attendants v. Zipes, 109 S. Ct. 2732 (1989) (discussed below in note 305); Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio, 109 S. Ct. 2115 (1989) (discussed below at pp. 484-85); Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821 (1985); Grove City College v. Bell, 465 U.S. 555 (1984); Pennhurst State School & Hosp. v. Halderman, 451 U.S. I, 24-25 (i98i) (discussed below at pp. 500-02). 
14 See Easterbrook, The Supreme Court, z983 Term - Foreword: The Court and the Economic System, 98 HARV. L. REV. 4, 15 (1984). 
'S For a discussion of public choice theory, see Plott, Axiomatic Social Choice Theory: An Overview and Interpretation,in RATIONAL MAN AND IRRATIONAL SOCIETY? 231 (B. Barry & R. Hardin eds. 1982). See generally K. ARROW, SOCIAL CHOICE AND INDIVIDUAL VALUES (1951); J. BUCHANAN & G. TULLOCx, THE CALCULUS OF CONSENT (x962). The treatment in H. HART & A. SACKS, THE LEGAL PROCESS (tent. ed. 1958), runs into severe problems because of its failure to appreciate the difficulties raised by work of this sort. My ultimate goal, however, is to revive important elements of the treatment in The Legal Process, rather than to celebrate its demise or to emphasize its occasional nalvet6 about politics and interpretation. 
16 This view is currently enjoying a renaissance in the courts. See cases cited infra note 29; see also Easterbrook, supra note 13 (advocating a presumption against applying a statute unless it expressly addresses the issue in question). 
17 See, e.g., R. UNGER, KNOWLEDGE AND POLITICS 88-oo (1975). 
18 See, e.g., S. FISH, DOING WHAT COMES NATURALLY 87-102 (1989); S. FISH, IS THERE A TEXT IN THIS CLASS?: THE AUTHORITY OF INTERPRETIVE COMMUNITIES 338-55 (i980) [hereinafter S. FISH, Is THERE A TEXT IN THIS CLASS?]. pretense that words quite generally have "plain meanings," others to the uninformative view that meaning is a function of authority, others to the demonstrably false claim that statutes are usually indeterminate in meaning, and still others to the open-ended suggestion that statutes should be interpreted so as to be "reasonable" or "the best that they can be." 1 9 In the face of contentions of this sort, debates about statutory interpretation, in and out of the judiciary, often dissolve into fruitless and unilluminating disputes about the constraints supplied by language "itself" (as if such a thing could be imagined). 
My project is to develop a theory of statutory construction that not only sheds light on current practices but also might claim to be worthy of adoption. In carrying out that task, it is first necessary to set out the proper relationships among the traditional sources of interpretation, including text, structure, purpose, intent, and history. A large part of the solution, however, lies in the identification and development of interpretive principles with which to approach regulatory statutes. 20 The meaning of a statute inevitably depends on the precepts with which interpreters approach its text. Statutes do not have pre-interpretive meanings, and the process of interpretation requires courts to draw on background principles. These principles are usually not "in" any authoritative enactment but instead are drawn from the particular context and, more generally, from the legal culture.2 1 Disagreements about meaning often turn not on statutory terms "themselves," but instead on the appropriate interpretive prin19 See R. DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE 337-38 (x986) (arguing that judges should interpret statutes "in the best light overall"); Llewellyn, Remarks on the Theory of Appellate Decision and the Rules or Canons About How Statutes Are To Be Construed, 3 VAND. L. REV. 395, 399 (1950) (suggesting that courts interpret statutes to "make sense"). 
20 It is important to emphasize that my approach is directed to regulatory statutes. I refer to other measures, including criminal law, largely by way of analogy. Much of the discussion, however, bears on statutory interpretation in general. 
21 The illuminating treatment in Eskridge, Public Values in Statutory Interpretation,137 U. PA. L. REV. 1007 (i989), presents a number of these background norms, including the idea that courts should defer to administrative interpretations of law if Congress has not clearly addressed the issue, see Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842 (1984); that criminal statutes should be construed in accordance with the "rule of lenity," see Eskridge, supra, at 1029; and that statutes and treaties should be construed favorably to Indian tribes, see id. at 1047. 
Eskridge's treatment is flawed, however, by the implicit assumption that the role of "public values" in interpretive disputes is to add to ordinary interpretation, or to bend the meaning of statutes in various directions. See id. at 1045-47. For reasons suggested below, see infra pp. 416-25, ordinary interpretation is also pervaded by "public values"; the dichotomy between interpretation that rests on fidelity to text and interpretation that is based on extratextual values greatly oversimplifies the problem and is in important respects a false one. ciples. Courts sometimes make the governing norms explicit, but frequently leave them unarticulated and latent. The principles are often misdirected or at least controversial. 
In these circumstances, it is important to identify the prevailing principles and to subject them to scrutiny. The ultimate task is to develop norms of statutory interpretation that grow out of, and do not collide with, the basic purposes of the constitutional framework, of contemporary institutional arrangements, and of modern social and economic regulation. Above all, it is important to develop principles that improve the performance of modern government, and that are not based on pre-New Deal understandings, which seem to have overstayed their welcome. 
To carry out this task, it will be necessary to develop distinctive understandings about both the nature of legal interpretation and the character of modern public law. Because interpretation is a function of background norms and cannot proceed without them, theories about statutory "meaning" cannot be separated from theories about how the modern regulatory state does and should operate. When interpretive norms are contested, and when neither the Constitution nor the Congress has specified the proper norms, there is no alternative but to base the inevitably value-laden choice among them on their role in improving or impairing governmental performance. 
In the course of the discussion, I reject a number of generally accepted understandings about statutory construction: o courts must always adhere to the original meaning of the statute, or the original intent of the enacting legislature; o courts are or can be mere agents of the Congress; o statutory meaning remains constant over time; o statutory meaning is equivalent to legislative intent; o controversial views about public policy are never and should never be part of statutory construction; o canons of construction, or background interpretive norms, are an outmoded and unhelpful guide to the courts. 
All of these aspects of the conventional wisdom, I suggest, are inconsistent with actual judicial behavior. Moreover, they provide incomplete instructions and often produce perverse results. 
The discussion proceeds in three stages. Part II rejects the usual understandings of how courts do and should construe statutes. It also suggests the proper uses of the traditional sources of interpretation: text, structure, purpose, congressional intent, and legislative history. The recent emphasis on the primacy of the text is a step in the right direction, but structure, purpose, intent, and history sometimes help to clarify ambiguities or to prevent unnecessary or unintended irrationality and injustice. I also suggest that the traditional sources offer incomplete guidance and that their incompleteness reveals the inevitable failure of the agency conception of the judicial role. At the same time, I reject the view that statutory disputes produce "indeterminacy" in most or all cases and the related idea that such disputes are resolved on the basis of conventions that are not subject to evaluation. Finally, I criticize, though on quite different grounds, the use of certain widelyheld extratextual norms to resolve statutory disputes: private autonomy, deference to agency interpretations, and conceptions of statutes as "deals." 
Part Ill attempts to understand statutory construction by means of a general defense of the much-maligned "canons" of construction, understood as background principles designed to help discern statutory meaning. I defend the use of such principles by disaggregating their various functions and by suggesting that the use of background norms is desirable and in any case inevitable. I also suggest that several current substantive norms can be supported through an understanding of the ways in which they incorporate constitutional principles, promote deliberation in government, and respond to New Deal reforms of the legal system. 
Part IV proposes a series of interpretive principles for judicial adoption in the regulatory state. I argue that many such principles, whether existing in current law or proposed here, can be defended by reference to constitutional norms; that others are based on assessments of the performance of various governmental institutions; and that still others are an effort to counteract some of the failings in regulatory systems. A general purpose of Part IV is to describe and defend principles that will serve the purposes of deliberative government and, in particular, will alleviate rather than aggravate the defects in modern regulatory programs. 
Although these suggestions are designed principally for reviewing courts in hard cases, their implications extend to administrative agencies attempting to implement statutes, and to Congress in its efforts to design and reform social and economic regulation. Debates over statutory meaning are often disputes over interpretive principles; these debates reflect broader divisions over the nature and performance of the regulatory state and, indeed, about the character of American democracy and constitutionalism as a whole. 22 
22The study of statutory construction is therefore one part of a more general effort to understand the performance of modern regulatory institutions - an effort that will ultimately make it necessary to focus more on Congress, the President, and the bureaucracy than on the courts. For discussion in this vein, see J. MAsHAW & B. HARFST, THE FREEDOM MACHINE (forthcoming 19go); C. SUNSTEIN, cited above in note *; and Rubin, Law and Legislation in the Administrative State, 89 CoLuM. L. REv. 369 (1989). II. STANDARD 
APPROACHES TO STATUTORY INTERPRETATION 
In the conventional account, the tools of statutory construction are language, structure, and history. The weight of each of these has been sharply contested, especially in recent years. 23 Disputes over questions of this sort have produced a range of approaches to statutory construction, all with support in the case law. Each, however, is flawed. My purpose here is to explain how these approaches fail, both as positive accounts of how courts in fact approach statutes and as normative theories of interpretation. 
This Part is divided into three sections. The first deals with theories that see courts as agents of the legislature and that charge courts with the duty to implement legislative decisions. These theories fail because they ignore the inevitable use of interpretive principles in the process of construction. Arguing that it is possible to choose among interpretive principles, the second section rejects both conventionalist accounts of meaning and the view that statutory interpretation produces "indeterminacy. '24 The third section considers three prominent approaches that do invoke supplemental principles; it suggests that these approaches also fail, largely because the relevant principles are difficult to defend. 
23Compare Hirschey v. Federal Energy Regulatory Comm'n, 777 F.2d x, 7-8 (D.C. Cir. i985) (Scalia, J., concurring) (criticizing use of legislative history) and B. ACKERMAN & W. HASSLER, CLEAN CoAL/DIRTY AIR 1o8-o9 (198i) (same) with Farber & Frickey, Legislative Intent and Public Choice, 74 VA. L. REV. 423 (x988) (arguing in favor of attention to legislative history). 
24 All interpretation involves the application of norms. Some of these "norms" are not open to change or even to discussion. There is a difference, at least in principle, between the sorts of understandings that make ordinary words intelligible and the sorts of interpretive principles that give meaning to statutory gaps or that resolve cases that are otherwise in equipoise - as, for example, in the norms in favor of state autonomy or judicial review. Participation in the set of practices that make ordinary words intelligible is probably best conceived of not as interpretation but as understanding. See L. WITTGENSTEIN, PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS § 2O, at 81 (G. Anscombe trans. 1972) (discussing a way "of grasping a rule which is not an interpretation, but which is exhibited in what we call 'obeying the rule' and 'going against it' in actual cases" (emphasis in original)). This point holds even though one's participation in those practices is conditional on a wide range of background understandings that are not "part" of words "themselves." 
The distinction is important because it is sufficient, for purposes of background understandings of this sort, that there be a social consensus on their behalf. Communication is possible only because of that consensus. But with respect to interpretive principles that are part of interpretation - for example, the idea that silence on the question of federal preemption means that state law continues to exist - a consensus may be inadequate if there are no good arguments on behalf of that consensus. In these latter cases, interpretive principles are at least in theory subject to evaluation and to replacement by alternatives. A pervasive problem with conventionalist accounts of meaning is that they treat all interpretation as akin to the sorts of understandings that make ordinary words intelligible. See infra pp. 442-43 (discussing conventionalism). I am grateful to Thomas Nagel for help with this point. 
According to the most prominent conception of the role of courts in statutory construction, judges are agents or servants of the legislature. 25 On the agency view, courts should say what the statute means, relying on its language, structure, and history. Background norms, policy considerations, indeed all "outside sources," are immaterial. The judicial task is to discern and apply a judgment made by others, most notably the legislature. 
The agency view is usually defended by a claim of judicial legitimacy.2 6 In a democratic system, with an electorally accountable legislature and separated powers, it is said to be the appropriate and indeed constitutionally prescribed role of the courts to apply legislative commands; it is thus impermissible for them to invoke considerations that cannot be traced to an authoritative text. The claim of illegitimacy is buttressed by (and perhaps reducible to) a range of prudential considerations: the use of outside sources will tend to increase judicial discretion, decrease legislative attentiveness, produce uncertainty, and risk usurpation by judges of powers reserved for legislative and executive actors. 27 Justice Holmes provided a particularly crisp expression of the agency view: after describing a regulatory statute as "foolish," he added, "if my fellow citizens want to go to Hell I will help them. It's my job." 28 
The agency view appears in several competing forms, and much of the history of statutory construction consists of shifts and disputes among the various possible sources of the instructions of the courts' "principal," the legislature. I discuss several variations here. 
i. Textualism. - It is sometimes suggested that statutory language is the source of judicial power and the only legitimate object of judicial concern. Textualism appears to be enjoying a renaissance in a number of recent cases, 2 9 and perhaps in the academy as well, 30 partly because of dissatisfaction with alternative interpretive strategies, taken up below, which counsel courts to rely on "purpose" or to produce "reason" in regulatory regimes. 3 1 
Several considerations argue in favor of textualist strategies. First, textualism contains an important and often overlooked truth. Statutory terms are the enactment of the democratically elected legislature and represent the relevant "law." Statutory terms - not legislative history, not legislative purpose, not legislative "intent" - have gone through the constitutionally specified procedures for the enactment of law. Second, resort to the text promotes goals associated with the rule of law: citizens have access to the statutory words and can most readily order their affairs in response to those words. Third, the words of a statute, considered in light of widely shared conventions about how they should be understood, often have only one plausible interpretation, or at least sharply constrain the territory of legitimate disagreement. Finally, an emphasis on the primacy of the text serves as a salutary warning about the potential abuses of judicial use of statutory "purpose" and of legislative history. 32 
Some textualists emphasize the "plain meaning" or dictionary definition of statutory terms; others are more sensitive to the particular settings. In its purest form, however, the textualist approach is inadequate. The central problem is that the meaning of words (whether "plain" or not) depends on both culture and context. Statutory terms are not self-defining, and words have no meaning before or without interpretation. 33 To say this is emphatically not to say that words 452-53 (1987) (Scalia, J.,concurring in the judgment). In Green v. Bock Laundry Mach. Co., 1o9 S. Ct. I98I (i989), however, all nine Justices refused to follow the dictionary meaning of the text because it would have produced an absurd result. See id. at 1984-85; id. at 1994 (Scalia, J., concurring); id. at i995 (Blackmun, J., dissenting); see also Public Citizen, lo9 S. Ct. at 2565-67 (I989). 
30 For example, once-Professor and now-Judge Easterbrook has defended textualism with insight and vigor. See, e.g., Easterbrook, supra note 13. 
31 As we will see, strategies of that sort were suggested by commentators who disregarded or downplayed the existence of controversy about what "reason" required or about the "purposes" of statutory regimes, and who failed to come to terms with the existence of sharp, ideologically based disagreements on such questions. See infra pp. 426-28, 435-36. Textualism relies on firm linguistic anchors to control ideological divisions. It is here that there is a commonality between those who believe that legal interpretation is inevitably indeterminate - because of ideological strife - and those who, embracing textualism, do so for essentially the same reason. 32 See infra pp. 427-28 (purpose), 429-31 (legislative history). 
33 Consider Learned Hand's view: "Words are not pebbles in alien juxtaposition; they have only a communal existence; and not only does the meaning of each interpenetrate the other, but all in their aggregate take their purport from the setting in which they are used . .. ." NLRB v. Federbush Co., 121 F.2d 954, 957 (2d Cir. 194); see also Shell Oil Co. v. Iowa Dep't of Revenue, log S. Ct. 278, 281 & n.6 (I989) (quoting Federbush). 
The dependence of meaning on culture and context is a conventional point in both AngloAmerican and Continental philosophy. See, e.g., L. WITTGENSTEIN, supra note 24 (AngloAmerican version); H. GADAMER, TRUTH AND METHOD (trans. 2d ed. 1975) (Continental 
INTERPRETING STATUTES, used in statutes or elsewhere can mean anything at all. 34 But it is to say that statutory terms are indeterminate standing "by themselves," and, even more important, they never stand by themselves. The significance of congressional enactments necessarily depends on the context and on background understandings about how words should be understood. Moreover, reliance on ordinary or dictionary definition, without reference to context, will sometimes lead to interpretive 3 5 blunders. 
Usually the context does not prevent reliance on ordinary meaning, and usually the background principles are so widely shared - for example, that Congress is speaking in English, that Congress is not joking or attempting to mislead, that statutes have purposes, or that judges should not decide cases simply according to their predilections - that they are invisible. Even in easy cases, however, courts must resort to background principles. For example, the question whether the enactment of federal environmental statutes preempts all of state tort law is an easy one, not because of the statutory text "itself," but because of shared understandings about the limited preemptive effect of federal enactments. 36 version). For legal writing on the inadequacy of textuaism, see R. DICKERSON, THE INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF STATUTES 217-27 (1975); S. FISH, Is THERE A TEXT IN THIS CLASS?, supra note 18, at 356-7r (discussing law as well as literature); H. HART & A. SACKS, supra note I5, at 1I5o-58; 9 J. WIGMORE, EVIDENCE § 2470, at 234-38 (J. Chadbourn ed. ig8i); Fish, Don'tKnow Much About the Middle Ages: Posneron Law and Literature, 97 YALE L. J. 777, 778-80 (1988); Frank, Words and Music: Some Remarks on Statutory Interpretation, 47 COLUM. L. REV. 1259, 1263-64 (I947); Horack, The Disintegrationof Statutory Construction, 24 IND. L.J. 335, 338 (I949). 
34 But see, e.g., Tushnet, Following the Rules Laid Down: A Critique of Interpretivism and Neutral Principles, 96 HARv. L. REV. 781, 8r9 (1983) (arguing, unpersuasively, that a good lawyer can always find an argument for the result he wants). 
35 Courts have conspicuously rejected literalism on many occasions. See Missouri v. Jenkins, 109 S. Ct. 2463, 247r (r989) (holding that "attorney's fee" should be read to include award of paralegal fees); and Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 429 n.2, 433 (1983) (observing that under § 1988, which provides attorney's fees to the "prevailing party," prevailing plaintiffs may recover if they prevail on any significant issue, but defendants may recover only if the plaintiff's suit was groundless) (dictum); United States v. Colon-Ortiz, 866 F.2d 6, iI (ist Cir. 1989) (refusing to adhere to an obvious drafting error); In re House Bill No. 1,291, 178 Mass. 605, 6o N.E. 129 (IgoI) (holding that a requirement in the Massachusetts Constitution of a "written vote" allows a voting machine involving no writing); Riggs v. Palmer, IIs N.Y. 506, 22 N.E. 188 (1889) (refusing to allow a testator's murderer to recover under the will); R. DICKERSON, supra note 33, at 23o. For other examples, see note 44 below. 
36 See R. STEWART & J. KRIER, ENVIRONMENTAL LAW AND POLICY 440-41 (1978); see also Mansell v. Mansell, 109 S. Ct. 2023, 2027-28 (1989) (observing that Congress must specifically preempt state law, especially in the area of domestic relations); Puerto Rico Dep't of Consumer Affairs v. Isla Petroleum Corp., 108 S. Ct. 1350, 1353 (1988) (requiring evidence of clear and manifest congressional purpose to preempt state law regarding gasoline price regulations); Hillsborough County v. Automated Medical Laboratories, 471 U.S. 707, 715 (I985) (discussing the assumption that states' powers to regulate health and safety are not preempted by congressional acts). Similarly, a law that says nothing about whether administrative action is reviewable is 
Those who accept textualist approaches might agree that the meaning of words is partly a function of the context and of background norms about how texts should be approached. Indeed, we may define an easy case as one in which the context produces no dispute and there is a consensus about the governing norms. 3 7 In many hard cases, however, the source of the difficulty is that the particular background norm and the nature of its application will be highly controversial. Textualism or "plain meaning" approaches can resolve these questions only by covertly introducing background principles, which are often controversial. 
Consider the question whether a statute creating a regulatory agency to police racial discrimination in employment implicitly authorizes victims of discrimination to bring private suits against employers who allegedly have engaged in discrimination. If the statute and its history do not resolve the question, the introduction of background norms is necessary to discern the meaning of the statute. It should thus be unsurprising that judges skeptical about implied causes of action have relied not on statutory "text" but instead on a highly controversial background assumption, traceable to a particular, contestable understanding of separation of powers, that only the legislature may create such rights, and that statutory silence should be assumed not to do So. 38 Without that assumption or a different one, statutory silence on the existence of an implied cause of action has no meaning. 
Background norms are ubiquitous in any legal system, and indeed in grammar itself; they are necessary to make reliance on "text" an intelligible concept. These considerations account for the pervasive difficulties with textualist approaches to statutory construction: ambiguity or vagueness, overinclusiveness, underinclusiveness, delegation or gap-filling, and changed circumstances. 
(a) Ambiguity or Vagueness. - The most familiar problem with textualism is that statutory language is sometimes ambiguous or vague. To say that courts should rely on the words or on their unambiguous, not because of the text "itself," but because of the strong presumption, created by courts but now widely shared, in favor of judicial review of administrative behavior. See infra PP. 475-76. 
37 Cf. Schauer, Easy Cases, 58 S. CAL. L. REV. 399, 413-14 (x985) (suggesting that easy cases arise when the relationship between legal norms and human behavior is uncontroversial). 
National Fed'n of Fed. Employees, Local 1263, 109 S. Ct. 1282, 1286 (x989) (describing a "canon" of construction against implied causes of action); Thompson v. Thompson, io8 S. Ct. 513, 520-23 (1988) (Scalia, J., concurring); Cannon v. University of Chicago, 441 U.S. 677, 730-31 ( SHAPIRO, HART AND WECHSLER'S THE FEDERAL COURTS AND THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 943-50 (3d ed. 1988) (recounting the changes in the Supreme Court's treatment of implied causes of action). ordinary meaning - the plain meaning approach - is unhelpful when statutory words have more than one dictionary definition, or when the context produces interpretive doubt. It is not clear, for example, whether the term "feasible" contemplates a cost-benefit analysis, or whether a prohibition of "discrimination" bars voluntary race-conscious measures designed to counteract the effects of past and present discrimination against blacks. 39 In both of these cases, moreover, it is uncertain whether the language should be taken to refer to the original meaning of those words for the enacting legislature (assuming that idea can be made intelligible in light of the problems of aggregating the views of numerous actors) or should instead take account of contemporary understandings of what the words mean. Indeed, it is not even clear what bearing the desires, or interpretive instructions, of the enacting legislature should have for judicial interpretation. By itself, textualism cannot answer these questions. Nor can the agency conception of the judicial role resolve such problems. 
(b) Overinclusiveness.40 - If textualism is taken, as it often is, to call for reliance on the literal4 1 language of statutory words - their dictionary definition or meaning in ordinary settings - it will sometimes suggest an outcome that makes little or no sense. For example, suppose that a state law says that no vehicles are permitted in public parks, and a city proposes to build in a park a monument consisting of tanks used in World War l.42 The literal language must yield, for the statute could not reasonably be taken to forbid a monument, which causes none of the harms the statute could be thought to prevent. 
A passage from Wittgenstein indicates the basic difficulty: "Someone says to me: 'Shew the children a game.' I teach them gaming with dice, and the other says 'I didn't mean that sort of game.' Must the exclusion of the game with dice have come before his mind when he gave me the order?"43 The example shows that sometimes the best interpretation of a textual command is one that runs counter to its apparent literal meaning - even if the author did not have in mind the case at issue, or make a judgment about how that case should be resolved. 
39See, e.g., Industrial Union Dep't, AFL-CIO v. American Petroleum Inst., 448 U.S. 607 (198o) (plurality opinion) (interpreting "feasible"); United Steelworkers of America v. Weber, 443 U.S. 193, 201-02 (,979) (rejecting an interpretation of "discriminate" that would bar affirmative action). 
40 "Overinclusiveness" and "underinclusiveness," as used in the text, refer to the fact that the best interpretation of a word, all things considered, sometimes calls for a restriction on or a departure from a word's dictionary meaning. 
41 The notion of "literal" meaning is a crude one. It usually refers to the meaning of words in "most" contexts, but because meaning is a function of context, it is wrong to suggest, as the concept of "literal meaning" does, that words have context-independent meanings. 42 This famous example comes from H.L.A. HART, THE CONCEPT OF LAw 121-32 (1961). 43 L. WITTGENSTEIN, su ra note 24, at 33. 
Courts encounter the problem of overinclusiveness frequently. 44 The Supreme Court recently held that a statute exempting state and local public housing obligations "from allt taxation . . . imposed by the United States" should not be interpreted to include an exemption from federal estate tax. 4 5 The Court held that the exemption did not mean what it appeared to say in light of the contemporaneous understanding that an excise tax was not ordinarily comprehended within the category of "taxation. '46 As another example, suppose that the legislature has said that an employer may discharge an employee "for any reason." Is the employer thereby authorized to fire workers who have refused to commit crimes on his behalf ? If a state law says that one spouse will inherit from another "in all circumstances," may a husband who has murdered his wife make a claim against the estate? 47 These are examples of what might be described as the overinclusiveness of a prominent version of textualism:48 the possibility that statutory language, read without sufficient regard to context or its intended field of application, will reach situations that it could not reasonably cover. 
(c) Underinclusiveness. - Although it arises less frequently, there is also a possibility that textualism will be underinclusive. Justice Holmes warned that "[c]ourts are apt to err by sticking too closely to the words of a law where those words import a policy that goes beyond them."'49 A particular difficulty here is that a statute may be 44See, e.g., Public Citizen v. United States Dep't of Justice, 1o 9 S. Ct. 2558, 2573-74 (1989); California Fed. Say. & Loan Ass'n v. Guerra, 479 U.S. 272, 284 (1987); Kelly v. Robinson, 479 U.S. 36, 43-44 (1986); O'Connor v. United States, 479 U.S. 27, 31 (1986); Offshore Logistics, Inc. v. Tallentire, 477 U.S. 207, 220-21 (1986); United Steelworkers of America v. Weber, 443 U.S. 193, 201 (979); United States v. American Trucking Ass'ns, 310 U.S. 534, 543 (194o); Armstrong Co. v. Nu-Enamel Corp., 305 U.S. 315, 333 (1933); Church of the Holy Trinity v. United States, 143 U.S. 457, 459 (1892); Perry v. Strawbridge, 209 Mo. 621, io8 S.W. 641 (1go8); see also Arizona v. California, 373 U.S. 546, 568-75 (1963) (finding that despite the interstate compact's express inclusion of the "Colorado River System," Arizona could not be forced to give up water from a portion of that system entirely within its borders because legislative history shows Congress intended to include mainstream water only). 45 See United States v. Wells Fargo Bank, io8 S. Ct. 1179, i182, 2284 (2988). 46 See id. at 1182. 
47See Riggs v. Palmer, 225 N.Y. 5o6, 22 N.E. x88 (1889); see also Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 429 n.2, 433 (1983) (discussed above in note 35). 
48 See, e.g., Public Citizen v. United States Dep't of justice, 109 S.Ct. 2558, 2573-74 (2989) (Kennedy, J., concurring in the judgment); Riggs, 115 N.Y. at S16, 22 N.E. at 191 (Gray, J., dissenting). 
49 Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438, 469 (1928) (Holmes, J., dissenting). See, e.g., Missouri v. Jenkins, 209 S. Ct. 2463, 2471 (2989) (holding that "attorney's fee" should be read to include award of paralegal fees); Friedrich v. City of Chicago, 1989 U.S. App. LEXIS 16693 (No. 88-3043, 7th Cir. Oct. 31, 1989) (Posner, J.) (holding that although § x988 specified recovery for an "attorney's fee," a proper interpretation of Congress' instructions allows no distinction between paying for an attorney and paying for an expert witness). "evaded" by private ingenuity. The literal language of the statute does not cover the situation, but because the private conduct causes all of the harms that the statute could be thought to prevent, courts sometimes hold a statute applicable notwithstanding its literal terms. 50 The problem of evasion should not be an excuse for judicial stretching of statutes (to be sure, a most ill-defined concept in this setting), but the problem has elicited judicial responses in a number of areas, most notably taxation. 5 ' 
(d) Delegation, Gaps, and Implementing Rules. - The incompleteness of textualism is most conspicuous when Congress has explicitly or implicitly delegated lawmaking power to the courts or when Congress has simply left a gap. In cases of delegated power or gap-filing, the problem is not that words are susceptible to more than one construction, but instead that the words necessarily require courts to look to sources outside of the text.5 2 
The Sherman Act, for example, raises a serious gap-filling problem. The language of the Act does not answer the question of what practices amount to "conspiracies in restraint of trade." The legislative history is suggestive but unclear,5 3 and the courts have inevitably taken the Act as a delegation of policymaking power pursuant to quite open-ended criteria.5 4 Similarly, section I983 s5 is silent on many im50 See, e.g., Helvering v. Gregory, 69 F.2d 8o9 (2d Cir. 1934), aff'd, 293 U.S. 465 (x935). 
S See, e.g., Commissioner v. Court Holding Co., 324 U.S. 331 (i945); Goldstein v. Commissioner, 364 F.2d 734 (2d Cir. I966); Helvering v. Gregory, 69 F.2d 809. Outside the area of taxation, there are many examples as well. See, e.g., cases cited supra note 49; Stoner v. Hudgins, 568 S.W.2d 898, 902-03 (Tex. Civ. App. 1978) (holding that despite a narrow verbal construction, a statute providing for credit against damages for advance payments made to tort claimants should be read to mean that the credit should be applied after the damage award is reduced to account for comparative negligence). See generally Isenbergh, Musings on Form and Substance in Taxation (Book Review), 49 U. CHI. L. REv. 859 (1982). Johnson v. Southern Pac. Co., 1I7 F. 462 (8th Cir. 1902), rev'd, 296 U.S. i (29o4), which held that the term "cars" in a statute requiring cars on common carriers to be equipped with automatic couplers did not extend to locomotive engines, is persuasively criticized by Hart and Sacks on the ground that the literalist court interpreted the statute too narrowly. See H. HART & A. SACKS, supra note 15, at 1173-74. 
52 The problems of delegation or gap-filling must be distinguished from a "gap" that is best taken as a legislative decision not to prohibit conduct or not to change the status quo. Here silence is a straightforward absence of law, and one that allows private coilduct to go on as before. This latter sort of gap - which is essentially an exclusion or exemption from a statute - is confused with the sort of gap that requires judicial elaboration of the law in Easterbrook, cited above in note i3; and OFFICE OF LEGAL POLICY, U.S. DEP'T OF JUSTICE, USING AND MISUSING LEGISLATIVE HISTORY: A RE-EvALUATION OF THE STATUS OF LEGISLATIVE HISTORY IN STATUTORY INTERPRETATION 100-04 (1989) [hereinafter USING AND MISUSING LEGISLATIVE HISTORY]. The confusion produces a version of the old idea that statutes in derogation of the common law must be narrowly construed. 
53 See i P. AREEDA & D. TURNER, ANTITRUST LAW io6, at 14-16 (1978). 54 See, e.g., National Soc'y of Professional Eng'rs v. United States, 435 U.S. 679, 688 (1978). 55 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (i982). portant questions, including available defenses, burdens of pleading and persuasion, and exhaustion requirements. Because of the textual silence, judges must fill the gaps. To this extent, the statute delegates power to make common law. 56 
Judicial implementation of title VII of the Civil Rights Act of I96457 can be understood in similar terms, though this example is more controversial. The basic prohibition of "discrimination" provides no guidance on the role of discriminatory effects, the appropriate burdens of proof and production, and the mechanisms for filtering out discriminatory treatment. Judicial answers to these questions sometimes purport to be relatively mechanical responses to congressional commands,5 8 but in fact they amount to judge-made implementing devices that reflect the judges' own, inevitably value-laden views. In light of the existence of textual gaps on many questions, this approach is hardly an embarrassment or a usurpation, but instead an inevitable part of interpretation. Much of the law of title VII is an unavoidable, and therefore legitimate, norm-ridden exercise in developing gap-filling rules.5 9 In this respect, the Sherman Act and title VII are closely analogous. 
When the language of a statute does not specify its implementing rules, textualism is incomplete: courts must look elsewhere. When Congress has delegated power or left a gap, the line between interpreting and creating federal common law60 becomes quite thin. 
(e) Changed Circumstances. - The discussion thus far has assumed that circumstances have not changed significantly since the statute was enacted. Textualism becomes even more problematic 56 The C6urt has sometimes indicated that gaps should be filled by reference to the common law of the time. See, e.g., City of Newport v. Fact Concerts, Inc., 453 U.S. 247, 258 (ig8i); Wood v. Strickland, 420 U.S. 308, 318 (I975). Frequently, however, it has filled gaps in accordance with its own views about how best to implement the statute - an approach that is probably consistent with the drafters' own understanding about how courts would act. See 
and Economic Analysis, 1987 SUP. CT. REV. 249, 263-66. 
57 42 U.S.C. §§ 2oooe to 2oooe-17 (1982 & Supp. V 1987). 
58 See, e.g., Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 252-53 (x98x); McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 8oo-o (1973); Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 402 U.S. 424, 431 (197I). 
59 See, e.g., Independent Fed'n of Flight Attendants v. Zipes, 109 S. Ct. 2732, 2737-38 (1989) (deciding that, under title VII, attorneys' fees may not be awarded against nonfrivolous intervenors, largely because of courts' perceptions about the social consequences of such a rule). 
60 Federal common law is usually thought to involve judicial lawmaking when little or no guidance has been supplied by the legislature. See Friendly, In Praise of Erie - And of the New Federal Common Law, 39 N.Y.U. L. REV. 383, 410-1I (2964). Statutory interpretation, by contrast, is usually thought to involve a decision about the meaning of ambiguous enactments. For the reasons stated in the text, this distinction is far too simple. when time has affected the assumptions under which the statute was originally written. Changed circumstances may produce ambiguity or interpretive doubt in the text where neither existed before. 
Consider the Delaney Clause, which forbids the use as food additives of substances that "induce" cancer. 61 The Delaney Clause was enacted at a time when carcinogenic substances were difficult to detect and all detectable carcinogens were extremely dangerous. These facts, however, no longer hold true, and under current conditions the Delaney Clause almost undoubtedly increases health risks by keeping relatively safe substances off the market and by forcing consumers to resort either to noncarcinogenic substances that pose other risks or to substances that were approved by earlier administrators using the cruder technology of their day. Because the factual premises under which the enacting Congress operated are now demonstrably false, might the word "induce" allow the government to exempt from regulation carcinogens that pose trivial risks? 62 Similarly, would a "public policy" exception to the charitable deduction in the Internal Revenue Code require the government to deny the deduction to schools that engage in racial discrimination, even if those who enacted the Code many decades before believed that such discrimination was perfectly consistent with public policy?63 In short, it is by no means obvious that the statutory text should be understood in accordance with its "original meaning," even if that concept were unproblematic. 64 
The discussion thus far suggests two principal points. First, and most fundamentally, there is no such thing as an acontextual "text" that can be used as the exclusive guide to interpretation. In easy cases, interpretive norms - on which there is wide or universal consensus - and context both play a part in the process of ascertaining statutory meaning. Because such norms are so widely shared, they are invisible and are not an object of controversy. Only in these cases can meaning ever be said to be "plain." With these qualifications, textualism is generally appropriate. In hard cases, however, courts must resort to a highly visible background norm, 65 or a con61 See 21 U.S.C. § 348(c)(3)(A) (1982). 62 See infra pp. 496-97. 63 See infra note ioo (discussing Bob Jones University v. United-States, 461 U.S. 574 (I983)). 64 Indeed, I will be offering reasons to suggest that it should not, be. See infra pp. 493-97; accord Aleinikoff, UpdatingStatutory Interpretation,87 MICH. L. REV. 20 (1988). 
65 In hard cases, a claimed reliance on the text often disguises the actual basis for decision, which does not turn on text at all. In these cases, discretion is inevitable. For a powerful demonstration in the context of environmental law, see R. MELNiCK, REGULATION AND THE COURTS: THE CASE OF THE CLEAN AIR ACT 371 (2983), which shows that the constant resort to statutory text in cases in which text is at best indeterminate can lead judges to act on the basis of unarticulated and uninformed policy considerations. in areas of economic regulation, such as banking and agriculture. 3 36 It also informs the courts' approach to the Robinson-Patman Act 337 and their effort to understand the Sherman Act as an attempt to promote consumer welfare rather than as protection of small business as such. 33 8 When a public purpose is palpably absent, this principle should be unexceptionable. 3 39 
(j) Requiring Proportionality. - Another interpretive principle would understand statutes to impose benefits roughly commensurate with their costs, unless there is a clear legislative statement to the contrary. This proportionality norm, implicit in several recent cases, 340 draws on an understanding of likely legislative purpose and on perceptions about regulatory failure. Statutes often fail because of excessive controls or inadequate implementation, 3 41 and courts should generally assume that Congress wants to avoid those problems and therefore intends agencies to impose regulations after a balancing process. 34 2 As we have seen, the absence of a proportionality principle 336 See, e.g., Securities Indus. Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., 821 F.2d 81o (D.C. Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 483 U.S. loo5 (1988); Investment Co. Inst. v. FDIC, 815 F.2d 1540 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (per curiam), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 847 (1988); Securities Indus. Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., 807 F.2d 1052 (D.C. Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 483 U.S. OO5 (1987); Investment Co. Inst. v. Conover, 790 F.2d 925 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 939 (1986); Langevoort, supra note 8o, at 701, 725-33. 
338 See id. at 72-89; Business Elecs. Corp. v. Sharp Elecs. Corp., 1O8 S. Ct. 1515, 151924 (1988); Broadcast Music, Inc. v. CBS, 441 U.S. i, 19-22 ( GTE Sylvania, Inc., 433 U.S. 36, 51-59 (1977). 
339 This principle must not, however, be confused with the unjustifiable idea that statutes in derogation of the common law should be narrowly construed; it is not a license for grudging interpretation of statutes that promote noncommodity values or that embody public-spirited redistribution, as suggested in Easterbrook, cited above in note 13, at 539-43. This is also a problem with the otherwise excellent treatment in Macey, cited above in note i59. As the experience of the early part of this century reveals, it is not for courts - in the process of statutory construction - to take a side in the regulatory debate that runs in the face of a legislative judgment. Courts should therefore attempt to discern a public-regarding purpose and give the benefit of every doubt to the legislature. But sometimes such purposes are not even plausibly at work. Of course, some difficult line-drawing problems will exist. 
340 See, e.g., Industrial Union Dep't, AFL-CIO v. American Petroleum Inst., 448 U.S. 607, 652 (198o) (plurality opinion) ("[Tihe mere possibility that some employee somewhere in the country may confront some risk of cancer is [not] a sufficient basis for the exercise of the Secretary's power to require the expenditure of hundreds of millions of dollars to minimize that risk.'); Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. Thomas, 824 F.2d 1146 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (en banc) (calling for consideration of feasibility). 
341 See J. MENDELOFF, Supra note 224, at 1-12. 
342 Consider, for example, Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1146 (D.C. Cir. 1987). In that case, the court concluded that § 112 of the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7412 (1982), which requires emissions standards that provide "an ample margin of safety," permits the Administrator to consider cost and technology despite the statute's failure to refer expressly to those factors. The decision is best understood as founded on a background principle of proportionality, one that Congress may eliminate only through a clear statement. may produce harmful systemic consequences as well as overregulation. Ironically, it will also produce severe underregulation. Moreover, bureaucratic self-interest or factional pressures sometimes incline agencies toward overzealous enforcement, which Congress is unable routinely to monitor or remedy. The proportionality norm is reinforced as well by interpretive norms calling for legislative deliberation. It leads to narrow construction of statutes enacted as a result of interestgroup pressure or as myopic or impulsive reactions to short-term problems. 
The difficulty with this principle is that there is no uncontroversial metric with which to measure social costs and social benefits. If courts understand benefits and costs technically - as in the economic formulation - and make the assessment turn on private willingness to pay, they will undervalue aspirations and nonmarket values and ultimately undermine statutory goals. 34 3 The very decision to create a regulatory system often reflects a rejection of private willingness to pay as the criterion of social choice. Many statutes are designed to transform rather than to implement preferences, to redistribute resources, or to reflect the outcome of a deliberative process about relevant public values. 3 44 Moreover, a statute that protects (for example) endangered species may have symbolic or aspirational benefits. The various values that are served by regulatory programs should be treated hospitably. 
For these reasons, the proportionality principle is most useful for cases of economic regulation. It becomes most workable when it is clear, by reference to a widely held social consensus, that the social benefits are small in comparison to the social costs. Even in cases of public aspirations or nonmarket values, the proportionality idea should be invoked when the disadvantages of regulation seem to dwarf the advantages, at least when the statute is ambiguous. 345 (k) Allowing de Minimis Exceptions. - It follows from the proportionality principle that regulatory statutes should ordinarily be understood to contain de minimis exceptions. In such cases, the costs of regulation outweigh the benefits, which are by hypothesis insubstantial. Moreover, the failure to allow de minimis exceptions will 343 See, e.g., Anderson, Values, Risks, and Market Norms, 17 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 54 (1988); see also Dworkin, Is Wealth a Value?, 9 J. LEGAL STUD. 191, 2o6-2 (198O) (arguing that wealth maximization in itself is not a value). 
344 Thus, title VII is partly an effort to transform preferences; the minimum wage has redistributive purposes; the Clean Air Act is partly an outcome of a deliberative process. On these and other regulatory functions, see C. SUNSTEIN, cited above note *, chs. 1-2. 
345 This principle casts in doubt the outcome in Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153 (1978), which held that the Endangered Species Act blocked construction of a dam that would destroy the habitat of the snail darter. See also R. DWORKIN, supra note x9, at 347 (concluding that Tennessee Valley Authority was wrongly decided). probably decrease rather than increase health and safety.3 4 6 Administrators should be allowed to refuse to impose costly regulations for highly speculative or minimal gains. 34 7 Many courts have reached precisely this conclusion. Indeed, courts should probably require such exceptions in the absence of an explicit statutory text or plausible substantive justifications 348 to the contrary. 
the Occupational Safety and Health Act illustrate the basic framework. The pertinent language of the statute34 9 directs OSHA to promulgate the standard that "most adequately assures, to the extent feasible . . . that no employee will suffer material impairment of health or functional capacity even if such employee has regular exposure to the hazard . . . for the period of his working life."'35 0 The statute also contains a general definition of "occupational safety and health standard," which says that the term refers to measures that require "conditions ... reasonably necessary or appropriate to provide safe or healthful employment and places of employment."'35 ' 
Institute,352 the Supreme Court invalidated an OSHA regulation of benzene. Although the precise consequences of the regulation were sharply contested, there was evidence that the regulation would impose enormous costs in exchange for small or speculative gains. OSHA itself concluded that its regulation would require capital investments of $266 million, first-year operating costs of $187 to $205 [VOL. 103:405 million, and recurring annual costs of $34 million.35 3 Contemporary scientific knowledge appeared to preclude a clear prediction of significant benefits, which in the Court's view "may be relatively small. '35 4 
A plurality of the Court concluded that the definitional clause required OSHA to establish a "significant risk" before regulating a toxic substance. The plurality justified its conclusion by referring to the Act's definition of occupational safety and health standards as those "reasonably necessary or appropriate to provide safe or healthful employment. 355 In the Court's view, a standard was not "reasonably necessary or appropriate" if OSHA was unable to demonstrate a significant risk. 
There was, however, little direct basis in the text or history of the Act for the plurality's conclusion. Congress did not explicitly require OSHA to show a "significant risk." The plurality found that such a requirement was implicit in the definitional clause, but it is very unusual to read a definitional clause, ordinarily carrying no weight, as creating a substantive limitation on administrative power. The clause is more plausibly treated as having no substantive content, or as having substantive content defined by other provisions of the Act. It is even more unusual for the Court to look to a definitional clause when the definition, so interpreted, contradicts a far more specific substantive provision, which in this case says that toxic substance standards must ensure "to the extent feasible . . . that no employee will suffer material impairment of health or functional capacity. '35 6 The reference to "no employee" seems to suggest that the statute forbids OSHA from permitting risks from toxic substances even if only one or a few workers would suffer "material impairment of health." The judicially created "significant risk" requirement, by contrast, forbids regulation unless enough workers will be affected to make the benefits of regulation significant. Nothing in the legislative history supports the Court's interpretation of the definitional clause, and indeed the history argues against that interpretation. 35 7 
Unable to point to a solid textual basis for its "significant risk" requirement, the plurality invoked a clear-statement principle: In the absence of a clear mandate in the Act, it is unreasonable to assume that Congress intended to give the Secretary the unprecedented power over American industry that would result from the Government's view . . . . Expert testimony that a substance is probably a human carcinogen ... would justify the conclusion that the substance poses some risk of serious harm no matter how minute the exposure 353 See id. at 628-29. 354 Id. at 630. 355 Id. at 638 (discussing 29 U.S.C. § 652(8)). 356 29 U.S.C. § 655(b)(5) (1982) (emphasis added). 3S7 See American Petroleum, 448 U.S. at 708-13 (Marshall, J., dissenting). and no matter how many experts testified that they regarded the risk as insignificant. That conclusion would in turn justify pervasive regulation limited only by the constraint of feasibility. ... [T]he Government's theory would give OSHA power to impose enormous costs that might produce little, if any, discernable benefit.35 8 
The plurality further suggested that the government's interpretation would give the Secretary of Labor "open-ended" policymaking authority that might amount to an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power.3 59 
The plurality's conclusion in American Petroleum is difficult to defend in either formalist or textualist terms. The "significant risk" requirement has no textual basis, at least not in any ordinary sense; it was a judicial creation. It would therefore be possible to caricature the result in the case as an impermissible judicial rewriting of the statute. 360 But the conclusion in the case was nonetheless sound. A realistic interpretation of the statutory language would recognize that it was not addressed to the problem at hand. It is simply a myth to suggest that the Congress that enacted OSHA focused on the question of imposing enormous expenditures to redress trivial risks - recall Wittgenstein's game of dice. Despite the broad-language of the toxic substances provision, Congress simply did not deal with the problem. 
In these circumstances, the plurality's opinion can be seen as invoking several of the substantive norms defended above. The case provided an excellent setting for the application of the principle calling for de minimis exceptions to social and economic regulation. An exclusive focus on the one or two employees who suffer "material health impairment" as a result of a lifetime of exposure would in the long run produce less, not more, protection of workers. 3 61 If OSHA must regulate to the point of feasibility in the face of trivial risk, the Department of Labor will be reluctant to embark on any regulation at all. 
Moreover, the proportionality principle and the background norm counseling avoidance of irrationality both argue in favor of the plurality's reading. The beneficiaries of OSHA regulation are well-organized and able to protect themselves in the implementation process. 358 American Petroleum, 448 U.S. at 645 (plurality opinion). 
359 See id. at 651-52. In his concurring opinion, Justice Powell, advocating an interpretation of the Act that would call for cost-benefit balancing, suggested that "a standard-setting process that ignored economic considerations would result in a serious misallocation of resources and a lower effective level of safety than could be achieved under standards set with reference to the comparative benefits available at a lower cost." Id. at 670 (Powell, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment). 
360 Similarly, a background principle in favor of interpreting words in accordance with their plain meaning would point toward acceptance of the government's position. See id. at 688 (Marshall, J., dissenting). 
361 See supra p. 480. There was therefore a ready political corrective both to the plurality's conclusion, if it was contrary to public consensus, and to inadequate implementation in general. For all these reasons, the plurality correctly interpreted OSHA to require a showing of a significant risk as a predicate for regulation. 362 
In American Textile Manufacturers Institute v. Donovan,3 63 the Supreme Court decided a question left open in American Petroleum: whether the OSHA statute required cost-benefit analysis. In arguing that it did, the industry contended that the word "feasible" required OSHA not only to show a significant risk, but also to demonstrate that the benefits of regulation justified the costs. "Feasibility," in the industry's view, contemplated a balancing of costs and benefits. The government contended that once OSHA had shown a significant risk, it could regulate to the point where the survival of the regulated industry would be endangered by additional controls. For the government, the term "feasibility" did not connote cost-benefit balancing, but instead meant "possible." 3 64 
In accepting the government's argument, the Court relied on the dictionary definition of "feasible" to conclude that the term meant "'capable of being done, executed, or effected,"' rather than justified by a balancing of costs and benefits. 3 65 This literal approach to the statute was not entirely unreasonable. The structure of the toxic substances provision - consider the "no employee shall suffer" language - is in considerable tension with the industry's construction. Moreover, Congress has sometimes used the term "feasible" as a selfconscious alternative to "cost-benefit" balancing, 366 and that fact argues against the view that the two terms have the same meaning. But the same principles that support the decision in American Petroleum cast serious doubt on American Textile Manufacturers. 
Notwithstanding the statute's language, it is probably unrealistic to believe that Congress actually focused on, and resolved, the ques362 A different result might be appropriate if the scientific evidence were uncertain. If a significant risk were impossible to show because the data were unclear, perhaps employers, rather than workers, should bear the burden of medical uncertainty. The plurality did not make clear how such considerations would bear on the problem of carcinogen regulation if they had been squarely confronted by OSHA. 
363 452 U.S. 490 (i981). 364 See id. at 494-95. 
365See id. at 508-09 (quoting WEBSTER'S THIRD NEW INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 831 (1976)). 
366 In construing feasibility, courts have not weighed the benefits of the practice against its costs but inquired instead whether the regulation would prevent the industry from functioning. See National Cottonseed Prod. Ass'n v. Brock, 825 F.2d 482, 487 (D.C. Cir. 1987) ("[A] standard is economically feasible if the cost of compliance does not threaten the 'competitive structure or posture' of the industry." (quoting Industrial Union Dep't, AFL-CIO v. Hodgson, 499 F.2d 467, 478 (D.C. Cir. 1974))). 
tion whether to favor the government's approach over some kind of balancing of costs and benefits. The question never arose during the debates. The general and more fundamental problem is the basic irrationality of a system in which OSHA is required to find a significant risk, but is prohibited from undertaking cost-benefit analysis. Whether a risk is "significant" depends in large part on the costs of eliminating it. A relatively small risk might justify regulation if the costs are also small, but a larger risk might best be left unregulated if the costs are enormous. A rational system of regulation looks not at the magnitude of the risk alone, but assesses the risk in comparison to the costs. 
These considerations would deserve little weight if the statute unambiguously dictated a contrary result, but the word "feasible" is flexible enough to accommodate a proportionality requirement. By refusing to read the statute in this way, the Supreme Court has contributed to the irrationality of the Occupational Safety and Health Act - an irrationality that has harmed workers, employers, consumers, and the public at large. 3 67 
When circumstances change, statutory interpretation becomes especially difficult. Older statutes may depend on factual assumptions that no longer hold, or may conflict with more recent statutes, thus producing inconsistency and incoherence in regulation. This problem is complicated by the fact that the statutory term may have been clear when enacted, and at that time it may have been inappropriate to invoke controversial substantive norms to interpret, it; but changed conditions can render a term ambiguous and thus make it appropriate to apply conspicuous or controversial norms. Because it represents a recurring hard case for statutory interpretation, the confrontation between statutory terms and new or unforeseen contexts deserves separate treatment. 
In cases of changed circumstances, statutory construction appears informed by an effort to ensure integrity and coherence in the law by "updating" obsolete statutes - or, to put it less contentiously and probably more accurately, by interpreting them in a way that takes account of changing conditions. 36 Here courts reject the idea that the original understanding of its audience or authors exhausts the meaning of a statute. There are good reasons to permit courts to go beyond the original understanding in the face of dramatically changed 367 See Rose-Ackerman, supra note 292, at 360-66. 368 See Eskridge, Dynamic Statutory Interpretation, 135 U. PA. L. REV. 1479 (198 7). circumstances, at least when the statutory text is ambiguous. 36 9 Such an approach is likely to produce greater coherence in the law; to reduce the problem, pervasive in modern government, of regulation by measures that are badly out of date; and to lead to a legal system that is both more rational and more consistent with democratic norms. 370 It is tempting but inadequate to say that the legislature should respond to the problem of changed circumstances. The question is what the statute means in those circumstances, and that question must be answered by those who interpret it, including the courts. This claim does not, of course, mean that changed circumstances should be understood to authorize courts to amend or rewrite statutes, but it does mean that "meaning" is itself a function of those circumstances.3 71 
The problem of changed circumstances presents questions not only of statutory meaning in new settings, but also of implicit interpretive instructions: how would Congress have wanted courts to approach its enactments in the face of obsolescence or changed circumstances? There will rarely be a direct answer to this question. As in constitutional law, the problem of changed circumstances requires courts to decide whether the content of legal rules should change when there have been changes in law, policy, and fact. At the very least, courts should answer in the affirmative 3 72 when a statute contains an openended term like "public policy" or "psychopathic '3 73 that invites interpretations that change over time; when statutory language already contains an ambiguous term ("feasible") whose meaning depends on current conditions; 374 or when the statute contains a phrase ("induce cancer") that has been rendered ambiguous because of changed circumstances. 3 75 
Even when no clear interpretive instructions allow a judge to adapt statutory terms to new conditions, courts may do so when those conditions have rendered a statute ambiguous. This problem typically occurs in three ways. First, the factual assumptions underlying the 369 See Aleinikoff, supra note 64, at 56-61; Eskridge, supra note 368, at 1497-539; see also Israel, Gideon v. Wainwright: The "Art" of Overruling, z963 Sup. CT. REV.211, 219-23 (noting that changed circumstances have traditionally provided a rationale for departing from stare decisis). 
370 See sources cited supra notes 224-28. 
371 Dean Calabresi has argued that courts should have the power to invalidate obsolete statutes and to return them to the legislature for reconsideration. See G. CALABRESI, supra note 82, at 163-66. A judicial role of this sort would be extremely controversial, and properly so. The principal problem posed by obsolescence or changed circumstances is that it complicates ordinary interpretation. 
372 See R. DWORKIN, supra note ig; Eskridge, supra note 368, at 1538-44. 373See Aleinikoff, supra note 64, at 47-54. 314 See suraPP. 492-93. 371See infra PP. 496-97. original statute may no longer be valid. For example, statutes regulating broadcasting were enacted with the understanding that because of the limitations of the spectrum, few broadcasting licenses would be available. In the face of new technology and the rise of cable television, that assumption has become hopelessly unrealistic. 
Second, a statutory provision may no longer be consistent with widely held social norms. In such cases a court must ask whether this change so alters the landscape that a reading of the statute that does not accord with the original understanding of its authors is justified - a question the enacting legislature may well have intended courts to answer in the affirmative. 
Third, the legal background may have changed dramatically as a result of legislative and administrative innovations. A statute enacted in 1935 may have ignored environmental considerations widely recognized in statutes enacted after I96O. The question is whether the change in the legal background has consequences for interpreting the 1935 statute. 
Judicial responses to all three kinds of obsolescence are not difficult to find. The first kind has resulted in aggressive construction, particularly in banking and broadcasting. 376 In light of the changed nature of the relevant markets, it is implausible to resolve ambiguities by examining Congress' intent at the time of enactment. Such an approach would be a recipe for absurdity, and absurdity would hardly promote legislative purposes. 
The second form of obsolescence is reflected in judicial construction of statutes of the 192o's and 1930's so as to require old-line agencies to take account of environmental concerns. In this context, the legal backdrop has changed so dramatically that seemingly straightforward interpretation of the old statutes would be undesirable. 377 The same point helps to explain the courts' narrow construction of provisions of the UCC not anticipating the revolution in the law of products liability.3 78 The Court's decision in Bob Jones can be understood in similar terms. Changing legislative and judicial developments had made racial discrimination inconsistent with "public policy" in the r98o's, even if no such inconsistency existed when the charitable deduction was first enacted. 
Decisions reading ambiguous statutes to require regulatory agencies to consider costs and benefits illustrate the third form of judicial response to obsolescence. 379 The Court may also have been reflecting 376 See Langevoort, supra note 80. 
377 See, e.g., Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Conm'n, 354 F.2d 6o8 (2d Cir. 1965), cert. denied, 384 U.S. 941 (1966). 
378 See Peters, Common Law Judging in a Statutory World: An Address, 43 U. PTT. L. REV. 995, ioio (1982). 
379 See supra note 340. contemporary values in reading the Sherman Act as an effort to promote consumer welfare. 38 0 The underlying argument would be that a welfare-based interpretive principle is the only basis for a judicially administrable standard, and that such a principle conforms best to current understandings about a well-functioning antitrust law.38 1 
Several substantive norms apply to cases of obsolescence. Obsolete statutes are by hypothesis inconsistent with other regulation or with the current legal framework. They may also have pernicious, if unintended, systemic effects. If the text allows, courts should attempt to harmonize such statutes with current circumstances. 
We might explore the problem of obsolescence in more detail by examining the Delaney Clause. As noted above, the clause prohibits the sale of food additives that "induce cancer when ingested by man or animal" or are found "after tests which are appropriate for the evaluation of the safety of food additives, to induce cancer in man and animal." 382 As we have seen, the drafters of the clause believed that few additives caused cancer, and that those that did so were extremely dangerous. By the I98o's, however, it was clear that many substances were carcinogenic, but that a number of them created exceptionally minor risks. 38 3 
These developments severely undermined the assumptions of the Congress that enacted the Delaney Clause. Indeed the clause, read literally, appeared quite perverse in many of its applications because it banned substances that posed no real risk to health. Having been forbidden to use food additives posing a de minimis risk of cancer, 380 See, e.g., R. BoRm, supra note 337, at 72-89. A similar method was at work in King v. Smith, 392 U.S. 309 (1968), in which the Supreme Court invalidated a state rule depriving women of welfare benefits whenever they lived with a man - even if cohabitation occurred as rarely as once a month. Although there had been a steady trend in the direction of eliminating moral requirements for welfare recipients, and although the "man-in-the-house" rule had been widely condemned as irrational, punitive, and probably both sexist and racist in operation, the Court was unable to point to any statutory provision that unambiguously invalidated the state rule. The decision in King v. Smith amounted to an aggressive reading of the statute to conform to what the Court understood to be the current (and well-founded) national consensus. 
381 See R. BORK, supranote 337, at 72-1,5; R. POSNER, ECONOMIc ANALYSIS OF LAW 26597 (3d ed. 1986). 
382 21 U.S.C. § 348(c)(3)(A) (1982). 383 Albert Kolbye argues: [A]nalytical chemists can now detect a whole new galaxy of low levels of substances in food. Previously the limits of qualitative identification and quantitative measurement were in the parts per thousand range: today parts per trillion are not uncommon and in some instances routine. This represents a millionfold increase in our ability to detect 'chemicals' in food. 
Kolbye, Decision-MakingIssues Relevant to Cancer-InducingSubstances, in REGULATORY AsPECTS OF CARCINOGENESIS AND FOOD ADDITIVES: THE DELANEY CLAUSE 93, 94 (F. Coulston ed. 1979); see also Merrill, supra note 81, at 15-16 (discussing these technological advances). manufacturers instead used additives that caused more serious risks of other diseases - thus creating what was quite possibly a significant increase in illnesses and deaths from food additives. In response, the FDA - invoking background principles against obsolescence and in favor of rationality and de minimis exception - interpreted the clause to permit the exemption of trivial risks. The claim, in short, was that changed circumstances made the word "induce" ambiguous. The FDA said that it would approve food additives that posed a de minimis risk of cancer. 
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia held that the FDA's position was unlawful. 384 In that court's view, the Delaney Clause was unambiguous on the point. Read in context, however, the statute's meaning was far from clear. Because Congress did not focus on the question of de minimis risks in its original enactment, a de minimis exception would not have defeated Congress' will. The factual background against which the Delaney Clause was written was so different from the present circumstances that the statutory terms "induce cancer" must be treated as ambiguous. The word "induce" should be read in its setting: whether a substance "induces" cancer within the meaning of the clause might well be a function of the degree of risk that it poses. We have seen that where there has been no clear legislative statement, agencies should be free to create de minimis exceptions to regulation. In these circumstances, interpretation of the clause to permit such exceptions seems consistent with permissible understandings of statutory construction, and quite sensible to boot. The D.C. Circuit's decision to the contrary was therefore misguided. 
It will not have escaped notice that the interpretive principles I have proposed will sometimes conflict with one another. For example, the principle favoring state authority might collide with the principle favoring disadvantaged groups, and the presumption against amendment through the appropriations process might contradict the principle in favor of generous construction of statutes protecting nonmarket values. The examples could easily be multiplied. The possibility of conflict renders the basic approach vulnerable to a neo-realist objection that, in practice, the interpretive norms will provide contradictory guidance for the judiciary. 
Principles of harmonization and priority can in fact be developed to resolve cases of conflict. To make this claim is not, however, to say that the application of interpretive norms can be purely mechan384 See Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F.2d ixo8 (D.C. Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 1o8 S. Ct. 1470 (i988). ical. Inevitably, statutory construction is an exercise of practical reason, in which text, history, and purpose interact with background understandings in the legal culture. 3 85 In light of the dependence of outcomes on particular contexts, a fully systematized approach to statutory construction would be unmanageable. But short of a complete system, it is possible to develop some guidelines. 
i. Priority. - The first task is to develop principles by which to rank interpretive norms. Although different judges and administrators will rank such norms in different ways, it should be possible to achieve a more precise understanding of statutory construction - both as a descriptive and as a normative matter - by generating a hierarchy of interpretive principles. 
In that hierarchy, the presumptions in favor of decisions by politically accountable actors and in favor of political deliberation should occupy the very highest place. The principle of political accountability has a clear foundation in article I of the Constitution, is an overriding structural commitment of the document, has roots in assessments of institutional performance, 3 86 and is also designed to counteract characteristic failures in the regulatory process. 3 87 In this sense, the norm of political accountability draws on all three basic sources of interpretive principles. 
The commitment to political deliberation belongs on the same plane. The belief in deliberative democracy is also a basic constitutional commitment. 388 Implicit in the systems of checks and balances and federalism, it draws on Madison's conception of political representation. The absence of deliberation has also contributed to regulatory failure. 38 9 In these ways, the belief in political deliberation and the belief in political accountability are closely allied. 
Other interpretive principles traceable to constitutional norms deserve great respect. They should occupy the next highest position in the hierarchy. This category would include the norms in favor of broad interpretation of statutes protecting disadvantaged groups, against delegations of legislative authority, in favor of state autonomy, and in favor of narrow construction of interest-group transfers. As we have seen, all of these principles have constitutional status but are underenforced as a result of the institutional position of the judiciary.3 90 Moreover, it is possible to create a kind of hierarchy within constitutionally based interpretive principles. Thus, for example, the 385 See Eskridge & Frickey, Statutory InterpretationAs PracticalReasoning, 42 STAN. L. REV. 321 (I990). 
386 See supra p. 475. 387 For a discussion of these failures, see pp. 467-68 above. 388 See sura pP. 471-72. 389 See, e.g., J. MENDELOFF, supra note 224; Rose-Ackerman, supra note 292, at 352-54. 390 See supra p. 466. principle in favor of state autonomy should occupy a lower place than the principle in favor of protection of disadvantaged groups, which is the product of the fourteenth amendment, a self-conscious attempt to limit the scope of state power. The case law in fact reflects this hierarchy.391 
Finally, interpretive principles without constitutional status should occupy the lowest rung, precisely because the judgments they represent are not so closely connected with the foundational commitments of American constitutionalism. This category includes norms in favor of coordination and of proportionality, norms requiring consideration of systemic effects, norms against implied repeals, and norms against obsolescence. All these norms should play a less significant role in cases of conflict. Moreover, these principles might themselves be placed in lexical order. For example, the principles calling for de minimis exceptions and for proportionality, and for taking account of systemic effects, should occupy the highest position among nonconstitutional principles. To use (for example) the principle calling for broad construction of statutes favoring nonmarket values as a reason to abandon proportionality would sacrifice those very values - because of the likelihood that stringent regulation that bars balancing will produce regulatory irrationality and, ultimately, underregulation. The background principles calling for proportionality and de minimis exceptions, and requiring consideration of systemic effects, should ordinarily apply unless a constitutional principle trumps them. 
to rank interpretive norms but to minimize the number of conflicts among norms. For example, courts should apply the proportionality principle differently when nonmarket values are at stake. In cases of economic regulation, translating costs and benefits into dollars, measured in terms of private willingness to pay, is entirely sensible. In cases implicating nonmonetary values, the fact that monetized costs and benefits are disproportionate is not controlling. Reflecting a similar understanding, the courts have interpreted statutes quite generously, and in a way that conspicuously departs from private willingness to pay, when aspirations and noncommodity values are involved. 39 2 
Another principle of harmonization would recognize that cases turn not simply on the applicability of interpretive norms, but also on the degree of their infringement. Thus, for example, an enormous grant of discretionary lawmaking power to a regulatory agency would argue more strongly in favor of an aggressive narrowing construction than a minor grant of such power. Moreover, if the norm in favor of 391See, e.g., Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer, 427 U.S. 445, 453-56 (1976). 392See cases cited supra notes 333-34. limited delegations conflicts with the norm in favor of coordination of regulatory policy, the degree of the infringement on both norms would be highly relevant to the decision. 
priority and harmonization. In Pennhurst, a group of mentally retarded people brought suit against a mental health facility that was found to contain dangerous conditions. Many of the residents had been physically abused, brutally mistreated, or drugged; the facility was utterly inadequate for the treatment of the retarded. As the basis of their legal claim, the plaintiffs invoked the "bill of rights" in the Developmentally Disabled Assistance and Bill of Rights Act. 3 94 The bill of rights contained a set of legislative findings, including the following: (i) Persons with developmental disabilities have a right to appropriate treatment, services, and habilitation for such disabilities. ( developmental disabilities should be designed to maximize the developmental potential of the person and should be provided in a setting that is least restrictive of the person's personal liberty. (3) The Federal Government and the States both have an obligation to assure that public funds are not provided to any institution]... that] does not provide treatment, services, and habilitation which is appropriate to the needs of such persons .... 395 
The question in Pennhurst was whether the bill of rights created legally enforceable rights, or whether it instead enacted a set of goals or aspirations that could not be vindicated in court. The history of the Act supported an argument that Congress intended to create legally cognizable rights. 39 6 On the other hand, it was not unreasonable to suggest that the bill of rights should be taken, like some other prefaces to legislation, as a statement of goals and purposes that amounted to an essentially precatory statement of congressional aspirations - a statement that would not permit the developmentally disabled to bring suit against a facility that failed to respect the bill of rights. There was no affirmative indication that the "findings" were intended to give rise to legally enforceable rights, costing the state enormous sums. Without a background interpretive principle, the case was probably impossible to resolve. 
393 451 U.S. i (1981). 39442 U.S.C. §§ 6ooo-6o8i (1982 & Supp. 1989). 395 Id. § 6009. 396 See, e.g., 451 U.S. at 42-47 (White, J., dissenting). 
In holding for the governmental defendant, the Supreme Court did not deny that the conventional sources of interpretation left the case in equipoise. Instead it invoked a background principle: "[I]f Congress intends to impose a condition on the grant of federal moneys, it must do so unambiguously. By insisting that Congress speak with a clear voice, we enable the States to exercise their choice knowingly, cognizant of the consequences of their participation. '3 97 The Court decided Pennhurston the basis of an interpretive norm derived from the constitutional background, not from the statute at issue. 
For reasons explored above, federalism principles are properly invoked, at least in ordinary settings, to require a clear statement from Congress for the imposition of significant duties on the states. If the Court had held the bill of rights legally enforceable, the states would have faced an enormous financial burden - one that they had not, in view of the statute's ambiguity, necessarily expected to incur. It is for this reason that the outcome in Pennhurst is a plausible one. But two considerations suggest that Pennhurst was incorrectly decided. 
First, a constitutional norm calls for aggressive construction of statutes involving the developmentally disabled. The Court has been extremely cautious in using the Constitution to protect the disabled, largely for institutional reasons. 398 In holding that the equal protection clause does not entitle the mentally retarded to special judicial protection, for example, the Court stressed that federal and state legislatures have responded to the pervasive mistreatment of the retarded, and that unelected judges should be reluctant to intrude so dramatically into democratic processes. 3 99 In these circumstances, the best substantive theory of the equal protection clause accords special protection to the disabled, and when other branches give such protection, they are fulfilling their constitutional responsibilities. 
Second, federalism principles have much less force in cases in which Congress attempts to protect a traditionally disadvantaged group from state political processes. The ordinary presumption in favor of state autonomy is countered by the fourteenth amendment - a self-conscious limitation on state power. Invocation of principles of state autonomy in the context of a socially subordinated group to justify a narrow reading of a statute enacted on its behalf - is positively perverse in light of constitutional structure and history. 40 0 397451 U.S. at 17 (footnote and citations omitted). 398 See City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 432 (1985). 399See id. at 442-47. 
400 To be sure, this conclusion depends on the (controversial) view that the developmentally disabled should for these purposes be treated the same as blacks, the unquestionable principal beneficiaries of the fourteenth amendment. But that view should not be difficult to defend in light of the past and present treatment of the developmentally disabled, treatment that led to 
It follows that when Congress has taken steps to provide safeguards for that group, the Court should take into account the fourteenth amendment and the underenforced character of the equality norm in order to give statutes involving the disabled a hospitable rather than a grudging interpretation. 40 1 The PennhurstCourt should not have relied on a background norm in favor of federalism in order to render meaningless a statutory provision involving a group and a right safeguarded by the fourteenth amendment. 40 2 
What would the universe of statutory interpretation be like if all of these proposals were accepted? In one sense, it would not be dramatically different from the one we inhabit. All of the principles suggested here have some foundations in current law. A system of interpretation without interpretive norms, even substantive and institutional ones, would be inconceivable. On the other hand, a legal system that adopted such principles self-consciously would have a far greater degree of uniformity and coherence. It would be especially responsive to constitutional norms, to institutional considerations, and to an informed understanding of the functions and failures of the modern regulatory state. Above all, the system would rely on norms that promote the goals and that improve the performance of statutory regimes, and it would use the process of statutory construction as a corrective against some of the pervasive weaknesses, injustices, and irrationalities of modern regulation. 
In all likelihood, a set of explicitly articulated interpretive norms would elicit administrative and legislative responses. In time, members of Congress, and others involved in the lawmaking process, would become aware of those norms and would enact statutes in the shadow of such norms. Some statutes would look quite different, for Congress would know that courts would, in the face of statutory silence or ambiguity, press legislation in one direction rather than another.403 Judicial adoption of interpretive norms of this sort would and made necessary the very statute at issue in Pennhurst. See Minow, When Difference Has Its Home: Group Homesfor the Mentally Retarded, Equal Protectionand Legal Treatment of Difference, 22 HARv. C.R.-C.L. L. REv. III, 144-52 (1987). 
401 But cf. Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez, 436 U.S. 49 (1978) (upholding tribal sovereign immunity against equal protection claim under the Indian Civil Rights Act). 
402 Principles of priority and harmonization were also at work in Bob Jones University v. United States, 461 U.S. 574 (1983). See supra note ioo. That decision reflects an implicit understanding that the nonsubordination principle trumps the interest in the autonomy of religious organizations, at least in the context of tax policy. 
403 In light of the absence of solid evidence that legislative activity is materially affected by interpretive norms in general, this effect would, however, probably not be as great as one might expect. ultimately shift the burden of legislative inertia - giving rationality of various sorts the benefit of the doubt, and raising the costs of absurdity or injustice - and at the same time would offer legislators and others a clear rather than murky background against which to do their work. 
The interpretive norms suggested here would convert some hard cases into easy ones, by providing principles with which to decide cases that might otherwise be in equipoise. Examples include cases like American Petroleum, which involved the operation of the proportionality principle, and cases involving allegations of preemption, which implicate the principle in favor of state autonomy. But the norms would also make some easy cases into hard ones, by shifting the legal backdrop and requiring clear legislative instructions before certain results could be reached. For this reason, a legal framework pervaded by explicit background norms of the sort outlined here would in some settings create rather than diminish legal uncertainty. 40 4 This cost, however, is a small price to pay for increased clarity in a variety of contexts, and, much more fundamentally, an improvement in the performance of regulatory law, an increase in rationality, and a greater sensitivity to the constitutional backdrop, statutory function, and regulatory failure. 
V. CONCLUSION 
The traditional understandings of statutory construction are inadequate. They fail to describe existing practice or to set out an approach that deserves support. Under the approach suggested here, the statutory text is the foundation for interpretation, but structure, purpose, intent, history, and "reasonableness" all play legitimate roles. It is possible, moreover, to distinguish among those roles, and thus to produce a system in which dictionary definitions of statutory terms ordinarily suffice, but are subject to various forms of contextual qualification. 
As complete theories of interpretation, however, all of the traditional sources depend on fictions or leave large interpretive gaps. Efforts to approach statutes as "deals," or to justify a general background rule in favor of either administrative interpretation or "private ordering, '40 5 cannot be defended, for they produce indeterminacy, lead 404 The Delaney Clause might be an example. On one understanding of a textualist approach, the case is an easy one, and the FDA loses; it is the norm against de minimis exceptions that introduces uncertainty into a case that might be otherwise resolved on the basis of the "text." 
40S The quotation marks are necessary because of the dependence of private ordering on legal decisions - a prominent New Deal theme. See Sunstein, supra note 9, at 437-38, 451to an inferior system of law, or depend on values that were repudiated by the decision to create the regulatory regime in the first instance. 
Because language "by itself" lacks meaning, and in light of the existence of gaps or ambiguities in hard cases, interpretive principles of various sorts are desirable and in any case inevitable. Interpretation cannot occur without background principles that fill gaps in the face of legislative silence and provide the backdrop against which to read linguistic commands. In easy cases, the text, in conjunction with generally held interpretive principles, is enough to solve interpretive disputes; in other cases, also relatively easy, a resort to purpose, context - including legislative history - or reasonableness will be proper, necessary, and sufficient. In many cases, however, courts must invoke interpretive principles that appear controversial. 
Some such principles aid courts in discerning the meaning of particular statutes, or help to implement Congress' actual or likely interpretive instructions. Others are rooted in constitutional concerns; others derive from assessments of institutional performance; still others attempt to respond to characteristic failings of regulatory legislation. Because statutory meaning is a function of interpretive principles and cannot exist without them, something like "canons" of construction, far from being obsolete, must occupy a prominent place in the theory and practice of statutory interpretation. 
In these circumstances, it is especially important to avoid thiee common errors. The first is to treat interpretive principles as the illegitimate intrusion of discretionary policy judgments into "ordinary" interpretation; as we have seen, there is no such thing. The second is to think that the existence of competing, and value-laden, principles is a reason to give up on the enterprise of statutory construction altogether, and in hard cases to resort to a sometimes fictional "plain language," to treat interpretation as inevitably indeterminate, or to rest content with the conclusion that statutes turn out to mean what people in authority say that they mean. Even in hard cases, it is possible to mediate among competing principles and to assess them in terms of their sensitivity to constitutional structure, to institutional arrangements, and to regulatory function and failure. The third error is to use traditional principles of private law - carried over from anachronistic conceptions of the relationship between the citizen and the state - to resolve disputes about the meaning of modern enactments. 
The interpretive principles suggested here are intended for the President, regulatory agencies, and Congress, as well as for the courts. Even more fundamentally, they provide a basis for understanding the ideas that underlie the fabric of the modern regulatory state. Indeed, it is in disputes over background norms of interpretation that one finds principles that organize and divide understandings not only of the New Deal reformation, but of American constitutionalism and democracy as a whole. 
The ultimate task is to develop a set of interpretive norms sensitive to constitutional structure, institutional design, the New Deal reformation, and the diverse functions and failings of governmental actors and statutory regimes 40 6 - with which to approach social and economic regulation in a system that has largely abandoned common law categories. It is possible to generate a series of interpretive principles, all with support in current law, that can promote the goals of deliberative government in the post-New Deal period. In this way, statutory construction can serve as an ally of other, more ambitious strategies designed to promote some of the original constitutional goals in a dramatically changed legal environment. It is far too much to expect statutory construction to respond to all of the failings of the modern regulatory state. But it is not too much to expect that the process of interpretation can make the situation better rather than worse. 
406 See Pound, Common Law and Legislation, supra note 4, at 386 (deploring the courts' failure to conceive of statutes "as entering into the legal system as an organic whole" and the judicial treatment of statutes "as introducing a sort of temporary innovation which is not at all to be thought of as on the same footing with common law doctrines"); see also Stone, The Common Law in the United States, 5o HARv. L. REv.4, i5 (1936) ("[A] statute is not an alien intruder in the house of the common law, but a guest to be welcomed and made at home there as a new and powerful aid in the accomplishment of its appointed task of accommodating the law to social needs."). 
APPENDIX: INTERPRETIVE PRINCIPLES, OLD AND NEW I. EXISTING OR DEFUNCT PRINCIPLES: A TYPOLOGY 
Cases i. Plain meaning (questionable). provisions. 
other statutes. 
I. I U.S.C. §§ 1-6. decisions. 

I. Plain meaning (questionable). decisions where discretion has been conferred. and force decision by politically accountable persons. judicial or administrative interpretations of statutes as acquiescence or ratification. 
I. Presumption against preemption of state law (questionable when discrimination is at issue). law (obsolete). immunity (obsolete). (questionable). io. Presumption that laws apply only within territory of United 
States. xi. Presumption against standing for "regulatory harms" (questionable). as a corrective to 4 above). of the President and federal courts. 
II. PROPOSED PRINCIPLES FOR THE REGULATORY STATE A. ConstitutionalPrinciples i. Avoiding constitutional invalidity and constitutional doubts. antipathy to naked interest-group transfers. 

B. Institutional Concerns x. Narrow construction of appropriations statutes. history. 
C. CounteractingStatutory Failure x. Presumption in favor of political accountability. action problems. substantive rights. io. Narrow construction of statutes embodying interest-group transfers (to counteract "deals"). iI. Broad construction of statutes protecting disadvantaged groups. values. 
]III. PRIORITY AND HARMONIZATION 
