University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1989 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Is There an Unconstitutional Conditions Doctrine? 
Is There an Unconstitutional Conditions Doctrine? 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Is There an Unconstitutional Conditions Doctrine?," 26 San Diego Law Review 337 
(1989). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Is  There  an  Unconstitutional  Conditions
Doctrine? t

CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN*

I

In  a  number  of  areas  of  public  law,  a  set  of  issues  is  organized
around  a  "doctrine"  that  purports  to  give  order  and  regularity  to
problems  that  might  otherwise  be  treated  as  discrete  and  unrelated.
Ordinarily,  organizing  strategies  of this  sort  are  no  cause  for  alarm;
they  help  provide  structure  and  direction  in  areas  that  are  indeed
closely  connected.  But  on  occasion,  such  strategies  are  highly  mis-
leading.  By  combining  problems  that are  quite discrete,  and  by  treat-
ing  them  at  a  high  level  of  generality,  they  deflect  attention  from
more  particular  considerations  that  ought  to  be  the  central  focus  of
judicial  attention.

One  of the  most prominent  examples  here is  the  "political  question
doctrine"  -
a  doctrine  that  is  said  to  help  courts  decide  when  to
remove  themselves  from  nonlegal  controversies.  To be sure,  some de-
cisions  should  not be  subject  to judicial  resolution,  but  not  because  of
a  unitary  or  general  "political  question  doctrine."'  When  decisions
are  immunized  from  the  courts,  it  is  because  no  particular  constitu-
tional  provision  forbids  the  governmental  action  at  issue  -
a  point

t  All  rights  reserved.
*  Karl  N. Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  Law  School  and  Department  of
Political Science,  University  of Chicago.  This  essay  is a revised  version  of a  presentation
to  the  Constitutional  Law  Section  of the  Association  of American  Law  Schools  in Janu-
ary  1989.  Akhil  Amar  and  Michael  McConnell  gave  helpful  comments  on  an  earlier
draft.

Some of the  ideas  in this essay  are  discussed  in more  detail,  and  from  a  different  angle,
the  Unconstitutional  Conditions  Doctrine  Is  An  Anachronism

in  Sunstein,  Why 
(forthcoming).

1.  This  is  the  central  argument  in  Henkin,  Is  There A  Political Question Doc-

trine?, 85  YALE  L.J. 597  (1976).

HeinOnline  -- 26 San Diego L. Rev. 337 1989

recognized  by  Chief  Justice  Marshall  in  the original  decision  giving
rise  to  that  doctrine.2  In  resolving  issues  of this  sort,  it  is  far  better
to  attend  to  the  nature of the  constitutional  disability  in the particu-
lar  case,  rather than  to  a  supposed  "political  question  doctrine."  The
question  is  whether  the government's  action  violates  a  constitutional
provision,  and  that  question  is  one  on  the  merits.3

Similar  considerations  apply  to  the doctrine  of  "standing."  Much
of the  confusion  of the  last  generation  has  been  a  product  of a  belief
that there  is something  called  a  unitary  standing doctrine,  one that is
independent  of the  particular  rights  created  under  particular  consti-
tutional  and statutory  provisions.  Whether  there is  standing depends
on  whether  positive  law  has  created  a  right  to  relief -
sometimes  a
complex  question,  to  be  sure,  but  one  that  will  yield  different  an-
swers  in  different  contexts.

Much  of the  same  is  true  of  the  unconstitutional  conditions  doc-
trine. Whether  a condition  is  permissible  is  a function  of the particu-
lar  constitutional  provision  at  issue;  on  that  score,  anything  so  gen-
eral  as  an  unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine  is  likely  to  be  quite
unhelpful.  The  due  process  clause  might  well,  for  example,  forbid
states  from  denying  Medicare  benefits  to  those  who  have  had  abor-
tions;  but  if  this  is  so,  it  is  because  the  best  interpretation  of  the
clause  leads  to  that  result,  and  not  because  of  anything  especially
revealing  in  the  idea  that  some  conditions  are  unconstitutional.  The
unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine  cannot,  in short,  do  much  of the
work  expected  of it.  It is  far  too  crude  and general  a  way  to  address
the  multiple  possible  collisions  between  constitutional  protections
and  the  modern  regulatory  state.  Indeed,  many  of  those  collisions
have  been  approached  in  highly misleading  ways,  and  ironically,  the
unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine  is  the  source  of the  difficulty.

I will  be  arguing,  in  short,  for particularism  in  cases  involving  un-
constitutional  conditions:  for  an  inquiry, not into  whether the greater
power  includes  the  lesser,  or  whether  the  government  can  do  "indi-
rectly"  what  it  cannot  do  "directly,"  but  instead  into  whether  the
particular  infringement  affects  a  protected  interest  in  a  constitution-
ally  troublesome  way,  and,  if so,  whether  the  government  is  able  to
justify  any such  effect.  In order  to ask  and  answer these  questions,  it
will  be  necessary  to  venture  far  beyond  the  unconstitutional  condi-
tions  doctrine.

2.  The  case  is  Marbury  v.  Madison,  5  U.S.  (1  Cranch)  137  (1803).
3.  To say  this is not  to deny  that, on occasion,  prudential  concerns  should stay  the

judicial  hand  even  if  the  particular  case  involves  an  otherwise  plausible  legal  claim.

4.  See  Fletcher,  The  Structure of Standing, 98  YALE  L.J.  221  (1988);  Sunstein,

Standing  and  the  Privatization of Public Law,  88  COLUM.  L. REv.  1432  (1988).

HeinOnline  -- 26 San Diego L. Rev. 338 1989

[VOL.  26:  337,  1989] 

Doctrine
SAN  DIEGO  LAW  REVIEW

II

We  might  begin  to  explore  the  confrontation  between  constitu-
tional  rights  and  government  expenditures  through  three  possible
cases  of  unconstitutional  conditions.  In  case  one,  the  government
makes  welfare  benefits  available  to  those,  and  only  those,  who  have
spoken  and  who  agree  to  speak  favorably  of  the  Democratic  party.
In case  two,  the  government  says  that  it  will  pay  for  public  schools
but  not  for  private  schools.  In  case  three,  the  government  funds  all
medically  necessary  expenditures  except 
those  associated  with
abortion.

In  all  of these  cases,  government  has  failed  to  intrude  on  rights
protected  by  the  common  law;  in  all  of  them,  complaining  citizens
are  better  off  with  the  program  (even  including  the  condition)  than
they  would  be  if  the  program  as  a  whole  were  eliminated.  In  all
three  cases,  the  source  of  the  difficulty  lies  in  the  possibility  that
government  might  (a)  be  attempting  to  influence  or  (b)  in  fact  be
influencing  the  decision  to  exercise  a  constitutional  right.  The  two
possibilities  are quite  different.  The  first would  point  to an  illicit  gov-
ernmental  motivation:  to use  federal  funds  in  a  way  designed  to  dis-
courage  people  from  availing  themselves  of a  constitutional  protec-
tion.  The  second  would  point  to  an  impermissible  effect:  the  use  of
governmental  funds  in  a  way that pressures  or coerces  the exercise  of
a  right.

Both  of these  possibilities  played  a  large  role  in  the original  devel-
opment  of the  unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine,  in  which  the  Su-
preme  Court  attempted  largely  to  protect  Lochner-like rights  from
invasion  through  the  regulatory  state.'  In  this  respect,  the  unconsti-
tutional  conditions  doctrine  owes  its  origins  to  a judicial  effort,  in  a
period  of  transition  from  the  common  law,  to  protect  common-law
rights  from  a  new  form  of interference.  That  effort  was  rooted  in  an
understanding  that  such  rights  could  be  pressured  by  something
other  than  common-law  coercion  -
as,  for  example,  when  govern-
ment  made  licenses  or  other  benefits  available  on  its  own  terms,  by
subjecting  them  to  conditions  that  led  citizens  not  to  exercise  what
would  otherwise  be  protected  rights.  Thus,  in  all  three  cases,  it  is  no
longer  sufficient  to  argue:  (a)  that  the  supposedly  greater  power  not

5.  The development  is  traced  in  Epstein,  The Supreme  Court, 1987  Term - Fore-
word:  Unconstitutional Conditions, State Power, and the  Limits of Consent,  102  HARV.
L.  REV.  4  (1988).  Epstein's  own  analysis  is  marked  above  all  by  its  foundations  in  a
Lochner-like conception  of the  relationship  between  the  citizen  and  the  state.  For  a  dis-
cussion,  see  Sunstein,  supra note  *.

HeinOnline  -- 26 San Diego L. Rev. 339 1989

to  create  or  to  abolish  the  program  includes  the  supposedly  lesser
power  to  create  the  program  with  the condition;  (b)  that  the  citizen
voluntarily  accepted  the  condition  because  he  willingly  participated
in  the  program  in  the  first  instance;  and  (c)  that  the citizen  cannot
complain  because  the  program  makes  him  better  off  than  he  would
be  without  it.'

But  in  all  three  cases,  what  sort  of help  does  the  unconstitutional
conditions  doctrine  offer?  The  doctrine  operates  as  a  shorthand  re-
sponse  to  these  otherwise  plausible  arguments  from  the  greater
power  and  waiver;  sometimes  it  provides  the  basis  for  a  broadside
attack  on  arguably  unconstitutional  conditions,  on  the  theory  that
government  cannot  do  "indirectly"  what  it  cannot do  "directly."  But
in  order  to resolve  the  three  cases,  or  any other  problem  of this sort,
it is  necessary  to  ask  far  more  particular  questions  about  the  nature
of  the  constitutional  right  in  the cases.

Case  one,  for  example,  is  relatively  simple. The  reason  is  that  the
first  amendment,  properly  interpreted,  does  not  permit  government
to  pressure  the  right  to  free  expression  in  this  way.  That  conclusion
is  in  turn  a  product  of  two  subsidiary  ideas:  (1)  The  pressure  im-
posed  on  the  right  to  free  expression  through  the  use  of  monetary
incentives  is  a  constitutionally  significant  burden,  in  light  of the  na-
ture  of  the  free  expression  interest,  which  calls  for  governmental
neutrality  among  different  points of view;  and  (2)  the government,  in
the  welfare  setting,  does  not  have  available  to  it  distinctive,  finance-
related  interests  that  justify  the  imposition  of  that  burden.  It  is
therefore  impermissible,  under  the first  amendment,  for  government
to  make  welfare  available  on  the  basis  of this  kind  of  selectivity.

Case  two  is  also  a  simple  one,  at  least  under  current  law,  and  it
goes  in  precisely  the  opposite  direction.  To  be  sure,  there  is,  under
Pierce v. Society of Sisters,7  a constitutional  right to send one's  chil-
dren  to  private  school.  But  there  is  no  right  to  government  funding
of  that  right  even  if  the  government  does  in  fact  fund  the  public
schools.  For  those  who  believe  in  a  unitary  unconstitutional  condi-
tions  doctrine,  the  different  results  in  cases  one  and  two  must  be  a
puzzle.  The  pressure  exerted  on  the  right by  the  government  is  pre-
cisely  the same  in  both  settings.  Why  is the government  able  to treat
speech  rights  in  a  way  that  it cannot  treat  the right to  educate  one's
children?

If there is an answer,  it lies  not in anything  with  which  the uncon-

6.  Although  these  arguments  are  insufficient,  it is necessary,  and  not  altogether
simple,  to  explain  why  this  is  so.  See Easterbrook,  Insider Trading, Secret Agents, Evi-
dentiary Privileges, and the  Production of Information, 1981  Sup.  CT.  REV.  309.  For
discussion  of  and  response  to  those  arguments,  see  generally  Sullivan,  Unconstitutional
Conditions, 102  HARV.  L. REV.  1413  (1989);  Epstein,  supra note  5.

7.  268  U.S.  510  (1925).

HeinOnline  -- 26 San Diego L. Rev. 340 1989

[VOL.  26:  337.  1989] 

Doctrine
SAN  DIEGO  LAW  REVIEW

stitutional  conditions  doctrine  can  be  helpful,  but  instead  in  the  dif-
ferent  nature  of the  rights  in  the  two  cases.  If current  law  is correct,
it  is  because  the  right  to  send  one's  children  to  private  schools  is  a
distinctive  one.  It  might  be  distinctive  in  the  sense  that  it  is  not  a
right  to  governmental  fneutrality  in  general  or  in  the  abstract,  but
instead  merely  a  right  to  be  free  from  criminal  coercion  in  the  pri-
vate  education  of one's  children.  On  this  view,  the  right  to  educate
one's  children  does  not  require  governmental  neutrality  as  between
public and  private schools,  and it  does  not proscribe  the  use  of fund-
ing  to  pressure  that  choice.  This  may  or  may  not  be  a  correct  inter-
pretation  of the  relevant  right.  But  if it  is  incorrect,  it  is  because  of
nothing  in  the  unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine,  but  instead  be-
cause  of something  in  the  nature  of  the  right.

If this  distinction  between  the  right  recognized  in  Pierce and  the
free  speech  right  is  unpersuasive,  current  law  might  nonetheless  be
correct  for  a  quite  independent  reason.  Perhaps  the  differential  use
of financial  incentives  in  the  setting  of private schools  is  constitution-
ally  troubling,  and  government  must  therefore  come  up  with  a  pow-
erful  argument  in  its defense;  but perhaps  such  an  argument  is  avail-
able.  The  argument  would  go  like  this.  Many  taxpayers  would  have
severe  objections  to  the  public  funding  of  religious  schools.  Those
objections  are  not  only  severe,  but  closely  tied  up  with,  and  indeed
are  an  inextricable  part  of,  the  rationale  behind  the  establishment
clause.  In  these  circumstances,  an  interpretation  of the  right  to  edu-
cate one's  children  that  would  compel  governmental  neutrality  would
wreak  havoc  with  the  deeper  logic  of the constitutional  text.  Govern-
mental  neutrality  would,  in  short,  bring  about violations  of the  estab-
lishment  clause. One  might add  here  that any  government  has strong
and  legitimate  reasons  to  favor  public  over  private  education,  in  or-
der  (for  example)  to  foster  the  development  of an integrated  national
(or  state)  polity.  These  reasons  may  well  be  insufficient  to  permit
prohibition  of private  schools  without  being  so  weak  as  to  be  insuffi-
cient  to  permit  the  funding  of public  but  not  private  schools.'

All  this  should  be  enough  to  suggest  that  it  is  at  least  plausible  to
understand  the  right  to  educate  one's  children  in  private  schools  as
not  including  a  prohibition  on  the  funding  of  public  but  not  private
schools.  If this  is  so,  case  one  and  case  two  properly  come  out  differ-

8.  Considerations  of  the  sort  suggested  in  this  paragraph  explain  my  uneasiness
with  Professor  McConnell's  contribution  to  this symposium.  See  McConnell  Unconstitu-
tional Conditions: Unrecognized Implications for the Establishment Clause, 26  SAN  Di-
EGO  L.  REv.  255  (1989).

HeinOnline  -- 26 San Diego L. Rev. 341 1989

ently.  The  reason  lies  in  the  distinctive  nature  of  the  constitutional
rights  in  the  two  cases,  and  the  availability  of  unusual justifications
in  case  two,  justifications  that  permit  government  to  invoke  addi-
tional  considerations  in  its  support.

What  of  case  three?9  Here  an  initial  instinct  would  be to  suggest
that it  necessarily  falls  within  case  one. Roe  v.  Wade'0  recognized  a
right  to  reproductive  freedom,  and  that  right,  it  would  be  argued,
cannot  exist  if  government  is  permitted  to  fund  childbirth  but  not
abortion.  Such  a  distribution  of financial  incentives  necessarily  pres-
sures  the  choice  -
particularly  in  the case  at  hand,  which  involves
indigent  women.

This  basic argument  derives  support  from a  current  staple  of mod-
ern  unconstitutional  conditions  arguments  -
the distinction  between
penalties  and  refusals  to  subsidize."  A  refusal  to  subsidize,  on  this
view,  amounts  to  a  constitutionally  unobjectionable  unwillingness  to
ensure  the  exercise  of  a  right.  By  contrast,  a  penalty  represents  a
sanction  exacted  by  making  citizens  worse  off than  they  would  be  if
the  program  were  not created;  a  penalty  is  therefore  constitutionally
suspect.  In  case  three,  it  might  be  said,  there  is  an  impermissible
penalty  since  government  is  depriving  citizens  of something  that they
would  otherwise  receive,  that  is,  funding  for  all  medically  necessary
expenditures. 2

Ironically,  these  arguments  reveal  precisely  what  is  wrong  with  a
general  or  unitary  unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine;  and  it is  pos-
sible  to  reach  this  conclusion  without  thinking  that  the  arguments
are  necessarily  wrong.  There  are  three  points  here.  The  first  is  that
the  asserted  characterization  of  the  right  in  Roe  v.  Wade  is  by  no
means  self-evidently  correct.  Whether  the  right is one  to governmen-
tal  neutrality,  or  instead  to  freedom  from  criminal coercion,  is not a
question  that can  be  answered  on  the basis  of the holding  or ration-
ale  in  Roe  itself.' 3  That  question  depends  on  a  far  more  complex
inquiry  into  the  best  argument  available for  the Roe  outcome.  There
is  nothing  illogical  in  reading  Roe  more  narrowly,  even  if  such  a
reading  would  be  incorrect  on  balance.  On  that  view,  the Roe  right
would  be  akin  to  the  right  in  Pierce.

The  second  point  is  that  in  the  setting  of financial  expenditures,
government  possibly  has  available  to  it  distinctive  finance-related
justifications  that  serve  to  legitimate  any  burdens  on  the  relevant

9.  The  case  is,  of course,  drawn  from  Harris  v.  McRae,  448  U.S.  297  (1980).
10.  410  U.S.  113  (1973).
!1.  The  distinction 

is  made  central  in  Harris. For  a  general  discussion,  see
Kreimer,  Allocational Sanctions: The  Problem of Negative Rights in a Positive State,
132  U. PA.  L.  REv.  1293  (1984).

12.  This  is  the  argument  in  Kreimer,  supra note  11.
13.  Roe,  410  U.S.  at  113.

HeinOnline  -- 26 San Diego L. Rev. 342 1989

[VOL.  26:  337,  1989] 

Doctrine
SAN  DIEGO  LAW  REVIEW

right.  Many  taxpayers  would  severely  object  to  the  use  of taxpayer
money  to  fund  an  activity  that  they  consider  the  moral  analogue  of
murder.  These  objections  do  not  have  the  weight  that would  ground
a  serious  free exercise  objection  to  the use of federal  funds  to  pay  for
abortion.  But  the  objections  might  well  make  it  permissible  -
not
necessary,  but  permissible  -
for  government  to  decide  not  to  fund
abortions  even  if it  cannot  criminalize  them.

The  third point  is  that the question whether  the denial  of funds  for
abortion  is  a  "penalty"  or  a  "refusal  to subsidize"  is  both  difficult  to
answer  and  - more  importantly  -
constitutionally  irrelevant.  To
decide  the  penalty-subsidy  question,  it  is  necessary  to  identify  some
status  quo,  or  baseline,  in  order  to  conceive  of  the  alternative  uni-
verse  from  which  the  current  deviation  is  to  be  measured. 4  In a  pe-
riod  in  which  governmental  regulatory  programs  interact  with  com-
mon-law  rights  in  complex  ways,  that  question  is  almost  impossible
to  sort  out.  More  fundamentally,  the  question  whether  a  denial  of
funding  operates  as  a  "penalty"  or  as  a  "refusal  to  subsidize"  is  not,
for  constitutional  purposes,  the  important  one.  The  question  is  in-
stead  whether  the governmental  action  at  issue  intrudes  on  the  rele-
vant  right  in  a  constitutionally  troublesome  way,  and  if so,  whether
the  government  has  available  legitimate  justifications  that  are  suffi-
ciently  weighty  to justify  any  such  intrusion.  The  penalty  or  subsidy
inquiry  does  not  help  to  answer  this  question.

These considerations  hardly  supply  a  decisive  argument  in  favor  of
government  programs  that  subsidize  childbirth  but  not  medically
necessary  abortions.  It  might  well  be  that the  right  in  Roe  should  in
fact  be  characterized  as  a  right  to  governmental  neutrality  -
an
argument  that would  draw  strength  if one  accepts  the view  that  the
Roe  outcome  is  best  understood  as  a  case  involving  sex  discrimina-
tion  and  predictable  adverse  consequences  for  poor  women. 15  It
might  well  be  that  taxpayers'  moral  objections  to  public  funding  of
abortion  are  not,  in  view  of the  best  characterization  of the  relevant
right, sufficiently  weighty  to justify  the intrusion.  This  view  might  be
supported  by  analogy  to  cases  involving  speech,  religious,  and  non-
discrimination  rights,  where,  as  a  general  rule,  the  moral  objections
of  the  taxpaying  public  are  insufficient 
to  permit  selectivity  in
funding.

These  are  complex  questions,  and  they  cannot  be  answered  here.

14.  See  Sullivan,  supra note  6;  Kreimer,  supra note  11.
15.  See Tribe,  The Abortion Funding Conundrum:  Inalienable Rights, Affirmative

Duties, and the  Dilemma of Dependence, 99  HARV.  L. REv.  330  (1985).

HeinOnline  -- 26 San Diego L. Rev. 343 1989

For  present  purposes,  the central  point  is  that  in  our  three cases  in-
volving  arguably  'unconstitutional  conditions  -
under  current  law,
the  first  an  easy  call  for  the citizen,  the  second  an  easy  call  for  the
government,  and  the  third  a  difficult  call  that  produced  a  split  Su-
preme  Court  -
the  unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine  has  been en-
tirely  unhelpful.  Cases  that  fall  within  the  general  category  of un-
constitutional  conditions  problems  require  a  quite  particular  analysis
of  the  nature  of  the  relevant  right.  Whether  there  is  a  penalty  or  a
subsidy  is  immaterial.  Sometimes  the  government  may  do  indirectly
what  it cannot  do directly.  The  relevant  cases  must be argued  on the
merits,  in  terms  of  the appropriate  conception  of the  relevant  right;
the  unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine  cannot  do  any  of  the neces-
sary  work.

All  this  is  not  to suggest  that  the doctrine  has  served  no  function,
and  it  is  hardly  to say  that cases  involving  conditions  on governmen-
tal  programs  do  not  call  up  distinctive  considerations.  The  doctrine
has  been  helpful  in  answering  familiar  objections  to  the use  of con-
stitutional  review  in  this  area,  and  those  objections  are  indeed  mis-
guided.1 6 Moreover,  reviews  of funding  programs  do share  distinctive
common  inquiries  -
into  the nature  of the right
and  the  character  of governmental justifications.  The  principal  prob-
lem  with  the  unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine  is  that  it  tends  to
focus  attention  away  from  these  questions,  which  are  the  correct
ones,  to other questions  altogether -
questions  that probably  cannot
be  answered  and  that  in  any  case  need  not  be  asked.

as  we  have  seen  -

III

We  have  seen  that  the  unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine  is  an
awkward  and  crude  effort  to  bring  under  constitutional  scrutiny  a
range  of  measures  that  affect  constitutional  rights  in  serious  ways,
but  that  would  not  otherwise  be  subject  to  serious  judicial  review.
The  doctrine  does  help  to identify  a  technique  of burdening  constitu-
tional  rights,'7  and  thus  to  alert  courts  that  a  serious  constitutional
issue  may  be  present  notwithstanding  both  the  absence  of common-
law  "coercion"' 8  and  the  possibility  that  the  person  who  has  ac-
cepted  both  the  benefit  and  the  burden  is  on  balance  better  off as  a
result  of  the  deal.  In  coming  to  terms  with  the  questions  raised  by
the  relevant  cases,  however,  the  unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine
is inadequate  in  two  fundamental  ways.

First, 

it  focuses  attention  on  the  largely 

immaterial  question

16.  For  discussion,  see  Sullivan,  supra  note  6;  Epstein,  supra  note  5.
17.  A  point  emphasized  in  Sullivan,  supra  note  6.
18.  For  a discussion  of  the  unfortunate  legacy  and  surprising  persistence  of this

idea.  see  Sunstein,  supra  note  *.

HeinOnline  -- 26 San Diego L. Rev. 344 1989

[VOL.  26:  337,  1989] 

Doctrine
SAN  DIEGO  LAW  REVIEW

whether  there  is  a  "threat"  (penalty)  or an  "offer"  (subsidy).  This  is
an  extraordinarily  complex  question  that  courts  are  unlikely  to  be
able  sensibly  to  unpack.  More  importantly,  the  question  is  not  the
one  that,  as  a  general  rule,  the  Constitution  tells  courts  to  ask.

Second,  and  most  fundamentally,  the  unconstitutional  conditions
doctrine  tends  to  lead  courts  to  disregard  the  extraordinary  particu-
larity  of  the  settings  in  which  problems  under  this  rubric  tend  to
arise.  Whether  a  condition  is  unconstitutional  depends  on  whether
the  relevant  clause,  properly  interpreted,  makes  the  particular  bur-
den  a  constitutionally  troubesome  one,  and,  if so,  whether  the  gov-
ernment  has  available  to  it  -
distinctive
justifications  that  make  its  action  permissible.  These  are  not  simple
questions,  but  they  are  the relevant  ones.  We  do  not  need  an  uncon-
stitutional  conditions  doctrine  in  order  to  ask  them.

because  of the  setting  -

HeinOnline  -- 26 San Diego L. Rev. 345 1989

HeinOnline  -- 26 San Diego L. Rev. 346 1989

