h Administrative Law Symposium: Question & Answer with Administrative Law Symposium: Question & Answer with Professors Elliott, Strauss, and Sunstein Professors Elliott, Strauss, and Sunstein University of Chicago Law School University of Chicago Law School Chicago Unbound Chicago Unbound Journal Articles Cass R. Sunstein Donald Ellicott Dick Pierce Peter L. Strauss Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, Donald Ellicott, Dick Pierce & Peter L. Strauss, "Administrative Law Symposium: Question & Answer with Professors Elliott, Strauss, and Sunstein," 1989 Duke Law Journal 551 (1989). DP = Dick Pierce, Moderatort DE = Donald Elliott* PS = Peter Strauss** CS = Cass Sunstein*** DP: Before you get your chance at questions, Peter said enough to provoke a request from Cass Sunstein for three minutes of rebuttal time, which I have granted. high University; J.D. 1972, University of Virginia. * Professor of Law, Yale Law School. Science, University of Chicago. DE: That's very hard to study. PS: experience. For example, in the air bags case, the court of appeals, in one of its early rulings, sends back a complex rulemaking because General Motors hadn't quite got the dummy's neck right. 17 A court is just too prone to misunderstand the problem as it was before the agency and to lead to the kind of flyspecking that, on my reading of the Mashaw and Harfst study of NHTSA administration, ' 8 is indeed a principal part of their account of regulatory failure. So to the extent that one sees now in place a pretty decent presidential process for insisting that agencies have regulatory priorities and think about how much they're going to accomplish through this regulation rather than that regulation, I'm prepared to see the courts let go. decided cases like the Ethyl23 case and the Vermont Yankee 24 case, and I can tell you that my perception is that the judges and law clerks did not really penetrate deeply into the facts and understand the consequences. In that sense I think Shep Melnick's book 2 s is really quite accurate and one of the pieces that Peter Schuck and I hope to do as an outgrowth of this study is to compare agency responses to remands from courts as opposed to agency responses to the EPA science advisory board. The working hypothesis is that precisely because the EPA science advisory board, which is composed of a group of outside scientists, can penetrate more deeply and more credibly into the bad math that the people at the program office do, that agencies are much more likely to respond in a real way when that kind of credible reviewing institution questions their conclusions than when a court does.