Faculty Scholarship 

Administrative Law Symposium: Question & Answer with 
Administrative Law Symposium: Question & Answer with 

Professors Elliott, Strauss, and Sunstein 
Professors Elliott, Strauss, and Sunstein 

University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1989 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Donald Ellicott 

Dick Pierce 

Peter L. Strauss 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, Donald Ellicott, Dick Pierce & Peter L. Strauss, "Administrative Law Symposium: 
Question & Answer with Professors Elliott, Strauss, and Sunstein," 1989 Duke Law Journal 551 (1989). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

ADMINISTRATIVE  LAW  SYMPOSIUM:
QUESTION  & ANSWER  WITH
PROFESSORS  ELLIOTT,
STRAUSS,  AND  SUNSTEIN

KEY:

DP  =  Dick Pierce,  Moderatort
DE  =  Donald  Elliott*
PS  =  Peter  Strauss**
CS  =  Cass  Sunstein***

DP:  Before you get  your chance  at questions,  Peter said enough to  pro-
voke  a  request  from  Cass  Sunstein  for  three  minutes  of rebuttal  time,
which  I have  granted.

CS: 
I  was  uncharacteristically  cautious,  wasn't  I?  The  three  major
cases  that divide contemporary  ideas  about administrative  law have to be
Chevron, 1 State Farm, 2  and Heckler v. Chaney, 3  right?  Chevron  on  def-
erence  to  agency  determinations  of  law,  State Farm on  the  hard  look
doctrine,  Heckler v.  Chaney against  agency  inaction.  I  think Chevron's
analysis  was badly  off, State Farm was basically  right,  and I think Heck-
ler v. Chaney points in the wrong direction  in drawing this sharp  distinc-
tion  between  action  and inaction.  In  understanding  why  I think that,  I
think Peter  is exactly  right  in pointing  to  the systemic  ex  ante effects  of
judicial  review.

Most of the real world is affected  by these three  cases not because  of
"bubbles"  and passive  restraints  and drugs  being injected  and people  are
going  to be executed  as  a result-those  are important,  yes, but adminis-
trative  law  now  is  done  day to  day  in  the shadow  of these  three  cases.
That's the  systemic ex  ante effect and that is huge.  Now, Don's  data are
extremely  interesting and important.  When thinking about the impact  of
judicial review,  one wants  to think also  about the systemic ex ante  effect.

t  George  W. Hutchinson  Professor  of Law,  Southern  Methodist  University.  B.S.  1965,  Le-

high University;  J.D.  1972,  University of Virginia.
*  Professor  of Law,  Yale  Law School.

**  Betts Professor  of Law, Columbia  University  School  of Law.
***  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  Law  School  and  Department  of Political

Science,  University  of Chicago.

1.  Chevron,  U.S.A.,  Inc. v.  NRDC,  467  U.S.  837  (1984).
2.  Motor  Vehicle Mfrs.  Ass'n  v.  State  Farm  Mut. Auto.  Ins.  Co.,  463  U.S.  29  (1983).
3.  Heckler  v.  Chaney,  470 U.S.  821  (1985).

HeinOnline  -- 1989 Duke L.J. 551 1989

DUKE LAW JOURNAL

[Vol.  1989:551

One need look no further than the Mashaw  and Melnick  studies, 4 which
showed that the allocation  of authority internal  to the agency  is dramati-
cally affected  by judicial  determinations  of this  sort.  In  the  OSHA  and
EPA  cases,  the most important thing  is  not  whether  the remand  comes
up  the  same  way  next  time;  it's  that  it  has  a  ripple  effect  on  what  the
agency  does  every  day  afterwards.  The  decision  will  still  be  political;
most  of these  cases  will  never  get  to  court,  but  their political  character
will  be  affected  very  dramatically  by  the  existence  of the  previous  case.
The  OSHA  decision  in  Benzene 5  had  effect  not  only  on  what  OSHA
does,  but  on  what  the  EPA does  and on  what  the FDA  does.  A lot of
federal  regulatory policy is affected  by  this  case,  and it has  nothing to  do
with  ex post litigation  at all.  I think  in that respect,  Peter  hasn't taken
far  enough  his initial  correct insight  about the systemic  effect  of judicial
review.

Now,  one  wants to  ask, is  this a  good  systemic  effect or  a bad  one?
That's  a complicated issue.  The two things one  wants to  think about  are
legality  and  the real  world.  There  is  a lot  to  be said  for  the  claim  that
both  legality  and  the  real  world  are  made  better,  are  better  served,  by
aggressive  judicial  review  of administrative  action.

One very  quick way to make this point is to look at what's happened
under  President  Reagan's  Executive  Order  No.  12,291.6  That  is  not
quite  a substitution  of political  controls  for legal  controls;  that's  comple-
mentary  and  not  exclusive.  The Executive  Order  is  done in  the shadow
of the hard  look doctrine.  You can't read the annual regulatory  program
of the President  without  seeing the omnipresence  of both legality require-
ments  and rationality requirements.  If you talk to  anyone involved  early
on  or today in  the OMB  process,  their eyes  are  on  the statute  books  and
on  rationality, and that owes  a whole lot to the hard look doctrine  and  to
what  preceded  Chevron.  The  reason  I  have  enthusiasm  for  State Farm
and  skepticism  about Chevron is  because  what  those cases,  if rightly  de-
cided,  will do,  is to  ensure  that you get  the analysis  first and the conclu-
sion second,  rather than  vice-versa.  My fear is  that the abandonment  of
aggressive judicial  review-the continuation  of Chevron, which  says  that
those  limited  by  authority judge  the scope  of the  limitation,  an  idea ex-
traordinarily  foreign to our traditions-and  abandonment  of State Farm,
the consequence  of those  things simultaneously  will be  to permit  conclu-

4.  Mashaw  & Harfst,  Regulation and Legal Culture:  The  Case of Motor  Vehicle  Safety,  4
YALE  J.  ON  REG.  257  (1987);  R.  MELNICK,  REGULATION  AND  THE  COURTS:  TmE  CASE  OF THE
CLEAN  AIR  AcT  379-83  (1983).

5.  Industrial Union  Dep't,  AFL-CIO  v.  American  Petroleum  Inst.,  448  U.S.  607  (1980).
6.  Exec.  Order No.  12,291,  44  C.F.R.  1 (1988),  reprinted in  5  U.S.C.  ยง  601  (1982).

HeinOnline  -- 1989 Duke L.J. 552 1989

Vol.  1989:551)

QUESTION AND ANSWER

sion  first  and  analysis  second,  which serves  neither  legality  nor the  real
world very  well.

DE: 
I  like  Chevron,  I  don't  like  State Farm, and  I  tend  not  to  like
Heckler.  I think  the key difference  between  Cass  and me  in this  area  is
that I tend  to incline  more  toward Peter's  view of preferring  alternatives
to courts  as reviewing  institutions.  I don't think the executive  order pro-
cess  exhausts  the potential  creativity  for devising  a  lot of other  alterna-
tives  to court to perform  some  of these functions.  But I would  take issue
with the assertion  that we know  that the effects  of judicial review  on the
administrative  process  and  on  the internal deliberations  within  agencies
are huge.  I know about  some  of these  articles  that  give  Bill Pedersen's 7
and  Shep  Melnick's8  and  I  think  to  a  lesser  extent  Jerry  Mashaw's 9
view-I  think I read  Mashaw's  study very  differently,  Cass.  I see  [it]  as
being  essentially  a  political  process  that  drives  that  shift,  in  which  the
courts and the visibility that courts bring to particular proceedings play  a
role,  but I think  it's a misreading  of what's  really  going  on  in both Mel-
nick's  and  Mashaw's  work to  suggest  that the courts  are  producing  this
effect.  I think  it's much  more  of a  total  political  context  within  which
the regulatory  action  is  taking place.
PS: 
I agree  with a good  deal of what  Cass  Sunstein  has  said,  but want
to  call attention  to an unstated  premise in his analysis.  To the extent his
argument was  that legality  and  the courts  are particularly  important  in
keeping  the  President's  political  controls  under  control,  I would  agree.
He and I,  as  you may  know,  cooperated in  the past  on  a study  aimed  in
that direction. 10  But keeping the President an honest political broker is  a
different  proposition  from  taking  over  supervision  of political  outcomes
at the agency level,  and that's where  I tend to be cautious.  In part this is
because if we  are going to  be candid  we have  to measure  our ideal of an
apolitical judiciary against  the reality  of some politicization.  One of the
realities  that you'll find in  Dick Pierce's  analysis  in the Duke Law Jour-
nal 1 
is  that  the  D.C.  Circuit  opinions  are  not  only  activist,  and  thus
dismissive  of  agency  outcomes,  but  also  very  readily  explained  on  the
basis of politics.  They  are sharply  divided along political lines.  From the
very  outset, when the great Chief Justice outlived his party for more than
three  decades,  we  have known  that judges  may be only our longest  lived

7.  Pedersen,  Formal Records and Informal Rulemaking, 85  YALE  L.J. 38  (1975).
8.  See  S.  MELNICK,  supra note  4.
9.  See  J. MASHAW,  supra note  4.
10.  Strauss & Sunstein,  The  Role of the President and OMB  in Informal Rulemaking, 38  AD-

MIN.  L.  REv.  181  (1986).

11.  Pierce,  Two Problems in Administrative Law:  Political Polarity on  the District of Columbia

Circuit and Judicial Deterrence of Agency  Rulemaking,  1988  DUKE  L.J.  300,  303-13.

HeinOnline  -- 1989 Duke L.J. 553 1989

DUKE LAW  JOURNAL

[Vol.  1989.-551

and  least  responsible  politicians.  One  of  the  situations  that  faces  the
country  today and may be  endemic for our future  is that  we have  a Re-
publican presidency  and a Republican judiciary lined up against a Demo-
cratic  Congress.  That  may  suggest  that  legality  is  too  simple  an
expression  for understanding judicial behavior.  Might  one argue,  for ex-
ample,  that an  allegiance  between  President  and judiciary  against  Con-
gress  provides  some  means  for understanding  the judiciary's  increasing
taste for plain  meaning approaches  to  statutory interpretation? 12  To  the
extent  that  we  imagine  judicial  review  as  delivering  political  services,
rather  than  defending  individual  rights,  judges'  political  characteristics
biecome  perhaps  especially  problematic.  Judicial  perpetuation  of values
that  the  people  are  free  to  choose  and  have  left  behind  has  again  and
again  been  a  source  of difficulty  for  the  courts.  It is,  in  this  context,  a
source  of concern about  hard  look.

The  other thing that might  be said  about State Farm is simply  that,
given  the  underlying  politics,  that particular  holding  may  in  fact  repre-
sent  the  courts  checking  the  President  as  much  as  it  does  the  courts
checking  the  agency.
DP  [to  the audience]:  Now  you get  your  chance.
QUESTION: 
I have a question  for Cass.  I have  to, first of all, agree.  I
don't  like Heckler; I don't  like  Chevron; and  I  like State Farm.  But  I
wonder how  you can conclude  that close judicial scrutiny makes agencies
put analysis  first and  conclusions  second  as  opposed  to  conclusions  first
and  more careful  analysis  that  supports the  conclusions  later.
CS:  That's  a good  question.  The answer is,  once you start to analyze  a
problem,  then you start to think  about it differently,  often.  This  is some-
thing that should  be studied  empirically,  but you  can  show  actually  that
it has  sometimes  happened.  One  example  is  the airbags  problem  itself.
When  you  know,  as  I  know  personally  because  I was  there,  when  the
Reagan  Administration  came  in,  passive  restraints,  anything  having  to
do with that was  top of the hit list-that is, on  a literal hit list-and that
was  not  an  analyzed  conclusion,  that was  an  irrebuttable  presumption.
Now,  once  the  courts  said  "that's  out,"  it  didn't  happen  that  a  better
justification  just  came  up,  it  was  that  the problem  was  revisited.  I'd be
very interested  in  seeing  from  the Elliott  and  Schuck  study 13 how  often
this happens.  What  I do  know,  is  that it  happens  sometimes,  and in  a
way that really  matters.  I believe that something  similar happened  with

12.  For an  example  of this  approach,  see  K-Mart  Corp. v.  Cartier, Inc.,  108  S.  Ct.  1811,  1817
(1988)  ("If the agency  regulation is not in  conflict  with the plain language  of the statute,  a reviewing
court must give  deference  to the agency's  interpretation  of the statute.").

13.  Schuck  & Elliott,  To  the Chevron  Station: An  Empirical Study of Federal Administrative

Law,  1990  DUKE  L.J-(forthcoming  June,  1990).

HeinOnline  -- 1989 Duke L.J. 554 1989

Vol.  1989:551]

QUESTION AND ANSWER

regulation  of lead;  it was  in  the  early  days  of  the  EPA.  There  was  a
decision  made;  Judge  Leventhal  sent  it back;  it  tuined  out  there  was  a
very  elementary  error  that was  quite  arguably  politically  driven,  a very
different  result eventually  came  out.  Even if that example  is a little off, it
happens enough.  Everyone  can  probably  see it with himself;  it is  not the
case that once one  is  forced  to  analyze  a problem,  the conclusion  comes
first  always;  the  fact  that  you  have  to  do  the  analysis  might  make  the
conclusion  softer  or different.

DE:  Just to  answer that one question, in the data that I showed there, it
shows  that  about  35-40%  of the  time,  when  a  case is  sent  back  to  an
agency,  the  agency  really  does  reassess  and  make  a  major  change.  I
think that's  a  good  deal more  than  I expected  before  we  did the  study,
but  it  leaves  the  question,  is  the  glass  half empty  or  half full?  I think
neither  very  simplistic  view  that  agencies  never  rethink,  are  never  af-
fected,  nor that they always  respond to  courts,  is correct.  It's someplace
in between  in  the 35-40%  range, but  that's  something.  That  does  pro-
mote  a  major  reevaluation.  We  also  looked  for factors  other  than  the
judicial review,  that might explain  the turnaround  and they really  didn't
exist.  It seems  to  be  that  the  second  look-not  the  hard  look  but  the
second  look-does  in fact empirically,  in a substantial but not a majority
of cases,  promote  a  real  rethinking.

QUESTION: 
I'd  like  to  think  that  rethinking  is  most  likely  when  a
court  sends  something  back  to  an  agency  and  says  "You've  gotten  it
wrong."  I'm  thinking  more  in  terms  of the  systemic  ex  ante  problem:
knowing  that the judicial  review  will  occur,  will  that really  change  the
conclusion  of the agency?

DE:  That's  very  hard  to  study.

In  my  experience,  the  answer  is  yes,  but  that's  old  and  limited

PS: 
experience.

QUESTION:  This is  addressed  to  everybody,  but perhaps  particularly
Cass and Peter.  Isn't it the  case,  or could  it be  the case,  that hard  look
and  increased  presidential  or  political  controls  are  consistent,  and  that
the  latter,  political controls,  could  be enhanced,  perhaps  thereby  reduc-
ing the likelihood  of reversals  or  the need  for hard  look?

CS:  Yes.  I  am  a  real  enthusiast  for  Executive  Orders  12,29114  and
12,49815.  Peter  and  I have  written  on  that together, 16  but I  am  not an
enthusiast  for the abandonment  of the hard  look doctrine, as  a  result.  I

14.  Exec.  Order  No.  12,291,  44  C.F.R.  1 (1988),  reprinted in  5  U.S.C.  ยง  601  (1982).
15.  Exec.  Order  No.  12,498,  50  Fed. Reg.  1036  (1985).
16.  Strauss & Sunstein,  supra note  9.

HeinOnline  -- 1989 Duke L.J. 555 1989

DUKE LAW  JOURNAL

[Vol.  1989:551

think they  fit  together  beautifully  and  they  are  necessary  correctives  to
the  abuses  of the other.

If we  can  isolate  for  a  moment  the effect  of hard  look  review  on
PS: 
internal  agency process  from  the effect of hard look  review  on  the  presi-
dential process,  and I'm not  sure  that that could  be  done,  then  I would
prefer  to see that impact on  internal agency  process disappear,  or at least
be subdued  in  comparison  to  what results from  the presidential  process.
That  is  to  say,  if one  has  a  President  in  fact  supervising  agency  priori-
ties-and  it  is just  that process  that makes  me as  enthusiastic  as  Cass is
for [Executive  Orders]  12,291  and  12,498-then  that aspect  of hard look
tends  to make  courts  ask:  "Did  you  get this  exactly  right?"

For  example,  in the air bags  case,  the court  of appeals,  in  one of its
early rulings,  sends  back a complex  rulemaking  because  General  Motors
hadn't  quite got the dummy's  neck  right. 17  A  court is just too prone  to
misunderstand  the problem  as it was before  the agency and to lead  to the
kind of flyspecking  that, on  my reading  of the Mashaw  and Harfst study
of NHTSA  administration, ' 8  is indeed a principal  part of their account of
regulatory  failure.  So  to  the  extent  that one  sees  now  in  place  a  pretty
decent presidential process for insisting that agencies  have regulatory  pri-
orities  and think  about how  much  they're going  to  accomplish  through
this regulation  rather than that regulation,  I'm prepared to see  the courts
let  go.

QUESTION:  Comment  on  two  of the three  panelists.  It seems  to  me
that  there's  a  lot  of focus  on  what  the  agencies  and  the President  want
the policies  to be  at the agency  and a  bit  of a slighting  of what  Congress
wanted  the policies  to  be.  I was  at the  EPA  during  all  the  early  1970s,
and  was  a  colleague  of Bill  Pedersen  and  my experience  was  that  it was
cases  such  as  the Kennecott case' 9  in  1972  that  allowed  lawyers  in  the
EPA  General  Counsel's  office  to bring  some  element  of Congress's  legal
controls  .to bear  and  time  after  time,  what  we  saw  when  the  packages
came up  from the program  offices  of the EPA was  shoddy work,  reflect-
ing more of the attitude  of the EPA engineers  of what they wanted  to do,
and  relatively  little  attention  to  rational-by  "rational,"  I  mean  even
good  math-rulemaking,  and  certainly  no  attention  to  legal  require-
ments.  And  it was Kennecott that gave  us  and  a few  other lawyers  the
ability to  send  the package  back  and say  "We  can't defend  this.  At  least
do  it right  and  correct  the math  while you're  at it."

17.  Chrysler  Corp.  v. Department  of Transp.,  472  F.2d  659  (6th  Cir.  1972).
18.  Mashaw  &  Harfst,  Regulation and Legal Culture: The  Case of Motor  Vehicle  Safety,  4

YALE  J. ON  REG.  257 (1987).

19.  Kennecott  Copper  Corp.  v.  EPA,  462  F.2d  846  (D.C.  Cir.  1972).

HeinOnline  -- 1989 Duke L.J. 556 1989

Vol.  1989:551]

QUESTION AND ANSWER

CS:  This  is  why  I think that what  I see  as the conventional  separation
of powers analysis of Chevron is off.  Chevron sees  the opposition between
court and agency and says that one ought to favor the agency because it's
accountable.  In  a case  in  which the  question  is  the meaning  of a  statu-
tory term,  I think you rightly point out that it is not court vs. agency,  but
Congress  vs.  agency,  and  this  is  why  a  certain  form  of the  hard  look
doctrine  can  be a  great  friend  of legality,  and of, I think,  ordinary  con-
ceptions  of the separation  of powers.

DE:  Well,  I  think the effect  that you  describe  at  EPA of strengthening
the hand of the lawyers  as opposed  to the engineers or the programmatic
people is probably in fact one of the effects  that aggressive judicial review
has.  I wish I could find  something to  disagree with Peter  Strauss  about,
because  I  normally  like  to  disagree  with Peter.

It's  probably  helpful  that  in  my  experience  in  the  early  period,  in
1972,  at EPA, I'm not at all convinced  that environmental  laws  that are
designed  and  run  primarily  by  lawyers  are  a  good  thing.  And  I  think
that the over-judicialization  of the regulatory process  and the dominance
of lawyers  in policymaking  positions  within agencies,  EPA in particular,
is  probably  an  illustration  of the  kind of thing  that we  would  be  better
without,  at least in the second  generation.  Picking up on the point  about
how  these  things  change  over  time,  maybe  we  needed  some  legalism  in
the early  1970s, but I think maybe now it's a different  time, it's a different
enterprise for the regulatory  state and maybe there  needs to be a  change.

PS: 
If I can make  what  I think is  the same point  in a  slightly  different
way, you did not  face  12,291,  and the kind  of aggressive  OMB  oversight
of agency  fact-thinking  processes  that  now  occurs.  Hal  Bruff, sitting in
the front row, has just published for the Administrative  Conference a fine
study  of that  subject  that  will  appear  in  George  Washington Law  Re-
view 20  soon.  You should  all read it;  it is  very much along the lines  we've
been  talking  about-that  is,  it recognizes  the need  for  more  controls  of
the President's  control  of the process.  But I think  one  needs to  go  back
to  Kennecott and  reexamine  it  in  terms  that  now  recognize  significant
political  controls  by  the President  and  structural  controls  by  the  Presi-
dent.  In  some  ways  this  is  why  I  like  Sierra Club v. Costle 21  so  much,
and  in part  why  I like  Chevron:  Chevron recognizes  that courts  are not
alone  in  the  business.  The  other  reason  why  I  like  Chevron,  and  I've
written  at some length  about this2 2 so I think I can  say it very  briefly,  is

20.  Bruff,  Presidential Management of Agency  Rulemaking,  57  GEO.  WASH.  L.  REV.  533

(1989).

21.  657  F.2d  298  (D.C.  Cir.  1981).
22.  Strauss, One Hundred-fifty Cases Per Year:  Some Implications of the Supreme Court's Lim-

ited Resources for Judicial Review  of Agency Action,  87  COLUM.  L. REV.  1093  (1987).

HeinOnline  -- 1989 Duke L.J. 557 1989

DUKE LAW  JOURNAL

[V/ol.  1989:551

that  we  still  have  only  one  Supreme  Court,  and  we  have  168  court  of
appeals judges.  If the notion is that any  time a court of appeals  looks at a
complex  statutory  question,  it  gets  it right  and  it  gets  it  the  same  way
that all  the other court  of appeals judges in  this  country are  going to  get
it, and it gets it with a full  understanding  of the agency  program and the
way in which its readirig  of the statute will impact  on that  program,  that
is not a notion with  which I can  easily agree.  That's not  to say that there
isn't  a  large  role  for the  courts  to  pursue  in  enforcing  legality.  At  the
very  least,  at  what is  described  as  Chevron step  1, the  courts  are  to  ask
what could  the statute mean,  and step  in  when the agency  action  stands
outside  of  any  possible  meaning  for  the  statute;  and  courts  probably
should  look  with the  kind  of cautionary  regard that  Cass  also  suggests
for those  cases  in  which what the agency is  doing is plainly  enlarging  its
own  power.  Nonetheless,  a realistic  look at what  mode  of control  is  go-
ing  to  produce  cheap  and  effective  government  to  the  extent  we  want
government  here,  won't always  choose  the courts.
QUESTION: 
If I  could  make  just  one  follow-up  about  12,291,  I  cer-
tainly  don't know how it's working,  inside the agencies,  because  I'm  not
there-it may be working  rationally,  technocratically,  perfectly.  But we
did have  3171-...  which  extended  until the day  after the Carter  admin-
istration  took  office  on  January  21,  1977.  What  that involved  was  very
strong  OMB  control,  supervision,  bargaining  with  other  agencies,  and
basically,  in my opinion,  and in the opinion  of most  people  at EPA,  was
very much political,  it was not at all  directed  toward  improving the per-
formance  [of the agencies]  now  12,291  and  all  the other  processes  now
are  doing  all  those  things,  but one  has  to  wonder  if somebody  couldn't
press the question  whether they are masks  for a  political process  as well.

PS:  Good  question.

CS:  When  you  think  of  12,291,  a  lot  of  it  is  excellent.  But  keep  in
mind,  this  is  President -Reagan's  regulatory  program,  which  has  very
deeply  held  political  biases,  some  of  which  I  think  are  great,  some  of
which  are  not so  great.  OMB  control  maybe  helps  technocracy,  maybe
not.  OMB's  focus,  I assure you,  and I know something about  this, is  not
first  and  foremost  on  legality.  And  to  the  extent  that  it's  not  first  and
foremost  on  legality,  Chevron is  no  help.

DE:  Well, let me respond  to  [the  question]  of how  we  assess  how good
a job  the  courts  are  doing,  you  know,  compared  to  what?  When  Peter
says  I wasn't  there,  that's  right  as  far  as  the agency  is  concerned,  but  I
was  there  as  a  law  clerk on  the D.C.  Circuit  in  the  mid  '70s,  when  we

HeinOnline  -- 1989 Duke L.J. 558 1989

Vol.  1989:551]

QUESTION AND ANSWER

decided cases  like the Ethyl23 case and the Vermont  Yankee 24 case,  and I
can  tell you  that my perception  is that the judges  and law clerks  did not
really  penetrate  deeply  into  the facts  and  understand  the consequences.
In that sense  I think  Shep  Melnick's  book 2 s  is  really  quite  accurate  and
one  of the pieces  that Peter  Schuck and I hope  to do  as  an outgrowth  of
this  study  is  to  compare  agency  responses  to  remands  from  courts  as
opposed  to  agency  responses  to  the EPA  science  advisory  board.  The
working  hypothesis  is  that  precisely  because  the  EPA science  advisory
board,  which  is  composed  of a group  of outside  scientists,  can  penetrate
more  deeply  and  more  credibly  into the bad math that the people  at the
program  office  do,  that agencies  are  much  more  likely  to  respond  in  a
real  way  when  that kind of credible  reviewing  institution questions  their
conclusions  than  when  a  court  does.

Just one  little story  about that:  in the  Vermont  Yankee  case,  and in  the
Baltimore Gas and Electric case, 26  among  other  things,  Judge  Bazelon,
for whom  I was working,  got the half life  of plutonium wrong by a factor
of  10.  Now, this  is  a quite  inessential  element  of the case,  but you  can
imagine  this going back to the scientists at the Nuclear Regulatory  Com-
mission and their saying, "This bozo doesn't even know what the half-life
of plutonium  is."  I  don't  have  that  data  yet,  at  some  point  I'd like  to
have  it, I think  that looking at  "leave  agencies  alone"  or have  hard  look
by  courts  and lawyers,  is  to create  false  oppositions in  my view.  I think
that we need  to be thinking in  the future more  creatively  about what the
right  type  of reviewing  institutions  are in  various  areas  rather  than just
pushing  courts,  which  were,  after  all, just  around;  a  kind  of bricolage
process  in  which  you  take  what's  available  and  press  it  into  service  to
perform  a  new  function.  If you  sat  down  to  design  a reviewing  institu-
tion  for  EPA,  the  D.C.  Circuit  is  never  what  anyone  would  design.  It
just happened  to  be there,  and  you  use it, and  so  on.

I  was  at  the  NRC  at precisely  the  time  when  Don  was  where  he
PS: 
was.  Perhaps  all  I'll  say  is  that  the  impact  of  that  Court  of  Appeals
opinion  on the Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission  was to subtract, let's say
roughly  10  man-years  of effort  from  whatever  else  the Nuclear  Regula-
tory  Commission  was  able  to  do  during  the relevant  period- of time.
QUESTION: 
[There's one thing that I want to point out.]  You have to
include  Congress's  relationship  with  courts  [which  is]  central  to  the

23.  Ethyl  Corp.  v.  EPA,  541  F.2d  1 (D.C.  Cir.  1976),  cert. denied, 426  U.S.  941  (1976).
24.  Vermont  Yankee  Nuclear  Power  Corp.  v.  Natural  Resources  Defense  Council,  Inc.,  547

F.2d  633  (D.C.  Cir.  1976)  rev'd,  435  U.S.  519  (1978).

25.  R.  MELNICK,  supra note  4.
26.  Natural  Resources  Defense Council v.  NRC, 685  F.2d 459  (D.C.  1983),  rev'd, 462 U.S.  87

(1983).

HeinOnline  -- 1989 Duke L.J. 559 1989

DUKE LAW JOURNAL

[Vol.  1989:551

courts'  objectives.  Now on  to  another point  of the equation,  I think the
question  to  ask  is  how  do  you  [consider  the]  impact  of Congress's  rela-
tionship  with  the  executive  branch.  We  now  know  [that]  Congress  is
much  more  productive  today  than the executive  branch.  The Executive
is  behind.  The theory  now in  which control  lies  [with the  Executive].  I
think  it  would  be  particularly  useful  to  evaluate  the  errors  of  different
courts  and  [think]  about the methods  that  one  uses  for  delegation.
PS:  That's  an  excellent  point,  and  is  reflected  in  the  kind  of  thing
you've  pointed  out  to  me in  private discussions  in the  past;  that,  in  fact
the nature  of what  Congress  is  doing today  is  often  extraordinarily  pre-
cise  delineation  of what the agencies  are  expected  to  do  rather  than  the
broad  delegations  that may  have  characterized,  say,  the  1930s  or  even
other  periods  of time when  the presidency  and the  Congress  were  in  the
same  political  hands,  and  whether  that is  a product  of what's  expected
from  the agencies  or what's  expected  from the courts  is a nice  issue.  But
clearly  part of the political control  equation,  and part of the legal  control
equation  has  also  to  look  at  the  Congress  and  the  impact  on  that
relationship.

DP:  We  are  adjourned.

HeinOnline  -- 1989 Duke L.J. 560 1989

