 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Introduction: Notes on Feminist Political Thought Cass R. Sunstein* As the collection of essays in this symposium reveals, the recent growth of feminist thought has produced a wide range of work in political theit has in most areas of the social sciences and the humanities. A ory-as large amount of feminist writing deals with various aspects of the social subordination of women. Much of it also discusses the ways in which that historical fact has affected political theory and political practice; and it explores the possibilities for reformulating both by eliminating gender biases. One of the most striking features of feminist political theory, however, is its diversity. It is difficult to describe the general tendencies in feminist political thought without eliding important differences. for helpful comments. Ethics CARE, JUSTICE, AND RIGHTS: THE QUESTION OF "DIFFERENT VOICE" A good deal of feminist work is responsive to Carol Gilligan's influential challenge to Lawrence Kohlberg's theory of moral development.' In Gilligan's view, Kohlberg's theory, which purports to generalize across social differences, is in fact based on male norms. Gilligan's study argues that the moral development of young girls is different from that of young boys-that girls are inclined to focus on responsibility, context, and connection, whereas boys tend to favor abstractions, rights, autonomy, and separation. For political theory, this account is noteworthy above all because Kohlberg's theory of the stages of moral development is closely connected with prominent approaches to questions of social justice. If Kohlberg's theory of development is based on male norms, and ignores an important alternative, the same may be true of (to take a not entirely random example) contractarian theories of politics. Thus Gilligan's "ethic of care" is opposed, in much feminist work, to the "ethic of justice" associated with social contract theory, most notably that of John Rawls. Views in this general category-many led to feminist challenges to approaches that purport, for normative or explanatory purposes, to treat people as self-interested maximizers of private or existing desires. Such approaches, it is contended, are false to the experience of many women. It is important to emphasize that there is no necessary connection between Gilligan's discussion of moral development and any particular approach to politics. A rights-based system of politics might provide the necessary conditions for community; it might protect against the abuse of public and private power; it might be defensible on any number of other grounds. But the divergent moral development of men and wom 1. C. Gilligan, In a Different Voice (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982). L. Kohlberg, "The Development of Children's Orientation toward a Moral Order. 1: Sequence in the Development of Moral Thought," Vita Humana, vol. 6 (1963), "Stage and Sequence: The Cognitive Developmental Approach to Socialization," in Handbook of Socialization and Research, ed. D. A. Goslin (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1969). Sunstein Introduction it can be established-seems especially interesting if there is a en-if relationship between conventional approaches to politics and distinctly male ethical norms. 3. See, e.g., M. Sandel, Liberalism and the Limits of Justice (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982); A. MacIntyre, After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory (Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1981). Ethics contract theory in general and of Rawls in particular. Such critiques typically challenge the abstraction of the original position, its foundations in rational choice theory, and its asserted inattentiveness to differences between individuals and groups on the one hand and to concrete social contexts on the other.5 Okin's response takes the form of an interpretation of social contract theory, and of Rawls's effort more specifically, so as to accommodate some of the concerns of the feminist attack on (liberal?) conceptions of justice. In Okin's view, the original position need not and should not be understood either abstractly or in terms of rational choice. On the contrary, she argues that Rawls's approach can be recast in terms that immunize it from the feminist critique. Above all, Okin contends that the original position forces political actors to be empathetic. In the original position, those who are in a position to choose principles of justice are deprived of knowledge of their place in society. As a result, the original position forces the choosers to take the position of (among others) the disadvantaged. For this reason, Okin argues, the choosers are not required to be or to think as if they were "disembodied nobodies" but are instead required to "think from the position of everybody, in the sense of each in turn." On this view, the original position is not at all abstraction from difference and contingency but is instead rooted in "an appreciation and concern for social and other human differences." This understanding of the original position serves largely to collapse the distinction between an ethic of care and an ethic of justice and to recast in a new light the goals, central to contractarian and liberal thought, of impartiality and universalizability. Okin emphasizes as well that Rawls's theory ignores problems of gender structure and above all the question of justice within the family, which, she claims, leads to tension for his theory. In her view, the logic of the original position draws the traditional family and gender structure into severe question. 5. See, e.g., S. Benhabib, "The Generalized and the Concrete Other," in Feminism as Critique: On the Politics of Gender, ed. S. Benhabib and D. Cornell (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987). Sunstein Introduction least some forms of contractarianism: the dichotomy between an ethic of care and an ethic of justice seems to dissolve. But other pieces in this collection- notably Iris Marion Young's essay, discussed below-attempt to provide reasons for skepticism about this strategy. In arguments made in the 1970s for the Equal Rights Amendment, the principal norm underlying much feminist work was one of formal equality. In this view, distinctions between men and women should (almost always) be abolished. More recently, norms of formal equality have been thrown the resulting debate has produced an outpouring into sharp question-and of work on the appropriate meaning of equality in this and other contexts. The major problems here are twofold. as a refusal to permit women to be First, formal equality-defined treated differently from men-will sometimes undermine rather than promote the cause of equality (understood in more substantive terms) as between men and women. Consider, for example, the fact that the achievement of formal equality with respect to alimony, child custody, and divorce has in many settings aggravated the real world inequality of women. Second, some aspects of the social inequality of women are entirely unaddressed by formal equality as it is usually understood. The principal problem has to do with the application of norms of formal equality to settings of "real differences" between men and women. How, for example, ought one to think of equality and discrimination in the settings of reproductive rights, sex-related violence, and the continuing differences in the domestic and economic responsibilities and welfare of mothers and fathers? Formal equality often considers these issues to raise no problem of inequality at all; but if that view is accepted, many arenas of sex discrimination will be unaddressed. 6. See C. MacKinnon, Sexual Harassment of Working Women: A Case of Sex Discrimination Ethics by Catharine MacKinnon and Iris Marion Young, both outlined in more detail below, are centrally concerned with the problem. MacKinnon examines the relationship between sexuality and inequality; Young explores the relationship of reproductive capacities to that problem. Some feminist work attempts to analyze the consequences of practices distinctive to women-most notably, the experiences associated with reproduction-for political and social theory. For example, it is sometimes said that women's reproductive functions, and male responses to those functions, have played a large role in the creation of a split between the public and private spheres; in the devaluation of domestic roles; in certain conceptions of the distinction between reason and passion (often described along gender lines [see Okin's contribution to this collection]); and in the emphasis, most prominent in republican thought, on the creation of public spheres for the expression of male solidarity and sometimes for the achievement of a kind of immortality. belongs in this category. Held argues that the act of giving birth-unlike the act of dying-has often been described as an essentially natural process not involving elements of human choice. In her view, the decision to give birth is a self-conscious one over which women have frequently exercised control. In Held's view, the alternate devaluing and disregarding of the reproductive act and of reproductive choice has both reflected the social subordination of women and distorted political thought. Held contends that attention to the act of giving birth will lead to greater understanding of human experience. The feminist critique of universality takes the form of an emphasis on the importance of differences among social groups for political deliberation and political interaction. This critique is represented by Iris Young's contribution here, "Polity and Group Difference: A Critique of the Ideal of Universal Citizenship." Sometimes the critique of universality is relatively specialized, emphasizing that social and legal practices are based on partial norms that they deem universal. Here some of the challenges to formal equality, noted above, become relevant. Consider, for example, the fact that workplaces, insurance policies, and educational systems tend to be tailored to male career patterns and that changes in those systems are often considered to provide "special benefits" or "affirmative action" for women. Young argues that rights sometimes thought to be "special" from one point of view might well be necessary in order to ensure equal citizenship. In this sense, and perhaps in others, the distinction between affirmative action and nondiscrimination tends to dissolve. Sunstein Introduction consensus might be reached by political deliberators. Sometimes the critique with some forms of is an attack on political conceptions-associated emphasize the duty liberal, republican, and even radical thought-that of the citizen to the "common good." In the face of sharp differences in social experience, the idea that political actors should look to the interests of the community as a whole seems alternately mystical, tyrannical, or perverse. For feminists in particular, the problem is that universalist claims have tended to exclude women or to make women's claims appear deviant when measured against established norms. a) Many feminists have dealt with the allocation of social power in areas that have been studied relatively infrequently. Relations between men and women provide the foundation for an inquiry into ways of understanding such notions as coercion, power, and consent. Some of this work can be connected with various attacks, prominent in the 1970s, on pluralist conceptions of power.8 Here the problem is to explore not only how one group is able to force another to do what it wants but also how certain issues come to be put on the political agenda and, more generally, how preferences and beliefs are formed. 7. See J. Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (New York: Harper & Row, Ethics a good example. Fraser's goal is to trace the social construction of needs: the ways in which needs come to be recognized as such, and are placed on the political agenda, as a result of the efforts and understandings of different social movements. In Fraser's view, needs cannot be seen as prepolitical or as independent of culture and politics. Fraser offers a number of illustrations, many of them coming from feminist work, of practices currently described as "needs" that have assumed that status only recently and as a result of a particular constellation of social forces. Fraser's essay raises two further questions, on which she touches briefly. The first has to do with the precise mechanism by which social needs are recognized as such. The second involves the normative problem the multiple injuries that society does of how to decide which harms-of or does not recognize as "needs"-ought to receive a response from the political community. Fraser's ultimate goal is to contribute to a discussion of the processes by which that question might be answered. c) Some feminist work asserts that the social subordination of women and sexuality are closely intermingled. In this light, it is no puzzle that 9. See J. Elster, Sour Grapes: Studies in the Subversion of Rationality (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983); J. Roemer, "Rational Choice Marxism," in Analytical Marxism, ed. J. Roemer (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986). Sunstein Introduction a large part of the feminist movement has concentrated on the social and legal treatment of rape, prostitution, male control of reproduction, and sexual harassment. The empirical work here has attempted to show the pervasive and systemic quality of all these practices; the theoretical work considers the implications of the fact that legal and social systems tend to treat them as infrequent or marginal. Consider in this regard the fact that sexual harassment has been recognized as a legal category only in the last decade or so and that marital rape was not treated as a crime until quite recently (and even now the law here is in a primitive state). Some of the relevant work emphasizes the analogies between rape and prostitution and forms of interaction between men and women that are taken as normal and unobjectionable. The same argument is the source of the controversy over the definition of and appropriate response to sexual harassment. Political theory has often dealt uneasily or not at all with the relationship of sexuality to political power. Freud of course attempted to explore the problem, but his discussion of gender relations is notoriously inadequate. The most prominent modern example is the work of Michel Foucault, which stresses the variability of social mechanisms for understanding, creating, and controlling sexual behavior; but Foucault's lengthy work on the subject (astonishingly) deals not at all with questions of power as between men and women. Catharine MacKinnon's contribution here, "Sexuality, Pornography, and Method: 'Pleasure under Patriarchy,'" explores the social and political meaning and consequences of sexuality for issues of gender and equality. The essay provides the theoretical underpinnings for MacKinnon's well-known efforts to regulate pornography. MacKinnon's basic argument is that sexuality ought to be seen as socially constructed rather than as natural; that sexuality, as currently constituted and practiced, is a central though overlooked ingredient in the subordination of women; that theories that celebrate the liberation of sexual drives disguise this fact and often serve-in purpose, in effect, or both-to increase the sexual availability of women to men; and that the case of pornography cannot be treated as marginal or deviant but, instead, reveals something significant about the nature of sexuality and gender relations. MacKinnon's basic argument is that political theory must deal with questions of sexuality if the sources of inequality as between men and women are to be understood. The argument bears as well on the relationship of objectification to ethics and politics. Ethics MacKinnon's analysis helps to explain why some feminists have found the control of pornography to be an important subject. If widespread physical abuse of women occurs in and results from pornography, and if pornography plays a role in reflecting and perpetuating conceptions of sexuality that are an ingredient in sexual inequality, then efforts to understand and regulate pornography might be thought central to feminist theory and practice.