 Cass R. Sunstein * This discussion will come in two parts. First, I will make a somewhat unconventional constitutional argument about how the privacy cases should be understood. Second, I will venture a few observations about the character of this argument and about the nature of legal interpretation. The statute at issue in Griswold v. Connecticut forbade the use of contraceptives by married couples. The statute was defended as a means of preventing extramarital sex. Its origins suggested that it was intended to ensure that sex would occur only for purposes of procreation. 1. I rely in the next few paragraphs on the analysis in Strauss, Discriminating Intent tion is itself an implausible one, not susceptible to reasoned answer; and in that case we have reason to reject the test itself. What does it mean to say that the argument just offered is a constitutional argument? In what sense do arguments of this sort represent "law"? Notably missing from the argument is explicit emphasis on some of the conventional sources of constitutional argument-language, history, structure. On the other hand, the argument is not simply moral theory or normative argument in the abstract. The claim that the privacy decisions should be understood as involving sex discrimination is not a claim that the best political theory would understand them as such. The claim is instead that the equal protection clause is best interpreted to treat the cases in these terms. That claim in turn depends on a theory of the meaning of the notion of constitutional equality. That theory attempts to link race and sex discrimination-understanding both practices, for constitutional purposes, as a reflection either of a kind of prejudice or of social subordination. The argument offered above receives some support from cases suggesting that neutrality as between blacks and whites and women and men is a constitutional requirement, at least outside of the setting of affirmative action. It is buttressed as well by cases suggesting that the equal protection clause is designed to combat social subordination. constitutional interpretation. ism"-embodied perhaps in the idea that the Constitution should be interpreted so as to coalesce with the best political and moral ideals-and "hard law" approaches to constitutional law is based on confusions that might be cleared up by paying attention to actual constitutional argument. It would be a large mistake to suggest that constitutional claims of the sort made here-even if, for example, the intent of the framers, narrowly understood, is put to one sideput everything up for grabs. Whether the argument is to be accepted or rejected will depend on the reasons offered in its behalf. Those reasons-as in Brown v. Board of Education-involve the meaning of constitutional equality in light of the decided cases and the appropriate conception of the constitutional text. To ask whether Brown is "hard law" or personal preference is to assume a dichotomy that misdescribes the process. The same is true of constitutional argument quite generally. thesis, at least as frequently understood, misconceives the process of constitutional argument (and legal argument generally). I assert that the argument offered above is correct. So to assert is not to deny that the argument depends partly on judgments of value. It is sometimes said, as against interpretive approaches to law, that if something depends on judgments of value, all bets are off. But this idea turns on crudely positivist notions of social science. The argument made above is not in any simple sense a mere assertion of personal preference. If it is wrong, it must be because constitutional argument, properly understood, makes it wrong; and that is a question that must be discussed. tion are permissible and others are not; the Supreme Court operates in a highly pluralistic society; the rulings of the Court are authoritative-all of these features distinguish legal interpretation from interpretive practices in literature, theology, and philosophy.