 Cass R. Sunstein Cass R. Sunstein* Discussing the judge's role in interpreting statutes, Justice Holmes wrote that "if my fellow citizens want to go to Hell I will help them. It's my job."' Critics of the view of the courts as passive agents of the legislature claim that it understates the difficulty of interpretation, the indeterminacy of both the language and the will of the citizens, and the resulting discretion of the judge. Similarly, a vigorous debate continues over the proper role of the the text, the legislative traditional sources of statutory interpretation history, the purpose of the enacting Congress, and the structure of the statute. Professor Sunstein suggests that both the conventional understandings of interpretation and the recent critiques are seriously flawed. Because interpretation inevitably involves the application of "background norms" often controversial, value-laden, and not found in any text the traditional theories are incomplete. These theories, however, properly stress the democratic primacy of Congress. When congressional instructions are clear and do not create absurdity, courts should follow them. Often, however, the instructions are ambiguous, and judges must choose from a number of possible background norms. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to many colleagues and friends for their help with this essay. Bruce Ackerman, Akhil Amar, Douglas Baird, Jack Beermann, Frank Buckley, Frank Easterbrook, Jon Elster, Richard Epstein, William Eskridge, Richard Fallon, Philip Frickey, Stephen Gilles, Don Herzog, Stephen Holmes, Donald Horowitz, Benjamin Kaplan, Larry Kramer, John Langbein, Howard Latin, Larry Lessig, Jon Macey, Geoffrey Miller, Martha Minow, Richard Posner, Susan Rose-Ackerman, Frederick Schauer, Richard Stewart, Geoffrey Stone, David Strauss, Lloyd Weinreb, Robin West, James Boyd White, and John Wiley offered valuable comments on all or parts of the manuscript. I am also grateful to participants in helpful workshops at the University of California at Los Angeles, Harvard University, the University of Michigan, New York University, Princeton University, Tulane University, and the University of Virginia. D. Gordon Smith, Gamhk Markarian, and Catherine O'Neill provided research assistance and useful comments. Finally, I am grateful to the Law and Government Program of the University of Chicago for generous support. TN the early part of the twentieth century, courts often treated Iregulatory statutes as foreign substances. 2 Starting from principles of laissez-faire, judges saw statutory protections of workers, consumers, and others as unprincipled interest-group transfers supported by theories that were at best obscure and often disingenuous. 3 By contrast, judge-made doctrines of property, contract, and tort seemed to create a system with integrity and coherence. The New Deal period marked an enormous change in the size and character of the national government. 6 The decade between 193o and 2 See, e.g., B. CARDOZO, THE PARADOXES OF LEGAL SCIENCE 9 (1928) ("The truth is that many of us, bred in common law traditions, view statutes with a distrust which we may deplore, but not deny."). 1940 saw the creation of as many agencies as had been created in the entire period between the framing of the Constitution and the close of the nineteenth century. 7 During the "rights revolution" of the 196o's and 1970's, the national government substantially increased its regulatory responsibilities by moving to protect the interests of consumers, the national environment, and victims of discrimination. 8 The emergence of the regulatory state represents a shift in both the substance of law and the institutions through which law is made and enforced, 9 and the sheer volume of federal statutes and regulations has dramatically changed the business of the federal courts.' 0 In particular, the work of federal judges has increasingly involved the interpretation of federal enactments. In many respects, however, the theory and practice of public law have not outgrown the understandings that underlay the initial period of judicial antagonism. 12 That period is unmistakably recalled by 437-46 (1987) (discussing substantive and institutional reform in the New Deal period). The initial judicial skepticism about the legitimacy and' coherence of statutory law is also recalled by both poles of the contemporary debate over the possibility of constrained or objective legal interpretation. At one extreme, some courts and observers see the text or "plain meaning" of statutory language as the exclusive or principal guide to meaning. 16 At the opposite extreme, other commentators claim that legal terms are quite generally indeterminate 7 or have the meaning that those with authority choose to impose on them.' 8 Despite their differences, the two camps share a number of assumptions. Both treat regulatory statutes as an undifferentiated and unprincipled whole, without distinct and accessible purposes. Because members of both camps see no way to mediate the sharp ideological disagreements that sometimes underlie interpretive disputes, some are driven to the My project is to develop a theory of statutory construction that not only sheds light on current practices but also might claim to be worthy of adoption. In carrying out that task, it is first necessary to set out the proper relationships among the traditional sources of interpretation, including text, structure, purpose, intent, and history. A large part of the solution, however, lies in the identification and development of interpretive principles with which to approach regulatory statutes. 20 The meaning of a statute inevitably depends on the precepts with which interpreters approach its text. Statutes do not have pre-interpretive meanings, and the process of interpretation requires courts to draw on background principles. These principles are usually not "in" any authoritative enactment but instead are drawn from the particular context and, more generally, from the legal culture.2 1 Disagreements about meaning often turn not on statutory terms "themselves," but instead on the appropriate interpretive prin 19 See R. DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE 337-38 (x986) (arguing that judges should interpret statutes "in the best light overall"); Llewellyn, Remarks on the Theory of Appellate Decision and the Rules or Canons About How Statutes Are To Be Construed, 3 VAND. L. REV. 395, 399 (1950) (suggesting that courts interpret statutes to "make sense"). accepted understandings about statutory construction: o courts must always adhere to the original meaning of the statute, or the original intent of the enacting legislature; o courts are or can be mere agents of the Congress; o statutory meaning remains constant over time; o statutory meaning is equivalent to legislative intent; o controversial views about public policy are never and should never be part of statutory construction; o canons of construction, or background interpretive norms, are an outmoded and unhelpful guide to the courts. to clarify ambiguities or to prevent unnecessary or unintended irrationality and injustice. I also suggest that the traditional sources offer incomplete guidance and that their incompleteness reveals the inevitable failure of the agency conception of the judicial role. At the same time, I reject the view that statutory disputes produce "indeterminacy" in most or all cases and the related idea that such disputes are resolved on the basis of conventions that are not subject to evaluation. Finally, I criticize, though on quite different grounds, the use of certain widelyheld extratextual norms to resolve statutory disputes: private autonomy, deference to agency interpretations, and conceptions of statutes as "deals." Part Ill attempts to understand statutory construction by means of a general defense of the much-maligned "canons" of construction, understood as background principles designed to help discern statutory meaning. I defend the use of such principles by disaggregating their various functions and by suggesting that the use of background norms is desirable and in any case inevitable. I also suggest that several current substantive norms can be supported through an understanding of the ways in which they incorporate constitutional principles, promote deliberation in government, and respond to New Deal reforms of the legal system. 22 The study of statutory construction is therefore one part of a more general effort to understand the performance of modern regulatory institutions an effort that will ultimately make it necessary to focus more on Congress, the President, and the bureaucracy than on the courts. For discussion in this vein, see J. MAsHAW & B. HARFST, THE FREEDOM MACHINE (forthcoming 19go); C. SUNSTEIN, cited above in note *; and Rubin, Law and Legislation in the Administrative State, 89 CoLuM. L. REv. 369 (1989). The distinction is important because it is sufficient, for purposes of background understandings of this sort, that there be a social consensus on their behalf. Communication is possible only because of that consensus. But with respect to interpretive principles that are part of interpretation for example, the idea that silence on the question of federal preemption means that state law continues to exist a consensus may be inadequate if there are no good arguments on behalf of that consensus. In these latter cases, interpretive principles are at least in theory subject to evaluation and to replacement by alternatives. A pervasive problem with conventionalist accounts of meaning is that they treat all interpretation as akin to the sorts of understandings that make ordinary words intelligible. See infra pp. 442-43 (discussing conventionalism). I am grateful to Thomas Nagel for help with this point. The agency view appears in several competing forms, and much of the history of statutory construction consists of shifts and disputes among the various possible sources of the instructions of the courts' "principal," the legislature. I discuss several variations here. 25 This conception has strong roots in the American legal tradition, see, e.g., Schooner Paulina's Cargo v. United States, I U.S. (7 Cranch) 52, 6o (1812) (Marshall, C.J.) ("In construing these laws, it has been truly stated to be the duty of the court to effect the intention of the legislature."). For more modern advocates of the agency conception, see cases cited in note 29 below. meaning and bind judges, why should judges' words bind or even interest the rest of us?"). well, 30 partly because of dissatisfaction with alternative interpretive strategies, taken up below, which counsel courts to rely on "purpose" or to produce "reason" in regulatory regimes. 3 1 Several considerations argue in favor of textualist strategies. First, textualism contains an important and often overlooked truth. Statutory terms are the enactment of the democratically elected legislature and represent the relevant "law." Statutory terms not legislative history, not legislative purpose, not legislative "intent" have gone through the constitutionally specified procedures for the enactment of law. Second, resort to the text promotes goals associated with the rule of law: citizens have access to the statutory words and can most readily order their affairs in response to those words. Third, the words of a statute, considered in light of widely shared conventions about how they should be understood, often have only one plausible interpretation, or at least sharply constrain the territory of legitimate disagreement. Finally, an emphasis on the primacy of the text serves as a salutary warning about the potential abuses of judicial use of statutory "purpose" and of legislative history. 32 Some textualists emphasize the "plain meaning" or dictionary definition of statutory terms; others are more sensitive to the particular settings. In its purest form, however, the textualist approach is inadequate. The central problem is that the meaning of words (whether "plain" or not) depends on both culture and context. Statutory terms are not self-defining, and words have no meaning before or without interpretation. 33 To say this is emphatically not to say that words insight and vigor. See, e.g., Easterbrook, supra note 13. used in statutes or elsewhere can mean anything at all. 34 But it is to say that statutory terms are indeterminate standing "by themselves," and, even more important, they never stand by themselves. The significance of congressional enactments necessarily depends on the context and on background understandings about how words should be understood. Moreover, reliance on ordinary or dictionary definition, without reference to context, will sometimes lead to interpretive blunders. Usually the context does not prevent reliance on ordinary meaning, and usually the background principles are so widely shared for example, that Congress is speaking in English, that Congress is not joking or attempting to mislead, that statutes have purposes, or that judges should not decide cases simply according to their predilections that they are invisible. Even in easy cases, however, courts must resort to background principles. For example, the question whether the enactment of federal environmental statutes preempts all of state tort law is an easy one, not because of the statutory text "itself," but because of shared understandings about the limited preemptive effect of federal enactments. 36 Those who accept textualist approaches might agree that the meaning of words is partly a function of the context and of background norms about how texts should be approached. Indeed, we may define an easy case as one in which the context produces no dispute and there is a consensus about the governing norms. 3 7 In many hard cases, however, the source of the difficulty is that the particular background norm and the nature of its application will be highly controversial. Textualism or "plain meaning" approaches can resolve these questions only by covertly introducing background principles, which are often controversial. is that statutory language unambiguous, not because of the text "itself," but because of the strong presumption, created by courts but now widely shared, in favor of judicial review of administrative behavior. See infra PP. 475-76. If textualism is taken, as it often is, to call for reliance on the literal4 1 language of statutory words their dictionary definition or meaning in ordinary settings it will sometimes suggest an outcome that makes little or no sense. For example, suppose that a state law says that no vehicles are permitted in public parks, and a city proposes to build in a park a monument consisting of tanks used in World War l.42 The literal language must yield, for the statute could not reasonably be taken to forbid a monument, which causes none of the harms the statute could be thought to prevent. (d) Delegation, Gaps, and Implementing Rules. - The incompleteness of textualism is most conspicuous when Congress has explicitly or implicitly delegated lawmaking power to the courts or when Congress has simply left a gap. In cases of delegated power or gap-filing, the problem is not that words are susceptible to more than one construction, but instead that the words necessarily require courts to look to sources outside of the text.5 2 The Sherman Act, for example, raises a serious gap-filling problem. The language of the Act does not answer the question of what practices amount to "conspiracies in restraint of trade." The legislative history is suggestive but unclear,5 3 and the courts have inevitably taken the Act as a delegation of policymaking power pursuant to quite open-ended criteria.5 4 Similarly, section I983 s5 is silent on many im Judicial implementation of title VII of the Civil Rights Act of I96457 can be understood in similar terms, though this example is more controversial. The basic prohibition of "discrimination" provides no guidance on the role of discriminatory effects, the appropriate burdens of proof and production, and the mechanisms for filtering out discriminatory treatment. Judicial answers to these questions sometimes purport to be relatively mechanical responses to congressional commands,5 8 but in fact they amount to judge-made implementing devices that reflect the judges' own, inevitably value-laden views. In light of the existence of textual gaps on many questions, this approach is hardly an embarrassment or a usurpation, but instead an inevitable part of interpretation. Much of the law of title VII is an unavoidable, and therefore legitimate, norm-ridden exercise in developing gap-filling rules.5 9 In this respect, the Sherman Act and title VII are closely analogous. The discussion thus far suggests two principal points. First, and most fundamentally, there is no such thing as an acontextual "text" that can be used as the exclusive guide to interpretation. In easy cases, interpretive norms on which there is wide or universal consensus and context both play a part in the process of ascertaining statutory meaning. Because such norms are so widely shared, they are invisible and are not an object of controversy. Only in these cases can meaning ever be said to be "plain." With these qualifications, textualism is generally appropriate. In hard cases, however, courts must resort to a highly visible background norm, 65 or a con 66 Consider, for instance, the examples of overinclusiveness mentioned earlier: a law allowing spousal inheritance "in all circumstances," invoked by someone who murdered his wife; or a law allowing employers to discharge employees "for any reason" invoked by an employer who fired a worker for refusing to commit murder. See supra p. 42o; see also cases cited supra notes 35 & 44. Structural approaches to statutory construction are entirely unobjectionable on the contrary, they provide significant interpretive guidance. Such approaches promote fidelity to congressional instructions and at the same time help to make sense of complex regulatory enactments. If an interpretation of one provision works against or makes meaningless another provision, there is good reason to reject that interpretation. (i) Purpose. - Resort to the "purpose" of the statute was especially popular among academic commentators in the 195o's and I96O's. Steeped in legal realism, these commentators disparaged approaches that substituted mechanical rules for more functional and purposive inquiries. 74 Their resort to purpose was an effort to maintain the role of the courts as agents of the legislature while at the same time acknowledging the inadequacy of textualism. Thus, in the case of the war memorial in the park, the question whether the memorial is a "vehicle" within the meaning of the statute might be answered by asking whether the memorial creates harms (such as noise or pollution) that undermine the purposes for which the statute was enacted. Because the memorial does not, the case is an easy one, and the statutory proscription does not apply. Purposive interpretation may also suffer from overinclusiveness or underinclusiveness. By taking the purpose of a statute out of context, one might broadly read a provision to prevent behavior that under the most plausible reading the statute should not reach. 7 7 Similarly, an unduly narrow categorization might prevent a statute from reaching a situation that should fall within its scope. 78 Advocates of purposive interpretation sometimes disregard the fact that purposes are expressed through and have no life independent of statutory words. The words represent the law. title VII does not forbid voluntary affirmative action plans). The problem in these settings is that mechanical transplantation of statutory purposes to new settings is unlikely to produce sensible results even from the standpoint of the enacting legislature. Nor is it sufficient to say that the legislature rather than the courts should respond to changed circumstances. Often it is unrealistic to expect a legislative response. 8' More important, the issue for interpretation is the meaning of the statute in the new circumstances. Meaning does not remain static across changes in law, policy, and fact. 82 Interpretation that brings the legislature into the present will, however, inevitably involve a large measure of discretion and a corresponding danger of judicial abuse. (statement of Rep. Heckler). Concerns of this sort are both legitimate and well-taken. Although it is proper to look at a statute's background in the form of actually enacted and repealed provisions, the legislative history, which was never enacted, should rarely be permitted to supplant the statutory words as they are ordinarily understood.8 8 This is so because attention to the language promotes the rule of law and because of democratic and constitutional considerations the words rather than the intent survived the procedures of article I. Moreover, such an approach might both discipline Congress, by forcing it to attend to its words, and minimize judicial discretion by barring judges from relying on policies and principles of their own. But Justice Scalia somewhat overstates the point.8 9 The legislative history will sometimes reveal what some or many members of the Congress thought about the meaning of an ambiguous term, and that understanding is relevant. It is unlikely that the history will only reflect the views of selfinterested private groups. 90 Moreover, legislative history provides a sense of the context and purpose of a statutory enactment, which, as we have seen, can provide important interpretive help. leave large gaps or produce mistakes. One might say all this without denying that Justice Scalia is saying something correct and important in cautioning courts not to accord weight to legislative history at the expense of statutory language, and in recognizing the risk that parts of the history may have been composed by one side or the other. In short, courts should approach legislative history cautiously. 93 Except in rare cases of unintended irrationality or injustice, 94 courts should not permit history to overcome statutory language; but they should also not ignore it, especially when the text is unclear. To say this is not to deny that the intentions of a group or majority of lawmakers will be pertinent and helpful. Legislative history has in fact provided a valuable sense of context in a number of recent cases.96 If the legislators understood a statutory word as a term of legislative history); Scalia, Judicial Deference to Administrative Interpretations of Law, 1989 DUKE L.J. 5II (acknowledging his textualism while detailing the necessity of deferring to an agency's greater expertise and accountability). Justice Scalia has, notably, endorsed some canons of construction. See, e.g., Green v. Bock Laundry Mach. Co., 1O9 S. Ct. i98i, 1994 (1989) (Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment) (advocating an interpretation "most compatible with the surrounding body of law into which the provision must be integrated a compatibility which, by a benign fiction, we assume Congress always has in mind'); Chan v. Korean Air Lines, iog S. Ct. 1676, 1683-84 & n.5 (1989) (invoking the expressio unius canon); Coit Independence Joint Venture v. FSLIC, 109 S. Ct. 1361, 1377 (1989) (Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment) (advocating a presumption against preemption of state law); Pierce v. Underwood, io8 S. Ct. 2541, 2547-49 (1988) (arguing that lower court interpretations should be presumed valid); Immigration & Naturalization Serv. v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 453-54 (1987) (Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment) (arguing for deference to agency interpretations of law). art, that understanding should prevail; courts should attend to the intended meaning rather than the usual meaning of the words if the former is clear and the latter would produce absurdity. Moreover, an undisputed congressional intent should ordinarily be followed in the event of linguistic ambiguity. 97 But the subjective intentions, even if ascertainable, are not controlling unless enacted. 98 would lead to inadvertent absurdity. The case involved the meaning of rule 6og(a)(x) of the Federal Rules of Evidence, which allows the introduction of prior crimes of a witness, for purposes of attacking credibility, when "the probative value of admitting this evidence outweighs its prejudicial effect to the defendant." FED. R. EVID. 6o9(a)(1). All nine members of the Court agreed that rule 6og could not plausibly mean that evidence would be automatically introduced against civil plaintiffs, but not against civil defendants. The legislative history revealed that such an interpretation was unintended for no one, at any point in the background and history of the rules, ever proposed or assumed a distinction between the rights of civil plaintiffs and those of civil defendants. Indeed, even Justice Scalia acknowledged the usefulness of history here: "I think it entirely appropriate to consult all public materials, including ... the legislative history... to verify that what seems to us an unthinkable disposition... was indeed unthought of, and thus to justify a departure from the ordinary meaning of the word 'defendant' in the Rule." Bock, io9 S. Ct. at 1994 (Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment). For all of these reasons, the notion of legislative intent is at best an incomplete guide to statutory construction. If the legislative intent is ascertainable, it should be used to resolve otherwise doubtful questions about statutory meaning. Nevertheless, difficult questions will often remain. Legal process approaches stand poised somewhere between agency theories of the judicial role and understandings of an altogether dif 101 See supra note io; see also Aleinikoff, supra note 64 (advocating interpretation that departs from original meaning in the face of changed circumstances). true of Freund and Radin. See sources cited supra note 104. The same problems underlie Ronald Dworkin's influential treatment of this subject.' 0 9 Dworkin argues that courts should interpret statutes in accordance with the best principle that can be brought forward in support of what the legislature "has done." In Dworkin's view, the judge should see himself as "a partner continuing to develop, in what he believes is the best way, the statutory scheme Congress began. " 110 The judge should ask "what coherent system of political convictions would best justify what [the legislature] has done," 111 and should find and apply to disputed issues of interpretation "the best justification . . . of a past legislative event."11 2 This position is a clear heir to the legal process position above all, in its emphasis on the use of judicial interpretation to produce reasonable results, to guard against arbitrariness, and to produce coherence in the legal system. As did its legal process predecessors, Dworkin's approach sees the courts partly as agents (hence the emphasis on "what the legislature has done") and partly as creative actors relying on normative theories of their own. In a number of respects, Dworkin's approach fits congenially with what I suggest here: it, too, insists on judicial efforts to promote a principled rather than ad hoc set of legal requirements and to foster what Dworkin calls "integrity," sometimes in the face of legislative "intent" or the actual character of the legislative process. 113 Dworkin's approach is marred, however, by the open-ended character of its guiding interpretive principle a failing that provides the final link between Dworkin's effort and that of the legal process school. The dangers of judicial discretion in searching for and giving content to "the best principle" are largely unaddressed. Dworkin fails to explore the institutional background, or the substantive functions and failures of statutory regimes. The characteristics of the modern regulatory state are entirely invisible in Dworkin's treatment. Dworkin's account draws far too sharp a dichotomy between "the best principle" found through tools external (to what extent?) to the disputed provision or the prevailing legal culture and "what the legislature has done," with the latter sometimes treated as if it were a kind of brute fact. 1 4 struction described in Part IV. For this reason and this is the central problem - Dworkin's effort to find the principle that best justifies what the legislature has done is largely untethered. An emphasis on text, history, or intention seems a most appealing refuge from a general inquiry of that sort. In particular, reliance on the text seems to have a far better democratic pedigree and to hold far more promise for limiting judicial discretion. 4. The Proper Role of Traditional Sources of Meaning and the Failure of the Agency View. - The discussion thus far suggests several conclusions about the use of traditional tools of statutory construction. The text, understood in its context and in concert with shared background norms, is usually sufficient to resolve interpretive disputes. Sometimes, however, the text is ambiguous or reveals a delegation or gap. Moreover, the ordinary meaning of the text should not be decisive when the statutory structure or purpose (if subject to an uncontroversial characterization) suggests an alternative meaning, and when a literal interpretation would produce a patently unjust or irrational application that was not clearly sought by the legislature. Similarly, the legislative "intent" is admissible to resolve ambiguities, but it usually should not be permitted to overcome the ordinary meaning of the statutory words if that meaning is otherwise clear. The only exception is when the history supports the conclusion that literalism would produce unintended irrationality or injustice." 5 In some cases, however, all of these sources of statutory meaning will leave serious gaps or uncertainties, and sometimes interpretive principles are properly invoked to press language in particular directions. As complete theories of statutory construction, then, the most prominent examples of the agency view of the judicial role appear to fail; it is time to consider the implications of that failure." 6 The agency view starts from the important truth that it would be improper for judges to construe statutes to mean whatever the judges think best; the lawmaking primacy of the legislature, with its superior democratic pedigree, 1 17 prohibits such a conception of statutory "interpretation." It follows from this understanding that where there is neither interpretive doubt nor constitutional objection, the judgment of the electorally accountable branch should prevail. complete one. The theory operates largely as a rhetorical device or a rallying cry, and as such, it is useful in disciplining judges but also highly misleading. Of course, there are risks in admitting power of this sort, largely in the form of increased judicial discretion. For this reason, invocation of controversial background norms should be modest. Although no decisive argument is available to demonstrate why and to what extent the recognition of such authority will make matters better rather than worse, it is possible to point to institutional characteristics of the judiciary that occasionally justify what might seem an aggressive role in interpretation. 120 In civil law systems, this point is conventional, and a judicial role of this sort is fully consistent with legal practice throughout this country's history, even before nationhood. See Zweigart & Puttfarken, Statutory Interpretation - Civilian Style, 44 TUL. L. REV. 704, 70708 (197o); infra note 124. Something like it was suggested by Alexander Hamilton himself. See It is one thing to say that courts must defer to the lawmaking primacy of the infra note 123. legislature; it is quite another thing to say that this principle implies a theory barring courts from interpreting statutes with the aid of sometimes controversial background norms. In light of the relevant history, the view that the Constitution carries with it this quite novel theory of interpretation is hard to sustain. Second, because of their independence and their deliberative capacities, courts have significant advantages over a legislature that may be influenced by parochial interests and is frequently responsive to momentary demands.122 Considerations of this sort were emphasized in The Federalist, quite outside of the context of constitutional review. 123 Those considerations support a relatively aggressive role for the courts in statutory interpretation, one that sees judges as something other than agents. That position is consistent as well with historical practice. 124 It would of course be possible to use contestable principles modestly or quite aggressively, and courts have occasionally used interpretive norms to construe statutes in ways that are plainly inconsistent with the outcome that would be reached through reliance on text, structure, purpose, and ordinary understandings of linguistic commands. 125 As a general rule, however, courts should use controversial background norms sparingly, in deference to the basic principle of democratic primacy. But in some situations for example, when conventional interpretation would produce absurdity or gross injustice, when changed circumstances call for creativity, when constitutional considerations counsel courts to interpret statutes in one direction involving interpretation of the Occupational Safety and Health Act and the Delaney Clause. See infra pp. 489-93, 496-97. The problems with textualism and with the agency view lead some to conclude that statutory interpretation produces unpredictability and indeterminacy in most or all cases. 12 6 Noting that interpretation is possible only within the context of interpretive conventions, 12 7 others argue that it is not possible to change, debate, or even theorize about interpretation. One just does it. 128 But cf. S. FISH, Is THERE A TEXT IN THIS CLASS?, sup a note IS, at 268 (arguing that, in interpretation, there are obvious and inescapable meanings resulting from shared interpretive assumptions). attacks on implausible versions of textualism or formalism provide little help in the descriptive or normative tasks of interpre 129 See Easterbrook, supra note 13, at 533 n.2 (discussing Wittgenstein's contention that "meaning" is supplied by the community). In recent years, courts and commentators have proposed three theories of statutory construction that rely on extratextual norms. The first involves a background rule in favor of private ordering; the second calls for a rule of deference to regulatory agencies; the third refers to the difficulties in aggregating diverse legislative views and the notion that statutes represent "deals" among self-interested actors. Each of these approaches suffers from significant flaws. 136 See supra pp. 407-08. This basic approach to regulatory statutes operated as the statutory analogue to the constitutional principle in Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45 (19o5), in which the Court treated certain statutory measures as impermissible deviations from the "neutral" principles reflected in the common law. Both principles were properly rejected. They used a highly controversial set of regulatory ideas, embodied in nineteenth-century common law, as the baseline against which to decide the scope of innovations developed by the democratic branches in a conscious rejection of the common law. The legal realists important forces behind the New Deal reformation argued that governmental power lay behind common law rules, which could not, therefore, be treated as merely facilitative of private desires; they played a constitutive role as well. See Cohen, Property and Sovereignty, 13 CORNELL L.Q. 8 (1927); Hale, Coercion and Distribution in a Supposedly Non-Coercive State, 38 POL. Sci. Q. 470 (1923). displacement of judicial lawmaking represented by the creation of regulatory schemes. Thus, in the exceptionally important Chevron case, 139 the Supreme Court said that courts should defer to agency interpretations of law unless "Congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue. 1 40 Even if read for all that it is worth, the Chevron position would not resolve every disputed statutory question. Threshold interpretive questions must be asked and answered even under Chevron. For example, courts have to rely on some methodology that is independent of the rule of deference to decide when statutes are ambiguous. The rule of deference would, however, have significant consequences, because it would remit all uncertain cases to regulatory agencies for administrative resolution. Moreover, such a rule is quite appealing, 141 especially when Congress has delegated law-interpreting power to the agency or when the question involves the agency's specialized factfinding and policymaking competence, as do "mixed" issues of law and fact. Second, the notion that administrators may interpret statutes that they administer is inconsistent with separation of powers principles that date back to the early days of the American republic 45 and that retain considerable vitality today. 146 The basic case for judicial review depends on the proposition that foxes should not guard henhouses. It would be most peculiar, for example, to argue that courts should defer to congressional or state interpretations of constitutional provisions whenever there is ambiguity in the constitutional text. Those who are limited by a legal restriction should not be permitted to determine the nature of the limitation, or to decide its scope. The relationship of the Constitution to Congress parallels the relationship of governing statutes to agencies. In both contexts, an independent arbiter should determine the nature of the limitation. politics not as an effort to carry out coherent or public-regarding purposes but as a battle for scarce resources among self-interested private groups, these commentators maintain that the legislative process is a series of interest-group struggles. They also emphasize the difficulties in aggregating the preferences and beliefs of numerous legislators. From this they conclude that statutes reflect unprincipled "deals" and not intelligible collective "purposes." Some of those who urge this view claim that it has foundations in the thought of the framers of the Constitution. 149 The second claim is that courts charged with interpreting statutes should not rely on unitary or public-regarding purposes, but instead should enforce the statute according to its terms, which reveal the relevant "deal." Courts should not see legislators as "reasonable people acting reasonably." Instead, statutes are often unprincipled outcomes of multiple pressures imposed on multiple actors. The contrast with the legal process school in particular could not be sharper.15 0 Consider, for example, how an advocate of the deals approach would analyze the question whether a federal statute regulating pollution implicitly authorizes victims of pollution to bring suits against If the statute does not expressly provide for such suits, the polluters. victims have not obtained that right as part of the statutory "deal," and the right should be denied. By contrast, a court that saw the legislature as "reasonable people acting reasonably," or that treated a multimember body. First, efforts to aggregate multiple points of view through legislation will not yield an intelligible preference of the collectivity. Even if legislators vote according to their actual preferences, the outcome may not reflect a coherent aggregation of preferences because the outcome eventually chosen depends on the order in which different proposals were considered rather than on a collective preference for that outcome. See K. ARRow, supra note i5, at 466o (describing the Impossibility Theorem). Advocates of the "deals" approach correctly emphasize legislative compromise, and they have also performed a valuable role in suggesting that legislative purposes are often multiple and even conflicting. As a theory of statutory interpretation, however, the "deals" approach suffers from many of the failings of textualism. The first problem is indeterminacy. In many cases, the terms of any deal will be hopelessly unclear in the absence of background norms that a system of interpretation alone can supply. For example, an approach that sees statutes as deals is in fact unhelpful in cases involving implied causes of action. If a statute is treated as a deal between industries seeking protection against too much regulation on the one hand, and environmental groups attempting to prevent pollution on the other, what result is appropriate? The answer would be obvious if there were a background norm to the effect that regulatory statutes generally create private rights of action. In that case, the failure of industry to obtain a prohibition on such rights would suggest that the deal authorized them. The result would also be clear if the background norm forbade private rights without explicit legislative authorization: the deal did not include them. The central question is what the relevant norm should be. The claim that statutes should be understood as deals provides no help in deciding on the background against which deals must be read. In the end, advocates of the "deals" approach like rely in fact on a substantive background norm;15' most formalists it is that norm, on which the "deals" approach is utterly unhelpful and indeed silent, that is the true basis for decision. 151 See, e.g., Easterbrook, supra note 13, at 549-50 (relying on the background norm of private autonomy). Consider also Justice Scalia's enthusiastic resort to the principle in favor of judicial deference to agency interpretations of law. See Immigration & Naturalization Serv. v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 453-55 (1987) (Scalia, J., concurring). interest-group pluralism cannot be defended as a method for ensuring accurate aggregation of citizen preferences. Public choice theory itself reveals that pluralist systems reflect collective A system of interpretation that treats statutes as interest-group deals or as incoherent compromises therefore would suffer from a wide range of problems. By contrast, a regime in which courts treat statutes as purposive, rational, and public-regarding would be more likely to push statutes in purposive, rational, and public-regarding directions. Of course, a court should respect a deal if it is unambiguously reflected in law. But an interpretive approach that is alert to the risks of deals and that attempts to make sense of statutory enactments will produce a superior system of law.15 9 supra note 148 (discussing the problems faced by multimember representative bodies). for regulation). A. Karl Llewellyn and the Canons of Construction The discussion thus far has suggested that the agency view is inadequate and that interpretive norms play an indispensable role in statutory construction. The relative silence about the role of such norms therefore presents something of a puzzle. 163 See Posner, Statutory Interpretation In the Classroom and in the Courtroom, 5o U. [C]anons give an air of abstract intellectual compulsion to what is in fact a delicate judgment, concluding a complicated process of balancing subtle and elusive . . So far as valid, they are what Mr. Justice Holmes called them, axioms elements. . . . Insofar as canons of construction are generalizations of experience, of experience. . they all have worth. in the form of "clear-statement" principles and background under can be found in every area of modern law. An analogy may be helpful here. The law of contracts is pervaded by a set of principles filling contractual gaps when the parties have been silent, or when the meaning of their words is unclear. 16 7 Imagine, for example, that the parties have been silent on the time of performance, damages in the event of breach, or the consequences of dramatically changed circumstances and partial default. The use of implied terms, or "off-the-rack" provisions, is a familiar part of the law of contract; and it would be most peculiar to say that they are an illegitimate incursion into the usual process of "interpreting" the parties' intent. Without implied terms of some sort, contracts simply would not be susceptible to construction. Implied terms also provide the background against which people enter into agreements. including the traditional "canons" 168 serve the same function in public law. They too help judges to construe both statements and silences; they too should not be seen as the intrusion of controversial judgments into "ordinary" interpretation. There are, however, differences as well as similarities. In the law of contracts, it is often said that implied terms should attempt to "mimic the market" by doing what the parties would do if they had made provision on the subject. 169 In this respect, contract law is pervaded by a background norm in favor of party autonomy and the market. In statutory construction, by contrast, the notion of "mimicking the market" is unavailable, and the idea that one should do what Congress would have done is far from a complete guide. As we have seen, how Congress would have resolved the question is sometimes unclear; sometimes the resolution of the enacting Congress would produce difficulties as a result of changed circumstances; 170 sometimes courts properly call into play principles - many of them 167 See generally Goetz & Scott, The Limits of Expanded Choice: An Analysis of the Interactions Between Express and Implied Contract Terms, 73 CALIF. L. REv. 261, 264-89 (1985) (discussing the courts' role in creating implied contract terms). Part of the problem in coming to terms with the canons is that they have served different functions, as do the interpretive principles courts generally employ. Some of these functions are nearly invisible: the norms are so widely shared, and so central to the very process of communicating in English, that they seem to be part of the words rather than part of the interpreter's tools. Some such "norms" are simply part of meaning and not open to discussion; others are also invisible but value-laden and potentially subject to evaluation. 171 Still other norms look to values that more visibly serve substantive or institutional goals and are applicable principally in the context of interpreting statutes: these norms here referred to as background norms often seem extratextual. It is useful to distinguish between the invisible norms and background norms because usually only the latter are controversial and constitute the subject of interpretive disputes. The distinction, however, is imprecise, for interpretive norms often serve multiple functions simultaneously, and substantive and institutional functions are served by invisible norms as well. Many of the infamous Latin-phrased canons serve similarly mun dane functions. For example, the principle of ejusdem generis where general words follow a specific enumeration, the general words should be limited to persons or things similar to those enumerated 176 derives from an understanding that the general words are probably not meant to include matters entirely far afield from the specific enumeration. If understood to be truly general, the general words would make the specific enumeration redundant. in order to support the conclusion that those not specified are not entitled to the good in question. 177 The assumption is that by expressly singling out those people to whom it wanted to grant the good, Congress implicitly decided to deny all others the good. The expressio unius canon should not be used mechanically. The failure to refer explicitly to the group in question may reflect inadvertence, inability to reach consensus, or a decision to delegate the decision to the courts, rather than an implicit negative legislative decision on the subject. Moreover, Congress could have explicitly solved the problem by specifying that the group in question may not receive the benefit, and the availability of that option weakens the inference that silence resolves 173 See, e.g., Shell Oil Co. v. Iowa Dep't of Revenue, io9 S. Ct. 278, 282 (1988). Suppose, for example, that the question is whether the term "feasible" requires an agency to weigh costs and benefits, or instead tells the agency to act unless the industry would be seriously jeopardized by the regulation. If the word "feasible" is used in the same sentence or provision as the term "cost-benefit analysis," then it is reasonable to assume that the word "feasible" itself does not call for cost-benefit balancing otherwise the statute would be redundant or incoherent. Some interpretive principles, however, are a product of an understanding of implicit rather than explicit legislative interpretive instructions. For example, a familiar and often quite important principle is that appropriations measures should not lightly be taken to amend substantive statutes. 183 That principle does not of course indicate Congress' specific instructions on every bill. Appropriations measures are often designed to amend substantive statutes. As a general matter, however, this norm tracks an understanding about how Congress would want courts to interpret appropriations measures: the rules of 178 Consider, for example, United Steelworkers v. Weber, in which the Court was asked to decide whether Congress had outlawed voluntary affirmative action by prohibiting racial discrimination. See 443 U.S. at 197. In concluding that Congress had not done so, the Court relied on the fact that Congress enacted a provision saying that it did not intend to "require" race-conscious decisions, an enactment that would be most puzzling if the basic antidiscrimination principle already invalidated affirmative action. See id. at 205-06. in accordance with contemporary understandings. See supra pp. 421-22. ambiguity to interpret provisions in favor of "natural right"). Consider, as another example, the idea that statutes should be construed to avoid constitutional invalidity. 185 Although this principle does not attempt to discern statutory meaning in the particular case, it might be justified as an accurate reflection of Congress' likely preference for validation rather than invalidation.18 6 3. Improving Lawmaking: Institutional Considerations. - A third function of interpretive principles is to promote better lawmaking. Some principles, for example, minimize judicial or administrative discretion, or push legislative processes in desirable directions. The effort is to improve lawmaking processes and the deliberation and accountability that are supposed to accompany them. In this respect, some interpretive principles fulfill goals associated with the separation of powers and with plausible assessments of comparative institutional competence. regulating subject should same the be concurring in part and concurring in the judgment). judgments should be made by the relatively more accountable agency rather than by courts. That substantive value judgment cannot be traced to Congress. It is a judicial construction designed to promote electoral accountability and to reduce the policymaking discretion of judges. 197 4. Substantive Purposes. istrative accountability). Another substantive principle, one without constitutional foundations but easily defended, holds that statutes and treaties should, in the face of ambiguity, be construed favorably to Indian tribes. 20 2 There is no reason to think that this notion will tend accurately to describe congressional intent in particular cases. It is instead a judgemade rule responding to obvious disparities in bargaining power and to inequitable treatment of Native Americans by the nation in the past. Other substantive norms counsel courts not to infer private causes of action from regulatory statutes, 20 3 to assume that legislation of Congress applies only within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States, 20 4 not to imply exemptions from taxation, 20 5 to assume that criminal statutes require mens rea, 20 6 to avoid irrationality, 20 7 to counteract obsolescence, 20 8 and to protect common law rights in the absence of a clear statement from Congress. 20 9 C. An Alternative Method: The Agency Theory of the Judicial Role Reconsidered The functions played by background norms suggest an alternative to the conventional understandings of statutory interpretation, an alternative that explains both the substantial areas of agreement and the nature of interpretive disputes. On this account, the statutory text is the starting point, but it becomes intelligible only because interpretive norms give it content. In most cases, the text, together with widely shared background norms, will be unambiguous. In other cases, the text alone will produce doubt, but a careful consideration of the context, structure, purpose, and legislative history of a statute will lead to a single conclusion. In the remaining cases, the history will itself be ambiguous or will reflect the work of an unrepresentative, self-interested group; the "purpose" of a multimember body will be impossible to characterize; and other contextual considerations will be unhelpful. In these hard cases, faced with the familiar problems of ambiguity, overinclusiveness, underinclusiveness, and gaps, courts must resort to more conspicuous background norms. 210 As we have seen, even the most formalist approaches must resort to such norms, but often at a high level of abstraction and without acknowledgment. See supra pp. 416-24. Background norms vary from one country to another; they also vary from one period to another within any particular country. In the United States, for example, the principles of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries reflected a belief in common law ordering that was largely repudiated in the 1930S.212 In the Warren Court period, the background norms differed from those that prevailed in the Burger Court era and those that operate today. 2 13 211 See infra p. 480 (calling for judicial consideration of systemic effects to promote rationality in regulation); infra pp. 48o-8i (calling for abandonment of private law principles when they are inconsistent with public law goals). Despite the shift in the New Deal period, courts have continued to use institutional and substantive norms that are a legacy of common law understandings. Those norms seem to have taken on a life of their own; indeed they appear invisible to those who rely on them. Sometimes, however, these norms conflict with the values that underlie the modern regulatory state, or they otherwise impair governmental performance. 2 14 A task for the future is to design background norms that are well-adapted to contemporary conceptions of the relationship between the citizen and the state and that are rooted in a solid understanding of the purposes and pathologies of regulation. In this Part, I attempt to carry out that task by outlining a series of institutional and substantive principles designed to promote constitutional purposes and to improve the operation of deliberative government in the post-New Deal period. All of the principles have at least some basis in current law, with some more firmly rooted than others. My goal, however, is not solely descriptive. All of the principles described here have justifications deriving from the constitutional backdrop, the promotion of sound institutional arrangements, 214 See infra pp. 480-81. A similar problem arises from the use of principles that reflect a poor understanding of the operation of regulatory law, including above all misconceptions of the probabilistic character of regulatory injuries and of the complex systemic effects of regulation. See infra p. 480. should not disguise the substantial overlap in their positions; both advert to convention as the basic source of interpretation and argue that those who undertake or evaluate interpretive practices must be content with invoking agreed-upon background principles. A. Sources and Scope of Interpretive Principles z. The Domain of Institutional and Substantive Norms. - Because this Part considers cases in which the traditional sources of meaning do not yield a single answer, I focus on norms that read legislative instructions in light of institutional or substantive concerns. Norms that perform the other two functions orientation to meaning or capturing interpretive instructions are not considered, except to the extent that norms serving institutional or substantive functions also serve those functions. In focusing on institutional and substantive norms, an initial question arises: when should they be applied? In easy cases, substantive and institutional norms often seem unnecessary, and norms serving syntactic functions - mostly those so widely shared that they need not be identified appear sufficient to resolve the case. But substantive and institutional norms are ubiquitous. Consider a federal environmental statute that allegedly preempts all of state tort law. The reason that it does not do so is not syntax alone, but syntax along with, and indeed inseparable from, a wide range of agreed-upon substantive and institutional understandings about, among other things, the limited preemptive effect of federal enactments and the appropriate role of the judiciary. in a context in which syntax and structure alone, accompanied by agreed-upon background norms, led to a single answer. consists of understandings about how statutory interpretation will improve or impair the performance of governmental institutions. Some such understandings are a firmly rooted and probably unavoidable part of interpretation. One might, for example, conclude that legislative history, produced by private groups and never enacted, is entitled to little weight; or that appropriations statutes, written hastily and without deliberation, should be narrowly construed. If one were simply describing statutory construction as it is currently practiced, one would find a number of background norms traceable to understandings of precisely this sort. curiously neglected topics Golden Rule"). i. Constitutional Norms. - Many constitutional norms deserve a prominent place in statutory interpretation. Some of them have been mentioned in Part I. The central point is that the Constitution provides the backdrop against which statutes are written and interpreted, and it furnishes the basic assumptions of interpretation. (a) Avoiding Constitutional Invalidity and Constitutional Doubts. - The principle that statutes should be construed so as to survive 228 See, e.g., K. BUMILLER, THE CIVIL RIGHTS SocIETY (I988) (discussing barriers to enforcement of civil rights laws); Wood, Does Politics Make a Difference at the EEOC?, 34 Am. J. POL. Sci. (forthcoming i9go) (arguing that politics does make a difference in the enforcement of civil rights). Various doctrines dealing with the degree of judicial deference to agency interpretations promote principles of nondelegation, accountability, and checks and balances. For example, the controversial proposition that courts should interpret congressional enactments on their own, without deferring to agency constructions, is intended to avoid the delegation problem that would arise if administrators could interpret the scope of their own authority. It is bad enough for administrators to have broad lawmaking power; the problem is aggravated if administrators can judge the scope of whatever constraints Congress has imposed on them. As we have seen, courts should not permit foxes to guard henhouses. 238 The exceptionally important idea that a delegation of power to an administrator implicitly permits presidential supervision and control similarly tries to promote political accountability. 2 39 This idea promotes the constitutionally grounded supra note 144, at 1693-97 (criticizing attempts to revive the nondelegation doctrine). (e) Political Deliberation; the Constitutional Antipathy to Naked Interest-Group Transfers. - Designed to ensure a kind of deliberative democracy, the constitutional system is hostile to measures that impose burdens or grant benefits merely because of the political power of private groups. 245 Governmental actions require some public value. 246 This norm, firmly rooted in current law, has a number of implications for statutory interpretation. It suggests, for example, that courts should develop interpretive strategies that promote deliberation in government - by, for example, remanding issues involving constitutionally sensitive interests or groups for reconsideration by the legislature or by regulatory agencies when deliberation appears to have been absent. It also suggests that courts should narrowly construe statutes that embody mere interest-group deals. 24 7 This principle does not authorize elaborate judicial review of legislative and administrative processes, but it does require a clear statement before courts will construe statutes as amounting to naked wealth transfers or as intruding into constitutionally sensitive areas. in original) (applying "traditional" balancing as a background rule). In this area, courts often interpret statutes in the shadow of constitutional hearing rights. For this reason, courts narrowly interpret statutory provisions purporting to eliminate rights to a hearing and to judicial review. 25 0 The ordinary presumption is that such rights are available, and that the constitutional issue therefore need not be resolved. (h) Property and Contract Rights. 253 See Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186 (1986) (upholding a Georgia sodomy statute over objections based on the right of privacy); City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 432, 439-47 (1985) (holding that mental retardation is not a quasi-suspect classification, but that requiring a special-use permit for group homes for the mentally retarded nevertheless violated the equal protection clause). have plausible if not firm substantive roots in some of the most prominent theories of judicial review2 5 8 and in the New Deal reformation of the constitutional structure. 25 9 There are, however, formidable institutional objections to such a judicial role, 2 60 which would involve careful monitoring of a massive national bureaucracy. For the Supreme Court to undertake to protect welfare rights entirely on its own would raise serious questions of democratic legitimacy and remedial competence. Perhaps a Court that saw substantive force in the claim for constitutional welfare rights would attempt to vindicate that claim, not through the Constitution itself, but through aggressive statutory construction to ensure against irrational or arbitrary deprivations of benefits. Such an approach would tend to produce evenhandedness in the distribution of funds to the poor in a democracy that has committed itself to a "social safety net." Statutory construction, requiring a clear statement before allowing selective exclusions, might produce many of the advantages of recognition of welfare rights without imposing nearly so severe a strain on the judiciary. SUP. CT. REV. 41 (challenging the proposed constitutional right to various goods). in particular, a belief that Congress, focused as it usually is on a particular problem, should not be understood to have eliminated without specific consideration another program that was likely the product of sustained attention. vindicated by recent experience 268 (f) The Presumption in Favor of Judicial Review. - By contrast, courts presume that the legislature has not precluded judicial review of agency decisions. This presumption is partly attributable to a belief that regulatory agencies are susceptible to factionalism and self-interested representation. Judicial review operates as both an ex ante deterrent against dangers of this sort and an ex post corrective. If Congress is to eliminate judicial review, it must do so unambiguously. 3. Counteracting Statutory Failure. (b) Taking Account of Collective Action Problems.2 78 - Regulatory statutes are sometimes subverted in the implementation process, often as a result of the diffuse character of the class of regulatory beneficiaries. 2 79 In one common scenario, the beneficiaries of regulatory programs, though numerous and ordinarily disorganized, are able to mobilize to obtain protective legislation. -As the statute is implemented, however, the group tends to dissipate, and well-organized members of the regulated class are able to exert continuing pressure on the agency. The regulatory program is skewed against effective implementation. 280 Congress' words become purely symbolic, and inadequate implementation prevents the statute from accomplishing legislative goals. judicial interpretation of ambiguous statutes that takes account of this phenomenon will promote fidelity to these goals. Many decisions appear to have reacted to the possibility that collective action problems will undermine regulatory programs. The most conspicuous examples are decisions aggressively construing regulatory statutes in order to protect the environment. 28 1 The context presents a classic setting for regulatory "failure" resulting from collective action problems (not to mention unrepresented future generations, which cannot wield political power). Other illustrations include judicial decisions taking a careful look at administrative decisions that jeopardize the interests of regulatory beneficiaries. 282 These decisions also respond to a perception that poorly organized beneficiaries are at risk during implementation, and that as a result, legislative goals will not be carried out in the real world. As a partial solution, courts should require a clear statement by Congress before allowing a statute to create significant inconsistency in the law. A judicial role of this sort has clear precedent in contemporary administrative law and in the old canon that statutes governing the same subject matter should be construed together. 28 9 In light of the potentially chaotic pattern of social and economic regulation, judicial decisions limiting agency authority to impose huge costs for uncertain or speculative gains might be seen as part of an integration of statutory systems into a coherent whole. 290 Similar considerations (d) Considering Systemic Effects. - Regulation is frequently unsuccessful because of a failure to understand the complex systemic effects of governmental controls. 292 Courts dealing with regulatory issues often act as if the decision will create only ex post winners and losers in the particular case. This misunderstanding leads to statutory construction that is uninformed by the real-world impact of regulation. Examples include the Supreme Court's OSHA decisions, 293 in which several members of the Court appeared to assume that greater protection for workers would automatically follow from more stringent statutory requirements.2 94 This assumption is false. By requiring government to regulate to the point of "feasibility" and forbidding balancing of benefits and costs, stringent statutory requirements have at times harmed workers themselves. Faced with such onerous requirements, 295 regulators have often underenforced the statute by failing to enforce the rules on the books or by refusing to issue rules at all.296 Interpreting an environmental or occupational health law as especially protective may ultimately decrease regulatory protection. The problem of unintended or perverse side-effects is pervasive. Courts should understand the sometimes counterintuitive systemic consequences of different interpretations of regulatory statutes. (refusing to apply cost-benefit analysis to OSHA's cotton dust standard); American Petroleum, 448 U.S. 607 (plurality opinion). On occasion, the Court's treatment of the standing provisions of the APA30 2 has likewise disserved the goals of the legislature in enacting regulatory statutes. In some cases construing the APA, the Court has barred regulatory beneficiaries from seeking relief because they lacked a common law injury.30 3 In others, the Court has used a clear-statement principle in favor of continued judicial power to "balance the equities" in environmental cases and has thus decreased the likelihood of injunctive relief in such cases. 30 4 In both of these contexts, the Court has used traditional private law principles in order to give content to modern public law; in both settings, the resulting doctrine disserves the goals of the legislature. 30 5 (f) Avoiding Irrationality and Injustice. - A time-honored principle in Anglo-American law is that statutes should be construed to avoid irrationality and injustice, even whell the language of the statute seems to lead in that direction. 30 6 The principle is controversial because there is no obvious basis for deciding whether an outcome is irrational, and because it is plausible to suggest that the correction for any such defect should come from the legislature rather than the courts. Because courts are able to focus upon the concrete and often unforeseeable effects of general statutory provisions, however, they are in a much better position to judge whether a particular provision produces peculiar consequences in a particular setting. The judgment that the consequence is peculiar and could not plausibly have been intended is sometimes irresistible. On occasion the text, read literally, will appear to compel results that the legislature could not have anticipated and resolved in enacting a broad standard. It would be unrealistic to think that any legislature could or should correct every such problem. were wholly frivolous, even if the intervenor had acted only after the defendant had agreed to settle. See Zipes, IO9 S. Ct. at 2736-39. The Court reasoned that the fee-award provision is subject to "the competing equities that Congress normally takes into account," and those equities called for a rule that would permit an intervenor - who was not a wrongdoer to participate free from liability for fees. See id. at 2736. The result of Eisen - which effectively bars small claim class actions in most settings is exceedingly peculiar. The purpose of notice is to protect those who are to be notified; in a case in which those notified do not have individually viable claims, it seems odd to suggest that notice is required in deference to their interests. Moreover, it is utterly irrational on the one hand to allow balancing with respect to the costs of identifying class members, but on the other to impose a per se rule in favor of notice when the costs of identification are low and the costs of providing notice are extremely high. The drafters of the notice provision of rule 23 probably were not thinking about the problem of individually small but collectively large claims when they drafted the notice provision. As in Wittgenstein's game of dice, the literal language, read acontextually, leads to an absurd result. (g) Protecting Disadvantaged Groups; Civil Rights Questions. Disadvantaged groups are especially at risk in the process of implementation. The same stereotypes and prejudices that afflict disadvantaged groups in the marketplace can also affect those responsible for implementing statutory protections. Those in a position to enforce the law thus tend to do so inadequately. Difficulties of organization and mobilization including the costs, stigma, threat to future employment, and other burdens of bringing an enforcement action undermine implementation as well. 3 1 2 In the face of ambiguity, courts should resolve interpretive doubts in favor of disadvantaged groups so as to ensure that regulatory statutes are not defeated in the implementation process. An example here is Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio, 3 19 which involved the standards governing disparate-impact cases brought under title VII. 320 In Griggs v. Duke Power Co.,321 the Court held that once a plaintiff showed that an employment practice had a discriminatory impact on members of a minority group, the burden shifted to the defendant to show that the practice was justified by "business necessity." 322 In Wards Cove, the Court altered Griggs in two major ways. First, it held that the defendant's burden is one of production, not of persuasion, and the plaintiff must carry the burden of persuasion on the issue of business justification. 323 Second, and more fundamentally, the Court held that the defendant need not show that a challenged practice is "'essential' or 'indispensable' to the employer's business." 32 4 Instead, the question is "whether a challenged practice serves, in a significant way, the legitimate employment goals of the employer. "325 The textual proscription of "discrimination" does not resolve the questions in Wards Cove. The text does not indicate whether discrim To resolve the disagreement between the majority and the dissent, one must ask a value-laden question: what sorts of devices best implement the nondiscrimination guarantee if it is properly characterized? The Wards Cove Court did not discuss this question at all; instead it acted as if the statute and relevant precedents largely disposed of the question. Although the issue is complex, one might start by observing that discriminatory purpose is exceptionally difficult to show even when it exists. A test that makes discriminatory effects probative of discriminatory purpose might invalidate some practices that should, given perfect implementing devices, be upheld. Wards Cove, however, will validate many practices that should, given such devices, be struck down. Moreover, discrimination exists when an employer has been nonneutral in the sense that it has adopted a practice having a discriminatory effect on blacks that it would not have adopted if the burden had been imposed on whites; Wards Cove will not reach this form of discrimination. For these reasons, Wards Cove will produce substantial underenforcement of the law. By contrast, systemic barriers to the implementation of antidiscrimination statutes3 29 make any concern about overenforcement highly speculative. No approach is perfect in this situation, but Griggs was probably a better method of implementing the statutory proscription. 326 Griggs, 401 U.S. at 430. 327 This conception of neutrality might well satisfy an intent requirement. On this view, if the employer would not be willing to use the same test if the burdened and benefited groups were switched, he has discriminated. This understanding of neutrality includes racially selective concern and indifference as well as conscious racial animus. See Strauss, supra note 252, at 956-59. the same reasons that nonmarket values are threatened by the willingness-to-pay criterion of the economic marketplace. If this characterization is accurate, an aggressive judicial role, combating a characteristic form of regulatory failure, is an appropriate way to achieve legislative- goals. In many decisions interpreting the "public interest" standard of the Federal Communications Act, 33 1 courts have prodded the FCC to promote diversity, local control, local participation, and high-quality programming, and to work against racism and sexism in broadcasting 332 all notwithstanding the fact that the market for broadcasting may fail to respect such norms. A similar solicitude for nonmarket values helps account for decisions taking a skeptical look at efforts to deregulate broadcasting 333 and perhaps most notably for the aggressive judicial protection of the environment. 334 (i) Minimizing Interest-Group Transfers. - Courts should narrowly construe statutes that serve no plausible public purpose, and amount merely to interest-group transfers. This idea is traceable to a basic constitutional norm335 and follows from the proportionality principle considered below. The idea helps explain a number of decisions values in the courts). (j) Requiring Proportionality. - Another interpretive principle would understand statutes to impose benefits roughly commensurate with their costs, unless there is a clear legislative statement to the contrary. This proportionality norm, recent cases, 340 draws on an understanding of likely legislative purpose and on perceptions about regulatory failure. Statutes often fail because of excessive controls or inadequate implementation, 3 41 and courts should generally assume that Congress wants to avoid those problems and therefore intends agencies to impose regulations after a balancing process. 34 2 As we have seen, the absence of a proportionality principle implicit in several the proportionality (k) Allowing de Minimis Exceptions. In Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO v. American Petroleum Institute,352 the Supreme Court invalidated an OSHA regulation of benzene. Although the precise consequences of the regulation were sharply contested, there was evidence that the regulation would impose enormous costs in exchange for small or speculative gains. OSHA itself concluded that its regulation would require capital investments of $266 million, first-year operating costs of $187 to $205 346 See supra p. 423. 347 Courts have reached somewhat conflicting conclusions on this point. The background rule, however, seems to be in favor of de minimis exceptions. See Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F.2d iio8, 1118-22 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (rejecting "literalism" and endorsing the de minimis exception, but refusing to imply such an exception to the Delaney Clause); Gilhooley, Plain Meaning, Absurd Results and the Legislative Purpose: The Interpretation of the Delaney Clause, 40 ADMIN. L. REv. 267 (1988) (advocating an "absurdity exception" that would be applied to the Delaney Clause); see also Alabama Power Co. v. Costle, 636 F.2d 323, 356-61 (D.C. Cir. 1979) ("[T]he ability ... to exempt de minimis situations from a statutory command is not an ability to depart from the statute, but rather a tool to be used in implementing the legislative design."); Monsanto Co. v. Kennedy, 613 F.2d 947, 955-56 (D.C. Cir. I979) (inferring a de minimis exception from the Food and Drug Act's definition of "food additive"); cf. Bowen v. Yuckert, 482 U.S. 137 (1987) (upholding denial of a benefit based on an interpretation of "disability" to mean "severe impairment"); Mumpower, An Analysis of the de Minimis Strategy for Risk Management, 6 RISK ANALYSIS 437 (1982) (emphasizing the complexity of risk management). See generally Fiksel, Toward a de Minimis Policy in Risk Regulation, 5 RISK ANALYSIS 257 (1985). Unable to point to a solid textual basis for its "significant risk" requirement, the plurality invoked a clear-statement principle: In the absence of a clear mandate in the Act, it is unreasonable to assume that Congress intended to give the Secretary the unprecedented power over American industry that would result from the Government's view . . . Expert testimony that a substance is probably a human carcinogen ... would justify the conclusion that the substance poses some risk of serious harm no matter how minute the exposure The plurality further suggested that the government's interpretation would give the Secretary of Labor "open-ended" policymaking authority that might amount to an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power.3 59 The plurality's conclusion in American Petroleum is difficult to defend in either formalist or textualist terms. The "significant risk" requirement has no textual basis, at least not in any ordinary sense; it was a judicial creation. It would therefore be possible to caricature the result in the case as an impermissible judicial rewriting of the statute. 360 But the conclusion in the case was nonetheless sound. A realistic interpretation of the statutory language would recognize that it was not addressed to the problem at hand. It is simply a myth to suggest that the Congress that enacted OSHA focused on the question of imposing enormous expenditures to redress trivial risks recall Wittgenstein's game of dice. Despite the broad-language of the toxic substances provision, Congress simply did not deal with the problem. In these circumstances, the plurality's opinion can be seen as invoking several of the substantive norms defended above. The case provided an excellent setting for the application of the principle calling for de minimis exceptions to social and economic regulation. An exclusive focus on the one or two employees who suffer "material health impairment" as a result of a lifetime of exposure would in the long run produce less, not more, protection of workers. 3 61 If OSHA must regulate to the point of feasibility in the face of trivial risk, the Department of Labor will be reluctant to embark on any regulation at all. In American Textile Manufacturers Institute v. Donovan,3 63 the Supreme Court decided a question left open in American Petroleum: whether the OSHA statute required cost-benefit analysis. In arguing that it did, the industry contended that the word "feasible" required OSHA not only to show a significant risk, but also to demonstrate that the benefits of regulation justified the costs. "Feasibility," in the industry's view, contemplated a balancing of costs and benefits. The government contended that once OSHA had shown a significant risk, it could regulate to the point where the survival of the regulated industry would be endangered by additional controls. For the government, the term "feasibility" did not connote cost-benefit balancing, but instead meant "possible." 3 64 In accepting the government's argument, the Court relied on the dictionary definition of "feasible" to conclude that the term meant "'capable of being done, executed, or effected,"' rather than justified by a balancing of costs and benefits. 3 65 This literal approach to the statute was not entirely unreasonable. The structure of the toxic substances provision consider the "no employee shall suffer" language is in considerable tension with the industry's construction. Moreover, Congress has sometimes used the term "feasible" as a selfconscious alternative to "cost-benefit" balancing, 366 and that fact argues against the view that the two terms have the same meaning. But the same principles that support the decision in American Petroleum cast serious doubt on American Textile Manufacturers. 362 A different result might be appropriate if the scientific evidence were uncertain. If a significant risk were impossible to show because the data were unclear, perhaps employers, rather than workers, should bear the burden of medical uncertainty. The plurality did not make clear how such considerations would bear on the problem of carcinogen regulation if they had been squarely confronted by OSHA. C. Changed Circumstances or Obsolescence When circumstances change, statutory interpretation becomes especially difficult. Older statutes may depend on factual assumptions that no longer hold, or may conflict with more recent statutes, thus producing inconsistency and incoherence in regulation. This problem is complicated by the fact that the statutory term may have been clear when enacted, and at that time it may have been inappropriate to invoke controversial substantive norms to interpret, it; but changed conditions can render a term ambiguous and thus make it appropriate to apply conspicuous or controversial norms. Because it represents a recurring hard case for statutory interpretation, the confrontation between statutory terms and new or unforeseen contexts deserves separate treatment. The problem of changed circumstances presents questions not only of statutory meaning in new settings, but also of implicit interpretive instructions: how would Congress have wanted courts to approach its enactments in the face of obsolescence or changed circumstances? There will rarely be a direct answer to this question. As in constitutional law, the problem of changed circumstances requires courts to decide whether the content of legal rules should change when there have been changes in law, policy, and fact. At the very least, courts should answer in the affirmative 3 72 when a statute contains an openended term like "public policy" or "psychopathic '3 73 that invites interpretations that change over time; when statutory language already contains an ambiguous term ("feasible") whose meaning depends on current conditions; 374 or when the statute contains a phrase ("induce cancer") that has been rendered ambiguous because of changed circumstances. 3 75 Even when no clear interpretive instructions allow a judge to adapt statutory terms to new conditions, courts may do so when those conditions have rendered a statute ambiguous. This problem typically occurs in three ways. First, the factual assumptions underlying the Several substantive norms apply to cases of obsolescence. Obsolete statutes are by hypothesis inconsistent with other regulation or with the current legal framework. They may also have pernicious, if unintended, systemic effects. If the text allows, courts should attempt to harmonize such statutes with current circumstances. These developments severely undermined the assumptions of the Congress that enacted the Delaney Clause. Indeed the clause, read literally, appeared quite perverse in many of its applications because it banned substances that posed no real risk to health. Having been forbidden to use food additives posing a de minimis risk of cancer, supra note 337, at 72-89. A similar method was at work in King v. Smith, 392 U.S. 309 (1968), in which the Supreme Court invalidated a state rule depriving women of welfare benefits whenever they lived with a man even if cohabitation occurred as rarely as once a month. Although there had been a steady trend in the direction of eliminating moral requirements for welfare recipients, and although the "man-in-the-house" rule had been widely condemned as irrational, punitive, and probably both sexist and racist in operation, the Court was unable to point to any statutory provision that unambiguously invalidated the state rule. The decision in King v. Smith amounted to an aggressive reading of the statute to conform to what the Court understood to be the current (and well-founded) national consensus. [A]nalytical chemists can now detect a whole new galaxy of low levels of substances in food. Previously the limits of qualitative identification and quantitative measurement were in the parts per thousand range: today parts per trillion are not uncommon and in some instances routine. This represents a millionfold increase in our ability to detect 'chemicals' in food. It will not have escaped notice that the interpretive principles I have proposed will sometimes conflict with one another. For example, the principle favoring state authority might collide with the principle favoring disadvantaged groups, and the presumption against amendment through the appropriations process might contradict the principle in favor of generous construction of statutes protecting nonmarket values. The examples could easily be multiplied. The possibility of conflict renders the basic approach vulnerable to a neo-realist objection that, in practice, the interpretive norms will provide contradictory guidance for the judiciary. 385 See Eskridge & Frickey, Statutory Interpretation As Practical Reasoning, 42 STAN. L. Finally, interpretive principles without constitutional status should occupy the lowest rung, precisely because the judgments they represent are not so closely connected with the foundational commitments of American constitutionalism. This category includes norms in favor of coordination and of proportionality, norms requiring consideration of systemic effects, norms against implied repeals, and norms against obsolescence. All these norms should play a less significant role in cases of conflict. Moreover, these principles might themselves be placed in lexical order. For example, the principles calling for de minimis exceptions and for proportionality, and for taking account of systemic effects, should occupy the highest position among nonconstitutional principles. To use (for example) the principle calling for broad construction of statutes favoring nonmarket values as a reason to abandon proportionality would sacrifice those very values because of the likelihood that stringent regulation that bars balancing will produce regulatory irrationality and, ultimately, underregulation. The background principles calling for proportionality and de minimis exceptions, and requiring consideration of systemic effects, should ordinarily apply unless a constitutional principle trumps them. Another principle of harmonization would recognize that cases turn not simply on the applicability of interpretive norms, but also on the degree of their infringement. Thus, for example, an enormous grant of discretionary lawmaking power to a regulatory agency would argue more strongly in favor of an aggressive narrowing construction than a minor grant of such power. Moreover, if the norm in favor of Pennhurst. - Pennhurst State School & Hospital v. Halderman3 93 illustrates the operation of principles of priority and harmonization. In Pennhurst, a group of mentally retarded people brought suit against a mental health facility that was found to contain dangerous conditions. Many of the residents had been physically abused, brutally mistreated, or drugged; the facility was utterly inadequate for the treatment of the retarded. As the basis of their legal claim, the plaintiffs invoked the "bill of rights" in the Developmentally Disabled Assistance and Bill of Rights Act. 3 94 The bill of rights contained a set of legislative findings, including the following: (i) Persons with developmental disabilities have a right to appropriate treatment, services, and habilitation for such disabilities. The question in Pennhurst was whether the bill of rights created legally enforceable rights, or whether it instead enacted a set of goals or aspirations that could not be vindicated in court. The history of the Act supported an argument that Congress intended to create legally cognizable rights. 39 6 On the other hand, it was not unreasonable to suggest that the bill of rights should be taken, like some other prefaces to legislation, as a statement of goals and purposes that amounted to an essentially precatory statement of congressional aspirations a statement that would not permit the developmentally disabled to bring suit against a facility that failed to respect the bill of rights. There was no affirmative indication that the "findings" were intended to give rise to legally enforceable rights, costing the state enormous sums. Without a background interpretive principle, the case was probably impossible to resolve. a self-conscious limitation on state power. Invocation of principles of state autonomy in the context of a socially subordinated group to justify a narrow reading of a statute enacted on its behalf is positively perverse in light of constitutional structure and history. 40 0 It follows that when Congress has taken steps to provide safeguards for that group, the Court should take into account the fourteenth amendment and the underenforced character of the equality norm in order to give statutes involving the disabled a hospitable rather than a grudging interpretation. 40 1 The Pennhurst Court should not have relied on a background norm in favor of federalism in order to render meaningless a statutory provision involving a group and a right safeguarded by the fourteenth amendment. 40 2 E. A Concluding Note: The Post-Canonical Universe What would the universe of statutory interpretation be like if all of these proposals were accepted? In one sense, it would not be dramatically different from the one we inhabit. All of the principles suggested here have some foundations in current law. A system of interpretation without interpretive norms, even substantive and institutional ones, would be inconceivable. On the other hand, a legal system that adopted such principles self-consciously would have a far greater degree of uniformity and coherence. It would be especially responsive to constitutional norms, to institutional considerations, and to an informed understanding of the functions and failures of the modern regulatory state. Above all, the system would rely on norms that promote the goals and that improve the performance of statutory regimes, and it would use the process of statutory construction as a corrective against some of the pervasive weaknesses, injustices, and irrationalities of modern regulation. and made necessary the very statute at issue in Pennhurst. See Minow, When Difference Has Its Home: Group Homes for the Mentally Retarded, Equal Protection and Legal Treatment of Difference, 22 HARv. C.R.-C.L. L. REv. III, 144-52 (1987). immunity against equal protection claim under the Indian Civil Rights Act). The traditional understandings of statutory construction are inadequate. They fail to describe existing practice or to set out an approach that deserves support. Under the approach suggested here, the statutory text is the foundation for interpretation, but structure, purpose, intent, history, and "reasonableness" all play legitimate roles. It is possible, moreover, to distinguish among those roles, and thus to produce a system in which dictionary definitions of statutory terms ordinarily suffice, but are subject to various forms of contextual qualification. 404 The Delaney Clause might be an example. On one understanding of a textualist approach, the case is an easy one, and the FDA loses; it is the norm against de minimis exceptions that introduces uncertainty into a case that might be otherwise resolved on the basis of the "text." 40S The quotation marks are necessary because of the dependence of private ordering on a prominent New Deal theme. See Sunstein, supra note 9, at 437-38, 451 legal decisions to an inferior system of law, or depend on values that were repudiated by the decision to create the regulatory regime in the first instance. Some such principles aid courts in discerning the meaning of particular statutes, or help to implement Congress' actual or likely interpretive instructions. Others are rooted in constitutional concerns; others derive from assessments of institutional performance; still others attempt to respond to characteristic failings of regulatory legislation. Because statutory meaning is a function of interpretive principles and cannot exist without them, something like "canons" of construction, far from being obsolete, must occupy a prominent place in the theory and practice of statutory interpretation. Cases i. Plain meaning (questionable). 2. Understanding words in context of statutory structure. 3. Understanding specific provisions to overcome general pro 4. Expressio unius (questionable). 5. Construing statutes in context of and harmoniously with visions. terpretive Instructions I. I U.S.C.  1-6. 2. Narrow construction of appropriations statutes. 3. Construing statutes so as to avoid constitutional invalidity. 4. Presumption in favor of judicial review of administrative decisions. prove Lawmaking I. Plain meaning (questionable). 2. Narrow construction of appropriations statutes. 3. Narrow construction of exemptions from taxation. 4. Deferring to agency interpretations of law, or to agency decisions where discretion has been conferred. and force decision by politically accountable persons. I. Presumption against preemption of state law (questionable when discrimination is at issue). 2. Presumption against implied repeals. 3. Construing statutes so as to harmonize with one another. 4. Narrow construction of statutes in derogation of common 5. Narrow construction of statutes abrogating sovereign im law (obsolete). 9. Rule of lenity in criminal cases. io. Presumption that laws apply only within territory of United x i. Presumption against standing for "regulatory harms" (ques 12. Broad construction of remedial statutes (indefensible except as a corrective to 4 above). of the President and federal courts. A. Constitutional Principles i. Avoiding constitutional invalidity and constitutional doubts. 2. Federalism. 3. Political accountability; the nondelegation principle. 4. Political deliberation; checks and balances; the constitutional antipathy to naked interest-group transfers. x. Narrow construction of appropriations statutes. 2. Presumption in favor of judicial review. 3. Presumption against implied exemptions from taxation. 4. Presumption against implied repeals. 5. Question of administrative discretion. 6. Cautious approach to legislative history. 7. Ratification, acquiescence, stare decisis and post-enactment history. x. Presumption in favor of political accountability. 2. Presumption against subversion of statute through collective action problems. tive rights. transfers (to counteract "deals"). 12. Broad construction of statutes protecting nonmarket val groups. A. Political Accountability and Political Deliberation As Meta Principles B. Principles with Constitutional Foundations (e.g., protect disadvantaged groups, prevent interest-group deals, ensure against procedural unfairness) C. Proportionality; Systemic Effects; de Minimis Exceptions D. Other Nonconstitutional Principles