 In a number of areas of public law, a set of issues is organized around a "doctrine" that purports to give order and regularity to problems that might otherwise be treated as discrete and unrelated. Ordinarily, organizing strategies of this sort are no cause for alarm; they help provide structure and direction in areas that are indeed closely connected. But on occasion, such strategies are highly misleading. By combining problems that are quite discrete, and by treating them at a high level of generality, they deflect attention from more particular considerations that ought to be the central focus of judicial attention. t All rights reserved. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This essay is a revised version of a presentation to the Constitutional Law Section of the Association of American Law Schools in January 1989. Akhil Amar and Michael McConnell gave helpful comments on an earlier draft. in Sunstein, Why (forthcoming). Similar considerations apply to the doctrine of "standing." Much of the confusion of the last generation has been a product of a belief that there is something called a unitary standing doctrine, one that is independent of the particular rights created under particular constitutional and statutory provisions. Whether there is standing depends on whether positive law has created a right to relief sometimes a complex question, to be sure, but one that will yield different answers in different contexts. judicial hand even if the particular case involves an otherwise plausible legal claim. 5. The development is traced in Epstein, The Supreme Court, 1987 Term - Foreword: Unconstitutional Conditions, State Power, and the Limits of Consent, 102 HARV. L. REV. 4 (1988). Epstein's own analysis is marked above all by its foundations in a Lochner-like conception of the relationship between the citizen and the state. For a discussion, see Sunstein, supra note *. But in all three cases, what sort of help does the unconstitutional conditions doctrine offer? The doctrine operates as a shorthand response to these otherwise plausible arguments from the greater power and waiver; sometimes it provides the basis for a broadside attack on arguably unconstitutional conditions, on the theory that government cannot do "indirectly" what it cannot do "directly." But in order to resolve the three cases, or any other problem of this sort, it is necessary to ask far more particular questions about the nature of the constitutional right in the cases. If there is an answer, it lies not in anything with which the uncon 6. Although these arguments are insufficient, it is necessary, and not altogether simple, to explain why this is so. See Easterbrook, Insider Trading, Secret Agents, Evidentiary Privileges, and the Production of Information, 1981 Sup. CT. REV. 309. For discussion of and response to those arguments, see generally Sullivan, Unconstitutional Conditions, 102 HARV. L. REV. 1413 (1989); Epstein, supra note 5. All this should be enough to suggest that it is at least plausible to understand the right to educate one's children in private schools as not including a prohibition on the funding of public but not private schools. If this is so, case one and case two properly come out differ 8. Considerations of the sort suggested in this paragraph explain my uneasiness with Professor McConnell's contribution to this symposium. See McConnell Unconstitutional Conditions: Unrecognized Implications for the Establishment Clause, 26 SAN DiEGO L. REv. 255 (1989). Ironically, these arguments reveal precisely what is wrong with a general or unitary unconstitutional conditions doctrine; and it is possible to reach this conclusion without thinking that the arguments are necessarily wrong. There are three points here. The first is that the asserted characterization of the right in Roe v. Wade is by no means self-evidently correct. Whether the right is one to governmental neutrality, or instead to freedom from criminal coercion, is not a question that can be answered on the basis of the holding or rationale in Roe itself.' 3 That question depends on a far more complex inquiry into the best argument available for the Roe outcome. There is nothing illogical in reading Roe more narrowly, even if such a reading would be incorrect on balance. On that view, the Roe right would be akin to the right in Pierce. is made central in Harris. For a general discussion, see Kreimer, Allocational Sanctions: The Problem of Negative Rights in a Positive State, 132 U. PA. L. REv. 1293 (1984). We have seen that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is an awkward and crude effort to bring under constitutional scrutiny a range of measures that affect constitutional rights in serious ways, but that would not otherwise be subject to serious judicial review. The doctrine does help to identify a technique of burdening constitutional rights,'7 and thus to alert courts that a serious constitutional issue may be present notwithstanding both the absence of commonlaw "coercion"' 8 and the possibility that the person who has accepted both the benefit and the burden is on balance better off as a result of the deal. In coming to terms with the questions raised by the relevant cases, however, the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is inadequate in two fundamental ways. it focuses attention on the largely immaterial question 16. For discussion, see Sullivan, supra note 6; Epstein, supra note 5. 17. A point emphasized in Sullivan, supra note 6. 18. For a discussion of the unfortunate legacy and surprising persistence of this idea. see Sunstein, supra note *.