 Cass R. Sunstein* 2. Pure Questions of Law Versus Application of Law * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, The University of Chicago. I am grateful to Eric Braun, Stephen Gilles, Larry Kramer, Larry Lessig, Michael McConnell, Geoffrey Miller, Richard Posner, and David Strauss for helpful comments on a previous draft. Simon Steel provided valuable research assistance and helpful comments. For financial support, I am grateful to the James H. Douglas,Jr. Fund for the Study of Law and Government, the Pritzker Family Faculty Fund, and the Jerome F. Kutak Faculty Fund. Throughout its brief history, administrative law has often been concerned with the question whether the name of its own subject is an oxymoron. We might distinguish among three positions on that question. The first treats law and administration as largely incompatible; the second sees traditional legal checks as a bulwark against administrative tyranny; the third suggests that these traditional checks must be adapted to the values, functions, and failures of the administrative state. The view that legal checks, in their traditional form, are an indispensable constraint on regulatory administration played a large role in the constitutional assault on the administrative state 3 and, in more modest form, helped give rise to the Administrative Procedure Act ("APA") 4 in 1946. 5 This view can also be found in the old idea, per haps enjoying a renaissance, that statutes in derogation of the common law should be narrowly construed. 6 On this account, legal checks of the pre-New Deal sort are a crucial mechanism for domesticating regulation by limiting governmental interference with private markets and by promoting a range of original constitutional goals. Hearing rights, independent judicial interpretation of law, separation of functions, and procedural safeguards are all necessary quid pro quos for the creation of administrative agencies combining traditionally separated functions and exercising broad discretionary authority.' A number of observers have argued that law should continue to play a large role in the administrative state, but that it must be adapted to take account of the new forms and values represented by the rise of social and economic regulation.8 On this view, regulatory controls protecting interests such as environmental quality, nondiscrimination, safe work places, and fair trade practices should be treated hospitably by the legal culture. This view can be found in a number of ideas: that private law principles ought not to play a large role in administrative law; that courts should attempt to prevent arbitrary or overzealous regulation, but also to help bring about regulatory controls when they are legally required; that courts should attempt both to promote the goals of regulation, understood in a public-regarding way, and to ensure against its pathologies. Here the relationship of law to administration is neither acquiescence nor hostility but instead adaptation. In Chevron, the Court established that "[i]f... Congress has not directly addressed the precise question at issue," courts should accept reasonable administrative interpretations of law. 12 The Chevron principle means that in the face of ambiguity, agency interpretations will prevail so long as they are "reasonable." This principle is quite jarring to those who recall the suggestion, found in Marbury v. Madison 13 and repeated time and again in American public law, that it is for judges, and no one else, to "say what the law is."1 4 But it is also strikingly reminiscent of the New Deal enthusiasm for agency autonomy and the New Deal belief in a sharp disjunction between the realm of law and the realm of administration. 15 In view of the breadth and importance of the decision, it should be unsurprising that the case has been cited 9. See generallyJ. RabkinJudicial Compulsions (1989) (arguing that courts should limit intervention in agency process to protection of individual rights to liberty and property, rather than considering policy arguments of various interest groups). An exception isJ. Mashaw & D. Harfst, The Struggle for Auto Safety (1990), which argues that legal checks have slowed down desirable regulation; see also Strauss, Considering Political Alternatives to "Hard Look" Review, 1989 Duke LJ. 538, 544 (arguing against judicial "hard look" because of availability of political safeguards). cated 1037 cases citing Chevron. The number increases significantly every month. (O'Connor, J., concurring in the judgment). and it would not be altogether surprising to see departures from a broad interpretation of Chevron. Indeed, the decision's own author, Justice Stevens, has suggested a relatively narrow reading. 2 7 Perhaps the principle of deference will apply only when the agency is carrying out delegated lawmaking authority. 28 Perhaps the principle applies only to cases calling for the agency's specialized fact-finding and policymaking competence, most notably those involving applications of law to fact, rather than pure questions of law.2 9 Perhaps an agency's views about its own jurisdiction will have little or no weight, or perhaps, more generally, an agency view will not warrant deference when its self-interest is conspicuously at stake.3 0 In this Article, I examine a range of questions about the rationale and reach of Chevron. My most general goal is to give the decision its appropriate place in mediating the relationship between law and administration. To carry out that task, it will be necessary to explore quite general questions about the relationship between the original constitutional structure and modern regulatory government. 31. For a discussion of particular principles, see infra notes 160-174 and accompanying text. For general discussion, see Eskridge, Public Values in Statutory Interpretation, 137 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1007, 1019-33 (1989); Sunstein, supra note 26, at 468-88. Indeed, it is mistaken to suggest that language and history exist independent of interpretive principles. The very notion of statutory text cannot make sense without simultaneous reference to principles of statutory construction. See infra note 159. In this Part, I undertake two tasks. First, I outline the origins of the perceived tension between law and administration, and I explore various efforts by courts to mediate that tension in the wake of the New Deal. Second, I discuss the origins and setting of the Chevron principle, attempting to defend that principle by reference to certain understandings about both the administrative state and the nature of statutory interpretation. Before the rise of the regulatory state, the allocation of authority between the executive branch and the judiciary was relatively clear: it was for the courts, not the executive, to "say what the law is,"'3 3 at least in litigated cases. This understanding extended to interpretation of statutes no less than to interpretation of the Constitution.3 4 Most statutory disputes did not involve the executive branch as a party. Since government almost always acted without the mediation of a policy-making, fact-finding administrative agency, it was only natural that questions of statutory meaning would be decided by the courts. And when the executive branch was a party, it was treated like any other litigant in the sense that its own views would not be entitled to special weight. 35 The judicial power of interpretation existed even when the task of resolving ambiguities depended not only on statutory language and history, but also on assessments of what sort of approach would produce rationality or justice in federal law. When traditional sources of interpretation left doubt, ambiguities were sometimes resolved by precisely these assessments.3 6 To be sure, assessments of this sort called for judicial inquiries into both policy and principle. But these inquiries were not especially troublesome, for judge-made regulatory principles-embodied in the common law of torts, contracts, and property-had been woven into the fabric of American public and private law from the out the most obvious example. All this was changed by the creation in the twentieth century of a massive administrative apparatus, which was of course a self-conscious repudiation of regulation through the judiciary. For the twentieth century reformers, courts lacked the flexibility, powers of coordination, initiative, democratic accountability, and expertise necessary to deal with complex social problems.3 8 The administrative framework resulting from these reform efforts disrupted every essential element of American constitutionalism, including its three cornerstones: The original conception of individual rights, the system of checks and balances, and federalism.3 9 Perhaps the most fundamental point is that the new framework called into question the original understanding that individual rights lay principally in immunity from governmental constraints.40 For the New Dealers, individual rights were in fact a product of legal decisions; they were hardly prepolitical or even "negative." Having rejected the view that the common law system was part of the state of nature, the New Deal reformers saw government action as a necessary guarantor of economic productivity, distributive equity, and even rights, properly 37. Because basic policy often had been a creature of the common law, subject to only intermittent statutory interference, it is misleading to suggest, as some do, see, e.g., J. Rabkin, supra note 9, at 6-18, that the period ofjudicial lawmaking is a creature of the late twentieth century. Of course the use of the Constitution as a source ofjudge-made law raises quite different questions from the use of the common law, especially because the former is much more difficult to correct through the political process. The idea that courts, and not administrators, were responsible for discerning the meaning of statutes seemed to win legislative endorsement through the enactment of the APA in 1946. 44 That statute was a compromise between New Dealers enthusiastic about administrative power and conservative critics who saw this power as a veil for tyranny, particularly in the context of labor relations.4 5 Despite its ambivalence on the question of agency autonomy, the APA appeared to endorse ju dicial control of administration and to direct courts to interpret statutes on their own. Thus the APA states: "To the extent necessary to decision and when presented, the reviewing court shall decide all relevant questions of law, [and] interpret constitutional and statutory provisions .... ,,46 Nevertheless, in the aftermath of the constitutional assault on administration, courts sometimes said that agencies were entitled to interpret the statutes that they administer, and that courts would defer as long as agency interpretations were reasonable. 4 7 This idea repre Procedure Act: The Beginnings, 72 Va. L. Rev. 219 (1986) (recounting APA's creation and passage and arguing that vituperation gave way to calm reasoning). certain on the point: The question of statutory interpretation might be approached by the court de novo and given the answer which the court thinks to be the "right interpretation." Or the court might approach it, somewhat as a question of fact, to ascertain, not the "right interpretation," but only whether the administrative interpretation has substantial support .... Thus, where the statute is reasonably susceptible of more than one interpretation, the court may accept that of the administrative body.... This may be particularly significant when the legislation deals with complex matters calling for expert knowledge and judgment. Final Report of the Attorney General's Comm. on Administrative Procedure, in Administrative Procedure in Government Agencies, S. Doc. No. 8, 77th Cong., 1st Sess. 90-91 (1941). Note, however, that the Attorney General's Committee is entitled to far less weight than the text of the APA and even its history in Congress, both of which argue for independent review. Moreover, the Committee may well have been biased against independent judicial review because it was allied with the institutional interests of the executive branch, and because it consisted in large part of New Deal enthusiasts skeptical about judicial checks on administration. sented a firm endorsement of the allied principles, prominent during the New Deal, of administrative autonomy and limited judicial interference with the process of regulation. It also recognized that the very arguments that called for the rise of regulatory entities raised sharp questions about whether judicial interpretation of regulatory law should continue to be independent. Marbury, in short, no longer seemed well adapted to American public law. At the same time, many courts continued to insist that the interpretation of statutes was first and foremost a judicial task.48 It is ironic but true that this insistence became particularly pronounced in the 1960s and 1970s, a period in which those enthusiastic about regulation were especially dissatisfied with administrative autonomy. In this period, agencies appeared unenthusiastic about their mandates. The phenomenon of "capture" received widespread attention, and judicial controls seemed to be an important part of the project of ensuring that regulatory statutes, especially in the environmental area, would produce change in the real world.49 In a surprising reversal of New Deal alliances, those who were critical of the effects of regulation in the 1980s were frequently insistent on administrative autonomy and the perverse effects of legalism 5 0-whereas critics seeking to bring about greater regulatory protections saw administrative independence and autonomy as the problem rather than the solution.5 1 The rule of law, including firm judicial constraints on the bureaucracy, was a mechanism for ensuring that agencies would carry out the will of Congress. Before 1984, the law thus reflected a puzzling and relatively ad hoc set of doctrines about when courts should defer to administrative interpretations of law. All this was changed by Chevron. In Chevron, the Supreme Court confronted an important decision by the Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") under the Clean Air Act. 52 The case involved permit programs in "nonattainment" states, that is, states that have not met federal ambient air quality requirements. These states are required to establish a permit program for "new or modified major stationary sources" of air pollution. 5 3 No new or modified source may receive a permit unless it meets stringent requirements. Before the 1980s, the EPA had treated as a "source" any pollutionemitting device in a plant.5 5 If a plant had ten of these devices, it had to apply for a permit to modify any of them or to add a new one. In 1981, however, the EPA decided that it would not require a permit if the modification of an existing device or the installation of a new device did not increase total emissions from the plant. 56 In other words, the plant, and not each emitting entity within it, would be treated as a "source." This plantwide definition of source enabled a company to add or modify pollution-emitting devices as long as it reduced emissions from another part of the same plant, producing no aggregate increase in emissions. The question for decision in Chevron was whether the plantwide definition of "source" violated the Clean Air Act. 57 The court of appeals held that it did.58 For the lower court, the purpose of the nonattainment program was to bring about rapid state compliance with federal air quality requirements, and the plantwide definition of source was inconsistent with that overriding goal. The court was unable to point to a particular provision that barred the EPA's plantwide definition, but it said that that definition was inconsistent with the general purposes of the nonattainment program. 59 The Supreme Court disagreed.6 0 Rebuking the court of appeals for usurping the agency's policy-making authority, the Court said that nothing in the statute or its history spoke to the issue whether the plant or each emitting device within it amounted to a "source." The general purposes of the nonattainment program, embodying an effort to promote environmental quality with minimal restrictions on economic growth, were simply too broad to bear on that issue. Because Congress had not "directly spoken to the precise question at issue," the question In addition, a principle of deference was appropriate in Chevron. The agency's fact-finding and policy-making competence, and its electoral accountability, were highly relevant to the issue of how "source" should be defined. In Chevron itself, the Court quite rightly implied that any principle of deference is a product of Congress's explicit or implicit instructions on that question. The central point is this: Courts must defer to agency interpretations if and when Congress has told them to do so. 64 And when agency competence is relevant, deference is particularly appropriate, since it is the most plausible instruction to attribute to Congress if the legislature has issued no clear statement on the point-a subject to which I return below. 6 5 Since Chevron itself, the general principle of deference has been invoked on numerous occasions and produced considerable controversy. In INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca,6 6 the Supreme Court appeared to say that Chevron would apply only in cases involving mixed questions of law and fact, rather than pure questions of law: courts would decide pure questions of law on their own. In a concurring opinion, Justice Scalia vigorously rejected this suggestion, 67 and the Court has failed to take it and accompanying text. up in subsequent cases. In other cases the Supreme Court has held that at least arguably ambiguous statutes admitted of only a single interpretation, sometimes producing sharp dissenting opinions that invoked Chevron.6 8 Most strikingly, the Supreme Court has rejected a number of agency interpretations of law even in the aftermath of Chevron.69 C. Chevron's Rationale It is not my purpose here to say whether or not the analysis in Chevron was correct.70 The nature and reach of the case can best be ascertained, however, by considering what might be said in its favor. pitable to regulatory controls than Congress. This fact is probably not irrelevant to the debate over Chevron. See supra note 9. Chevron nicely illustrates the point. The decision about whether to adopt a plantwide definition of "source" required distinctly administrative competence because it called for a complex inquiry, not foreseen by Congress, into the environmental and economic consequences of the various possibilities. If regulatory decisions in the face of ambiguities amount in large part to choices of policy, and if Congress has delegated basic implementing authority to the agency, the Chevron approach might reflect a belief, attributable to Congress in the absence of a clear contrary legislative statement, in the comparative advantages of the agency in making those choices. At least as a general rule, these suggestions argue powerfully in favor of administrative rather than judicial resolution of hard statutory questions. The fact-finding capacity and electoral accountability of the administrators are far greater than those of courts.8 0 Chevron is best 75. The question about whether deference is due to an administrative interpretation of law itself is an example. Congress has not explicitly resolved that question, and so it must be answered on the basis of an attempted reconstruction invoking extratextual considerations. understood and defended as a frank recognition that sometimes interpretation is not simply a matter of uncovering legislative will, but also involves extratextual considerations of various kinds, including judgments about how a statute is best or most sensibly implemented. Chevron reflects a salutary understanding that these judgments of policy and principle should be made by administrators rather than judges.8 1 The point can be made more vivid by examining some of the characteristic problems in modem regulation. 82 Often the regulatory process is confounded by the difficulty of coordinating numerous statutes with one another. For example, the problems of air and water pollution are closely entangled. Efforts to control the one may aggravate the other, and there are complex interactions among various cleanup strategies. If the problems are treated separately, they will not be treated well. The EPA is charged with implementing numerous statutes, and it is in a far better position than the judiciary, reacting as it must to single cases, to respond to difficulties of this sort.83 Sometimes regulation is made more difficult because of the pervasive problem of changed circumstances. New developments involving technological capacity, economics, the international situation, or even law may affect regulatory performance. Congress is unable to amend every statute to account for these changes, a situation that creates a genuine problem for those who must apply the statute. Here as well, administrators are in a far better position than courts to interpret ambiguous statutes in a way that takes account of new conditions.8 4 Or to put the point slightly differently: Because of its focus on individual cases, and because decisions are made after the dispute has arisen, the common law process has a significant advantage over legislation in its capacity to respond to changing conditions and mores. The shift from the common law to legislation, embodied in the New Deal, therefore gave rise to a serious risk of obsolescence, one that is often realized in practice. 8 5 In these circumstances, a grant of interpretive authority to (1982) (suggesting that NLRB's policies may be closely tied to those of the administration). Moreover, shifts in the judiciary are a predictable consequence of shifts in the administration, and in this sense courts are not wholly independent. Finally, agencies are sometimes subject to narrow or parochial pressures. Their decisions can hardly be said to track the public will in all cases. These qualifications do not, however, undermine the basic claim that the democratic pedigree of the agency is usually superior to that of the court. text. administrators, allowing them to take changed circumstances into consideration, seems to be a valuable if partial corrective.8 6 The result is to confer a power of adaptation on institutions that combine the judicial virtue of continuing attention to individual contexts and new settings with the legislative virtue of a fair degree of electoral accountability. approach are to be treated as precedents. See also G. Gilmore, The Ages of American Law 95-98 (1977) (arguing forjudicial overruling of outdated statutes). But a system in which administrators respond to changed conditions through statutory construction seems far preferable. Administrators have a better democratic pedigree and more knowledge with which to undertake this task. Moreover, changed circumstances often produce ambiguities that agencies are in a uniquely good position to resolve. See Sunstein, supra note 26, at 493-97. The court of appeals rejected the definition. According to the court, the statutory definition of waste as "any garbage, refuse, sludge ... and other discarded material," 42 U.S.C. ยง 6903(27), meant that the secondary materials were not subject to EPA regulation. 824 F.2d at 1179-85. According to the court, "discarded" means, simply, discarded as that term is understood in the dictionary, and materials that would flow from one production process to another were not "discarded." Id. In light of these considerations, the Chevron approach might be understood as the best reconstruction of legislative instructions on the question of deference. Of course the notion of reconstruction should not be taken as a mechanical application of some actual legislative decision; as we have seen, Congress has rendered no general decision about what institution should interpret the statutes it enacts.9 2 In the absence of a clear resolution, however, a principle of deference might improve the operation of regulatory law and at the same time appropriately distribute authority between courts and agencies. How the term "discarded" should be understood in this context is not a question that realistically can be resolved by reference to the dictionary. Second, the question whether these materials should be understood as "discarded" and thus treated as "waste" depended on a range of highly complex and particular inquiries of fact and policy. It is fully plausible that much of this material produced the same risks that the relevant statute was designed to prevent-indeed the problem of management of recycled industrial materials creates "extremely serious hazards. Here the court should have deferred to the agency's expert judgment on a complex problem not foreseen by Congress, rather than using, in a mechanical way, a statutory term that is ambiguous with regard to the particular problem. Indeed, the case was an excellent one for application of Chevron on grounds of superior administrative competence. The considerations marshalled thus far may not be decisive. Countervailing considerations, some of them taken up below, make it easy to understand the continuing debate over the wisdom of the Chevron principle. 95 But even if it is agreed that deference was appropriate in the context of Chevron and that the basic principle is sound, a large number of questions remain. Indeed, it is in the effort to sort out the reach of Chevron that a significant amount of the allocation of authority between courts and agencies, and among courts, agencies, and Congress, will occur. I attempt in this section to describe the unresolved questions and to suggest how they might be treated. I do not deal here with cases of conflict with other interpretive principles, a problem treated in Part III. For present purposes I assume that Chevron provides the only applicable principle. Chevron does not say how ambiguous a statute must be in order for the agency view to control. If any ambiguity triggers the deference rule-if the agency wins whenever a reasonable person could be persuaded that more than one interpretation exists-the principle will be extraordinarily broad. Indeed, Justice Kennedy has gone so far as to suggest that the agency view should prevail if the statute is "arguably ambiguous." 96 The Court's own decisions, however, suggest that the mere fact of a plausible alternative view is insufficient to trigger the Chevron rule.9 7 In fact, however, reasonable people certainly could differ on whether "a well-founded fear" required a showing of probability of persecution. Although the Court's interpretation ultimately was persuasive as a matter of both text and history, neither of these sources was unambiguous on the point.10 2 The outcome in the case thus suggested that the mere fact of a plausible agency view is insufficient for deference. 10 3 An approach of this sort appears to be a sound understanding of Chevron insofar as the case recognizes the primacy of legislative instructions over administrative will. 10 4 Even in the aftermath of the New Deal, it is for Congress, not the agencies, to make the law. Any inter pretive approach must recognize that principle of priority. An understanding that would allow the agency to prevail merely because there is some room for disagreement would pose an undue threat to the basic principle of congressional supremacy in lawmaking, risking as it would administrative subversion of statutory standards. Of course it remains true that under Chevron, the agency will prevail even if the court would have chosen otherwise had it been entrusted with the power to decide the issue in the first instance. In this section, I explore possible limitations on the Chevron principle. The most plausible limitations are those that can be inferred from actual congressional instructions and, where Congress has not spoken, from a reading of congressional purposes in light of the relevant structural principles. Under this approach, Chevron is inapplicable when Congress has not granted the agency law-interpreting power at all and also in cases likely bias, most notably jurisdictional determinations. 1. Limitation to Legislative Rules or to Other Congressional Delegations of Law-Interpreting Power. - Chevron involved a "legislative rule," that is a rule issued by an agency pursuant to a congressional grant of power to promulgate regulations. For reasons suggested above, it is plausible to think that the legislative grant of rulemaking power implicitly carries with it the grant of authority to interpret ambiguities in the law that the agency is entrusted with administering. 10 5 Somewhat more broadly, Chevron might be taken to suggest that whenever an agency is entrusted with implementing power-whether to be exercised through rulemaking or adjudication-agency interpretations in the course of exercising that power are entitled to respect so long as they are reasonable. mitted to administer the Act in a manner that is inconsistent with the administrative structure that Congress enacted into law." Id. at 817. so, Chevron applies only when an agency is exercising the power to make rules or otherwise carrying out legislatively delegated interpretive authority. 2. Pure Questions of Law Versus Application of Law to Fact. - Before Chevron, the law might have been described roughly in the following way: Agency decisions that involve pure issues of law are subject to independent judicial examination. Nojudicial deference is appropriate because strictly legal competence is sufficient to resolve the question. But decisions that involve the application of law to fact call for a different standard, since the agency's specialized fact-finding capacity and accountability are highly relevant. Courts therefore should defer to agency decisions of this latter sort."i' We might distinguish, for example, between (a) the question whether the Occupational Safety and Health Act requires the Secretary of Labor to show a "significant risk" before regulating a carcinogen and ring in the judgment). This approach has a good deal to be said in its favor. Above all, it is a plausible reconstruction of Congress's interpretive instructions. If the agency is simply saying what the statute means, it is making a decision that at least ordinarily calls into play distinctly legal competence. The best inference is probably that Congress wants courts to answer these inquiries. But the agency's own capacities are conspicuously pertinent when it is applying law to fact, and in these cases the best reconstruction of legislative instructions is that the decision is for the agency. It is not surprising that several courts, including the Supreme Court in a post-Chevron opinion written by justice Stevens, 1 4 have accepted precisely this line of argument. (suggesting a similar distinction). 118. See NLRB v. Hearst Publications, 322 U.S. 111, 128-30 (1944). 119. See Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F.2d 1108, 1122 (D.C. Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 108 S. Ct. 1470 (1988); see also Pension Benefit Guar. Corp. v. LTV Corp., 110 S. Ct. 2668, 2676-79 (1990), in which the Court accepted the agency's interpretation after considering Congress's interpretive instructions and concluding that neither they nor "any of the other traditional tools of statutory construction compel" a conclusion contrary to the agency's interpretation. Id. at 2677. The Court also considered the rationality of the agency's interpretation and concluded that "the judgments about the way the real world works that have gone into the [agency's interpretation] are precisely the kind that agencies are better equipped to make than are courts. This practical agency expertise is one of the principal justifications behind Chevron deference." Id. at 2679 (footnote omitted). [I]t is plain that giving deference to an administrative interpretation of its statutory jurisdiction or authority is both necessary and appropriate. It is necessary because there is no discernible line between an agency's exceeding its authority and an agency's exceeding authorized application of its authority. To exceed authorized application is to exceed authority. Virtually any administrative action can be characterized as either the one or the other, depending upon how generally one wishes to describe the "authority." And deference is appropriate because it is consistent with the general rationale for deference: Congress would naturally expect that the agency would be responsible, within broad limits, for resolving ambiguities in its statutory authority or jurisdiction. others insistent on that distinction.1 2 5 In a few cases the Court appears to have deferred to agency decisions on questions that were at least plausibly jurisdictional.12 6 In a recent case, however, the Court said nonjurisdictional decisions is in fact "discernible," at least if it is understood in the way suggested infra at notes 136-139 and accompanying text. ing, joined by Marshall and Blackmun, JJ.) (citations omitted): . may indeed conflict . of a jurisdictional ambiguity. In the absence of a clear congressional answer to the question, for example, the comparative competence of the FCC might well bear on whether federal regulatory authority extends to cable television.1 34 When Congress has not spoken clearly, whether the Commodity Futures Trading Commission has adjudicative authority over common law counterclaims might well depend on the consequences of the exercise of that authority for the fair and efficient administration of the Commodity Exchange Act. 135 For these reasons, it would be at least plausible to suggest that a general rule of deference would be preferable even on jurisdictional questions, because of its greater ease of application and because the agency's competence bears on the resolution of jurisdictional ambiguities. tional determinations by the definition offered at infra notes 135-139 and accompanying text. 136. It would follow that no deference was appropriate in Dole, discussed supra notes 128-131 and accompanying text, because the agency's competence was irrelevant to the question of statutory meaning. toward which If Chevron applies only when the agency has been delegated lawmaking authority, much of this problem will disappear. To be sure, an agency's view that its own decisions are unreviewable, that it need not undertake certain action, or that it has (or does not have) the power to issue fines will amount to an "interpretation." But the expression of these views is unlikely to be part of the exercise of authority that has been congressionally granted. In these cases, an agency's claim of immunity from the judiciary could not easily be seen as part of its delegated rulemaking power. In rare cases, however, an agency might interpret a statute in a way that predictably lines up with agency selfinterest or bias even while exercising delegated authority. In these cases, the rule of deference should probably be inapplicable, since deference would be a poor reading of congressional instructions. All this might suggest that an agency's new interpretations should be entitled to the same basic deference as old ones. Agency decisions about the meaning of ambiguous statutes often turn in part on questions of policy. For an agency to interpret a statute one way rather than another is for it to set out a view that is permissible rather than mandatory. Under Chevron, agency views receive deference not because they capture a unitary intended meaning, but because the resolution of statutory ambiguities should be undertaken by accountable, specialized administrators, not by courts. Under this approach, it matters relatively little whether the agency decision is longstanding and consistent or not. Regulatory shifts from one administration to another should be entirely expected and indeed welcomed as a healthy part of democratic selfgovernment or as a recognition of changed circumstances. So long as the statute is ambiguous, those shifts reflect legitimate changes of policy. One might expect, then, that after Chevron agency decisions will be entitled to deference even if they are novel. Two conclusions follow. First, and most importantly, agencies should be allowed to depart from interpretations by prior administrations, certainly in the face of changed conditions, but also to reflect new views about policy. What is necessary is that the new interpretation be explained as reasonable in light of statutorily permissible factors. 15 0 Second, new departures should be accorded somewhat less deference than longstanding interpretations, for reasons analogous to those that justify stare decisis in the judicial context. I have noted that Chevron sets out a two-step process for analyzing agency interpretations. Even if Congress has not directly addressed the issue in question, and even if deference is due, the agency's decision must be "reasonable." 15'1 The Supreme Court has given little explicit guidance for determining when interpretations will be found reasonable. In most of the cases rejecting an agency's view, the Court has relied on the first step of Chevron, finding an explicit congressional decision on the point. Thus far I have discussed the Chevron principle as if it stood alone-that is, as if it provided the only applicable interpretive principle, and was not in conflict with other possible principles. In fact, however, the principle of deference is merely one of a large number of interpretive principles or norms playing a major role in statutory construction as that process occurs in courts, agencies, and elsewhere. In some cases in which Chevron would otherwise govern, other interpretive norms may require a rejection of the agency's position. 152. 5 U.S.C. ยง 706 (1988); see Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) ("Normally, an agency rule would be arbitrary and capricious if the agency has relied on factors which Congress has not intended it to consider, entirely failed to consider an important aspect of the problem, offered an explanation for its decision that runs counter to the evidence before the agency, or is so implausible that it could not be ascribed to a difference in view or the product of agency expertise."); Silberman, supra note 81, at 827-28. Notwithstanding Karl Llewellyn's celebrated effort to demolish the canons of construction by showing their tendency toward vacuity and self-contradiction, 15 7 interpretive principles of various sorts continue to be an important part of current law.' 58 Statutory ambiguity is common. In the face of ambiguity, outcomes must turn on interpretive principles of various sorts; there is simply no other way to decide hard cases. 1 59 Any volume of the Federal Reporter or the United States Reports will turn up a wide range of interpretive principles. These principles exist not only because they are indispensable to decision, but also because many of them ieflect grammatical, institutional, or substantive understandings that have or warrant widespread support. date agency decisions, since the agency is in a better position to judge whether a particular rule is rational or not. changeably in this discussion. ring in the judgment). that statutes will be interpreted so as not to apply retroactively, 172 that implied repeals will be disfavored, 173 and that federal statutes and treaties will be construed generously to the Indian tribes. 17 4 The category of substantive norms is not fixed but changes over time, with new assessments of what norms are well adapted to the functions and failures of government. What bearing does Chevron have on the principles of construction? Notably, Chevron itself creates an interpretive principle, and if it is to be defended, it must probably be as one that reflects implicit interpretive instructions or that satisfies institutional goals.' 75 It is not difficult to imagine a conflict between the Chevron principle and one or more of the other interpretive principles. Imagine, for example, that an agency interprets a statute in a manner that raises a serious constitutional question, preempt state law, or unfavorably to the Indian tribes. The problem has arisen specifically in cases in which agency interpretations competed with the norms against retroactivity 76 and against implied exemptions from antitrust laws. 177 In these cases, the issue is whether Chevron will displace or be displaced by otherwise applicable interpretive norms. That issue in turn implicates a wide range of questions about the relationships among different interpretive norms, created as they were in vastly different periods and designed for dramatically different institutional arrangements and substantive concerns. Here as well the traditional legal culture is confronted by an administrative system built on a novel set of substantive and institutional premises. It seems clear that agency interpretations will not prevail when they conflict with syntactic norms. Chevron speaks of "the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress" as the basis for rejecting an agency's view, and many syntactic principles are explicitly designed to help capture legislative instructions. The idea that specific terms prevail over general, 178 that each word in a statute will be construed to have independent meaning,' 79 and that words will be taken in the context of the statute as a whole,' 80 are part of the process of uncovering "legislative intent."1 8 1 These norms therefore overcome the agency's view, at least if they operate reliably in the case at hand. The Supreme Court has indicated as much in so many words.' 8 2 The agency interpretation will also be defeated when Congress has issued interpretive instructions. When explicit instructions appear in the statutory text, they should prevail over contrary agency interpretations. Interpretive instructions that do not appear on the face of the statute, but that derive from the legislative history or background of the statute, or from understandings about likely legislative desires, are also part and parcel of the process of discerning Congress's instructions (its "intent"). These instructions should also prevail over conflicting agency views. D. Norms that Require an Explicit Legislative Statement The discussion thus far has involved norms that are invoked to uncover congressional "intent." The remaining categories of norms do not involve legislative instructions or "intent" at all. It is plausible to suggest that these norms should always be trumped by Chevron. In Chevron, after all, the Court emphasized that the agency's view will prevail unless there is a direct congressional judgment to the contrary. When a court is dealing with norms that do not relate to congressional instructions, it seems reasonable that the agency's view should prevail. On this account, only intent and intent-related canons can defeat the agency's view. 18 5 On the other hand, Chevron does refer to and endorse the "traditional tools of statutory construction." 18 6 This point has frequently been emphasized in subsequent cases. 18 7 Constitutionally inspired norms, along with many others that serve institutional or substantive goals, stand as part of those traditional tools. If the traditional tools include the substantive norms, then these norms can defeat agency interpretations consistently with Chevron. In many cases, powerful arguments support this conclusion. 184. See DeBartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Bldg. & Constr. Trades Council, 108 S. Ct. 1392, 1397 (1988) ("[W]here an otherwise acceptable construction of a statute would raise serious constitutional problems, the Court will construe the statute to avoid such problems unless such construction is plainly contrary to the intent of Congress."); TVA v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153, 189-91 (1978) (rejecting agency interpretation in part because of norm in favor of narrow construction of appropriations statutes). 194. See Kent, 357 U.S. at 130; supra notes 191-192 and accompanying text. 195. In Kent and related cases, the link between the clear statement principle and the nondelegation doctrine is especially conspicuous: courts demand a clear statement from the principal lawmaker and do not regard a vague or general grant of authority as genuine democratic authorization for constitutionally troublesome decisions. Some interpretive norms are intended to respond to systemic biases in governmental processes and thus to promote principles of fair dealing. These norms are not designed merely to require a clear statement from Congress; they represent a quite general effort to resolve ambiguities in a way that fairly allocates both burdens and benefits in governmental processes. The idea that treaties and statutes should be construed generously to the Indian tribes is a prominent example. 20 4 This principle is designed to require a clear congressional statement before allowing a statute to be interpreted unfavorably to a group that has been mistreated in the past. Similarly, criminal statutes are interpreted favorably to criminal defendants 20 5 and to require mens rea.206 The same idea accounts for the notion that it is not for agencies to It would be odd to suggest that these principles can be overcome by an agency interpretation. Principles of this sort are self-conscious efforts to counteract administrative or governmental bias, by requiring an express congressional judgment on the point before allowing certain results to be reached. These principles should not be overridden simply because the agency wants them to be. Some norms are designed to protect the legislative process by increasing rationality and integrity in that process. In this category belong the ideas that implied repeals are disfavored; that exemptions from taxation or antitrust will be narrowly construed; and that appropriations statutes will rarely be understood to amend substantive statutes. 208 There is a legitimate argument that Chevron overcomes norms of this sort. Through these norms, courts attempt to coordinate statutes with one another and to promote the coherence of statutory law. The agency is in a superior position to perform that task. Its expertise and experience with related statutes make it better able to fit statutes with one another or to coordinate seemingly inconsistent enactments. 209 Norms designed to promote the coherence of statutory law probably should counteract the agency's view if, but only if, the purpose of the relevant norm is to ensure a clear congressional statement or to carry out likely interpretive instructions from the legislature. If the norm merely reflects the court's own view about how statutes ought to be fit together, Chevron should require the agency's position to prevail. This conclusion is consistent with the Chevron Court's recognition that in the aftermath of the rise of the administrative state, the role of coordinating and making sense of regulatory enactments falls principally on agencies rather than judges. The strongest cases for allowing Chevron to prevail involve norms In these areas, displacement of ordinary interpretive norms by the agency's view is highly plausible. The agency's specialized fact-finding capacity and policy-making competence are highly likely to be relevant in resolving any ambiguities. Here the court ought to be especially cautious in attributing irrationality or absurdity to the agency's view. It is the agency that is most likely to be in a good position to know whether the application, taken in context of the statutory scheme as a whole, is in fact irrational or absurd. This idea has potentially broad consequences. In the period of common law ordering, courts often departed from the literal meaning of statutes in cases in which literalism produced absurdity or irrationality. In the modem period, similar departures should also be expected, but here the principal agent is the agency rather than the judiciary. The task of softening rigid statutes, and of adapting them to unantici Many disputes in contemporary public law involve the relationship between original constitutional principles and a twentieth century governmental apparatus that was created in self-conscious rejection of those principles. Chevron, a kind of counter-Marbu y for the administrative state, is one of many efforts at synthesis. Despite its seemingly technical character, the Chevron principle-in far more substantial ways than more visible decisions of the 1980s-has altered the fabric of modern public law, influencing an enormous range of substantive outcomes in the process. of statutory interpretation. Indeed, it is precisely here that the legal system will resolve many of the struggles over the roles of Congress, agency, and court in the development of federal regulatory law.