University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1990 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Republicanism, Rights: A Comment on Pangle 
Republicanism, Rights: A Comment on Pangle 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Republicanism, Rights: A Comment on Pangle," 66 Chicago-Kent Law Review 177 
(1990). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

REPUBLICANISM,  RIGHTS:  A  COMMENT  ON  PANGLE

CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN*

Professor  Pangle's  essay  revolves  around  a  fairly  straightforward
narrative.  The  period of classical  republicanism  placed  a  high  premium
on virtue and  responsibility;  its conception  of freedom  presupposed  rule,
not license:  its rulers were  to  be chosen  on the basis  of wisdom  and char-
acter;  it had  no real  place  for  rights.  The  early  liberals,  symbolized  by
Machiavelli,  largely abandoned  these  commitments.  Seeing selfishness as
the  usual  motivating  force  of  human  behavior,  they  inaugurated  a  new
emphasis on rights, and they disparaged  virtue.  The American founding,
influenced  above  all by the early  liberals, reflected  at most a diluted belief
in the republican  commitments.  The  framers'  main  goal was  the protec-
tion of rights.  For them,  self-interest was the  ordinary  motivating  source
of human behavior.  American-style  republicanism  was  egalitarian, liber-
tarian,  and democratic;  it saw  as  its chief goal  the protection  and foster-
ing  of individual  rights.  As  time  has  gone  on, the  American  departure
from  republicanism  has  become  all  the  more  conspicuous,  and  also
troubling.  Its  consequences  have  been  "the  shrinking  of the  spirit,  the
shriveling  of the  heart, the  banalization  of existence,"  manifesting  itself
in  an  extraordinarily  wide  array  of social  problems.

thought 

There  is  undoubtedly  a  great  deal  that is  true in  Pangle's  account,
and we should all be  grateful that a scholar of Pangle's learning  and com-
mitment  has chosen to  devote himself to exploration  of the role of repub-
In  this
the  American  constitutional 
lican 
Comment,  I  want  to venture  a  few  cautionary  words about  Pangle's nar-
rative.  My  basic concern  is  that he  may have  drawn  the  distinction  be-
tween  liberalism  and  republicanism  a  bit  too  sharply,  in  a  way  that  is
perhaps  untrue to  the amplitude  of America's  liberal  republicanism.

tradition. 

in 

As Pangle  emphasizes,  there  is  not  one  "republicanism"  but  many;
and  it  is  no simple  task  to describe  those  features  of republicanism  that
unite, say, Aristotle,  Jefferson,  Madison, and Franklin  Delano Roosevelt.
But  the  American  founders  were  insistent  on  their  republicanism,  and
they  did not at all understand the term to be an  antonym to those of their

*  Karl N.  Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence, University  of Chicago  Law  School  and De-

partment of  Political  Science.

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 177 1990

CHICAGO-KENT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  66:177

commitments  that we  would  now  describe  as  liberal.I  For the founders,
republicanism  connoted  a form  of democratic  self-determination;  a large
degree of deliberation  in government;  political  equality;  and  a belief that
political  outcomes  should  reflect  a  capacity  to  think  about  the  public
good.2  The  framers  emphatically  rejected  the notion  that self-interest  is
the  inevitable  motivating  force  behind  human  behavior.  They  did  not
believe  that reason  was always  the slave of the passions.  They  sought  to
create  a  deliberative  democracy  that  was  realistic  about  human  motiva-
tion but that  sought simultaneously  to encourage  and provide  a place  for
virtue.

At least  if stated  at a certain  level of generality,  then,  the republican
commitments of American  constitutionalism  have a  degree of continuity
with  classical  thought,  on  which  the framers  drew  a  great  deal.  It is  in
any  case  profitable  to  explore  the  ways  in  which  the  thought  of  the
founding  period  shared  characteristics  with  classical  thought  that  have
been  abandoned  in such  prominent  modem  approaches  as  interest-group
pluralism  and  contemporary  neo-Lockeanism.  A  large  part  of the  value
of the modem  revival  of the  republican tradition has been,  not to displace
liberalism,  but to  show  that  the  American  tradition  is  inadequately  un-
derstood  by  those  who  see  the  framers  as  neopluralists  or  as  believers
above  all  in  a  prepolitical  sphere  of private  rights.

Moreover,  the writing and ratification  of the American  Constitution
was  not first and  foremost a  matter of protecting  rights.  We  might recall
here  that the federalists  did not  want  a  bill of rights,  and  that  the moti-
vating  force  behind  the  Constitution  was  that the Articles  of Confedera-
tion  were  ill-adapted  to  the  process  of  republican  self-government.  In
arguing  for  the  Constitution,  those  who  favored  it  did  not  exclusively
stress  "rights"-which  is  not  to  say  that  these  were  unimportant.  In-
stead  they wanted  to provide a government  that could  promote economic
prosperity  and  domestic  security,  and  avoid  the  extraordinarily  difficult
conflicts  that  had  characterized  life  under  the Articles.

In  any  case,  the  American  founders  thought  that  their  belief  in
rights marched  hand-in-hand  with their republicanism;  and  any  form  of
republicanism  that is  worthy of contemporary  support  will have  to place
a  high premium on rights.  Like  republicanism,  the term  "rights"  embod-
ies  a  widely  disparate  array  of concerns.  It  includes  the vast  panoply  of
claims  that  individual  citizens,  or  groups,  might  make  against  the  state:

1.  See  G.  Wood,  Classical  Republicanism  and  the  American  Revolution,  66  CHL-KErr  L.

2.  For a  summary  and  citations,  see  Sunstein,  Beyond  the  Republican  Revival,  97  YALE  L.J.

REv.  13  (1990).

1539  (1988).

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 178 1990

1990]

REPUBLICANISMS  RIGHTS  A  COMMENT  ON  PANGLE

freedom  from discrimination;  protections  of property  and  contract;  pre-
vention  of redistribution;  rights of interstate  mobility;  political  rights,  in-
cluding  free  speech  and  political  participation;  rights  of  criminal
procedure;  welfare  rights;  and  so  on.  Many  of these  rights  fit  naturally
with republicanism  and  are in  no serious  conflict  with it.  Rights  of free-
dom of speech,  political  association,  and assembly  are quite logical coun-
terparts of the republican  commitments.  The right  to a jury trial, with its
firm  encouragement  of citizenship,  belongs  in the same category.  So too
with  the right  of private  property,  furnishing  a  basic  guarantee  of inde-
pendence  and  security,  a  check  against  arbitrary  government,  and  a
shield  against  the corruption  of political  activity  through  the  sometimes
distorting effects  of interest.

Pangle is no doubt correct  to emphasize  the modernity  of the notion
of rights as  we use that term.  But I wonder  if a republicanism  of rights is
in fact "problematic"  or in the end even  daring.  No doubt, some concep-
tions  of rights would  warrant  this  characterization.  It  would  be  hard to
combine  republicanism  with a  rights-based  system that had  no  place  for
deliberation  in politics,  that disparaged  citizenship,  or that was skeptical
that  different  "preferences"  might  be  distinguishable  in  terms  of  their
consequences  for  the  individual,  for  intermediate  organizations,  or  for
the state.  A  system  of rights is  critical,  but  (and here  I  fully  agree  with
Pangle) it must not  serve  as  a substitute  for other  values that  rights  sim-
ply  do  not  promote.  Nonetheless,  so  long  as  we  define  the category  of
rights in  an  appropriate  way,  a  republicanism  of rights  is  likely  to  be  a
fortunate  alliance  rather than  an  oxymoron  or a crazy-quilt.  Indeed,  the
American  system  has  functioned  best  when  it  has  adhered  simultane-
ously  to  its republicanism  and  to  its  commitment  to  rights.

One  final  note.  Pangle's  wide-ranging  concluding  section  seems  to
me  to  collapse  ideas  and  problems  that  should  be  distinguished.  There
are  of course  profound  differences  among  egalitarianism,  libertarianism,
and  a commitment  to popular  sovereignty.  Indeed  the three  are conflict-
ing  creeds.  Libertarianism  cannot  always  coexist  with  popular  sover-
eignty,  as the New  Deal and  Great Society  periods  (among  many  others)
demonstrated.  America's  commitment  to libertarianism  (as the libertari-
ans  themselves  stress)  has  been  at  best  intermittent.  Egalitarianism  has
never been  a crucial  principle  of American  constitutionalism,  and a belief
in egalitarianism,  understood as  equal distribution  of resources,  would be
entirely  incompatible  with beliefs in  popular sovereignty  and libertarian-
ism.  When Pangle suggests  that American republicanism,  or liberal prin-
ciples  about 
the  social  contract,  are  founded  on  egalitarianism,
libertarianism,  and  popular  sovereignty,  I  find  myself  wishing  that  he

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 179 1990

CHICAGO-KENT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  66:177

would  say more about  exactly  what he thinks  is  entailed  by these  appar-
ently  quite  different  ideas.

There  is  much  to be  said, it seems  to  me,  in  favor of Pangle's  views
about  the social  problems  with which  he concludes.  He  points  to  a wide
range  of problems,  including decreasing  voting,  dwindling  interest  in  se-
rious  literature,  fascination  with  brutal  and  sentimental  entertainment,
and  drug  use.  On  all  these  he  is  saying  something  true  and  important.
But  I wonder  whether  he might not  be tackling  too  much  too quickly.  I
wonder  to what  extent a "dissolution  of relations between  the sexes,"  an
"erosion  of the supports  in  tradition, religion,  and  reason  for shared  ties
of  reverence  and  meaning,"  and  "a  disconnectedness  between  genera-
tions"  have  actually  occurred,  and  whether  these  belong  at  all  in  the
same  category.  In  any  case  I  wonder  about the  precise  relationships  be-
tween  these  phenomena  on  the  one  hand  and  republicanism,  liberalism,
and  rights on the other.  Surely  these  relationships  are  not simple  or lin-
ear  ones.  It  would  be  most  interesting  for those  concerned  about  these
relationships  to  deal  with  them  in  more  detail  in  the future.

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 180 1990

