University of Chicago Law School ersity
Cass R. Sunstein
WHY THE UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE IS AN ANACHRONISM (WITH PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO RELIGION,
SPEECH, AND ABORTION)
Many of the most vexing questions in constitutional law result from the rise of the modem regulatory state, which has allowed government to affect constitutional rights, not through criminal sanctions, but instead through spending, licensing, and employment.1 It may well be in these areas that constitutional doctrine is least well developed. It is here that constitutional law promises to receive its most serious tests in the next generation. Under current law, the unconstitutional conditions doctrine serves to mediate the boundary between constitutional rights and government prerogatives in the areas of spending, licensing, and employment.2 The doctrine operates as a shorthand response to the view that those who voluntarily par-
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW ticipate in government programs have "waived" their constitutional objections, and also to the claim that the government's power not to create a regulatory program necessarily includes the power to impose on that program whatever conditions it chooses. The various puzzles produced by the doctrine have created considerable doctrinal confusion and provoked a wide range of commentary.' It is notable that for all their differences, participants in the debate, both on and off the bench, treat the unconstitutional conditions doctrine as the appropriate device for approaching disputed questions. The differences can be found not on that point, but only in the description of the scope and nature of the doctrine.'
This Article comes in two parts. In Part I, I argue that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine should be abandoned. The doctrine, I suggest, is an anachronism it cannot do th work expected of it. During the transition from the common law system to the modern regulatory state,' the unconstitutional conditions doctrine represented an awkward and never fully explicated effort to protect constitutional rights in a dramatically different institutional environment. The peculiar legacy of this transition and its outmoded foundations continue to pervade current approaches to the problem of unconstitutional conditions. The idea that the system of common law and criminal prohibition provides the basic, even natural state of affairs, and that
[Vol. 70:593
1990] UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE 595 regulatory and spending programs are occasional and somewhat jarring additions, affects all sides of the debate.
Indeed, the very idea of a unitary unconstitutional conditions doctrine is a product of the view that the common law is the ordinary course and that governmental "intervention"-the regulatory state-is exceptional.6 Despite its pervasiveness,7 this view is misconceived. It is inconsistent with both the realities of contemporary government and the principles that gave rise to it. Instead of a general unconstitutional conditions doctrine asking whether there has been "coercion" or "penalty," what is necessary is a highly particular, constitutionally-centered model of reasons: an approach that asks whether, under the provision at issue, the government has constitutionally sufficient justifications for affecting constitutionally protected interests.
In the second part of this Article, I explore the constitutional issues raised in several areas of selective funding. My goal is to show the sort of analysis that would be used in a legal system that has abandoned the unconstitutional conditions doctrine. I conclude that government may constitutionally fund public but not private schools that government has broad discretion to be selective in funding art and other projects involving speech and, perhaps most controversially, that government is under a constitutional duty to fund abortion in cases of rape and incest, at least if it is funding childbirth in such cases. Whether or not these conclusions are correct, the relevant outcomes should depend on reasons entirely independent of a general unconstitutional conditions doctrine. It is on that broader point, rather than the particular conclusions, that I will be insisting here.
To make the analysis as concrete as possible, I will focus throughout on three cases involving selective funding. In the first, government decides to fund public schools but not private schools, and it does so even though there is a constitutional right to send one's children to private schools.8 In the second case, government funds some artistic projects but not others, excluding, for example, projects containing sex or nudity, criticizing the government, or proclaiming the virtues of Nazism or Communism. In the third, government funds childbirth but not abortion in cases in which pregnancy results from rape or incest. In this section, I explore what sort of directions the current understandings of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine might provide in these cases.
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW A. The Rise of the Regulatory State and the Unconstitutional Conditions
Doctrine
I have said that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is an artifact of the collision of the regulatory-welfare state with the preexisting common law framework. To understand that claim, it will be useful briefly to review the collision. Most of the story will be familiar.
In the early days of the regulatory state, legislation that is now generally taken as constitutionally uncontroversial-for example, minimum wage and maximum hour legislation-was subject to attack under the due process clause, usually as a form of an impermissible "taking" from one person for the benefit of another.9 On this account, the distribution of wealth and entitlements pursuant to the common law and market ordering was treated as a part of nature, or at least as the baseline from which to assess whether government had violated its obligation of neutrality. It was on this premise that the idea of impermissible redistribution was made plausible.' The Lochner decision, invalidating maximum hour laws, has come to be the symbol of this approach to constitutional law. Before and during the New Deal period, this framework came under assault. The common law system began to be seen not as a natural or impartial order, but as a set of collective choices. Because market outcomes were at least in large part a function of the law itself, employers were no longer seen to have an antecedent entitlement to market wages and market hours." Thus Franklin Roosevelt contended, "We must lay hold of the fact that the laws of economics are not made by nature. They are made by human beings."' The rise of the regulatory state represented a general understand[Vol. 70:593
important lesson of the Lochner period was that constitutional courts should not treat the existing distribution of entitlements pursuant to the common law as sacrosanct. Justice Holmes treated the rejection of the Lochner framework-the basic ordering principle for the unconstitutional conditions doctrine-as entailing the abandonment of the doctrine as well. On this view, the only logical replacement for the doctrine is untrammeled governmental discretion in the areas of employment, licensing, and funding. That is: when a citizen participates in a program to which there is no antecedent entitlement, the Constitution imposes no constraints on the government's decision to impose conditions. It would follow that, for example, the government might award grants to artists as it chooses. Indeed, under the Holmesian view, all three of the cases with which I started become simple ones. The government wins. This position represents a distinctive reaction to the rise of the regulatory state. It takes the New Deal repudiation of common law baselines as a reason to abandon baselines, and to this (significant) extent constitutionalism, altogether. But for familiar reasons, the rise of the regulatory state need not compel the complete elimination of constraints on governmental activities that pressure what would otherwise qualify as constitutional rights.' The Constitution constrains not simply criminal law, but all governmental conduct. If government could, for example, limit spending programs to those who speak favorably of the party in power, there would be a serious distortion of deliberative processes--one that creates precisely the same dangers, in terms of both purposes and effects, against which the first amendment was originally supposed to guard. Governmental conditions on the receipt of licenses or funds may have powerful distorting effects on (for example) freedom of expression'" or racial equality.' All this suggests that in its broadest forms, the Holmesian position is unacceptable. It eliminates constitutional protections from spending, licensing, and employment decisions, without providing a plausible explanation for so doing. More fundamentally, and perhaps surprisingly, the Holmesian position is a legacy of precisely the pre-New Deal understandings that it purports to repudiate. On the Holmesian View, coercive governmental entry into the
[Vol. 70:593
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW This understanding of the doctrine would suggest-to take one examplethat a government that funds public schools must also fund private schools. On this account, some version of a voucher system, in which the government would also finance students who chose to attend religious schools, would be constitutionally compelled.' If government funds only public schools, it works an impermissible redistribution from one group of taxpayers to another and it is redistribution against which the doctrine must guard.
It should not be difficult to see why this approach is unacceptable. First, no constitutional provision forbids "redistribution., After the demise of the Lochner period,' the Constitution has been interpreted to authorize a wide range of transfers from some groups to others, largely on the understanding that existing distributions of wealth and property are not sacrosanct. When a "redistribution" is unconstitutional, it is not because of any general constitutional disability, but because particular constitutional provisions rule particular government acts, some of them of course "redistributive," off-limits. For example, a welfare program limited to members of the Republican party is impermissible because of the specific constraints of the first amendment. An unconstitutional conditions doctrine rooted in an antiredistributive norm is simply too general a framework for approaching a constitutional system that offers quite concrete prohibitions.
1990] UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE 601 More fundamentally, the second position, rooted as it is in Lochner, depends on conceptions of the purpose of the state and the correlative judicial role30 that have been roundly repudiated in the twentieth century, and for good reasons." It is here that one can find a surprising but firm alliance between Holmesianism, minimally intrusive on governmental power, and the anti-redistributive position, maximally intrusive on such power. For all their differences, both positions draw a sharp distinction between the realm of common law autonomy and the realm of public law. Both positions understand the unconstitutional conditions doctrine by reference to precisely that distinction. But barring a return to Lochner, redistributive and paternalistic programs are no longer constitutionally out-of-bounds. An unconstitutional conditions doctrine built on pre-New Deal foundations is poorly adapted to the regulatory state.
3. Subsidy vs. Penalty
The third position, represented by the current constitutional mainstream,32 sees the unconstitutional conditions doctrine as an effort to preserve legal requirements of governmental neutrality under different social and economic conditions. It is in this requirement of government neutrality that one finds the staples of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine: the government may not do indirectly what it may not do directly government may not "penalize" the exercise of constitutional rights and government may not coerce people into relinquishing constitutional rights through regulation, spending, and licensing, any more than it may do so through criminal sanctions.
These are the conventional arguments in the cases.' In some respects,
1990] UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE 603 argument.3 The majority replied that there had never been a general entitlement to funding of all medically necessary treatments. The dissenters might have answered that the existence of a Medicaid program altered the baseline to one containing such a general entitlement. But the majority might have responded: Why?
All this suggests that the development of the relevant baseline is enormously difficult. In Harris, the Court appeared quite reflexively to use a common law baseline that assumed government funding to be exceptional rather than ordinary,' but the common law may simply no longer be appropriate in these cases. Once the common law touchstone is abandoned, however, it is not at all clear what standard is to replace it. If the subsidypenalty line is crucial, development of proper baselines is the key issue but it is also an issue on which the unconstitutional conditions doctrine and the subsidy-penalty distinction, standing by themselves, have absolutely nothing to say.41 The problem goes deeper. Sometimes, as I argue below, the government can legitimately "penalize" the exercise of constitutional rights through selective funding.' Some constitutional provisions do indeed permit regulation through funding but not through criminalization. It is hardly self-evident, in any case, that all penalties must be unconstitutional. This point leads to the broader conclusion that the development of a baseline to distinguish between penalties and subsidies is neither necessary nor sufficient.4 ' The Constitution offers no general protection against the imposition of penalties on the exercise of rights. Instead, the question the Constitution ordinarily makes it necessary to ask is whether government has intruded on a right in a way that is constitutionally troublesome and, if so, whether government can justify its intrusion under the appropriate standard of review. The view that there is a unitary category of intrusions called "unconstitutional conditions" is the product of a belief that in a certain set of cases, another question-"subsidy/penalty"--displaces the ordinary inquiry altogether. But it is not at all clear why this displacement should occur.
Even more fundamentally, the very notion that one should approach these cases with a distinction between penalties and subsidies has much in com-
necessary abortion as she would have had if Congress had chosen to subsidize no health care costs at all." Id. at 316.
See Sullivan, supra note 3, at 1420.
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW mon with the two positions that appear to be its adversaries. As with the Holmesian and anti-redistributive approaches, the subsidy-penalty distinction appears to depend on the notion that the regulatory state is an artificial supplement to an otherwise well-defined status quo. The distinction simply cannot be administered without some such notion." Moreover, the distinction cannot be sustained in light of the omnipresence of government spending and funding. A set of doctrines that assumes that spending programs are an artificial supplement to a system of common law ordering-in short, an inquiry into subsidy or penalty-is inconsistent with the values and operation of modem government. All three of the prominant approaches to the subject are too general to be helpful in dealing with cases involving particular prohibitions on government activity. Moreover, they are anachronisms. And they are anachronisms in precisely the same sense: they treat common law ordering as the usual state of affairs and see governmental funding as a questionable interference with an otherwise stable status quo. To be sure, such interference might well raise serious constitutional problems. But nothing in the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is likely to be helpful in resolving those problems. B. Plausible Functions of Current Doctrine, and Why They Can Be
Served in Other Ways
The discussion thus far suggests that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine has taken the shape that it has and produced the debates that it has only in reaction to a set of particular, quite distinctive historical conditions. In short, the doctrine filled a particular gap in post-New Deal constitutional theory by offering a means of placing limits on novel governmental activities. We might make this point by imagining a different society in which collective constraints were, from time immemorial, carried out through licensing, funding, and employment decisions. In such a society, the criminal law would be absent, and constitutional safeguards would be applied to the familiar kinds of sanctions. Suppose that after many generations, the society created a new set of sanctions--call them criminal fines and confinementas a supplement to its basic regulatory system.
Such a society might at that point find it necessary to create a set of doctrines to control this novel kind of intrusion, one that sometimes adversely
1990] UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE 605 affected constitutional rights. Once the society matured, however, the category of criminalization would no longer be administered as a unitary doctrine. It would instead take its place alongside the more familiar constitutional safeguards that inquire into the nature of the burden on the relevant rights and the available government justifications for imposing that burden. For modern observers, then, the question has to do with what genuine, nonobfuscating work the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is necessary to perform. I suggest here that it is possible to identify three such functions. But because the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is not necessary to discharge these tasks, and because the tasks can be carried out through other, more particular, approaches, I argue that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine should be abandoned.45
1. Identifying a Technique of Burdening The first function the unconstitutional conditions doctrine performs is to identify a technique by which government affects or burdens constitutional rights.6 The doctrine serves to alert courts to the fact that a government spending decision-for example, a decision to condition the receipt of welfare benefits on a waiver of first or fourth amendment rights-often affects constitutional rights in ways that call for persuasive justification or perhaps invalidation. The doctrine thus reminds courts that it would be quite wrong to disregard the effects that spending decisions may have on constitutional rights, even if there is an apparent or real individual waiver. But the fact that spending decisions do affect constitutional rights should hardly be thought surprising or unusual. A reminder of the possibility that constitutionally troublesome burdens can be imposed through spending, licensing, or regulation is necessary only to those who hold an outmoded view of what modern government does.
2. Responding to Persistent Arguments The second function of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is to provide a shorthand and sometimes persuasive response to two familiar arguments. The first is that if government has no duty to create a program at all, it may create the program with certain conditions. The greater power, in short, necessarily includes the lesser. The second argument invokes the language of voluntariness. If, for example, a person has freely chosen to forego
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW rights of free speech in order to work for the government, it might be thought that the courts have no reason to intervene.
Unpacking what is right and what is wrong in these two arguments requires substantial work.47 The unconstitutional conditions doctrine serves as a brief response to these arguments in their crudest forms. It responds to the implausible idea that the government's power not to create the program necessarily includes the power to impose whatever condition it chooses, and to the equally implausible idea that there can never be a constitutional obstacle to an arguably or actually voluntary individual choice. But the implausibility of these arguments, in their broadest forms, should be self-evident under modern conditions. The short response is that it is often irrelevant that the government need not fund at all or that the recipient accepted the condition. The Constitution limits the reasons for which government may act and the effects of its actions. A welfare program limited to Democrats is unconstitutional because of the first amendment points about voluntary participation and the "greater power" are simply a diversion.4 Courts do not need an unconstitutional conditions doctrine in order to make the necessary response. Whether the greater power includes the lesser, and whether there is a legal obstacle to an apparently free choice, depend on a reading of the constitutional provision at issue, not on shorthand phrases.
3. The Character of Substantive Rights and the Nature of Government Justifications The third function of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is to reveal something true, important, and perhaps surprising about the character of some substantive rights and the nature of government justifications. In short, the doctrine reveals that some constitutional rights are not rights to government neutrality at all. In some contexts, government has available to it certain justifications that allow it to be selective in decisions with respect to funding, licensing, or employment.
1990] UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE 607 The point is a bit obscure in the abstract, but it emerges quite naturally from the cases. Consider, for example, a statute through which the government provides medical benefits only to those who agree to speak for a Democratic presidential candidate, and to speak against the Republican candidate. Such a statute would be unconstitutional. The right to free expression is a right to government neutrality as among competing ideas. It does not matter whether government violates the neutrality requirement by imposing criminal prohibitions or by providing cash payments.
By contrast, imagine-a case in which the government pays for secondary education, but only for those who send their children to the public schools. The Supreme Court has interpreted the Constitution to include a right to send one's children to private schools but that right operates only against criminal sanctions, and not against the incentive effects to which parents are subject when government funds public but not private education. This understanding of the relevant right is controversial, but it is perfectly intelligible. In some cases, the government has legitimate and distinctive interests that permit it to engage in conduct on the spending side that would be impermissible on the criminal side. In the spending context, the government may be able to invoke justifications that are tightly connected to, and become legitimate because of, the very fact that it is engaging in those activities. In the public school setting, for example, government can plausibly justify its selectivity by the need to ensure that public funds are not spent on religious activities.
There are other examples as well. In Snepp v. United States,5x the Supreme Court upheld the use of secrecy agreements to regulate speech by employees of the Central Intelligence Agency. The best argument for this result is that in its capacity as manager of an intelligence agency, the government has legitimate interests, not related to censorship in the ordinary sense, that justify restrictions on the speech of those who have access to sensitive information. Similarly, a possible argument, taken up below, for the outcome in Harris would be that the government can properly consider taxpayers' religious and moral objections to the practice of abortion in deciding what sorts of medically necessary operations it will fund.
Lyng v. International Union offers a final example. In Lyng, the Supreme Court upheld an amendment to the Food Stamp Act prohibiting strikers from receiving food stamp benefits. A plausible argument for this outcome would rely on the proposition that even if the government cannot
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW
1990] UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE 609 taxpaying public. In general, such objections often provide a legitimate reason for funding decisions. What is the status of those objections in funding that involves constitutionally troublesome areas? Perhaps surprisingly, I argue that for the most part, moral objections ought not to play a significant role. A. Public Schools, Private Schools We have seen that under current law, government is constitutionally obliged to permit people to send their children to private schools but it is under no obligation to fund private schools even if it pays for public schools. Neutrality as between public and private schools is not a constitutional imperative.' Financial pressures that induce people to send their children to public school raise no constitutional problem. The fact that the Constitution permits nonneutrality here is something of a puzzle. But for two reasons, the conventional wisdom is probably correct. First, the right to send one's children to private schools-rooted in the free exercise clauseS---is an unusual one in light of the functions of the establishment clause. By prohibiting the government from establishing religion, the first amendment imposes a special disability on religion. In that sense, the Constitution is not neutral as between religion and nonreligion. Under the establishment clause, an exaction from the taxpayers for the support of religious organizations is a distinctive harm, one that is peculiarly likely to lead to religious divisions and factional strife.
If this is so, it follows that governmental neutrality as between public and private schools is not a constitutional imperative. Many taxpayers would have severe objections to the public funding of religious schools. Indeed, those objections are an inextricable part of the rationale behind the establishment clause. An interpretation of the right to educate one's children that would compel governmental neutrality would be inconsistent with the logic of the religious guarantees themselves. Governmental neutrality would probably not violate the establishment clause, but it would raise problems sufficient to provide a justification for selective funding. The second reason for this general conclusion is that any government has strong and legitimate reasons to favor public over private education, in order, for example, to foster the development of an integrated national or state polity, to promote citizenship, and to break down barriers of race,
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW religion, and class.' These reasons are of course insufficient to permit an outright governmental prohibition of private schools. But they are significant enough to permit the government to fund public but not private schools, and through that route to encourage attendance at public schools.
Government is thus constitutionally authorized to be neutral toward private and public schools, but it is under no obligation to do so. A system in which government may fund public schools but not private schools, and allows its citizenry to opt out of the public school system at its own expense, seems to be the best reconciliation of the competing interests-understood through the lens of the constitutional structure generally and the first amendment in particular. In this context, then, governmental selectivity is permitted, not because of the absence of "penalty," but because of the presence of legitimate justifications. B. Governmentally Funded Speech and Art
The question of governmentally funded speech and art has become especially controversial in recent years, because of troublesome selectivity in funding decisions in the first instance and because of several highly visible efforts to withdraw federal or state money from publicly disapproved projects."° The general issue is likely to become even more heated in the future. Government is quite frequently implicated in the funding and promotion of the arts, and there are both legitimate and illegitimate reasons for refusing to fund or withdrawing funds from certain programs. Some of these cases are exceptionally difficult, and my conclusions should be regarded as especially tentative.
It will be useful to begin by illustrating some permissible funding decisions. The central point here is that government has limited resources with
[Vol. 70:593
1990] UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE 611 which to fund the arts and its allocations are necessarily selective. In this area, generality on the part of government is inconceivable. From this point at least three conclusions seem straightforward.
First, it is surely permissible for government to refuse to fund speech that can be banned through the criminal law. A refusal to fund obscenity, libelous speech, or incitement to crime is therefore unobjectionable.
Second, funding decisions that are based on qualitative or aesthetic grounds should be entirely legitimate, at least presumptively and in most cases. The government might properly decide to fund projects that it considers to be of high caliber. Indeed, such judgments are inescapable for those who allocate limited resources. Third, decisions to fund projects on the basis of subject matter should generally be uncontroversial. For example, there should be no basis for complaint if the government chooses to fund projects related to American history, Chaucer, World War II, the civil rights movement, Egypt, or the film industry. To say that government may be in the business of funding art is almost by itself to say that government may select subjects or topics that it considers worthy of approval. Here too the existence of limited funds makes any alternative approach implausible.
Taken together, these conclusions should be sufficient to authorize the bulk of current practice with respect to funding of the arts. In all of these cases, government has legitimate reasons for selectivity. If government may properly make decisions by reference to subject matter or to aesthetic quality, existing policies will generally be upheld.
Under what circumstances, then, might serious first amendment objections arise? The most obvious involve straightforward discrimination on the basis of viewpoint. Suppose, for example, that government decides to fund projects by Democrats but not Republicans, or only by those who have voted in favor of the current President. The case is an easy one for invalidation. The prohibition on discrimination based on point of view lies at the heart of the first amendment.62 In this case, both the purpose and the effects of governmental action are objectionable. Moreover, no distinctive, fundingrelated justification is available to authorize the government's action. Here the problem lies in the absence not of "coercion," but of legitimate reasons for selectivity.
The only possible justification for viewpoint discrimination in this setting would be the taxpayers' unwillingness to subsidize art by people they find disagreeable. But a decision to admit this justification would allow funding
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW decisions to skew artistic creation in accordance with prevailing political convictions, especially those of governmental actors. At least in a world in which the government engages in a wide range of funding, that skewing effect could not plausibly be tolerated. Even more fundamentally, the core of the first amendment is offended by governmental efforts to skew expression.
Slightly harder but also reasonably clear are cases in which government decides to fund only projects that contain a particular, approved viewpoint. Imagine, for example, a law stating that the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) will fund only those projects that deal favorably with the current performance of the American government, or only projects involving the Vietnam War that portray the government in a favorable light. An across-the-board ban on the funding of projects critical of government or embodying governmentally-disapproved views would at least usually be impermissible. Here too the government cannot justify selectivity in constitutionally acceptable terms.63
If these claims are broadly correct, it is possible to develop some tentative conclusions. The clearest constitutional violation consists of discrimination on the basis of point of view." Most other decisions will be permissible, for they will involve subject matter or aesthetics. The hardest cases arise when the relevant discrimination seems to involve judgments about subject matter or aesthetics but is in fact an effort to control a particular point of view.
The problem is that the line between these two categories is an elusive one-not only in the uninteresting sense that there will be hard intermediate cases, but in the far more troubling sense that the distinction is difficult to draw even as a conceptual matter. Judgments about aesthetics or quality
[Vol. 70:593
1990] UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE 613 always depend, at root, on the standpoint of the decisionmaker.1 This is most obvious for people who think that art celebrating Nazism, Communism, or white supremacy, at least ordinarily, cannot qualify as good art. But the point extends quite generally. Distinctions between representational and nonrepresentational art, or embroidery and painting, involve issues that are at bottom political. The idea that yellow marks smeared on a page, a sentimental drawing of a cat, or American flags marked with swastikas do not qualify for funding is necessarily rooted in views, broadly speaking political in nature, about the appropriate character and aims of the arts.
The available approaches to these difficulties are few-indeed, there are only three realistic options, and none of them is entirely appealing. The first posits a constitutional principle forbidding even aesthetic or subject-matter judgments on the ground that they too are rooted in moral or political judgments and, in that sense, in point of view. But this principle would be intolerable, for it would forbid selective funding of any sort and so also bar government funding entirely. Such a solution would hardly be desirable in a system in which public funding is an important individual and collective good, especially because public funding removes some of the distortions created by private funding of the artistic process.
The second route would be to permit even the most conspicuously partisan funding decisions on the ground that sensible lines cannot be drawn between impermissibly partisan and permissibly neutral decisions. This approach would also be intolerable, because it would authorize egregious governmental interference with expression for the state's own self-interested or otherwise objectionable purposes.
The third and probably the only sensible solution is to apply the constitutional prohibition only in straightforward cases of viewpoint discrimination," and to permit aesthetic or qualitative judgments as long as they are not conspicuously based on partisan aims. Of course this approach must be accompanied by a recognition that it rests on some conceptually uncertain ground. Under this framework, there are two final hard cases. The first involves a restriction that does not on its face discriminate on the basis of viewpoint, but that amounts to an attempt to impose conventional morality on artistic processes. The second involves hate literature or art that offends a significant portion of the community because it is degrading.
For an example of the first problem, suppose that government says that it will refuse to fund projects containing profanity or sexually explicit scenes. The concern here is that in such cases, government will distort artistic processes by imposing financial pressures that incline people toward offi-
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW cially sanctioned views about what is fitting in art. In a system containing some public funding, this problem cannot be altogether avoided. But it can be minimized rather than increased. The appropriate strategy here is probably to view with some suspicion across-the-board measures that deny funding to art that offends conventional morality-a conclusion that will of course produce formidable line-drawing problems. The more narrow and selective the exclusionary term, the more it will be properly characterized as viewpoint-based: a ban on depictions of homosexuality is in this sense even more troublesome than a ban on depictions of sexuality in general.
The argument for constitutionality in these cases is strengthened, however, if the regulation has a limited spatial and temporal reach. Cases involving general regulations-those imposing a nationwide statutory ban on, for example, profanity in funded projects-should, if borderline, be resolved unfavorably to the government. A decision by the NEA to forbid the funding of all art with nudity would be far more objectionable than a decision not to allow nudity in one or two governmentally-funded projects. The latter would have some of the familiar characteristics of time, place, and manner restrictions. Indeed, some viewpoint-based restrictions will be permissible if they are narrow in terms of space and time. A local exhibit on the civil rights movement could surely exclude art celebrating slavery or advocating its reinstatement.
The second category, involving hate literature or art, is also troublesome. What if the government decides, for example, not to fund Nazi art, proslavery art, art of the Ku Klux Klan, art glorifying rape and sexual violence, or Rushdie's The Satanic Verses, on the ground that the relevant causes are filled with hatred, are harmful and abhorrent, or are perceived as harmful and abhorrent by a large segment of the community? The basic problem here, noted above, is that conventional morality is not the proper arbiter of governmental funding decisions that bear on expression. A system in which conventional morality played that role would be inconsistent with the core of the first amendment guarantee, which is designed precisely to protect views that do not accord with conventional morality. What is required, in these cases, is a principle of sufficient generality to encompass any legitimate concerns about the use of taxpayer money without at the same time impermissibly dictating a particular point of view.
It is not easy to devise any such principle. Surely government should not be permitted to decline to fund any project to which a significant number of taxpayers have a conscientious objection. Such a proposition would enshrine conventional morality as the basis for funding decisions. Perhaps, however, government should be permitted to decline to fund projects that fuel hatred of disadvantaged social groups, at least if the category of regulated speech can be narrowly defined. To be sure, such an approach would embody a form of viewpoint discrimination. There is, however, at least a plausible argument for such an exception in this context. Speech of the sort at issue is not merely offensive, but also helps produce a distinctive set of harms, including a perpetuation of second-class citizenship for certain groups. Gov[Vol. 70:593
1990] UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE 615 ernment might have sufficient reason to refuse to fund such speech even if it may not criminalize it.
It follows from these considerations that government has broad power to allocate funds to artistic projects, even if it does so on a highly selective basis. The only clear prohibition is on allocations based on a straightforwardly partisan basis, as in the case of discrimination against a particular point of view and even here there are exceptions. A similar prohibition might be triggered when a subject-matter restriction also embodies a form of viewpoint discrimination, as in the exclusion of art containing profanity and here much will depend on the particular context. Hard cases will of course remain. But such an approach would resolve the vast majority of cases, and at least suggest an orientation for the rest.
C. Funding Abortions In Cases of Rape or Incest
The Supreme Court has held that the existence of a right to an abortion does not imply a correlative right to public funding of abortion, even if the government is also funding childbirth. In this respect, the right to have an abortion stands on the same footing as the right to send one's children to public schools. In neither case is neutrality required.
I want to explore here the question whether the government might be obliged to fund abortions in cases of rape or incest, at least when government is funding childbirth in such cases. I do not speak to the question whether these considerations suggest that funding for abortions is required even in cases not involving rape or incest. That broader question raises distinctive and more difficult problems.
Under current law, government is almost certainly" under no obligation to pay for abortion in cases of rape or incest. No matter what produced the pregnancy, taxpayers are not required to foot the bill for abortions. In the relevant cases, the Court has not been clear about its rationale. It has insisted that government need not remain neutral as between abortion and childbirth the legitimate interest in protecting fetal life is the reason that neutrality is not compelled.6 In this quite particular respect, the abortion right is similar to that in Pierce v. Society of Sisters: the government has an interest in nonneutrality that does not have sufficient force to justify criminalization, but that does allow selectivity in funding.
In the setting of private schools, we have seen that this line of argument is correct, largely because of the authority of the establishment clause, which is best taken as a self-conscious protection against the use of taxpayer funds to
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW pay for religious schools.7 But this rationale seems unavailable in the abortion context. There would be no tension with the establishment clause if those having religious or other objections to abortion were forced to pay for that procedure. Indeed, taxpayers are quite generally forced to pay for things-for example, national defense, welfare, certain forms of art-to which they have powerful moral objections. If government is to be relieved of its obligation to be neutral as between abortion and childbirth in cases of rape and incest, the argument must take a somewhat different form.
Perhaps one could generalize from the establishment clause, or from the structure of liberal democracy generally, a principle allowing substantial segments of the public not to pay for practices that it considers to be abhorrent for reasons of conscience.7 In most democratic countries, governments are permitted and indeed encouraged to take account of conscientious objections. This permission may not be an enforceable entitlement, but it does provide a generally legitimate reason for selective funding. Of course, this permission could not be invoked to allow government to violate obligations of neutrality that seem a straightforward inference from the relevant rightsuch as the first amendment right to neutrality among points of view, or the equal protection right to neutrality between blacks and whites. But perhaps some rights are best conceived as nonneutrality rights in the sense that they allow selectivity in funding decisions if taxpayers have an objection of conscience. And since many taxpayers consider abortion to be murder of defenseless human beings, perhaps they can refuse to pay for it, even in cases of rape and incest.
At least as a general rule, it seems not merely correct but obvious to say that funding decisions may and often do take into account the desires of the citizenry, including conscientious objections.72 It is unclear, however, what weight such objections should have in hard constitutional cases. If the relevant constitutional provision requires neutrality, consideration of conscientious objections is probably illegitimate and, in any case, insufficiently weighty to justify selective decisionmaking. A decision to fund Christian but not Jewish art, or paintings favorable to Republicans, would be plainly unconstitutional. In cases in which the right does not call for neutrality, conscientious objections are easily translatable into sufficient governmental justifications to survive review.
To evaluate the arguments for and against neutrality in the abortion fund-
1990] UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE 617 ing context, it is necessary to understand the nature of and basis for the right at issue. If the abortion right is seen as one of "privacy," there are good reasons to say that governmental neutrality is not required, and that government may fund childbirth but not abortion regardless of whether the pregnancy is consensual or coercive.7 Indeed, if the right is one to privacy, it is plausible to say that the conscientious objections of a significant segment of the population provide a sufficient justification for refusing to fund abortions.7 There are, however, notorious difficulties in treating the abortion right as one of privacy, not least because the Constitution does not refer to "privacy" and because the abortion decision does not involve conventional privacy at all.75 Certainly, in the case of abortions involving rape or incest, the best argument on behalf of the relevant right is based on principles of equal protection rather than on due process.76 This argument stresses issues of sex discrimination and views a prohibition on abortion as an involuntary cooptation of women's bodies in the service of third parties.77
The first point here is that restrictions on abortion uniquely burden women. A statute that is addressed at women by plain terms is of course a form of sex discrimination. A statute that involves a biological correlate of being female should be treated in the same way.7 " The fact that what is to many another life-that of the fetus-is involved is of course extremely important. The practice of abortion plausibly involves the death of another human being, one who is especially defenseless and conscientious objections that invoke fetal protection deserve a response. But that fact goes to the issue of justification, not to the question whether there is discrimination in the first instance.
It is important to recall here that the biological capacity to bear children, frequently taken as the basis for women's "natural" role, in fact has the social consequence of involuntary childbearing only as a result of collective decisions, conspicuous among them the legal prohibition of abortion. The question at hand is whether government has the power through law to turn that capacity, limited to one gender, into a source of social disadvantage. The recognition of the Roe79 right sees the biological capacity as having no necessary social consequences, and treating the role of motherhood for women as chosen rather than given,8 " to be selected by women rather than by the state. At the very least this seems to be the best argument in cases of rape or incest. In those cases, the question is whether the state's interest in protecting the fetus allows the state to compel women to bring the fetus to term.
Is the state's justification sufficient? The argument to the contrary would be that in cases in which women are not responsible for their pregnancies, the state may not conscript women in order to protect another life, whether fetal or not. This is so partly because the notion that women should be coopted in this way is in fact a product of sex discrimination, in the form of
[Vol. 70:593
1990] UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE 619 impermissible stereotypes about the role of women in society. The history unambiguously supports the claim that restrictions on abortion are closely tied up with traditional and now-impermissible ideas about women's proper role."' Two additional factors support this line of argument. First, outside of the abortion context, the government never imposes similar obligations on its citizens, even when human life is uncontroversially at stake.82 In the abortion context, the striking inequality of imposing the burden of bodily cooptation on women alone suggests that the interest in protection of human lifeif invoked as the basis for selective impositions and when pregnancy is involuntary-is inadequate, or can be found adequate only as a result of impermissible sex role stereotypes. The second factor is that in the real world, the consequence of a restriction on abortion is not materially to save fetal lives, but instead to lead women to procure dangerous abortions with increased risks to women themselves. The abortion rate has not increased dramatically as a result of the decision in Roe. Indeed, some estimates suggest that before Roe, 5,000 to 10,000 women died per year as a result of incompetently performed, illegal abortions, and that nearly as many abortions were performed before Roe as now." Even if these statistics are overstated, the principal effect of Roe was not to increase fetal deaths, but instead to produce a shift from dangerous to safe abortions. 8" If this is so, restrictions on abortion do not materially advance the end of protecting fetal life. These arguments have the advantage of making it unnecessary to decide on the moral status of the fetus. Even if the fetus has all of the status of human life, involuntarily pregnant women cannot be conscripted in order to protect it. To put it bluntly: the question is not whether women may kill fetuses but instead whether the state may enlist women's bodies in the protection of third parties, however defenseless. In view of the inequality in the imposition of such burdens, the connection between restrictions on abortion and impermissible stereotypes, and the unlikelihood that such burdens will promote their own purposes, the answer seems to be negative.
If arguments of this sort are accepted, might government fund childbirth
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW but not abortion in cases of rape or incest? If Roe is treated as a case in which government is not permitted to turn biological capacities into social disadvantages, it is hard to see why the abortion right, at least limited to such cases, should not be a right to governmental neutrality. The reason is that the very deneutralizing that underlies Roe itself seems to forbid a distinction between funding and criminalization. A refusal to fund is merely another form of government cooptation. To be sure, the protection of potential life is a legitimate state interest, but if the interest is insufficient to outweigh the right in the criminal context, it is not clear why it suffices in the setting of funding. For cases of rape and incest, a selective funding decision has precisely the consequence of turning women into involuntary incubators. The relevant right is best characterized as akin to the first amendment right to neutrality with respect to point of view.86 If the right is to equal protection, the conscientious objections of the taxpayers should count no more here than in the first amendment context, or in the setting of race or sex discrimination in allocating funds for social security.
At least this perspective will seem persuasive if funding decisions are not treated as an artificial supplement to a natural or spontaneous social orderthe central instinct behind Harris v. McRae -and if the ideas that gave rise to the regulatory state are taken seriously. Viewed through the lens of the New Deal period, the failure to fund is not inaction at all. It represents a conscious social choice, one that conscripts women in the cause of incubation, rather than simply letting "nature" take its course.' If poverty is seen not as part of nature, but instead as a predictable consequence of a system of collective choices, governmental decisions that turn poverty and biology into a basis for the creation of the status of involuntary incubators seem to run afoul of the equal protection clause.
The unconstitutional conditions doctrine, nominally designed as an effort to adapt constitutional doctrines to the regulatory state, is rooted in intuitions that are deeply incompatible with the understandings that gave rise to modern government. The doctrine is therefore an anachronism. It is also too crude and too general to provide help in dealing with contested cases. There is no need to ask whether government has subsidized rather than penalized, or threatened rather than offered. We might substitute for those unhelpful and probably unanswerable questions a more direct and constitutionally-grounded inquiry into, first, the nature of the incursion on the rele-
