Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
. 
This content downloaded from 195.34.79.253 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 09:58:33 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Philosophers,politicalscientists,and lawyershave devoted considerable attentionto therole ofnormsin thetwoareas forwhichAnglo-American legal systemsare mostfrequentlycelebrated: the common law and constitutionallaw. Thus, for example,judicial elaboration of common law principlesofcontract,tort,and propertyhas been described(alternately) as an efforto promoteeconomicefficiencoyr to protectprivateautonomy; and backgroundnormsof varioussortshave been developed fromthese premises.So too,theroleofnormsin thechoiceamongdifferensttrategies forinterpretingtheopen-ended phrasesoftheConstitutionis reasonably well understood. 
There is a conspicuous gap, however,in the treatmentof statutory interpretationT.he gap is strikingin lightofthefactthattheinterpretation of statuteshas become by farthe mostfrequentand importanttaskfor judges (and administrators)in industrializeddemocracies. Although interpretationof regulatorystatutesfrequentlydeterminesthe content and scope of programsaffecting(forexample) pollution,energy,nuclear power, endangered species, workers,and victimsof discriminationi,t is in thissettingthatcourtsare said to have littleor no room to move. On theusual view,theirroleis to actas agentsofthelegislaturei,mplementing itscommands. Indeed, it is here thatcourtsare said to act,at least most of the time,without"interpretation"or "norms"at all. In these circumstances,thenotionthatnormsplaya major role in statutoryconstruction mightseem iconoclasticor even bizarre. 
In thisessay,I want to argue thatextratextualnorms-understood as principlesabout constitutionaglovernmenti,nstitutionaalrrangements, basic fairness,and regulatoryfailure-do in factplay a crucial role in the interpretationof statutes.Indeed, descriptiveand prescriptivework on thistopicis impossiblewithoutan understandingoftheroleofnorms. My argumentcomes in twobasic parts.In the firstpart,I rejectthe view * Many of the argumentsin thisessayare givenin more detailin a forthcomingbook, AftertheRightsRevolution:ReconceivingtheRegulatoryState (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UniversityPress,1990), and also in "InterpretingStatutesin theRegulatoryState,"Harvard Law Review,vol. 103 (December 1989). 803 that courts can be "agents" of the legislatureand suggest instead that extratextualnorms are a necessarypart of statutoryinterpretationI.n thesecond part,whichis morespeculative,I describepossiblefoundations forextratextualnorms and outline theirrole in statutoryconstruction. Above all, I urge thatit is desirable,not to limitthe role of such norms, but to identifythem,to evaluate them,and to develop and apply norms thatare wellsuitedto,and improvetheperformanceof,modernregulatory systems. 
It is sometimessuggestedthatthestatutor ylanguageis theonlylegitimate basis forinterpretationT.he principalfeatureof the textualistcreed is the belief that courts have no license to rely on "outside sources." A particulartargethere is theuse of normsthatcannotbe tiedto statutory textitself.The language of thestatute-and nothingelse-is thesource ofjudicial power and the object ofjudicial concern. 
Textualism appears to be enjoying a renaissance in a number of recentcases, and perhaps in the academy as well. Whateverits precise form,however,thetextualistapproach is inadequate.The centralproblem isthatwordsare notself-definingt;heirmeaningdepends on bothculture and context.There is no such thingas a preinterpretivetext,and words have no meaning beforeor withoutinterpretationT.o say thisis not to say thatwords used in statutescan mean anythingat all. (Confusion of thetwoquite separatepointshas been frequentin recentworkon literary interpretationand on linguistics.)But itis to say thatstatutorytermsare indeterminatestanding"bythemselves,"and, more important,thatthey never stand by themselves.For thisreason, backgroundnormsof interpretation,orientingthejudicial reader to the textbut not "in" it,are an indispensable part of interpretation. 
Usually the backgroundnormsare so widelyshared-for example, that Congress is speaking in English, that Congress is not joking or attemptingto mislead, or that courts should not decide cases simply according to theirpredilections-that theyare invisible.But in easy as well as hard cases, courtsmustresortto such normsifinterpretationis to proceed. For example, thequestion whetherthe enactmentof federal environmentalstatutespreemptsall of statetortlaw is an easy one-it does not-not because of the statutorytext"itself"but because of universallyshared understandingsabout the limitedpreemptiveeffectof federalenactments. 
So far,perhaps, those who accept textualistapproaches mightbe in agreement.Perhapstheywould agree thatthemeaningofwordsis largely a functionofbackgroundnormsabout how textsshould be approached. Indeed, we maydefinean easy case as one in whichthereis a consensus about thegoverningnorms.But theproblemfortextualismgoes deeper. 
In manyhard cases, thesource ofthedifficultiys thattheparticularkind of background norm and the nature of its application will be highly controversial. 
Assume,forexample, thatthequestion is whethera statutecreating a regulatoryagencyto bar racialdiscriminationin employmentimplicitly authorizes privatesuits by victimsof discriminationagainst employers who have engaged in discrimination.If the statuteand its historyare silenton the question, the case cannot be decided withoutintroducing background norms, which are necessaryto tell interpreterswhat such silencemeans. Thus itshould be unsurprisingthatjudges skepticalabout implied causes of action have relied, not on statutory"text,"but on a backgroundassumption,traceableto a particularunderstandingof separation of powers,thatonly the legislaturemay create such rights,and thatstatutorysilence should be assumed not to do so. 
These considerationsaccount forthe pervasivedifficultiewsithtextualistapproaches to statutoryconstruction:ambiguity,delegation or gaps, overinclusivenessu,nderinclusivenessa,nd changed circumstances. The most familiarproblem is thatstatutorylanguage is sometimesambiguous. It is not clear, for example, whetherthe term"feasible"contemplatescost-benefitanalysis,whethera statutoryreferenceto "wages" is meantto includeemployercontributiontso a pensionprogram,whether regulatorypoweroverthebroadcastingindustryincludescable television, or whethera prohibitionof "discriminationb"arsvoluntaryrace-conscious measures designed to counteractthe effectsof past and presentdiscrimination against blacks.' In all of these cases, moreover,it is uncertain whetherthe language should be taken to referto the originalmeaning of those words for the enacting legislature(assuming thatidea can be made intelligiblein lightof the problems of aggregatingthe views of numerous actors) or should instead take account of contemporaryunderstandingsofwhatthewordsmean. By itself,textualismcannotanswer these questions. 
Statutesmightalso representa delegation of lawmakingpower to courts,or containgaps thatinterpretersmustfill.For example, thebasic termsof the most importantAmerican antitrustlaw-forbidding "conspiracies in restraintof trade"-are uninformativeabout the sorts of norms that mightbe broughtto bear in deciding preciselywhich conspiraciesare unlawful.So too,thestatutoryprohibitionon "discrimination" in civilrightslaw is silenton burdens of pleading and production,the appropriatestatuteof limitationsa,nd a rangeof additionalimplementing rules. In such cases, the problemis thatthe textrequiresinterpretersto look to sources outside of its fourconcerns. 
Sometimes,language thatwould in many contextsbe entirelyunambiguous should not be the only basis for interpretationT.he literal language of a statute-the meaning of itstermsin ordinarysettingswillsuggestan outcome thatwould make littleor no sense. Suppose, for example, that a state law says that no vehicles are permittedin public parksand thata cityproposes to build in a parka monumentconsisting oftanksused in WorldWar 11.2 Here whatappears tobe theunambiguous language must yield,for the statutecould not reasonablybe taken to forbidsuch a monument,which causes none of the harms the statute could be thoughtto prevent. 
The example is not fanciful.The Supreme Court recentlysaid that a statuteexempting state and local public housing agencies "fromall taxation... imposed bythe United States"should not be interpretedto include an exemptionfromfederalestatetax.3The Court held thatthe exemptiondid not mean whatit appeared to say in lightof the contemporaneous understandingthatan excise tax was not ordinarilycomprehended withinthecategoryof"taxation."Or suppose thatthelegislature has said thatan employermay dischargean employee "forany reason." Is the employertherebyauthorizedto fireworkerswho have refusedto commitcrimeson his behalf? Mighta man who has murderedhis wife inheritfromher under a statuteallowing spouses to inherit"under all circumstances"?These are examples of what mightbe describedas the overinclusivenessof textualism:the possibilitythat statutorylanguage, read withoutregard to context,willreach situationsthatitought not to cover. 
Courts encounter the problem frequently.4A passage fromWittgensteinindicatesthe basic difficulty":Someone says to me: 'Shew the childrena game.' I teach them gaming withdice, and the other says 'I didn'tmean thatsortof game.' Must theexclusionof the game withdice have come beforehis mind when he gave me the order?"5The example shows that sometimesthe best interpretationof a textualcommand is one thatruns counter to itsapparent literalmeaning-even in cases in which the author did not have in mind the particularcase at issue or make a judgment about how thatcase should be resolved. 
Although it arises less frequently,there is also a possibilitythat textualismwill be underinclusive.This problem occurs when the text, read outside of context,does not regulateconductthatthe statute,most 
plausiblyread, should be understood to control.A particulardifficulty here is thata statutemay be "evaded" by privateingenuity.The literal language of the statutedoes not cover the situation,but because the privateconduct causes all of the harmsthatthe statuteprevents,courts sometimeshold a statuteapplicable notwithstandingits precise terms.6 ConsiderJusticeHolmes's suggestionthatcourtsare "apt to errbysticking too close to the words of a law where those words importa policythat goes beyond them."7 
The discussion thus far has assumed that circumstanceshave not changed significantlysince the statutewas enacted. But the difficulties of textualismbecome all the more severe when time has affectedthe assumptionsunder whichthestatutewas originallywrittenC.onsiderthe Delaney Clause, which forbidsthe use as food additivesof substances that "induce" cancer. The Delaney Clause was enacted at a timewhen carcinogenicsubstances were difficultto detect,and all detectablecarcinogenswereextremelydangerous.Currentlyc,arcinogensare detectable at exceptionallylow levels,and manyof them pose trivialrisks.In such circumstances,mighttheword"induce" allowthegovernmenttoexempt fromregulationcarcinogensthatpose trivialrisks?Mechanicalapplication ofthetextin newcircumstancesislikelytoproduce interpretivbelunders. 
All thissuggeststwoprincipalpoints.First,and mostfundamentally, there is no such thingas an acontextual "text"thatcan be used as the exclusiveguide to interpretationI.n easy cases, backgroundnorms-on which there is wide or universalconsensus-are part of the process of ascertainingstatutorymeaning.Preciselybecause thenormsare so widely shared, theyappear invisibleand are not an object of controversyI.n othercases,usuallytreatedas hardones,courtsmustresortto a contestable background norm in order to resolve an interpretivedispute. It is in these settings,and in thissense, thattextualismis inevitablyincomplete. 
Second, it is by no means obvious thatcourtsshould alwaysrelyon the textor on the "plain meaning" of wordseven in cases in whichsuch relianceis possibleand leads to determineresults.An interpretivsetrategy thatrelies exclusivelyon the ordinary,dictionarydefinitionof words is preciselythat-an interpretivestrategythatreflectsa choiceamong competing possibilities-and in manycases it willproduce irrationalitya,bsurdityo,r an inferiorsystemoflaw.The invocationofbackgroundnorms of various sortspromisesto be a salutarycorrective. 
Thus far we have seen that the most prominentspecies of the agency viewof thejudicial role appears to fail.It is timeto see whatconclusions emergefromthatfailure.On whatremainsthemostwellknownapproach to the matter,the processof statutoryconstructioninvolvesascertaining the meaning of the legislativecommand in the particularcase. This approach sees the courtsas agents or servantsof the legislature. 
On the agency view,courtsshould say what the statutemeans, and in thatprocesslanguage, historya,nd structureare relevant;and perhaps those who accept the agency view,rejectingtextualism,would concede the need forinterpretiveprinciplesto help orientreader to text.But on thisview,background norms of other sorts-taken up below-are impermissibleT.he agencyviewamountsto a formalisatpproachto statutory construction-formalistbecause it does not permitcourtsto undertake value-laden inquiries into statutoryfunctionand failureas part of the process of interpretation. 
The agency view is usually defended by a claim of legitimacy.In a democraticsystemo,ne withseparatedpowers,itis said tobe impermissible for courts to invoke norms that cannot be traced to an authoritative textualinstrumentT.he claimofillegitimacyisbuttressedby(orreducible to) a range of prudentialconsiderations:the use of backgroundnorms willtend to increasejudicial discretion,decrease legislativeattentiveness, produce uncertaintya,nd riskusurpationbyjudges of powers accorded to legislativeand executiveactors.In thissense,thedebateoverformalism in statutoryconstructionreplicatesa similardebate in constitutionalaw. As a particularlycrispexpressionof the agencyviewof thejudicial role, considerthewordsofJusticeHolmes, who, afterdescribinga regulatory statuteas "foolish,"added: "If my fellowcitizenswant to go to Hell I willhelp them. It's myjob."8 
The agencyviewcontainsan importanttruth.It would be improper forcourtsto "interpret"statutesby construingthemto mean whatever thejudges thinkwould be best. No one could defend an approach to statutoryconstructionthat would license judges to say that a statute meanswhatevera good statutewouldsay.Itfollowsfromthisunderstanding thatwherethereis neitherinterpretivdeoubtnor constitutionaolbjection, it is thejudgment of the electorallyaccountable branch,and not thatof thejudges, thatwill prevail. 
Notwithstandingthese considerations,the formalistposition,and the agency view of statutoryconstruction,are subject to two decisive objections.First,the formalistconceptionof "meaning"is fartoo crude. As we have seen,language is not self-interpretinCgo.urtscannot"simply" be agents. The instructionsof the principal are unintelligiblewithout backgroundnormsthatinterpretersalone can supply.It is importantto emphasize that this is a conceptual or logical claim, not a proposition about the appropriate distributionof powers as among administrators, courts,and legislatures. 
Suppose thismuch were acknowledged,and itwere suggestedthat courts should relyon the agency view "as much as possible." This is a 1953), vol. 1, p. 249. 
highlyambiguous concept,but perhaps itcan be takento argue in favor ofadherencetolegislativemeaningtotheextentthatitisfairlyascertainable forjudges equipped withconventionalor uncontestedbackgroundnorms. The second problem forthe agencyview is thatitsclaim of illegitimacy relies on question begging and probably indefensiblepremises. That claimmustbe defendedbya setofinstitutionaalnd substantivaerguments, and thoseargumentsare hardtosupply.The claimmustbe thata formalist approach to construction-again, to the extentthatit is possible-will lead on balance to the best or most sensible systemof law. But it is far more likelythatthe introductionof otherconsiderationswillaccomplish thatgoal. Assume,forexample,thatstatutor ylanguage,whileambiguous, is mostnaturallyread to lead in a directionthatis,bygeneralconsensus, absurd and could not plausiblyhave been intended; thata statutemight be understoodas givingopen-ended authorityto a bureaucracy;thatthe most obvious reading of a statuteprovides bizarre or unjust resultsin lightofchangesin thefiftyearssinceitsenactmentt;hatan appropriations measure appears to intrudeon a carefullyelaborated(and sensible)compromise in the environmentalfield. In all of these settings,invocation of backgroundnormswilllead to betteroutcomes. In such cases, courts thatactas somethingotherthanmereagentswillproduce a moresensible systemof law. 
How, in lightof these considerations,ought the problem of statutory constructionto be understood?Some help in thisregardmightbe found in an unlikelyplace. In interpretingstatutes,courtshave oftenreliedon canonsn" of construction.I will use the term "canons" to referto all backgroundnorms thatare used in statutoryconstruction. 
Anydefenseof thecanons mustcome to termswithone of the most important(and characteristicc)ontributionosf the legal realistmovement, whichwas to discreditthe canons. The mostimportantexample is Karl Llewellyn'scelebratedeffortto demonstratethatforeach canon thereis an equal canon pointingin the opposite direction.9In Llewellyn'sview, an inspectionof the decisions revealed thatthe canons did not help to decide cases; insteadtheyoperatedas mechanical,after-the-farcetcitations disguisingthe reasons fordecision. This view of the canons has deeply penetrated modern legal culture. Almost no one has had a favorable word to say about the canons in manyyears. 
But the canons of constructioncontinueto be a prominentfeature in the federal and state courts.The use of guides to construction-in theformofbackgroundunderstandingsand principlesrequiringa "clear statement"from Congress in various settings-can be found in every or Canons about How StatutesAre to Be Construed,"VanderbilLtaw Review3 (1950): 395. area of modern law. And thereis no sign thatcanons are decreasingin importance-partly, as we have seen, because of theirinevitabilityand partlybecause oftheirplausibilityon substantivegrounds.The deviation betweenjudicial practiceand academicconsensusis somethingofa puzzle. 
An analogy may be helpfulhere. The law of contractsis pervaded by-indeed, itconsistslargelyof-a setofprinciplesfillingin contractual gaps when the parties have been silent,or when the meaning of their words is unclear. The use of implied termsis a familiarpart of the law ofcontracta;nd itwouldbe mostpeculiartosaythattheyare an illegitimate incursion into the usual process of "interpreting"the parties' intent. Withoutimplied termsof some sort,contractssimplywould not be susceptibleto construction. 
To a large degree, interpretivenorms serve the same functionin publiclaw.They too helpjudges toconstruebothstatementsand silences; theytoo should not be seen as the intrusionof controversiajludgments into "ordinary"interpretationB.ut thereare differencesas well as similarities.In the law of contract,itis oftensaid thatimpliedtermsshould attemptto "mimic the market"by doing what the parties would do if theyhad made provisionson the subject. In the law of statutoryconstruction,by contrast,the notionof "mimickingthe market"is farfrom a complete guide. Sometimesit willbe extremelyunclear how Congress wouldhave resolvedthequestion;sometimestheresolutionoftheenacting Congress would have been differentfromthatof the currentCongress, and it is not clear whose resolutionshould control; sometimescourts properly call into play principles-many of them constitutionally inspired-that push statutesin directionsthatdivergefromtheconclusion thatCongress would have reached ifit had resolvedthe matter. 
Despite these differencest,he analogy to contractlaw revealsthatit is impossibleto dispense withbackgroundnormsin interpretingterms. In the contextof statutoryconstruction,however,such normswilloften servefunctionsotherthan thatof applyingthejudgment thatCongress would have reached ifit had addressed the question. 
Partoftheproblemiscomingtotermswiththecanons,or withbackground normsof interpretations,temsfromthe factthattheyservea varietyof differentgoals. Those goals fallin fourbasic categories. designed to orientjudicial readers to the textin order to help them to ascertainitsmeaningin theparticularcase. This is themostuncontroversial functionofinterpretivperinciplest,houghnotall ofthemsensiblypromote thisgoal. Consider,forexample,theidea thatthelanguage ofa particular provisionwillbe taken in the contextof the statuteas a whole and will not be interpretedso as to do violence to statutorystructure.The understandingthat even apparentlyunambiguous statutorytermsmight 
Normsand StatutorIynterpretation 811 have a counterintuitivemeaning if other provisionsof the statuteso indicate is a sensible way of understandingstatutorymeaning in the particularcase. whatmightbe called theinterpretiveinstructionsofthelegislature.Such principlesare designed to capture an actual or hypotheticallegislative judgment about how statutesshould be construed.They do not serveas guidance to meaning in the particularcase but, instead,attemptto incorporate explicitor implicitcongressionalcommands withrespect to the interpretiveprocess. 
The easiest cases here involveexplicitlegislativeinstructionsabout interpretationT.hus the firstsectionsof the United States Code set out a seriesofguidelinesforcourtsto followin interpretingstatutes.'0When Congress has been explicit,therecan be no objection tojudicial use of the relevantinstructions.Some interpretiveprinciples,however,are a product of an understandingof implicitratherthan explicitlegislative interpretivienstructionsC.onsidertheidea thatstatuteswillbe interpreted so as to be constitutionalratherthan unconstitutional,or thatjudicial reviewof administrativebehavior will be assumed in the absence of a clear congressionalinstructionto the contrary. promotebetterlawmaking.Such principlesmight,forexample,minimize judicialor administrativdeiscretionor pushlegislativeprocessesin desirable directions.Principlesof thissortattemptneitherto orientthe reader to the textin the particularcase nor to capture congressionalinstructions withrespecttointerpretationT. he effortisinsteadtoimprovelawmaking processes and the deliberationand accountabilitythatare supposed to accompanythem.In thisrespect,some interpretiveprinciplesfulfilgloals associated withthe separationof powers and withplausible assessments of comparativeinstitutionaclompetence.They are designed above all to channel certaindecisions throughcertaininstitutionsor to improvethe operation of those institutions.Examples include the idea that appropriationsstatutes,usuallydone hastily,willnot be understoodto amend substantivsetatutest;hatimplicitrepealsofpreviouslawswillbe disfavored; thatstatuteswillnot ordinarilybe read to interferewiththe president's power in foreignaffairs. purposes whollyapart fromstatutorymeaning, interpretiveintent,or the lawmakingprocess. The categoryof substantiveprinciplesspans a wide range. Substantiveprinciplesmay reflectan objectionablejudicial value judgment; but they mightderive instead from policies that are easy to defend. 
Interpretivenormsoftenderivefromconstitutionalprinciples.It is a familiaridea thatwhen a statutemightbe interpretedto be valid or invalid,courtsshouldconstrueitso thatitsurvivesconstitutionaclhallenge. There are numerous othersubstantivenormsas well; manyof themare withoutconstitutionailnspiration.Such normscounsel courtsnottoinfer privatecauses of actionfromregulatorystatutest,o assume thatlegislation of Congress applies onlywithinthe territoriajlurisdictionof the United States,not to inferexemptions fromtaxation,to assume that criminal statutesrequiremensrea, to avoid irrationalityto, counteractobsolescence, and (an outmoded norm) to protectcommon law rightsin the absence of a clear statementfromCongress. 
All of these considerationssuggest an alternativeto the conventional understandingsofstatutoryinterpretationT. he statutorytextisofcourse thestartingpoint,but itbecomes intelligibleonlybecause ofbackground norms that give it content.Usually, those norms are so widelyshared, and so uncontroversial,that the text"alone" appears to be a sufficient basis forinterpretations;tatementsof thissortmean thattogetherwith generallyagreed upon interpretiveprinciples,the meaning of the text is notin doubt. In manycases, however,thetextwillproduce ambiguity, overinclusiveness,or underinclusiveness. 
In such cases, courts often must resortto background norms of various sorts.Such normsare sometimesdesigned to reveal meaning in the particularcases; theyare sometimesintendedto serveproceduralor substantivepolicies. Sometimestheyserve theirintended purpose well, and those purposes are not terriblycontroversial.But sometimesthe relevantpurposesare disputable-considernormscallingfortheprotection offederalism,therule oflenityin criminalcases,theprotectionofIndian tribes-and sometimesit is unclear thatthose purposes are in factwell served by the particularprinciple. 
Backgroundnormsvaryfromone countryto another;therelevantprinciples diverge sharplyin accordance with the political understandings thatprevailin the nation'slegal culture.It is in thislightthatone should understand disagreementsabout interpretivenorms in differentlegal systemsB.ackgroundnormsalso differfromone periodtoanotherwithin any particularcountry.In the United States,forexample, the principles 
of the late nineteenthand earlytwentiethcenturiesreflecteda beliefin common law orderingthatwas largelyrepudiated in the 1930s. 
In thissection,I provide an outline of the basis forand contentof interpretivenormsthatare designedto promoteconstitutionaplurposes, and the basic goals of deliberativegovernment,in the post-New Deal period. 
Sourcesofinterpretipvreinciples 
a) In general-.Interpretive normsrequiresources;and itisimportant to be quite explicitabout themhere. The firstand moststraightforward is the Constitution.Understandingsabout constitutionalarrangements provide a significantamount of the backgroundagainstwhichstatutory constructionoccurs. To be sure, there is frequentlyuncertaintyabout constitutionalmeaning; and statutorydisputesare sometimes,in part,a functionof a broader dispute about the nature of the constitutional structure.Often,however,thereis sufficientconsensus about the Constitutionto ground a large part of interpretivepractice. 
The second source of interpretivenorms-also straightforwardconsistsofunderstandingsabout theappropriateand actualperformance of governmentalinstitutions.One might,for example, conclude that appropriationsstatutesare writtenhastilyand withoutdeliberation;that in the face of ambiguity,courtsshould deferto administrativeinterpretationsof law; or that,on the contrary,regulatoryagencies should have littlediscretion.If one weresimplydescribingstatutoryconstructiono,ne would finda number of backgroundnormstraceableto understandings of preciselythissort. 
b) The regulatorsytate.-The thirdand finalsource of background norms involves the intended functionsof regulatorystatutesand the waysin whichsuch statutestend to failin practice.A detailed discussion of thesepointswould be wellbeyondthescope ofthepresentdiscussion, but a briefoutline willbe useful. 
The goals of regulatoryregimesspan a wide range. Some statutes are designed to promote economic efficiencyo,thersto redistributeresources in public-regardingways,to reflectsocial values or aspirations, to counteractthe social subordinationof disadvantaged groups, or to enforce the termsof pure interest-groupdeals. Moreover,statutesfail fora varietyofreasons.Sometimestheyare adverselyaffectedbyinterestgroup power, collective action problems, the absence of political accountabilityor deliberation,obsolescence, or lack of coordinationwith other statutes.Other statutesfailbecause of implementationproblems. Statutesdesigned to redistributeresources,forexample, mayfailto take account of the way that the marketcan nullifythe intended effects. Statutesdesigned to reduce or eliminatethe social subordinationof disadvantaged groups, or to promote noncommodityvalues like environmental diversity,are frequentlysubject in the implementationprocess to preciselythe same obstaclesthatmake such statutesnecessaryin the firstplace. Governmentfailurethus replicatesmarketfailure.'2 
Conclusions of thissortare principallyof interestto regulatorsin thelegislativeand executivebranches;buttheyare relevanttothejudiciary as well. Legal interpretationof regulatorystatuteshas in factbeen responsiveto understandingsabout thelikelyfunctionand failureofthose statutes.Moreover,legal interpretationis likelyto be improvedby such understandings.It is notsimple,tobe sure,to make such understandings operational-to explain exactlyhow theyshould be used in hard cases. But itis not difficulto show how understandingsof regulatoryfunction and failurehave worked,and should work,to produce norms-or so I willbe arguing. 
In this section, I brieflydescribe interpretivenorms drawn from the threesources described above. statutoryinterpretationspan a wide range. The Constitutionprovides thebackdropagainstwhichstatutesare writtenand interpretedM.oreover, federal courts underenforcemany constitutionalnorms,and for good reasons.13 Institutionaclonstraints-mostnotably,the courts'limitedfactfindingabilityand weak electorallegitimation-lead courtsto be reluctant to vindicateconstitutionalprincipleswiththe vigorappropriate to governmentalbodies witha betterdemocraticpedigree. It followsthatsome statutesshould be understood as responses to Congress's constitutional responsibilitieseven if courtswould not require Congress to carryout those responsibilitiesin the firstinstance.Relativelyaggressivestatutory interpretation-pushingstatutesaway fromconstitutionalltyroublesome ground-provides a way for courts to vindicatenorms that do in fact have constitutionalstatus. 
a) Federalism.-In the systemof American public law, the basic assumptionis thatstateshave authorityto regulatetheirown citizensand territoryT.his assumptionjustifiesan interpretivenorm calling for a clear statementin order to support federalpreemptionof statelaw. 
b) Politicaldeliberationt;heconstitutionaanltipathtyonakedinterest-group transfers.-The American constitutionalregime is built on hostilityto measures thatimpose burdens or grantbenefitsmerelybecause of the politicalpower of privategroups; some public value is required forgovernmentalaction.This norm,traceableto theoriginsof theConstitution and firmlyrootedin currentlaw,has a numberofimplicationfsorstatutory interpretationI.t suggests,forexample, thatcourtsshould develop in 
Normsand StatutorIynterpretation 815 terpretivestrategiesto promote deliberationin government-by, for example, remandingissues involvingconstitutionallysensitiveinterests or groups forreconsiderationbythelegislatureor byregulatoryagencies when deliberation appears to have been absent. It also suggests that statutesthatembody mere interest-groupdeals should be narrowlyconstrued.Much ofAmericanadministrativleawis foundedon theseideas.14 c) Politicalaccountabilityth;enondelegatiopnrinciple-.In the period since the New Deal, courtshave permittedCongress to delegate exceptionallybroad policy-makingauthorityto regulatoryagencies.Such broad delegationswereatone timethoughttooffendArticleI oftheConstitution, which vestslegislativepower in Congress. In recentyears,courtshave been reluctantoenforcethenondelegationdoctrineB.utthroughstatutory construction,courts are sometimesable to vindicatethe constitutional principle against delegation of legislativepower. They can do so, for example, by narrowlyconstruingdelegationsof policy-makingpower. 
d) Propertyand contractrights.-In the aftermathof the New Deal reformationc,ourtshave been reluctantto use theConstitution'sexplicit protectionof propertyand contractin a way thatwould interferewith social and economic regulation.But courtscan vindicatethoserightsless intrusivelythroughthe narrowconstructionof regulatorystatutesthat raiseseriousconstitutionadloubtsunderthecontractsand takingsclause. 
e) Welfarerights.-In recentyears,the Supreme Court has rejected claims that the Constitutionguarantees rightsof basic subsistence;the resistancestemslargelyfromreasonsofdemocraticlegitimacyB.ut perhaps a Court thatsaw substantiveforcein the claim forconstitutionawlelfare rightswould attempttovindicatethatclaim,notthroughtheConstitution itselfb,ut throughaggressivestatutoryconstructionso as to ensureagainst irrationalor arbitrarydeprivationsof benefits.Such an approach would tend to produce even-handedness in the distributionof welfare in a democracythathas committeditselfto a "social safetynet." Aggressive statutoryconstruction,requiringa clear statementforexclusions,might produce manyof the advantagesof recognitionof constitutionawlelfare rightswithoutimposing nearlyso severe a strainon thejudiciary. 
f) Disadvantagedgroups-.Some of the most difficultconstitutional questions involve the extent of protectionaffordedto disadvantaged groups by the equal protectionclause; and in many cases, courtshave affordedless protectionthan theymightbecause of a desire to minimize interferencewiththe politicalbranchesof government.Thus the Court has required a showingof discriminatory"intent"in order to make out a violationof the equality principle,and in various ways it has limited its protectionof blacks, women, and the handicapped.'5 In this light, statutesthatprovideprotectionforsuch groups,or againstdiscriminatory effects,mightwell be seen as a legislativeresponse to its (judiciallyunderenforced)constitutionadluties.Through statutoryconstructionsc,ourts can ensure thatthe relevantnorms are vindicated. straightforwardltyo institutionalconcerns,havingto do withthe actual or appropriatefunctioningof governmentalentities.Most of theseprinciples are straightforwaradnd can be discussed quite briefly. 
a) Appropriatiosntsatutes.-Courtsconstrueappropriationsprovisions quite narrowly.That principle can be connected withjudicial understandingsabout the characterof the appropriationsprocess, in which legislativedeliberationis highlyunlikely,and interest-grouppower is peculiarlylikelytomakeitseffectsfelt.Narrowconstructionofappropriationsstatutespromotesdeliberationin government. 
b) Thepresumptioinnfavorofjudicial review-.Courts presume that thelegislaturehas notprecludedjudicial reviewofagencydecisions.This presumption is partly attributableto a belief-vindicated by recent experience' that regulatoryagencies are susceptibleto factionalism and self-interestedrepresentationJ.udicialreviewoperatesas a powerful ex ante deterrentagainstdangersof thissort;itis also an ex post corrective.IfCongressistoeliminatejudiciarleviewi,tmustdo so unambiguously. 
c) Impliedexemptionfrsomtaxation.-Courts do not inferexemptions fromtaxation.This principleis partlya resultof a desire to protectthe Treasury; it is partlya productof a viewthatexemptionsfromtaxation frequentlyreflectthe influenceof well-organizedprivategroups. 
rule oflaw. The mostconspicuous example is the rule of lenity:criminal statuteswillbe construedfavorablytothedefendant,above all topromote fairnotice.Other illustrationsinclude ajudicial assumptionthatstatutes do not apply retroactivelyt,hatadministrativediscretionis narrow,and thatadministratorshave the authorityto proceed by rule. interpretivenormsmightbe designed to counteractfailuresin social and economic regulation. In this space, it will be possible only to list the relevantnorms.Where thereis interpretivedoubt,a perceptionof characteristicpathologiesin regulatorylegislationhelpsin statutoryconstruction. Courts should, I suggest,construe regulatorystatutesso that ( politicallyunaccountable actorsare prohibitedfromdecidingimportant issues; ( ( intoa coherentwhole;( 
developments of law, policy,and fact; ( substantiverightsare kept narrow; ( regulationare taken into account; and, mostgenerally,( measuredagainstthestatute'sown purposes,isavoided. These principles apply acrosstheuniverseofregulatorystatutes,thoughtheirapplication willvarywiththe statutoryfunction. 
In lightof the conventionaldifficultieins theimplementationprocess, courtsshould also, I suggest,generouslyconstruestatutesdesigned to protecttraditionallydisadvantaged groups and noncommodityvalues. Courts should attemptto ensure as well thatthe costsof regulationare proportionateto thebenefitsand thatde minimisexceptionsto regulatory requirementsare permittedor required. Finally,statutesthat embody interestgroup transfersshould be narrowlyinterpreted. 
It shouldbe clearthatsome oftheseideas are a productofcontestable substantivetheories.Some of them depend fortheirsupport on views about the usual nature of regulatoryfailure;and it would of course be possible to accept some of the principleswhile rejectingothers. Notwithstandingtheirnumberand variety,moreover,thevariousnormsare united by certaingeneral goals. These include, above all, the effortto promote deliberationin government,to furnishsurrogatesforit when it is absent,to limitfactionalismand self-interestedrepresentation,and to help bringabout politicalequality.All of the normsare responsiveto an understandingof the various reasons forstatutesand of the various ways thattheytend to fail in practice.Of course it would be necessary to develop rules of priorityand harmonizationin cases of conflict. Illustrations prohibitsthe sale of food additivesthat "induce cancer when ingested by man or animal" or are found "aftertestswhich are appropriate for the evaluation of the safetyof food additives,to induce cancer in man and animal." As we have seen, the draftersof the clause believed that few additivescaused cancer and that those thatdid so were extremely dangerous. By the 1980s, however,it was clear that many substances were carcinogenic,but that a number of them created exceptionally minorrisks.These substancesincludednaturaldietaryconstituentpsosing dangers thatsurpass those of artificialchemicals. 
These developments severelyundermined the assumptionsof the Congress thatenacted the Delaney Clause, and indeed made it appear quite perversein manyof itsapplications-banning as itdid substances that posed littleor essentiallyno riskto health. One consequence was thatmanufacturers,havingbeen forbiddento use food additivesposing a de minimisriskof cancer,used instead additivesthatcaused farmore serious risksof other diseases-thus creatingwhat is quite possiblya significanitncreasein illnessesand deathsfromfoodadditives.In response, the Food and Drug Administration(FDA)-invoking backgroundprinciples against obsolescence and in favor of de minimisexceptionsinterpretedthe clause to permitexemptionsof trivialrisks.It said that it would approve food additivesthatposed a de minimisriskof cancer. 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Districtof Columbia held that the FDA's position was unlawful.'7 In the court's view, the Delaney Clause was simplyunambiguous on the point. But this interpretationwas farfrominevitable.Read in itscontext,therewas no such clarityC.ongresssimplydid notfocuson thequestionofde minimisrisks. It is farfromclear thatthe court'smechanicalreadingof the statutewas sensiblefromthe perspectiveof itsoriginalauthors,whose assumptions simplydid not hold in the 1980s. The background against which the Delaney Clause was writtenwas so differentfrompresentcircumstances thatthe statutoryterms"induce cancer" mustbe treatedas ambiguous. Whethera substance"induces" cancer withinthe meaningof the clause mightwell be a functionof the degree of riskthat it posed. In these cirumstancesi,nterpretatioonf the clause to permitde minimisexceptions seems quite consistentwithpermissibleunderstandingsofjudicial interpretationand quite sensibleto boot. The court'sdecisionto thecontrary was thereforemisguided. group of mentallyretarded people brought suit against a facilitythat was found to contain dangerous conditions.Many of the residentshad been physicallyabused, brutallymistreated,or drugged; and the facility was utterlyinadequate forthe habilitationof the retarded.As the basis of their legal claim, the plaintiffsinvoked the "bill of rights"in the DevelopmentallyDisabled Assistanceand Bill of RightsAct.'9 The bill of rightscontained a set of legislativefindings,includingthe following: treatments,ervicesa,nd habilitatiofnorsuchdisabilities. 
personwithdevelopmentaldisabilitiesshouldbe designedto maximizethedevelopmental potentiaolf thepersonand shouldbe providedin a settingthatis least restrictivoeftheperson'spersonaliberty. 
assurethatpublicfundsare notprovidedtoanyinstitutio.n.. thatdoes notprovidetreatments,ervicesa,nd habilitatiownhichis appropriateto theneedsofsuchpersons. 
The question in Pennhurstwas whether the bill of rightscreated legallyenforceablerightsor whetherit instead set out a set of goals or aspirations that could not be vindicatedin court. Whether the bill of rightswas legallyenforceablewas an uncertainissue in lightof the text 
and historyof the act. Withouta backgroundinterpretiveprinciple,the case was probablyimpossibleto resolve. 
In holdingforthe governmentaldefendant,theSupreme Courtdid not deny thatthe conventionalsources of interpretationleftthe case in equipoise. Instead it invoked a backgroundnorm: "If Congress intends to impose a condition on the grant of federal moneys,it must do so unambiguously.By insistingthatCongress speak witha clear voice, we enable the States to exercise their choice knowingly,cognizant of the consequences of their participation."Pennhurstwas thus decided as a resultofan interpretivneormthatwasa resultoftheCourt'sunderstanding of the constitutionalbackground-a norm thatcould not be connected to the statuteat issue in the case. 
For reasons explored above, federalismprinciplesare properlyinvoked, at least in ordinarysettings,to require a clear statementfrom Congress forthe impositionof significantdutieson the states.If the bill of rightshad been held legallyenforceable,the stateswould have faced an enormous financialburden, one that they had not, in view of the ambiguityofthestatute,necessarilyagreedtoincur.But twoconsiderations suggestthatPennhurswtas incorrectlydecided. First,federalismprinciples have much less forcein cases in whichCongressis attemptingto protect a traditionallydisadvantaged group fromthe politicalprocesses of the states. Here the ordinarypresumption in favor of state autonomy is countered by the history and implementation of the fourteenth amendment-a self-consciouslimitationon state power. Invocation of principlesof state autonomy in the contextof a sociallysubordinated group-to justifya narrowreading of a statuteenacted on itsbehalfis positivelyperversein lightof constitutionalstructureand history. 
Second, an underenforcedconstitutionalnorm calls foraggressive constructionof statutesinvolvingthedevelopmentallydisabled.The Court has been extremelycautious in using the Constitutionto protectthe disabled, largelyforinstitutionalreasons. In holdingthatthe equal protectionclause does notentitlethementallyretardedto special protection, forexample, the Court stressedthatfederaland statelegislatureshave in fact responded to the pervasive mistreatmentof the retarded,and that courts should be reluctantto intrude in so dramatic a way into democratic processes.20In these circumstances,it remains possible to argue thatthe best substantivetheoryof the equal protectionclause in factaccordsspecialprotectiontothedisabled,and thatwhenotherbranches give such protection,theyare carryingout theirconstitutionalresponsibilities. 
It followsthatwhen Congress has takenstepsto providesafeguards forthat group, the Court should take into account the underenforced characterof the equality norm in order to give statutesinvolvingthe disabled a hospitableratherthan grudginginterpretationI.t is puzzling indeed thatthe PennhurstCourt relied on a backgroundnorm in favor of federalismin a case involvinga group and a rightsafeguardedbythe fourteenthamendment. 
Because language "by itself"is withoutmeaning, and in light of the existence of gaps or ambiguitiesin hard cases, interpretivenorms of various sorts are indispensable-desirable and in any case inevitable. Statutoryinterpretationcannotgo forwardwithoutbackgroundprinciples that orient reader to text,fillgaps in the face of legislativesilence, or provide the backdrop againstwhichto read linguisticcommands. Some such principlesaid courtsin discerningthe meaningof particularstatutes, or help toimplementCongress'sactual or likelyinterpretiveinstructions; othersarerootedin constitutionacloncerns;othersarebasedon assessments of institutionaplerformance;and stillothersattemptto respond to characteristicfailingsof regulatorylegislation.In all of theserespects,norms of statutoryconstruction,far frombeing obsolete or representingan illegitimatejudicial value judgment, mustoccupy a prominentplace in the theoryand practiceof statutoryinterpretation. 
The ultimatetaskis to develop a set of interpretivenormsor backgroundunderstandings-sensitiveto constitutionasltructurei,nstitutional design,the New Deal reformationa,nd thediversefunctionsand failings of governmentalactorsand statutoryregimes-with whichto approach social and economic regulationin a systemthathas largelyabandoned common law categories.And itis possible to generatea seriesof norms, all with support in currentlaw, that can help accomplish some of the goals of deliberativegovernmentin the post-New Deal period. In this way,statutoryconstructioncan serveas an allyof other,more ambitious strategiesdesigned to promotesome of the originalconstitutionalgoals in a dramaticallychanged legal environment.It is fartoo muchto expect statutoryconstructionto respond to all of the failingsof the regulatory state.But itis not too much to expect thatthe processof interpretation can make the situationbetterratherthan worse. 
