 In the last generation, writings on the regulatory state have taken three principal forms. The first, coming mostly from academic lawyers, consists of efforts to discern the logic of judge-made public law and to make recommendations to federal courts reviewing administrative action. The second, coming mostly from economists, consists of efforts to explain regulatory law by reference to the self-interest of participants in the legislative process. The third, coming from a quite eclectic group, consists of efforts to compare the current administrative state with approaches that show a better appreciation of the appropriate nature of government intervention and, especially, of the proper relationships among democratic self-government, bureaucracy, and private rights. Mashaw understands it, might not be misguided. If it is, there is a simple reason: only one of the different efforts amounts to an effort at explanation or prediction at all. There are no competing hypotheses here. For this reason, the task of mediation comes at a high price. It converts a large amount of work on the regulatory state into positive social science, when in fact it is something quite different. Let me begin by attempting to characterize the three "stories" around which Mashaw's efforts revolve. I will stay with his basic categories, but, as we shall soon see, in some ways my descriptions will depart from his. sense indicated by Mashaw. They are more on the order of the claim that Brown v. Board of Education was "designed" to impose a general principle of color blindness. In other words, they are interpretive rather than positive claims. They attempt to make the best possible sense out of a line of judicial decisions. They are falsifiable in the sense that they attempt to fit their claims with the data (i.e., with existing judicial decisions). Among the various possible accounts that have a plausible claim to fit, however, the choice is made on value-laden grounds. In this respect, interpretive claims are not positive in the sense that Mashaw understands the term. What Mashaw describes as the "CLS description of administrative law" I prefer to see as a far broader effort, from a range of starting points, to evaluate regulatory substance and process by reference to first principles with respect to (a) democratic theory and (b) substantive ideas about the proper extent and form of regulatory controls. In this category fall a number of claims about the democratic or antidemocratic character of the modern regulatory state and about the ways in which that state does more or less than it ought to do. Thus, for example, it might be said that the category of public-interest justifications for legislation is very large, including not simply responses to market failures but also a recognition of the endogenous character of certain preferences; an endorsement, through law, of social aspirations; a powerful antidiscrimination principle; and certain forms of redistribution. In one version, coming from the far left, the administrative state is said to have been defended on the basis of a number of ultimately unsuccessful strategies of legitimation. 2 On this account, administrative 1. Of course, it would be possible to recast some such claims in those terms and then to test them: for example, do the courts consistently defer to political choices? Do they systematically disfavor regulatory beneficiaries? I do not deny that some claims of academic lawyers take the form of falsifiable predictions. istrative law. Mashaw relies on Frug. With respect to positive political theory, Mashaw is, of course, on firm ground. Here the task is indeed to explain why administrative process takes the form that it does. Moreover, a number of Mashaw's criticisms of positive work on administration seem to me correct. I think, however, that Mashaw may be mischaracterizing the relevant work when he suggests that it posits "legislative control" as the overarching theme of positive political science in this area. Any positive theory of the regulatory state will acknowledge that there are other actors, with other agendas, in the process. And, as several positive analysts have argued, legislative control may be something that 3. Of course, these sorts of normative claims do involve some views about the data, includ ing the decided cases. The considerations treated thus far do not suggest that the three enterprises might not learn something from one another, nor do I deny that all of them might be making serious mistakes that an engagement with the others might help to remedy. In this section, I want to say a few words about some of the limitations of each of these enterprises, and to speculate on how work in each of them might be enriched through an understanding of the others. Administrative law in the law schools remains largely in the grip of the tradition set by Kenneth Culp Davis and Louis Jaffe. Focused on judicial control of administrative behavior, it sees the purposes of administrative law as embracing a constellation of related concerns: to guarantee legality; to promote procedural regularity; and to ensure against irrationality and injustice, defined by reference to common-sense intuitions. utes have a variety of malfunctions, some of them counterintuitive. 4 Statutes are often poorly coordinated with one another. Sometimes they become obsolete. They also have complex systemic effects. Overregulation produces underregulation; concentration on new risks perpetuate old risks; redistributive regulation often hurts those at the bottom of the economic ladder; legal requirements of the "best available technology" can, ironically, retard technological development. legitimacy and A considerable amount of positive political science on the subject of regulation is organized around the notion of "rent-seeking." The notion is not always clearly explicated; at least in some hands, it seems to refer to the wasteful expenditure of funds on the redistribution of resources through politics rather than the healthy production of resources through markets. Thus, for example, efforts to obtain environmental controls, or to obtain a Some work in the critical tradition seems naive about a range of issues including the consequences of governmental intervention in the mar ketplace. Such intervention does not create simple ex post winners an( losers. It has a range of distributive consequences, some of them unantici pated and perverse. An understanding of the complex systemic effects o regulatory enactments-inevitable in a market (or nonmarket) economywould be extremely helpful here. describing any outcome in a multimember body as reflecting a unitary "public will." An understanding of collective action problems, cycling, strategic behavior, agenda manipulation, and economies of scale should at least weaken the enthusiasm of some critical theorists for small-scale systems of participatory democracy. It is a mistake, I think, to translate either the work of the doctrinal analyst or the various critiques of the democratic theorist into a set of positive claims about how administrative processes actually come about. At most, the doctrinal analyst is arguing, for example, that there is a discernible logic behind otherwise mysterious developments in the case law; and the democratic theorist is arguing that, for example, participants in modern liberal states make unsuccessful claims by which they attempt to legitimate the exercise of discretionary power by bureaucrats. But neither of these arguments is a prediction or explanation at all. Sunstein, Cass R. 1990a. After the Rights Revolution. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 1990b. "Paradoxes of the Regulatory State," 57 University of Chicago Law