 By "paradoxes of the regulatory state," I mean self-defeating regulatory strategies-strategies that achieve an end precisely opposite to the one intended, or to the only public-regarding justification that can be brought forward in their support.' This definition excludes, and I will not discuss, a number of pathologies of the regulatory state that are clearly related to the phenomenon of regulatory paradoxes, such as strategies whose costs exceed their benefits, or that have unintended adverse consequences. An example of a regulatory paradox would be a Clean Air Act that actually made the air dirtier,2 or a civil rights law that increased the incidence of racial discrimination.' A large literature, inspired by public choice theory and welfare economics, has grown up around the theory that purportedly public-interested regulation is almost always an effort to create a cartel or to serve some private interest at the public expense.4 Although I shall be drawing on much of that literature here, I do not conclude, f Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. Some of the arguments in this essay expand on Cass R. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution: Reconceiving the Regulatory State ch 3 (Harvard, forthcoming 1990). I am grateful to Frank Easterbrook, Jon Elster, Larry Kramer, Geoffrey Miller, Sam Peltzman, Richard Posner, Frederick Schauer, George Stigler, David Strauss, and Alan Sykes for helpful suggestions. For financial support, I am grateful to the James H. Douglas, Jr. Fund for the Study of Law and Government, the Pritzker Family Faculty Fund, and the Jerome F. Kutak Faculty Fund. all effect is beneficial. See text at notes 10-12 (regulatory successes) and 40-42 (shortcomings of Clean Air Act). as some of that literature appears to, that the appropriate response to regulatory paradoxes is to abandon regulation altogether and rest content with the operation of private markets. In many cases the market itself produces harmful or even disastrous results, measured in terms of efficiency or justice.5 The appropriate response to the paradoxes of regulation is not to return to a system of "laissez faire,"'6 but to learn from past failures. To this end, I outline the lessons, for legislators, judges, and administrators, that are to be drawn from the omnipresence of regulatory paradoxes. My most general goal is to describe some reforms by which we might restructure regulatory institutions so as to achieve their often salutory purposes, while at the same time incorporating the flexibility, respect for individual autonomy and initiative, and productive potential of economic markets. In even the most prominent evaluations of the performance of the regulatory state, explorations of the real world consequences of regulatory intervention are strikingly infrequent. Work in administrative law, throughout the long history of that subject, has been conspicuously silent on the question.7 That silence is unfortunate, for evaluation of regulatory controls and legal doctrines must depend in large part on their effects in the world. The purpose of the ' Much of the relevant literature focuses on the evils of "rent-seeking"-the expenditure of resources on the transfer of wealth through law rather than on the production of wealth through markets. Insofar as this is a normative critique, it is an ideological one, and a peculiar one at that. All laws have redistributive functions, and some such laws have powerful arguments in their support. Consider measures preventing environmental degradation or race and sex discrimination. Moreover, the expenditure of resources on laws is part and parcel of the practice of citizenship, and it would be wrong to devalue that practice because of the admittedly frequent phenomenon of self-interested political behavior on behalf of causes lacking public-regarding justifications. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) is to alter the conduct of private actors in certain ways. Evaluations that refer to "checks and balances" or "legitimacy," 8 or that deal in general or speculative terms with the effects of bureaucratic incentives or well-organized private groups, are of limited use if unaccompanied by a solid understanding of the actual consequences of regulatory programs. Attention to those consequences, and their implications for legislative and administrative policy, is perhaps the principal task for administrative law in the next generation. water quality.' 3 All in all, both air and water are substantially cleaner than they would have been without regulatory controls, and despite a wide range of errors, the American experience serves in some respects as a model for the rest of the world. so at More generally, studies of the costs and benefits of regulatory initiatives show that a number of other measures have produced health and other benefits at especially low costs. OSHA's regulation of asbestos prevents an estimated 396 deaths per year, and it does regulation of low expense.' trihalomethanes saves a life at only $300,000 per year; the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's (NHTSA) fuel system integrity controls, also $300,000; the Consumer Product Safety Commission's (CPSC) mandatory smoke detector rule, between $0 and $85,000; NHTSA's roadside hazard removal rule, $0.20 relatively Finally, regulatory successes are not limited to the areas of safety and health. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 has led to a de " See CEQ, Environmental Quality (cited in note 10). " See Robert W. Crandall, et al, Regulating the Automobile 44-74 (Brookings Institu Regulatory Paradoxes crease in racial discrimination in employment.2 There have been gains in the area of sex discrimination as well.2 2 And the Endangered Species Act has saved a number of species from extinction and endangerment.23 On the other hand, regulation has frequently failed. Sometimes it has imposed enormously high costs for speculative benefits; sometimes it has accomplished little or nothing; and sometimes it has aggravated the very problem it was designed to solve. For example, the United States spent no less than $632 billion for pollution control between 1972 and 1985, and some studies suggest that alternative strategies could have achieved the same gains at less than one-fifth the cost.24 The fuel economy standards for new cars appear to have produced no substantial independent gains in fuel economy, given consumer demands for fuel efficient cars in response to gas shortages and high gas prices. 5 Worse, they have led manufacturers to produce smaller, more dangerous cars; an estimated 2,200-3,900 mortalities are expected over the next ten years as a result of regulatory changes in 1989 alone.26 There is little question that the administration of the Natural Gas Act helped produce the energy crisis of the late 1970s-with huge attendant costs to investment and employment-by artificially restraining the price of gas.2 Some of OSHA's carcinogen regulations impose enormous costs for uncertain gains. Indeed, the pattern of OSHA regulation of carcinogens is a crazy quilt; regulations costing up to $40 million per life saved exist in some areas, with no regulations at all in others.2 8 The EPA has promulgated only seven regulations controlling toxic substances, so that a huge number of such sub ysis at 91-93 (cited in note 18). These studies also show a bizarre pattern of controls, with some programs saving lives at exceptionally high costs. Thus the FDA ban on DES in cattlefeed saves a life at $132 million each year, while much regulation of automobiles costs $400,000 or less per life. stances remain uncontrolled.2 9 By delaying the entry of beneficial drugs into the market, the Food and Drug Administration has, in many settings, dramatically increased risks to life and health. ° The general task of regulatory reform raises issues far beyond the scope of this discussion. Ironically, a large source of regulatory failure in the United States is the use of Soviet-style command and control regulation, which dictates, at the national level, technologies and control strategies for hundreds, thousands, or millions of companies and individuals in a nation that is exceptionally diverse in terms of geography, costs and benefits of regulatory controls, attitudes, and mores. 3 1 A valuable perspective on this problem can be obtained by examining the paradoxes of regulation, which pose a particular dilemma for the administrative state. A government that eliminated self-defeating regulatory strategies would eliminate a significant source of regulatory failure. And although the paradoxes are numerous, six of them have been of major importance in the last generation. I have defined a regulatory paradox as a self-defeating regulatory strategy; but whether a strategy is self-defeating depends on how its purposes are described. Any statute that fails to produce a net benefit to society can be described as self-defeating if its purpose is described as the improvement of the world. But if the statute's purpose is to benefit a particular group or segment of society, and that purpose is achieved, then the statute is not self-defeating at all. For example, a statute benefiting the agricultural industry at the expense of the public will not be self-defeating if its purpose is described as helping farmers. Throughout this discussion I describe the relevant statutory purposes at an intermediate level of generality and as public-regarding rather than as benefitting special interest groups. Under this approach, a statute whose costs outweigh its benefits, or that produces irrationality of various sorts, is not necessarily paradoxical. Moreover, I mean to assess whether a statute is self-defeating by comparing the result it has produced to the likely state of affairs had Congress enacted a different and better statute or no statute at all.32 Measured against these benchmarks, regulation has produced a wide range of paradoxes. failure Importantly, nearly all of the paradoxes are a product of the government's to understand how relevant actors-administrators and regulated entities-will adapt to regulatory programs. The world simply cannot be held constant after regulations have been issued. Strategic responses, the creation of perverse incentives for administrators and regulated entities, unanticipated changes in product mix and private choice-these are the hallmarks of the paradoxes of the regulatory state. The adoption of strategies that take account of these phenomena would produce enormous savings in both compliance costs and safety and health gains. In this sense, a response to the regulatory paradoxes would produce no losers, or at least no losers who have a legitimate basis for complaint. The first paradox is that especially aggressive statutory controls frequently produce too little regulation of the private market. This surprising outcome arises when Congress mandates overly stringent controls, so that administrators will not issue regulations at all, or will refuse to enforce whatever regulations they or Congress have issued.3 The imposition of extremely stringent controls on regulated industries is a common strategy in Congress. Such controls typically ban cost-benefit balancing or indeed trade-offs of any sort. 4 The expectation is that these controls will bring about safety in the workplace, or clean air and water, even if both the agency and industry are reluctant to act, and even if the costs of regulation are high. This strategy was especially popular during the dramatic growth of regulation in the 1960s and 1970s. It both fueled and was fueled by the notion that a safe workplace, or clean air and water, 32 Additional benchmarks include the intended effects of the regulation and the status quo ante. Of course the "alternative statute" and "no statute" benchmarks point in different directions; the context should make those differences clear. should be treated as involving a right to be vindicated rather than a risk to be managed. Consider President Nixon's proclamation: "Clean air, clean water, open spaces-these should again be the birthright for every American."3 5 This form of rights-based thinking was also inspired by evidence that recalcitrant agencies, suffering from inertia or immobilized by the power of well-organized private groups, frequently disregarded regulatory controls. 6 The strategy of imposing stringent regulatory controls or banning cost-benefit balancing is not hard to understand. It is only natural to think that if air pollution is a severe problem, the correct response is to reduce it as much as possible; and this idea quickly translates into a command to the EPA to reduce dangerous substances in the atmosphere to a level that will not adversely affect human health. 1 Similarly, an obvious method for controlling toxic substances in the workplace is to tell OSHA to eliminate these substances "to the extent feasible."3 8 Such strategies might produce too much regulation, but this might be thought a small price to pay for (finally) reducing pollution in the air or deaths in the workplace.3 9 In addition, a prohibition on "balancing" might be thought desirable by those fearful that any effort to balance would be distorted by the enforcement agency's undervaluation of life and health, especially in the context of seemingly permanent political divisions between the executive and the legislature. " State of the Union Address, 8 Public Papers of President Richard M. Nixon 13 consequences. The current pattern, however, includes not only substantial overregulation of the substances that are subject to federal standards, but also, and possibly more serious, substantial underregulation of dangerous substances, such as chromium, perchloroethylene, and trichloroethylene.4 3 Despite the stringency of statutory standards, many activities in the United States are entirely free from regulatory controls. There is no evidence that the United States generally does a better job than England in protecting workers and citizens from occupational and environmental hazards, even though the English system consciously allows balancing in most contexts and the American system consciously rejects it.4 4 Statutes containing stringent regulatory requirements have thus yielded no protection at all in many settings. What is responsible for this astonishing outcome? One is tempted to find answers in the power of regulated industries or in the intransigence and deregulatory zeal of government officials. But the pattern of underregulation can be found in the Carter Administration as well as the Reagan Administration, even though President Carter's appointees, drawn in large number from the consumer and environmental movements, were hardly eager to prevent the government from curbing the proliferation of toxic substances. Elaborate and costly procedural requirements for the promulgation of federal regulations undoubtedly provide some explanation, since the process, including judicial review, has built into it enormous delays and perverse incentives.4 5 These requirements surely slow down and deter rulemaking. Industry has every opportunity and every incentive to fend off regulation by making plausible claims that additional information is necessary before regulation can be undertaken. This explanation is not in itself adequate, however, because organized interests have not prevented agencies from being far more aggressive in other settings. A large part of the explanation lies in the stringency of the regulatory standard itself. A stringent standard-one that forbids balancing or calls for regulation to or beyond the point of "feasibility"-makes regulators reluctant to act.46 If, as is customary, regulators have discretion not to promulgate regulations at all, a stringent standard will provide them with a powerful incentive for inaction. Their inaction is not caused by venality or confusion. Instead, it reflects their quite plausible belief that the statute often requires them to regulate to an absurd point. If regulators were to issue controls under the statute, government and private resources would be unavailable to control other toxic substances; domestic industry costs would increase; and ultimately industries competing in world markets would face a serious risk of shutdown. Under these circumstances, a stringent standard will mobilize political opposition to regulation from within and without government. It will also increase the likelihood of judicial invalidation. Finally, it will require agencies to obtain greater supporting information to survive political and judicial scrutiny, while at the same time making it less likely that such information will be forthcoming from regulated class members. All the incentives are therefore in the direction of issuing fewer regulations. "' See Mendeloff, The Dilemma of Toxic Substance Regulation at 11-12 (cited in note 47 Low appropriations are also a predictable consequence. 48 See W. Kip Viscusi, Risk by Choice: Regulating Health and Safety in the Workplace Regulatory Paradoxes B. Paradox 2: Stringent Regulation of New Risks Can Increase Aggregate Risk Levels Frequently Congress is presented with a risk or problem that can be found both in existing entities and in potential entrants. For example, automobiles produce carbon monoxide; modern electricity plants emit sulfur dioxide; many existing buildings are inaccessible to the handicapped; and drugs currently on the market pose health hazards to consumers. In such situations, a common strategy has been to impose especially severe limitations on new sources but to exempt old ones. Indeed, such exemptions might be a political prerequisite for enactment of the regulation. Congress might require that new automobiles be equipped with pollution control devices, that new plants emitting pollution meet stringent regulatory controls, that new buildings be accessible to the handicapped, and that new drugs survive special safety requirements. As a control technique, however, the strategy of imposing costs exclusively on new sources or entrants can be self-defeating. Most important, it will discourage the addition of new sources and encourage the perpetuation of old ones. The problem is not merely that old risks will continue, but that, precisely because of regulatory programs, those risks will become more common and last longer than they otherwise would. agency determined to eliminate all risks will create paradoxes of its own-causing ancillary social harms, or producing greater risks of different sorts. Compare the Delaney Clause, discussed in the text at notes 59-60. raises the price of new products it will shift choices in the direction of old risks. Second, a focus on new risks reduces the entry of potentially superior sources or technologies and thus perpetuates old ones. Regulatory controls eliminate possibilities that might have turned out to be substantially safer than currently available options. The result is to increase the life of those options. A final example of the old risk/new risk paradox is the Delaney Clause,5 9 which prohibits manufacturers from using food addi tives containing carcinogens. Ironically, this provision has probably increased safety and health risks. The Clause forces manufacturers to use noncarcinogenic, but sometimes more dangerous, substances. In addition, it makes consumers resort to substances already on the market that often pose greater risks than new entrants would. Since the newest and best detection equipment is used on proposed new additives, the statutorily prohibited additive may well pose fewer risks to consumers than substances already on the market that were tested with cruder technology. Thus the Delaney Clause defeats its own purpose.6 ° The phenomenon of careful regulation of new risks and lenient or no regulation of old ones may not simply reflect legislative myopia or confusion. Public choice theory provides a plausible explanation for the phenomenon. A system of regulation that imposes controls solely on new products or facilities should have considerable appeal for those in possession of old ones. If new sources will face regulatory costs, the system of government controls will immunize existing producers from fresh competition. Indeed, the regulatory statute will create a partial cartel, establishing a common interest among current producers and giving them a significant competitive advantage over potential new entrants. The victims of the old-new division, however, often do not yet exist. They are usually hard to identify, do not perceive themselves as victims, and are not politically organized. C. Paradox 3: To Require the Best Available Technology is to Retard Technological Development Industry frequently fails to adopt the best technology for controlling environmental or other harms. The technology exists or can be developed relatively cheaply, but polluters simply refuse to use it. Congress and the EPA have often responded by requiring that all industries use the best available technology (BAT). The BAT strategy is pervasive in federal environmental law,6 and may indeed be its most distinctive characteristic. The BAT approach, however, can defeat its own purposes and thus produce a regulatory paradox. It is an extremely clumsy strategy for protecting the environment. To be sure, the approach is a plausible one if the goal is to ensure that all firms use currently established technology. But a large goal of regulation should be to promote technological innovation in pollution control. Regulation should increase rather than decrease incentives to innovate. Government is rarely in a good position to know what sorts of innovations are likely to be forthcoming; industry will have a huge comparative advantage here. Perversely, requiring adoption of the BAT eliminates the incentive to innovate at all, and indeed creates disincentives for innovation by imposing an economic punishment on innovators. Under the BAT approach, polluting industries have no financial interest in the development of better pollution control technology that imposes higher production costs. Indeed, the opposite is true. The BAT approach encourages industry to seek any means to delay and deter new regulation. Industry will have the information as well as the incentive to persuade administrators, (Clean Water Act). courts, and other authorities that a suggested technology is not "feasible" and should not be required. D. Paradox 4: Redistributive Regulation Harms Those at the Bottom of the Socioeconomic Ladder A common justification for regulation is redistribution. The legislature imposes controls on the market to prevent what it sees as exploitation 65 or unfair dealing by those with a competitive advantage. In principle, the claim for redistribution is often a powerful one. Market wages and prices depend on a wide range of factors that are morally irrelevant: supply and demand curves at any particular point; variations in family structure and opportunities for education and employment; existing tastes; and perhaps even differences in initial endowments, including talents, intelligence, or physical strength.6 So long as the regulation can be made effective and does not produce high ancillary costs (an important qualification), government should not always take these factors as "natural," or let them be turned into social disadvantages. worth does not vary according to how many offer similar skills, or happen to want what he can produce. No one supposes that when someone's abilities are less in demand or have deteriorated (as in the case of singers) his moral deservingness undergoes a similar shift."); G.A. Cohen, Robert Nozick and Wilt Chamberlain, in John Arthur and William Shaw, eds, Justice and Economic Distribution 246 (Prentice-Hall, 1978). if accompanied by other departures from the status quo). especially harsh results for the poor, who may be left without housing at all.7' Laws forbidding discrimination or requiring affirmative action will to some extent have the same effect, since they will make it more expensive to hire blacks, women, and older people by increasing the likelihood that employers will be subject to a lawsuit in the event of a discharge.7 2 Similarly, occupational safety and health regulation does not unambiguously promote the interests of workers. By raising costs, it may depress wages and increase unemployment, thus harming the least well-off.7 3 In each of these cases, the group that is harmed is likely to be poorly organized and incapable of expressing itself through the political process. 71 See Werner Z. Hirsch, Joel G. Hirsch, and Stephen Margolis, Regression Analysis of the Effects of Habitability Laws upon Rent: An Empirical Observation on the AckermanKomesar Debate, 63 Cal L Rev 1098, 1139 (1975). A second qualification of the redistribution paradox relates to the fact that preferences are not static. Preferences are usually taken as exogenous to and independent of the legal rule, but sometimes this is a mistake.75 If the statute in question transforms preferences and beliefs, the self-defeating effect just described will not occur. For example, laws forbidding sexual harassment aim to alter the desires and beliefs of would-be harassers; and if the laws succeed in this goal, any perverse side effects may be minimal or nonexistent. The same argument may apply to antidiscrimination laws generally. If such laws change attitudes, they may not on balance harm the least well-off. There is, however, little empirical evidence on the effects of law in changing preferences and beliefs, and in any case this is not likely to result from such redistributive regulation as minimum wage legislation. Sometimes markets fail because people are deceived or lack information.76  Regulatory agencies commonly respond by requiring correction or full disclosure. Congress and agencies have imposed disclosure regulations in many areas, ranging from occupational risks deceptive advertising.77 Here the rationale is straightforward. Whether or not ignorance is bliss, it is an obstacle to informed consumer choice. Surely, it might be asked, regulation cannot be condemned for increasing information? to potentially environmental and Disclosure strategies are indeed valuable i n many circumstances. But for two reasons, they can be self-defeating. The first is that people sometimes process information poorly.7 8 After being given certain data, they actually "know" less than they did beforehand. In particular, when people receive information about probabilities, especially low ones, they frequently rely on heuristics 7' For discussion, see Cass Sunstein, Legal Interference with Private Preferences, 53 U that lead to systematic errors. 9 Thus, for example, people assess probabilities by asking if the event was a recent one and by misunderstanding the phenomenon of regression to the mean. 0 In addition, disclosure or corrective language can help straighten out one form of false belief but at the same time increase the level of other kinds of false beliefs."' Finally, there is a risk of information overload, causing consumers to treat a large amount of information as equivalent to no information at all.82 All this suggests that with respect to information, less may be more. Additional information can breed confusion and a weaker understanding of the situation at hand. F. Paradox 6: Independent Agencies are not Independent The distinctive institutional legacy of the New Deal period is the "independent" agency. An agency is independent if Congress has provided that its members can be discharged by the President only for specified causes. If Congress has so provided, it is ordinarily understood that the President cannot discharge independent commissioners simply because he disagrees with their views, and that his supervisory authority is sharply limited. 4 Independent agencies, some of them antedating the New Deal, include the Federal Trade Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Interstate Commerce Commission, and the National Labor Relations Board. The paradox at issue here is one of institutional design rather than substantive regulatory policy. I question this understanding below. See text at notes 126-35. Geoffrey P. Miller, Independent Agencies, 1986 S Ct Rev 41 (presenting but rejecting this argument and claiming that Congress may not constitutionally deny the President the power to remove a policymaking official who has refused a presidential order). of well-organized private groups-perhaps even more susceptible, on balance, than executive agencies. Why would agencies independent of the President be susceptible to factional power? The phenomenon might be explained at least in part by the fact that executive agencies, precisely because they are subject to presidential control, are able to withstand the parochial pressures imposed on "independent" agencies that lack the buffer of presidential oversight. The absence of this presidential buffer leaves agencies vulnerable both to individual members and committees of Congress," which sometimes represent narrow factions and well-organized private groups with significant stakes in the outcome of regulatory decisions. Executive agencies are at least sometimes immunized from those pressures precisely because of the protective, insulating wing of the President.9 1 Ironically, independence from the President often appears to be a mechanism for increasing susceptibility to factionalism. 8 See Marvin H. Bernstein, Regulating Business By Independent Commission 170 (Princeton, 1955); and Richard A. Harris and Sidney M. Milkis, The Politics of Regulatory Change (Oxford, 1989). The University of Chicago Law Review the executive branch seems overly broad.92 But if Congress wants to ensure independence in the execution of the laws, the independent agency device appears to be a most unlikely way to achieve that goal. The creation of independent agencies is usually selfdefeating." G. Other Paradoxes, in Brief I have described some prominent regulatory paradoxes, but there are others as well. For example, it has been argued that the pursuit of the "best interests of the child" in custody determinations in fact disserves the best interests of children, because of the enormous time spent in resolving the complicated factual question.94 Protectionist legislation is sometimes justified on the theory that it will help domestic industries develop into potent competitive forces, but in fact protectionism may induce flabbiness and in the end defeat the goal of promoting international competitiveness. And restrictions on the availability of abortion, defended as a means of protecting human life, appear to have resulted in the death of many women per year and at the same time not to have protected a large percentage of fetuses from the practice of abortion. 5 Many more paradoxes can be found. There is evidence that mandatory prescriptions for drugs have increased health risks by limiting the availability and raising the cost of prescription drugs; this in turn has decreased self-treatment and encouraged people to use possibly less effective over-the-counter drugs.9 6 Product safety 11 See Peter L. Strauss, The Place of Agencies in Government: Separation of Powers regulation may have a "lulling effect" on consumers, leading them to take fewer precautions and to miscalculate risks.97 The government prohibition on cigarette advertising on television, designed to decrease smoking, may have increased smoking because it: (1) reduced competition among firms, thus cartelizing the industry over the advertising issue; (2) eliminated the application of the fairness doctrine to cigarettes, which would have ensured a vigorous anticigarette campaign; and (3) saved the industry substantial sums of money."8 A final paradox can be found in the law of sex discrimination, where principles of "formal equality" have been invoked to forbid consideration of sex in custody, alimony, and divorce disputes. It is quite possible that equality principles, understood as prohibitions on any form of sex differentiation in law, have in some contexts produced less rather than more in the way of real equality between men and women. 9 When two groups are differently situated, a legal requirement that they be treated the same seems a perverse method of promoting equality between them. There is in fact evidence that the application of these principles has further disadvantaged women.1"' Here too, then, legal controls have been selfdefeating. A. Causation One might react to the regulatory paradoxes by suggesting that the relevant strategies are not self-defeating at all. On the contrary, they might represent a conscious governmental choice and even, on one view, regulatory success. Public choice theory suggests that legislative outcomes are frequently a product of pressure applied by well-organized private groups. It is not difficult to find "cartels in the closet"'101 to account for many or all of the paradoxes and to make them seem far less mysterious. For example, the apparently perverse effects of redistributive regulation may be actively sought by the benefited groups. On this account, the purpose of minimum wage legislation might not be to help the poor, but rather to immunize union members from competition by people who are willing to work for low wages by limiting entry into the labor market. Far from being unintended consequences, the harmful effects on those at the bottom of the economic ladder may be actively sought. Looked at from this perspective, minimum wage legislation creates a cartel among those not threatened by unemployment, benefiting them at the expense of new entrants into the labor market. To explain a phenomenon by reference to its consequences is bad social science, even though it is pervasive in such widely diverse disciplines as neoclassical economics, Marxism, and sociobiology.0 3 In the context of the regulatory state, whether public choice explanations are good ones rather than merely plausible stories depends not just on the consequences of regulation, but also on a careful investigation into the actual forces that lead to regulation. In the regulatory sphere, such investigations are infrequent. Whether the regulatory paradoxes should cause major concern depends on their magnitude. Here too, much of the relevant information remains to be developed. For example, a decision to focus on new sources of pollution would be understandable if that decision would have only a minor effect in perpetuating old sources. But if the effect is substantial, the regulatory policy would almost certainly be ill-considered. Similarly, the minimum wage might well be justified if its effect is the unemployment of only a few additional people. The relevant question is the elasticity of the demand for labor.104 Finally, even if some people are misled by compulsory disclosure of risks, perhaps there will be sufficient gains through reducing others' ignorance to justify the regulation. And even if some producers refuse to advertise at all in the face of a substantiation requirement, perhaps the overall level of information will increase. "I The best discussions here are by Jon Elster. See his various criticisms of functional explanations in Explaining Technical Change: Studies in Rationality and Social Change (Cambridge, 1983); The Cement of Society: A Study of Social Order (Cambridge, 1989); and Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences (Cambridge, 1989). and overall. In some contexts, regulation having some self-defeating results will on the whole make things better rather than worse. It is simply a fact that even a regulatory state pervaded by paradoxes has had a number of substantial successes. 10 6 From both theory and experience, it is possible to conclude that the regulatory paradoxes will arise frequently, and thus to prescribe efforts to avoid them. Certainly we have far too little information to say, as a general matter, that regulatory programs embodying the paradoxes are by virtue of that fact a bad idea on balance, at least when compared with the pre-regulatory status quo. Total elimination of such regulatory programs is hardly warranted. Nevertheless, a system that avoided the paradoxes would bring about major improvements. The paradoxes of regulation provide a number of concrete lessons for Congress. At the most general level, they suggest that legislators should be attentive to the incentive effects of regulatory statutes and the possibility of strategic or self-interested adaptation by administrative agencies and members of regulated classes. Statutes embodying an assumption that the preregulatory world can be held constant-that existing prices, wages, choices, and so forth will endure-are particularly likely to be confounded when implemented. For example, Congress is in the midst of considering amendments to the Clean Air Act. One valuable strategy would be to sub "' See text at notes 10-23. 107 It is of course unclear that Congress will listen to such advice. Perhaps the legislators' existing incentives must be altered in order to bring about lasting reform of the sort suggested here. stitute an emissions trading program for the "BAT" approach.10 8 Such a program would not require specified control technology for all pollution sources, but would instead force people to pay for a license to pollute and allow them to sell that "right" to other producers. People who can reduce pollution will have a large incentive to do so, because polluters will pay substantial sums for the pollution "credits" it frees them to sell. A fundamental virtue of an emissions trading program is that it would create dynamic incentives for pollution control by making it profitable for people to develop good pollution control technology. Those who developed such devices would be able both to reduce their own pollution and to sell the technology to others. In either case, innovation would be financially rewarding. There is considerable evidence that emissions trading programs are successful. 0 9 The same rationale supports a trading system in the international arena, in which some countries would pay others to reduce emissions levels. International debt might be traded for protection of nature. This would be especially desirable in the frequent instances where the effects of pollution, or other environmental degradation, crosses national boundaries. Such a system would produce more efficient reduction techniques and would also be more equitable than an approach requiring all countries-rich and poor, new and old contributors to environmental hazards-to use the same control technology. Congress should also amend the Delaney Clause to allow de minimis exceptions. Similarly, Congress should permit administrators to balance costs and benefits in choosing the appropriate controls for toxic substances, or Congress should itself make the regulatory decisions on the basis of some such balancing process. At the same time, Congress should take steps to ensure that regulatory statutes create strong incentives for industry to seek and administrators to promulgate regulations. 110 The current system puts a premium on-and has resulted in-inaction. A system that (for example) imposes disclosure requirements or other penalties on manufacturers until regulations have established levels of relative safety would be far more productive. The regulatory paradoxes provide important lessons for judges and administrators as well as legislators. These officials are of course bound by legislative enactments, and to the extent that regulatory statutes unambiguously call for self-defeating strategies, officials have no choice but to honor them. But frequently the interpretation of a statute, or the filling of statutory gaps, is based on an understanding of the real world consequences of the alternative possibilities. Administrators exercise considerable discretion in giving content to ambiguous laws,11 1 and the legal judgment about whether an agency's decision is "arbitrary" within the meaning of the Administrative Procedure Act" 2 should be informed by an accurate understanding of the paradoxes of the regulatory state. Attention to the often unanticipated systemic effects of regulatory controls is an imperative for administrators and judges as well as for legislators. I offer three examples here of how these officials can use the knowledge of regulatory paradoxes to inform their actions. In two important cases, the Supreme Court was asked to interpret the provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act that regulate exposure to toxic substances. The pertinent language directs the Secretary of Labor to promulgate the standard that cymaking discretion to agencies engaged in statutory construction. "most adequately assures, to the extent feasible . . . that no employee will suffer material impairment of health or functional capacity even if such employee has regular exposure to the hazard . . . for the period of his working life."" 4 The statute also defines "occupational safety and health standard[s]" as measures that require "conditions... reasonably necessary or appropriate to provide safe or healthful employment and places of employment."" 5 In Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO v American Petroleum Institute,"6 the Court was confronted with an OSHA regulation of benzene. Though the consequences of the regulation were sharply contested, there was reason to believe that the regulation would impose enormous costs for small or speculative gains. A plurality of the Court concluded that the Secretary of Labor must establish that a toxic substance posed a "significant risk" to health before she could regulate it. There was little direct support for the plurality's conclusion in the language or history of the Act. Unable to point to a solid textual basis for its "significant risk" requirement, the plurality invoked a clear statement principle: In the absence of a clear mandate in the Act, it is unreasonable to assume that Congress intended to give the Secretary the unprecedented power over American industry that would result from the Government's view .... Expert testimony that a substance is probably a human carcinogen . . . would justify the conclusion that the substance poses some risk of serious harm no matter how minute the exposure and no matter how many experts testified that they regarded the risk as insignificant. That conclusion would in turn justify pervasive regulation limited only by the constraint of feasibil[T]he Government's theory would give OSHA power ity .... to impose enormous costs that might produce little, if any, discernable benefit." 7 The plurality went on to suggest that the government's interpretation would give the Secretary of Labor "open-ended" policymaking authority that might amount to an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power. In a concurring opinion advocating an interpretation of the Act that would permit cost-benefit balancing, Justice Powell suggested that "a standard-setting process that ignored economic considerations would result in a serious misallocation of resources and a lower effective level of safety than could be achieved under standards set with reference to the comparative benefits available at a lower cost."" 8 The "significant risk" requirement cannot be found explicitly in the statute; indeed, the text of the relevant provisions suggests that no such requirement was imposed on the Secretary of Labor. But the plurality's conclusion was nonetheless sound. Realistically speaking, the language of the statute need not be considered dispositive. It is simply a myth to suggest that the Congress that enacted OSHA even considered the propriety of regulation requiring enormous expenditures to redress minimal risks. Despite the broad language of the toxic substances provision, Congress never focused on that problem. the Supreme Court decided a question left open in American Petroleum: whether the Occupational Health and Safety Act required cost-benefit analysis. In arguing that it did, the industry contended that the word "feasible" meant that the Secretary must show not only a significant risk, but also that the benefits of regulation justified the costs. "Feasibility," in the industry's view, contemplated a balancing of costs and benefits. The government contended that once OSHA had shown a significant risk, it could regulate to the point where the survival of the regulated industry would be endangered by additional controls. For the government, the term "feasi bility" connoted not cost-benefit balancing, but instead regulation to the maximum extent "possible." In accepting the government's argument, the Court relied on the dictionary definition of "feasible," concluding that the term meant "capable of being done, executed, or effected," rather than justified after balancing costs and benefits. 12 0 This approach to statutory interpretation was not entirely unreasonable. But the same principles that support the plurality view in American Petroleum cast doubt on American Textile Manufacturers. sider, for example, one district court's creation, in the face of an ambiguous text, of the "prevention of significant deterioration" (PSD) program in Sierra Club v Ruckelshaus.12 2 In that case, the court ruled that state implementation plans under the Clean Air Act must include provisions not merely complying with national air quality standards, but also designed to prevent the degradation of air currently cleaner than those standards require. The consequence of the PSD program is to ensure that especially clean areas remain especially clean. They are not permitted to become dirtier even if they would continue to provide a safe and healthful environment. 3. The independent agency problem. in Humphrey's Executor, which describes the commissioners of the FTC as "independent of Executive authority, except in [their] selection" by the President. 295 US at 625-26. in dicta, The University of Chicago Law Review decision, Bowsher v Synar.1 1 In that case, the Court held that Congress could not delegate power to administer the Gramm-Rudman statute to the Comptroller General, because the Comptroller was subject to congressional will. In the Court's view, those who execute the law must not be subject to the policymaking authority of the Congress except insofar as legislative instructions are embodied in substantive law.132 The relevant statute allowed Congress to discharge the Comptroller for "inefficiency, . . . neglect of duty, . . . [or] malfeasance."' 13 The Court said that these words conferred on Congress "very broad" removal power and would authorize Congress to remove the Comptroller for "any number of actual or perceived transgressions of the legislative will."' 3 4 The words governing congressional power over the Comptroller General and presidential power over independent agencies are essentially identical. If those words have the same meaning in these admittedly different contexts, the President has "very broad" removal power over the commissioners of the independent agencies, with correlative powers of supervision and guidance. It would follow that the independent agencies are in fact subject to a considerable degree of presidential control. They are not, as a matter of statutory law, "independent" of him at all. There are multiple breakdowns in private markets, and government controls often successfully counteract them. The administrative state has not been a universal failure. But regulatory programs have not always succeeded, and the paradoxes of the regulatory state have been a pervasive source of its problems. Selfdefeating regulatory strategies take many forms. I have discussed six such paradoxes and referred to several others; still others undoubtedly exist.