 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Norms in Surprising Places: The Case of Statutory Interpretation* Cass R. Sunstein Philosophers, political scientists, and lawyers have devoted considerable attention to the role of norms in the two areas for which Anglo-American legal systems are most frequently celebrated: the common law and constitutional law. Thus, for example, judicial elaboration of common law principles of contract, tort, and property has been described (alternately) as an effort to promote economic efficiency or to protect private autonomy; and background norms of various sorts have been developed from these premises. So too, the role of norms in the choice among different strategies for interpreting the open-ended phrases of the Constitution is reasonably well understood. * Many of the arguments in this essay are given in more detail in a forthcoming book, After the Rights Revolution: Reconceiving the Regulatory State (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990), and also in "Interpreting Statutes in the Regulatory State," Harvard Law Review, vol. 103 (December 1989). that courts can be "agents" of the legislature and suggest instead that extratextual norms are a necessary part of statutory interpretation. In the second part, which is more speculative, I describe possible foundations for extratextual norms and outline their role in statutory construction. Above all, I urge that it is desirable, not to limit the role of such norms, but to identify them, to evaluate them, and to develop and apply norms that are well suited to, and improve the performance of, modern regulatory systems. Textualism It is sometimes suggested that the statutory language is the only legitimate basis for interpretation. The principal feature of the textualist creed is the belief that courts have no license to rely on "outside sources." A particular target here is the use of norms that cannot be tied to statutory text itself. The language of the statute-and nothing else-is the source of judicial power and the object of judicial concern. Sunstein Norms and Statutory Interpretation 805 In many hard cases, the source of the difficulty is that the particular kind of background norm and the nature of its application will be highly controversial. language of a statute-the meaning of its terms in ordinary settingswill suggest an outcome that would make little or no sense. Suppose, for example, that a state law says that no vehicles are permitted in public parks and that a city proposes to build in a park a monument consisting of tanks used in World War 11.2 Here what appears to be the unambiguous language must yield, for the statute could not reasonably be taken to forbid such a monument, which causes none of the harms the statute could be thought to prevent. 2. The example comes from H. L. A. Hart, The Concept of Law (Cambridge: Cambridge Sunstein Norms and Statutory Interpretation 807 plausibly read, should be understood to control. A particular difficulty here is that a statute may be "evaded" by private ingenuity. The literal language of the statute does not cover the situation, but because the private conduct causes all of the harms that the statute prevents, courts sometimes hold a statute applicable notwithstanding its precise terms.6 Consider Justice Holmes's suggestion that courts are "apt to err by sticking too close to the words of a law where those words import a policy that goes beyond them."7 The discussion thus far has assumed that circumstances have not changed significantly since the statute was enacted. But the difficulties of textualism become all the more severe when time has affected the assumptions under which the statute was originally written. Consider the Delaney Clause, which forbids the use as food additives of substances that "induce" cancer. The Delaney Clause was enacted at a time when carcinogenic substances were difficult to detect, and all detectable carcinogens were extremely dangerous. Currently, carcinogens are detectable at exceptionally low levels, and many of them pose trivial risks. In such circumstances, might the word "induce" allow the government to exempt from regulation carcinogens that pose trivial risks? Mechanical application of the text in new circumstances is likely to produce interpretive blunders. All this suggests two principal points. First, and most fundamentally, there is no such thing as an acontextual "text" that can be used as the exclusive guide to interpretation. In easy cases, background norms-on which there is wide or universal consensus-are part of the process of ascertaining statutory meaning. Precisely because the norms are so widely shared, they appear invisible and are not an object of controversy. In other cases, usually treated as hard ones, courts must resort to a contestable background norm in order to resolve an interpretive dispute. It is in these settings, and in this sense, that textualism is inevitably incomplete. Second, it is by no means obvious that courts should always rely on the text or on the "plain meaning" of words even in cases in which such reliance is possible and leads to determine results. An interpretive strategy that relies exclusively on the ordinary, dictionary definition of words is precisely that-an interpretive strategy that reflects a choice among competing possibilities-and in many cases it will produce irrationality, absurdity, or an inferior system of law. The invocation of background norms of various sorts promises to be a salutary corrective. Thus far we have seen that the most prominent species of the agency view of the judicial role appears to fail. It is time to see what conclusions emerge from that failure. On what remains the most well known approach to the matter, the process of statutory construction involves ascertaining the meaning of the legislative command in the particular case. This approach sees the courts as agents or servants of the legislature. democratic system, one with separated powers, it is said to be impermissible for courts to invoke norms that cannot be traced to an authoritative textual instrument. The claim of illegitimacy is buttressed by (or reducible to) a range of prudential considerations: the use of background norms will tend to increase judicial discretion, decrease legislative attentiveness, produce uncertainty, and risk usurpation by judges of powers accorded to legislative and executive actors. In this sense, the debate over formalism in statutory construction replicates a similar debate in constitutional law. As a particularly crisp expression of the agency view of the judicial role, consider the words of Justice Holmes, who, after describing a regulatory statute as "foolish," added: "If my fellow citizens want to go to Hell I will help them. It's my job."8 The agency view contains an important truth. It would be improper for courts to "interpret" statutes by construing them to mean whatever the judges think would be best. No one could defend an approach to statutory construction that would license judges to say that a statute means whatever a good statute would say. It follows from this understanding that where there is neither interpretive doubt nor constitutional objection, it is the judgment of the electorally accountable branch, and not that of the judges, that will prevail. 8. Holmes-Laski Letters, ed. M. Howe (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, Sunstein Norms and Statutory Interpretation 809 highly ambiguous concept, but perhaps it can be taken to argue in favor of adherence to legislative meaning to the extent that it is fairly ascertainable for judges equipped with conventional or uncontested background norms. The second problem for the agency view is that its claim of illegitimacy relies on question begging and probably indefensible premises. That claim must be defended by a set of institutional and substantive arguments, and those arguments are hard to supply. The claim must be that a formalist approach to construction-again, to the extent that it is possible-will lead on balance to the best or most sensible system of law. But it is far more likely that the introduction of other considerations will accomplish that goal. Assume, for example, that statutory language, while ambiguous, is most naturally read to lead in a direction that is, by general consensus, absurd and could not plausibly have been intended; that a statute might be understood as giving open-ended authority to a bureaucracy; that the most obvious reading of a statute provides bizarre or unjust results in light of changes in the fifty years since its enactment; that an appropriations measure appears to intrude on a carefully elaborated (and sensible) compromise in the environmental field. In all of these settings, invocation of background norms will lead to better outcomes. In such cases, courts that act as something other than mere agents will produce a more sensible system of law. The Unlikely Promise of "Canons"-and an Analogy How, in light of these considerations, ought the problem of statutory construction to be understood? Some help in this regard might be found in an unlikely place. In interpreting statutes, courts have often relied on canonsn" of construction. I will use the term "canons" to refer to all background norms that are used in statutory construction. 9. See K. Llewellyn, "Remarks on the Theory of Appellate Decisions and the Rules or Canons about How Statutes Are to Be Construed," Vanderbilt Law Review 3 (1950): 395. area of modern law. And there is no sign that canons are decreasing in importance-partly, as we have seen, because of their inevitability and partly because of their plausibility on substantive grounds. The deviation between judicial practice and academic consensus is something of a puzzle. An analogy may be helpful here. The law of contracts is pervaded by-indeed, it consists largely of-a set of principles filling in contractual gaps when the parties have been silent, or when the meaning of their words is unclear. The use of implied terms is a familiar part of the law of contract; and it would be most peculiar to say that they are an illegitimate incursion into the usual process of "interpreting" the parties' intent. Without implied terms of some sort, contracts simply would not be susceptible to construction. Part of the problem is coming to terms with the canons, or with background norms of interpretation, stems from the fact that they serve a variety of different goals. Those goals fall in four basic categories. Sunstein Norms and Statutory Interpretation 811 have a counterintuitive meaning if other provisions of the statute so indicate is a sensible way of understanding statutory meaning in the particular case. value judgment; but they might derive instead from policies that are easy to defend. All of these considerations suggest an alternative to the conventional understandings of statutory interpretation. The statutory text is of course the starting point, but it becomes intelligible only because of background norms that give it content. Usually, those norms are so widely shared, and so uncontroversial, that the text "alone" appears to be a sufficient basis for interpretation; statements of this sort mean that together with generally agreed upon interpretive principles, the meaning of the text is not in doubt. In many cases, however, the text will produce ambiguity, overinclusiveness, or underinclusiveness. Background norms vary from one country to another; the relevant principles diverge sharply in accordance with the political understandings that prevail in the nation's legal culture. It is in this light that one should understand disagreements about interpretive norms in different legal systems. Background norms also differ from one period to another within any particular country. In the United States, for example, the principles Sunstein Norms and Statutory Interpretation 813 of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries reflected a belief in common law ordering that was largely repudiated in the 1930s. a) In general. -Interpretive norms require sources; and it is important to be quite explicit about them here. The first and most straightforward is the Constitution. Understandings about constitutional arrangements provide a significant amount of the background against which statutory construction occurs. To be sure, there is frequently uncertainty about constitutional meaning; and statutory disputes are sometimes, in part, a function of a broader dispute about the nature of the constitutional structure. Often, however, there is sufficient consensus about the Constitution to ground a large part of interpretive practice. to precisely the same obstacles that make such statutes necessary in the first place. Government failure thus replicates market failure.'2 Conclusions of this sort are principally of interest to regulators in the legislative and executive branches; but they are relevant to the judiciary as well. Legal interpretation of regulatory statutes has in fact been responsive to understandings about the likely function and failure of those statutes. Moreover, legal interpretation is likely to be improved by such understandings. It is not simple, to be sure, to make such understandings operational-to explain exactly how they should be used in hard cases. But it is not difficult to show how understandings of regulatory function and failure have worked, and should work, to produce norms-or so I will be arguing. In this section, I briefly describe interpretive norms drawn from the three sources described above. transfers.-The American constitutional regime is built on hostility to measures that impose burdens or grant benefits merely because of the political power of private groups; some public value is required for governmental action. This norm, traceable to the origins of the Constitution and firmly rooted in current law, has a number of implications for statutory interpretation. It suggests, for example, that courts should develop in 12. See, generally, C. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution: Reconceiving the Regulatory State (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990), in press, for citations and details. 13. See L. Sager, "Fair Measure: The Legal Status of Underenforced Constitutional Sunstein Norms and Statutory Interpretation 815 terpretive strategies to promote deliberation in government-by, for example, remanding issues involving constitutionally sensitive interests or groups for reconsideration by the legislature or by regulatory agencies when deliberation appears to have been absent. It also suggests that statutes that embody mere interest-group deals should be narrowly construed. Much of American administrative law is founded on these ideas. 14 c) Political accountability; the nondelegation principle. -In the period since the New Deal, courts have permitted Congress to delegate exceptionally broad policy-making authority to regulatory agencies. Such broad delegations were at one time thought to offend Article I of the Constitution, which vests legislative power in Congress. In recent years, courts have been reluctant to enforce the nondelegation doctrine. But through statutory construction, courts are sometimes able to vindicate the constitutional principle against delegation of legislative power. They can do so, for example, by narrowly construing delegations of policy-making power. d) Property and contract rights.-In the aftermath of the New Deal reformation, courts have been reluctant to use the Constitution's explicit protection of property and contract in a way that would interfere with social and economic regulation. But courts can vindicate those rights less intrusively through the narrow construction of regulatory statutes that raise serious constitutional doubts under the contracts and takings clause. e) Welfare rights.-In recent years, the Supreme Court has rejected claims that the Constitution guarantees rights of basic subsistence; the resistance stems largely from reasons of democratic legitimacy. But perhaps a Court that saw substantive force in the claim for constitutional welfare rights would attempt to vindicate that claim, not through the Constitution itself, but through aggressive statutory construction so as to ensure against irrational or arbitrary deprivations of benefits. Such an approach would tend to produce even-handedness in the distribution of welfare in a democracy that has committed itself to a "social safety net." Aggressive statutory construction, requiring a clear statement for exclusions, might produce many of the advantages of recognition of constitutional welfare rights without imposing nearly so severe a strain on the judiciary. 14. See C. Sunstein, "Interest Groups in American Public Law," Stanford Law Review effects, might well be seen as a legislative response to its (judicially underenforced) constitutional duties. Through statutory constructions, courts can ensure that the relevant norms are vindicated. Sunstein Norms and Statutory Interpretation 817 developments of law, policy, and fact; (5) procedural qualifications of substantive rights are kept narrow; (6) the complex systemic effects of regulation are taken into account; and, most generally, (7) irrationality, measured against the statute's own purposes, is avoided. These principles apply across the universe of regulatory statutes, though their application will vary with the statutory function. 1. The Delaney Clause. -I have referred to the Delaney Clause, which prohibits the sale of food additives that "induce cancer when ingested by man or animal" or are found "after tests which are appropriate for the evaluation of the safety of food additives, to induce cancer in man and animal." As we have seen, the drafters of the clause believed that few additives caused cancer and that those that did so were extremely dangerous. By the 1980s, however, it was clear that many substances were carcinogenic, but that a number of them created exceptionally minor risks. These substances included natural dietary constituents posing dangers that surpass those of artificial chemicals. ciples against obsolescence and in favor of de minimis exceptionsinterpreted the clause to permit exemptions of trivial risks. It said that it would approve food additives that posed a de minimis risk of cancer. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia held that the FDA's position was unlawful.'7 In the court's view, the Delaney Clause was simply unambiguous on the point. But this interpretation was far from inevitable. Read in its context, there was no such clarity. Congress simply did not focus on the question of de minimis risks. It is far from clear that the court's mechanical reading of the statute was sensible from the perspective of its original authors, whose assumptions simply did not hold in the 1980s. The background against which the Delaney Clause was written was so different from present circumstances that the statutory terms "induce cancer" must be treated as ambiguous. Whether a substance "induces" cancer within the meaning of the clause might well be a function of the degree of risk that it posed. In these cirumstances, interpretation of the clause to permit de minimis exceptions seems quite consistent with permissible understandings of judicial interpretation and quite sensible to boot. The court's decision to the contrary was therefore misguided. 1. Persons with developmental disabilities have a right to appropriate treatment, services, and habilitation for such disabilities. Sunstein Norms and Statutory Interpretation 819 and history of the act. Without a background interpretive principle, the case was probably impossible to resolve. indeed that the Pennhurst Court relied on a background norm in favor of federalism in a case involving a group and a right safeguarded by the fourteenth amendment. Because language "by itself" is without meaning, and in light of the existence of gaps or ambiguities in hard cases, interpretive norms of various sorts are indispensable-desirable and in any case inevitable. Statutory interpretation cannot go forward without background principles that orient reader to text, fill gaps in the face of legislative silence, or provide the backdrop against which to read linguistic commands. Some such principles aid courts in discerning the meaning of particular statutes, or help to implement Congress's actual or likely interpretive instructions; others are rooted in constitutional concerns; others are based on assessments of institutional performance; and still others attempt to respond to characteristic failings of regulatory legislation. In all of these respects, norms of statutory construction, far from being obsolete or representing an illegitimate judicial value judgment, must occupy a prominent place in the theory and practice of statutory interpretation. ground understandings-sensitive to constitutional structure, institutional design, the New Deal reformation, and the diverse functions and failings of governmental actors and statutory regimes-with which to approach social and economic regulation in a system that has largely abandoned common law categories. And it is possible to generate a series of norms, all with support in current law, that can help accomplish some of the goals of deliberative government in the post-New Deal period. In this way, statutory construction can serve as an ally of other, more ambitious strategies designed to promote some of the original constitutional goals in a dramatically changed legal environment. It is far too much to expect statutory construction to respond to all of the failings of the regulatory state. But it is not too much to expect that the process of interpretation can make the situation better rather than worse.