 Professor Pangle's essay revolves around a fairly straightforward narrative. The period of classical republicanism placed a high premium on virtue and responsibility; its conception of freedom presupposed rule, not license: its rulers were to be chosen on the basis of wisdom and character; it had no real place for rights. The early liberals, symbolized by Machiavelli, largely abandoned these commitments. Seeing selfishness as the usual motivating force of human behavior, they inaugurated a new emphasis on rights, and they disparaged virtue. The American founding, influenced above all by the early liberals, reflected at most a diluted belief in the republican commitments. The framers' main goal was the protection of rights. For them, self-interest was the ordinary motivating source of human behavior. American-style republicanism was egalitarian, libertarian, and democratic; it saw as its chief goal the protection and fostering of individual rights. As time has gone on, the American departure from republicanism has become all the more conspicuous, and also troubling. Its consequences have been "the shrinking of the spirit, the shriveling of the heart, the banalization of existence," manifesting itself in an extraordinarily wide array of social problems. There is undoubtedly a great deal that is true in Pangle's account, and we should all be grateful that a scholar of Pangle's learning and commitment has chosen to devote himself to exploration of the role of repubIn this the American constitutional lican Comment, I want to venture a few cautionary words about Pangle's narrative. My basic concern is that he may have drawn the distinction between liberalism and republicanism a bit too sharply, in a way that is perhaps untrue to the amplitude of America's liberal republicanism. As Pangle emphasizes, there is not one "republicanism" but many; and it is no simple task to describe those features of republicanism that unite, say, Aristotle, Jefferson, Madison, and Franklin Delano Roosevelt. But the American founders were insistent on their republicanism, and they did not at all understand the term to be an antonym to those of their * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and De partment of Political Science. 1. See G. Wood, Classical Republicanism and the American Revolution, 66 CHL-KErr L. would say more about exactly what he thinks is entailed by these apparently quite different ideas.