University of Chicago Law School ersity
Cass R. Sunstein
VOL. 90 DECEMBER 1990 NO. 8 LAW AND ADMINISTRATION AFTER CHEVRON
Cass R. Sunstein*
Introduction ....... ................................. 2072 I. Courts, Administration, and the New Deal ................ 2078
A. Historical Notes ..................................... 2078
B. The Chevron Principle ................................ 2083
C. Chevron's Rationale ................................... 2085 II. Chevron's Reach .......................................... 2091
A. Just How Ambiguous? ............................... 2091
B. The Breadth of the Deference Principle and Its
Lim itations .......................................... 2093
1. Limitation to Legislative Rules or to Other
Congressional Delegations of Law-Interpreting
Power ............................................ 2093
2. Pure Questions of Law Versus Application of Law
to Fact ........................................... 2094
3. Cases Involving the Agency's Specialized
Competence ...................................... 2096
4. Agency Jurisdiction ............................... 2097
5. Agency Bias ...................................... 2101
6. Agency Views that Are New or that Depart from
Past Practices ..................................... 2101
C. Chevron's Second Step: The Reasonableness of the
Agency's Interpbretation .............................. 2104
Interpretive Principles .................................... 2105
A. In General ........................................... 2106
B. Chevron and the Interpretive Principles ................ 2108
C. Syntactic Norms and Interpretive Instructions ......... 2109
D. Norms that Require an Explicit Legislative Statement . 2110
1. Constitutionally Inspired Norms .................. 2111
2.' Nonconstitutional Norms Designed to Require a
Clear Congressional Statement .................... 2114
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW E. Norms Designed to Counteract Administrative or
Governmental Bias ................................... 2115 F. Norms Designed to Protect Legislative Processes ...... 2116 G. Norms Against Regulatory Irrationality ............... 2116 Conclusion .................................................... 2119 2072 [Vol. 90:2071
Throughout its brief history, administrative law has often been concerned with the question whether the name of its own subject is an oxymoron. We might distinguish among three positions on that question. The first treats law and administration as largely incompatible the second sees traditional legal checks as a bulwark against administrative tyranny the third suggests that these traditional checks must be adapted to the values, functions, and failures of the administrative state.
The incompatibility of law and administration was a prominent theme during the 1920s and the New Deal period, which produced a fundamental reformation in the structure of American constitutionalism.' Indeed, the creation of the administrative state was largely a selfconscious repudiation of legalism. The New Deal reformers believed that modern problems required institutions having flexibility, expertise, managerial capacity, political accountability, and powers of initiative far beyond those of the courts. On this view, the appropriate response of the legal system to the rise of administration is one of
The view that legal checks, in their traditional form, are an indispensable constraint on regulatory administration played a large role in the constitutional assault on the administrative state and, in more modest form, helped give rise to the Administrative Procedure Act ("APA") in 1946. This view can also be found in the old idea, per-
haps enjoying a renaissance, that statutes in derogation of the common law should be narrowly construed. On this account, legal checks of the pre-New Deal sort are a crucial mechanism for domesticating regulation by limiting governmental interference with private markets and by promoting a range of original constitutional goals. Hearing rights, independent judicial interpretation of law, separation of functions, and procedural safeguards are all necessary quid pro quos for the creation of administrative agencies combining traditionally separated functions and exercising broad discretionary authority.'
A number of observers have argued that law should continue to play a large role in the administrative state, but that it must be adapted to take account of the new forms and values represented by the rise of social and economic regulation.8 On this view, regulatory controls protecting interests such as environmental quality, nondiscrimination, safe work places, and fair trade practices should be treated hospitably by the legal culture. This view can be found in a number of ideas: that private law principles ought not to play a large role in administrative law that courts should attempt to prevent arbitrary or overzealous regulation, but also to help bring about regulatory controls when they are legally required that courts should attempt both to promote the goals of regulation, understood in a public-regarding way, and to ensure against its pathologies. Here the relationship of law to administration is neither acquiescence nor hostility but instead adaptation.
All of these views have played a large role in legal developments of the last two decades. In particular, the view that law and administration
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW are incompatible has enjoyed a revival-ironically, mostly at the hands of people with little sympathy for regulation in general or the New Deal reformation in particular.9 This view can be found in the revival of serious limits on standing to review administrative action, on reviewability of agency inaction, and on the courts' ability to impose procedural requirements beyond those in the Administrative Procedure Act.' But of all of the Supreme Court's decisions raising issues of this sort, by far the most important is Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.' 1
In Chevron, the Court established that "[i]f... Congress has not directly addressed the precise question at issue," courts should accept reasonable administrative interpretations of law. 1 The Chevron principle means that in the face of ambiguity, agency interpretations will prevail so long as they are "reasonable." This principle is quite jarring to those who recall the suggestion, found in Marbury v. Madison and repeated time and again in American public law, that it is for judges, and no one else, to "say what the law is."1 But it is also strikingly reminiscent of the New Deal enthusiasm for agency autonomy and the New Deal belief in a sharp disjunction between the realm of law and the realm of administration. In view of the breadth and importance of the decision, it should be unsurprising that the case has been cited
[Vol. 90:2071 2074
more than 1000 times since its publication in 1984.16 Chevron promises to be a pillar in administrative law for many years to come. It has become a kind of Marbury, or counter-Marbury, for the administrative state.
Perhaps more importantly, the decision has established itself as one of the very few defining cases in the last twenty years of American public law. Chevron defines a cluster of ideas about who is entrusted with interpreting ambiguous statutes and, less obviously, about what legal interpretation actually is. In its allocation of governmental authority and in its production of outcomes in the real world, the importance of the case far exceeds that of the Supreme Court's more celebrated constitutional rulings on the subject of separation of powers in the 1980s, probably even if all of these are taken together.1 In an extraordinarily wide range of areas-including the environment, welfare benefits, labor relations, ' civil rights, energy, food and drugs, banking,2 and many others-Chevron has altered the distribution of national powers among courts, Congress, and administrative agencies.
To say this is not to say that Chevron is self-applying. As is usual with important rulings, the case raises at least as many questions as it answers. The Court's reasoning has been subject to sharp criticism, 1990]
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW and it would not be altogether surprising to see departures from a broad interpretation of Chevron. Indeed, the decision's own author, Justice Stevens, has suggested a relatively narrow reading. Perhaps the principle of deference will apply only when the agency is carrying
[Vol. 90:2071 2076
agency interpretations in a number of contexts are not entitled to deference at all.
In Part III, I deal with a problem that has only begun to be addressed in the courts. That question involves the relationship between the Chevron principle and other prevailing norms or principles of statutory construction.3 What is a court to do when an administrative agency interprets an ambiguous statute in a way that conflicts with an established interpretive principle?3 The question is of both considerable theoretical interest and immense practical importance. If Chevron allows agency interpretations to defeat well-established interpretive principles, it will indeed have worked a revolution in the law.
In Part III, I contend that many interpretive principles serve an important separation of powers function by requiring legislative rather than merely administrative deliberation on certain questions. For this reason, the Chevron principle ought not to be understood to overcome all otherwise applicable interpretive norms, though some of these norms are in fact defeated by Chevron.
A more general conclusion follows from these suggestions. In many of its applications, Chevron is a salutary recognition of a largescale shift in the allocation of authority within American institutions. It embodies, in those applications, a plausible reconstruction of congressional desires and a sound understanding of the comparative advantages of agencies in administering complex statutes. At the same time, Chevron is in tension with deeply engrained ideas, traceable to the earliest days of the American republic, to the effect that those who are limited by law ought not to be entrusted with the power to define the limitation. But if other interpretive norms counter the Chevron approach in contexts in which the risks are especially serious, it may be possible to reconcile that approach with principles of separation of powers and statutory construction that are both time-honored and entitled to current respect. An effort to explain the relationship between Chevron and other interpretive principles is therefore part of the continuing and far larger enterprise of sorting out the relationship between the original constitutional framework and traditional legal constraints
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW on the one hand, and, on the other, a regulatory state that was intended in large part to displace them.
I.
In this Part, I undertake two tasks. First, I outline the origins of the perceived tension between law and administration, and I explore various efforts by courts to mediate that tension in the wake of the New Deal. Second, I discuss the origins and setting of the Chevron principle, attempting to defend that principle by reference to certain understandings about both the administrative state and the nature of statutory interpretation. A. Historical Notes
Before the rise of the regulatory state, the allocation of authority between the executive branch and the judiciary was relatively clear: it was for the courts, not the executive, to "say what the law is,"'3 at least in litigated cases. This understanding extended to interpretation of statutes no less than to interpretation of the Constitution.3 Most statutory disputes did not involve the executive branch as a party. Since government almost always acted without the mediation of a policy-making, fact-finding administrative agency, it was only natural that questions of statutory meaning would be decided by the courts. And when the executive branch was a party, it was treated like any other litigant in the sense that its own views would not be entitled to special weight.
The judicial power of interpretation existed even when the task of resolving ambiguities depended not only on statutory language and history, but also on assessments of what sort of approach would produce rationality or justice in federal law. When traditional sources of interpretation left doubt, ambiguities were sometimes resolved by precisely these assessments.3 To be sure, assessments of this sort called for judicial inquiries into both policy and principle. But these inquiries were not especially troublesome, for judge-made regulatory principles-embodied in the common law of torts, contracts, and property-had been woven into the fabric of American public and private law from the out[Vol. 90:2071
set. Statutory interpretation that involved a measure of policy-making discretion existed comfortably in a legal order in which policy frequently had been determined by the judges.3
All this was changed by the creation in the twentieth century of a massive administrative apparatus, which was of course a self-conscious repudiation of regulation through the judiciary. For the twentieth century reformers, courts lacked the flexibility, powers of coordination, initiative, democratic accountability, and expertise necessary to deal with complex social problems.3 The administrative framework resulting from these reform efforts disrupted every essential element of American constitutionalism, including its three cornerstones: The original conception of individual rights, the system of checks and balances, and
Perhaps the most fundamental point is that the new framework called into question the original understanding that individual rights lay principally in immunity from governmental constraints.40 For the New Dealers, individual rights were in fact a product of legal decisions they were hardly prepolitical or even "negative." Having rejected the view that the common law system was part of the state of nature, the New Deal reformers saw government action as a necessary guarantor of economic productivity, distributive equity, and even rights, properly
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW understood. In these circumstances, the common law catalogue of private rights was inadequate because it included both too much and too little-too much in the way of protection of rights of property and market ordering too little because it excluded rights of economic security deemed indispensable in the wake of the Depression.
Institutional lessons followed from these substantive claims. Traditionally separated powers and the system of checks and balances seemed an obstacle to the enactment and implementation of protections at the national level. New governmental bodies- combining powers and not subject to the constraints of checks and balanceswere necessary to carry out the agenda of the New Deal. Far from being a valuable safeguard against national tyranny, federalism appeared to be a faction-driven obstacle to necessary social change. So too, traditional legal constraints on administration seemed to defeat the goal of providing new entities with unique self-starting capacities, a high degree of democratic accountability, and, not incidentally, enthusiasm for the new regulatory missions set for the national government by Congress and the President.
It was inevitable that this set of claims-the continuing source of most major debates in American public law-would ultimately draw into question the idea that interpretation of regulatory statutes was for the judiciary alone. Indeed, during the constitutional and nonconstitutionaljudicial assault on administration, independent judicial interpretation of law was seen as a constitutional requirement under article
Judicial review was thought to serve identifiable substantive goals as well. Invoking the principle that statutes in derogation of the common law should be narrowly construed, and insisting that interpretation of law was for judges, courts often sharply circumscribed administrative power by drawing on principles of private autonomy and free markets that regulation was intended to displace.43
The idea that courts, and not administrators, were responsible for discerning the meaning of statutes seemed to win legislative endorsement through the enactment of the APA in 1946. That statute was a compromise between New Dealers enthusiastic about administrative power and conservative critics who saw this power as a veil for tyranny, particularly in the context of labor relations.4 Despite its ambivalence on the question of agency autonomy, the APA appeared to endorse ju[Vol. 90:2071
dicial control of administration and to direct courts to interpret statutes on their own. Thus the APA states: "To the extent necessary to decision and when presented, the reviewing court shall decide all relevant questions of law, [and] interpret constitutional and statutory provisions ,,46
Nevertheless, in the aftermath of the constitutional assault on administration, courts sometimes said that agencies were entitled to interpret the statutes that they administer, and that courts would defer as long as agency interpretations were reasonable. This idea repre2081
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW sented a firm endorsement of the allied principles, prominent during the New Deal, of administrative autonomy and limited judicial interference with the process of regulation. It also recognized that the very arguments that called for the rise of regulatory entities raised sharp questions about whether judicial interpretation of regulatory law should continue to be independent. Marbury, in short, no longer seemed well adapted to American public law. At the same time, many courts continued to insist that the interpretation of statutes was first and foremost a judicial task.48
It is ironic but true that this insistence became particularly pronounced in the 1960s and 1970s, a period in which those enthusiastic about regulation were especially dissatisfied with administrative autonomy. In this period, agencies appeared unenthusiastic about their mandates. The phenomenon of "capture" received widespread attention, and judicial controls seemed to be an important part of the project of ensuring that regulatory statutes, especially in the environmental area, would produce change in the real world.49 In a surprising reversal of New Deal alliances, those who were critical of the effects of regulation in the 1980s were frequently insistent on administrative autonomy and the perverse effects of legalism 0-whereas critics seeking to bring about greater regulatory protections saw administrative independence and autonomy as the problem rather than the solution.5 The rule of law, including firm judicial constraints on the bureaucracy, was a mechanism for ensuring that agencies would carry out the will of Congress.
Before 1984, the law thus reflected a puzzling and relatively ad hoc set of doctrines about when courts should defer to administrative interpretations of law. All this was changed by Chevron. 2082 [Vol. 90:2071
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW was "whether the agency's answer is based on a permissible construction of the statute." For the Court, "considerable weight should be accorded to an executive department's construction of a statutory scheme it is entrusted to administer."' The Court thus created a twostep inquiry. The first question was whether Congress had explicitly foreclosed the agency's decision. The second was whether that decision was reasonable or permissible.
All this was sufficient to dispose of the specific problem in Chevron. Congress had not decided against a plantwide definition of source. Moreover, the agency's decision was an exceedingly reasonable means of accommodating the economic and environmental goals that underlay the Clean Air Act. Indeed, the plantwide definition achieved economic savings without jeopardizing environmental degradation, and may even have helped to diminish
In addition, a principle of deference was appropriate in Chevron. The agency's fact-finding and policy-making competence, and its electoral accountability, were highly relevant to the issue of how "source" should be defined. In Chevron itself, the Court quite rightly implied that any principle of deference is a product of Congress's explicit or implicit instructions on that question. The central point is this: Courts must defer to agency interpretations if and when Congress has told them to do so. And when agency competence is relevant, deference is particularly appropriate, since it is the most plausible instruction to attribute to Congress if the legislature has issued no clear statement on the point-a subject to which I return below.
Since Chevron itself, the general principle of deference has been invoked on numerous occasions and produced considerable controversy. In INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, the Supreme Court appeared to say that Chevron would apply only in cases involving mixed questions of law and fact, rather than pure questions of law: courts would decide pure questions of law on their own. In a concurring opinion, Justice Scalia vigorously rejected this suggestion, and the Court has failed to take it
[Vol. 90:2071
up in subsequent cases. In other cases the Supreme Court has held that at least arguably ambiguous statutes admitted of only a single interpretation, sometimes producing sharp dissenting opinions that invoked Chevron.6 Most strikingly, the Supreme Court has rejected a number of agency interpretations of law even in the aftermath of Chevron.69 C. Chevron's Rationale
It is not my purpose here to say whether or not the analysis in Chevron was correct.70 The nature and reach of the case can best be ascertained, however, by considering what might be said in its favor.
Before the discretionary, policy-making administrative agency became pervasive, the notion that courts would interpret the law, including federal statutes, seemed axiomatic. In the twentieth century, however, Congress frequently has delegated basic implementing authority to regulatory agencies, and the allocation of interpretive power has become far more complex. Any principles of deference to administrators must of course depend on congressional instructions, at least as a general rule.
When Congress has expressly said that deference is or is not ap2085
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW propriate, the matter is relatively simple. ' As stated above, the text and background of the APA suggest a firm belief in the need for judicial checks on administration, particularly with respect to the interpretation of law. The view that courts should always defer to agency interpretations is, therefore, a poor reconstruction of the instructions of the APA. It remains possible, however, that particular substantive statutes displace the APA and accord law-interpreting power to the agency. If so, the courts should defer in such cases on the ground that the relevant law is what the agency says that it is. The APA's provision for independent judicial interpretation of law is not inconsistent, then, with Chevron's deference to the agency's interpretation if Congress has, under particular statutes, granted the relevant authority to administrative agencies.
Frequently, however, Congress does not speak in explicit terms on the question of deference. When this is so, the court's task is to make the best reconstruction that it can of congressional instructions. And if Congress has not made a clear decision one way or the other, the choice among the alternatives will call for an assessment of which strategy is the most sensible one to attribute to Congress under the circumstances. This assessment is not a mechanical exercise of uncovering an actual legislative decision. It calls for a frankly value-laden judgment about comparative competence, undertaken in light of the regulatory structure and applicable constitutional considerations.
If all this is so, the Chevron approach might well be defended on the ground that the resolution of ambiguities in statutes is sometimes a question of policy as much as it is one of law, narrowly understood, and that agencies are uniquely well situated to make the relevant policy decisions. In some cases, there is simply no answer to the interpretive question if it is posed as an inquiry into some real or unitary instruction of the legislature. Sometimes congressional views cannot plausibly be aggregated in a way that reflects a clear resolution of regulatory problems, many of them barely foreseen or indeed unforeseeable.7 In these circumstances, legal competence, as narrowly understood, is insufficient for decision. The resolution of the ambiguity calls for an inquiry into something other than the instructions of the enacting legislature. And in examining those other considerations, the institution entrusted with the decision must make reference to considerations 2086 (Vol. 90:2071
policy.75 Chevron nicely illustrates the point. The decision about whether to adopt a plantwide definition of "source" required distinctly administrative competence because it called for a complex inquiry, not foreseen by Congress, into the environmental and economic consequences of the various possibilities. If regulatory decisions in the face of ambiguities amount in large part to choices of policy, and if Congress has delegated basic implementing authority to the agency, the Chevron approach might reflect a belief, attributable to Congress in the absence of a clear contrary legislative statement, in the comparative advantages of the agency in making those choices.
All this suggests that Chevron reflects not merely a particular view about who ought to interpret ambiguous statutes, but also, and perhaps more interestingly, a distinctive theory of interpretation. In the last generation it has frequently been suggested that the process of interpretation is often not merely a mechanical reconstruction of legislative desires. Instead that process sometimes calls for an inquiry into questions of both policy and principle. Thus, for example, it has been said that statutory ambiguities should or must be sorted out on the basis of an assessment of which interpretation is "reasonable," or makes the statute "the best piece of statesmanship it can be, or takes account of appropriate background norms dealing with the functions and failures of the regulatory state.
At least as a general rule, these suggestions argue powerfully in favor of administrative rather than judicial resolution of hard statutory questions. The fact-finding capacity and electoral accountability of the administrators are far greater than those of courts.8 Chevron is best
COLUMBIA L4W REVIEW understood and defended as a frank recognition that sometimes interpretation is not simply a matter of uncovering legislative will, but also involves extratextual considerations of various kinds, including judgments about how a statute is best or most sensibly implemented. Chevron reflects a salutary understanding that these judgments of policy and principle should be made by administrators rather than judges.8
The point can be made more vivid by examining some of the characteristic problems in modem regulation. Often the regulatory process is confounded by the difficulty of coordinating numerous statutes with one another. For example, the problems of air and water pollution are closely entangled. Efforts to control the one may aggravate the other, and there are complex interactions among various cleanup strategies. If the problems are treated separately, they will not be treated well. The EPA is charged with implementing numerous statutes, and it is in a far better position than the judiciary, reacting as it must to single cases, to respond to difficulties of this sort.83
Sometimes regulation is made more difficult because of the pervasive problem of changed circumstances. New developments involving technological capacity, economics, the international situation, or even law may affect regulatory performance. Congress is unable to amend every statute to account for these changes, a situation that creates a genuine problem for those who must apply the statute. Here as well, administrators are in a far better position than courts to interpret ambiguous statutes in a way that takes account of new conditions. Or to put the point slightly differently: Because of its focus on individual cases, and because decisions are made after the dispute has arisen, the common law process has a significant advantage over legislation in its capacity to respond to changing conditions and mores. The shift from the common law to legislation, embodied in the New Deal, therefore gave rise to a serious risk of obsolescence, one that is often realized in practice. In these circumstances, a grant of interpretive authority to 2088 [Vol. 90:2071
LAW AND ADMINISTRATION administrators, allowing them to take changed circumstances into consideration, seems to be a valuable if partial corrective.8 The result is to confer a power of adaptation on institutions that combine the judicial virtue of continuing attention to individual contexts and new settings with the legislative virtue of a fair degree of electoral accountability.
Sometimes regulation fails because of the excessive rigidity of statutory commands.8 In light of the wide variety of contexts to which statutes must be applied, a degree of flexibility in implementation is quite healthy. Congress cannot possibly foresee all of the problems to be dealt with under broad statutory terms.8 Statutory terms may offer ambiguous guidance to agencies that must establish regulations in complex areas.8 Such agencies are in a much better position than courts to 1990] 2089
deal with these sorts of problems. Perhaps most important, regulation often runs into difficulty because of the complex systemic effects of regulatory controls. Statutes interact in surprising ways with markets, other statutes, and other problems. Unanticipated consequences are common. For example, regulation of new risks may exacerbate old risks severe controls on the nuclear power industry may increase the need for coal-fired plants and thus aggravate health risks and other dangers from acid rain a requirement that industry adopt the best available technology may well retard technological development in pollution control. Agencies are far better situated than courts to understand and counter these effects. A principle of deference might also increase Congress's incentive to provide specific guidance to administrators and simultaneously reduce the amount of regulatory litigation, its attendant costs, and the potential balkanization of federal law in a highly decentralized court system.9 '
In light of these considerations, the Chevron approach might be understood as the best reconstruction of legislative instructions on the question of deference. Of course the notion of reconstruction should not be taken as a mechanical application of some actual legislative decision as we have seen, Congress has rendered no general decision about what institution should interpret the statutes it enacts.9 In the absence of a clear resolution, however, a principle of deference might improve the operation of regulatory law and at the same time appropriately distribute authority between courts and agencies.
To be sure, such a reconstruction would not track legislative desires under every statute. By itself, an ambiguity is not a delegation of law-interpreting power, and it would be a major error to treat all ambiguities as delegations. In fact many regulatory statutes, especially in the environmental area, were passed in periods of considerable suspicion of agency performance. Congress has often believed that the pressures imposed on administrators lead them to regulate with insufficient vigor.9 Congress's fear of agency bias or even abdication makes
LA WAND ADMINISTRATION it most doubtful that the legislature has sought deference to the agency under all circumstances. But even if the Chevron principle is not accurate in every case, it is perhaps as accurate as any bright-line alternative, and it therefore has the significant virtue of combining a fair degree of
rule.94 1990] 2091
II. The considerations marshalled thus far may not be decisive. Countervailing considerations, some of them taken up below, make it easy to understand the continuing debate over the wisdom of the Chevron principle. But even if it is agreed that deference was appropriate in the context of Chevron and that the basic principle is sound, a large number of questions remain. Indeed, it is in the effort to sort out the reach of Chevron that a significant amount of the allocation of authority between courts and agencies, and among courts, agencies, and Congress, will occur. I attempt in this section to describe the unresolved questions and to suggest how they might be treated. I do not deal here with cases of conflict with other interpretive principles, a problem treated in Part III. For present purposes I assume that Chevron provides the only applicable principle.
A quite general conclusion emerges from the discussion: Chevron is inapplicable when the particular context suggests that deference would be a poor reconstruction of congressional desires. The clearest case is provided when the agency has not been accorded implementing authority at all, but the same concern arises when the agency is for some other reason at a clear comparative disadvantage to courts. This latter category includes cases of likely bias and, somewhat more controversially, cases involving questions of jurisdiction. A. Just How Ambiguous?
Chevron does not say how ambiguous a statute must be in order for the agency view to control. If any ambiguity triggers the deference rule-if the agency wins whenever a reasonable person could be persuaded that more than one interpretation exists-the principle will be extraordinarily broad. Indeed, Justice Kennedy has gone so far as to suggest that the agency view should prevail if the statute is "arguably ambiguous."
The Court's own decisions, however, suggest that the mere fact of a plausible alternative view is insufficient to trigger the Chevron rule.9
No verbal formulation will be completely helpful here, relying as it must on undefined defining terms. But perhaps this will do: If the court has a firm conviction that the agency interpretation violates the statute, that interpretation must fail. This is so even if a reasonable person might accept the agency's view.
Consider, for example, INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca. That case involved the meaning of a statutory provision allowing the Attorney General to grant asylum to an alien unable or unwilling to return to his home country 'because of persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion.' The Immigration and Naturalization Service ("INS") defined "well-founded fear" to mean that an alien must show that it is more probable than not that she would be subject to persecution. Invoking the statutory text and history, the Court rejected the agency's view. In a concurring opinion, Justice Scalia said that the agency view would warrant deference if there were ambiguity, but that the statutory text was clear.10 '
In fact, however, reasonable people certainly could differ on whether "a well-founded fear" required a showing of probability of persecution. Although the Court's interpretation ultimately was persuasive as a matter of both text and history, neither of these sources was unambiguous on the The outcome in the case thus suggested that the mere fact of a plausible agency view is insufficient for
An approach of this sort appears to be a sound understanding of Chevron insofar as the case recognizes the primacy of legislative instructions over administrative Even in the aftermath of the New Deal, it is for Congress, not the agencies, to make the law. Any inter[Vol. 90:2071
pretive approach must recognize that principle of priority. An understanding that would allow the agency to prevail merely because there is some room for disagreement would pose an undue threat to the basic principle of congressional supremacy in lawmaking, risking as it would administrative subversion of statutory standards. Of course it remains true that under Chevron, the agency will prevail even if the court would have chosen otherwise had it been entrusted with the power to decide the issue in the first instance. B. The Breadth of the Deference Principle and Its Limitations
In this section, I explore possible limitations on the Chevron principle. The most plausible limitations are those that can be inferred from actual congressional instructions and, where Congress has not spoken, from a reading of congressional purposes in light of the relevant structural principles. Under this approach, Chevron is inapplicable when Congress has not granted the agency law-interpreting power at all and also in cases involving likely bias, most notably jurisdictional determinations.
1. Limitation to Legislative Rules or to Other Congressional Delegations of Law-Interpreting Power. Chevron involved a "legislative rule," that is a rule issued by an agency pursuant to a congressional grant of power to promulgate regulations. For reasons suggested above, it is plausible to think that the legislative grant of rulemaking power implicitly carries with it the grant of authority to interpret ambiguities in the law that the agency is entrusted with administering. Somewhat more broadly, Chevron might be taken to suggest that whenever an agency is entrusted with implementing power-whether to be exercised through rulemaking or adjudication-agency interpretations in the course of exercising that power are entitled to respect so long as they are reasonable.
If this is the basis for Chevron, the principle of deference does not extend to interpretations by agencies that have not been granted the authority to interpret the law. For example, agencies that have been entrusted with the power to prosecute violations but not to make rules lack the pedigree that is a prerequisite for deference. It follows that even if an agency has been given the power of interpretation through rulemaking, it is not entitled to deference if it did not exercise rulemaking power in the particular case.' It follows even more clearly that mere litigating positions are not entitled to deference. And if this is 1990]
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW so, Chevron applies only when an agency is exercising the power to make rules or otherwise carrying out legislatively delegated interpretive authority.
This basic idea goes a long way toward making sense of the entire dispute over the reach of Chevron. In a recent case, the Court made precisely this point, suggesting that a "precondition to deference under Indeed, Justice Scalia, an enthusiastic defender of the Chevron principle, has argued for a distinction very much like this one. If agencies are simply interpreting a statute, but have not been granted the power to "administer" it, the principle of deference should not apply. And if Chevron does not apply outside of the context of delegations of lawinterpreting power, it is consistent with a well-established body of previous law.' "
2. Pure Questions of Law Versus Application of Law to Fact. Before Chevron, the law might have been described roughly in the following way: Agency decisions that involve pure issues of law are subject to independent judicial examination. Nojudicial deference is appropriate because strictly legal competence is sufficient to resolve the question. But decisions that involve the application of law to fact call for a different standard, since the agency's specialized fact-finding capacity and accountability are highly relevant. Courts therefore should defer to agency decisions of this latter sort."i'
We might distinguish, for example, between (a) the question whether the Occupational Safety and Health Act requires the Secretary of Labor to show a "significant risk" before regulating a carcinogen and
[Vol. 90:2071
LAW AND ADMINISTRATION (b) the question whether benzene, an acknowledged carcinogen, creates a "significant risk." For the first question, strictly legal expertise seems relevant. For the latter question, it is the agency that has a comparative advantage. Deference might be accorded on the latter but not the former. Similarly, in the leading pre-Chevron case, the Supreme Court appeared to decide independently the purely legal question whether the statutory term "employees" included independent contractors, but to defer to the National Labor Relations Board ("NLRB") on the mixed question whether newsboys qualified as employees within the National Labor Relations Act.
This approach has a good deal to be said in its favor. Above all, it is a plausible reconstruction of Congress's interpretive instructions. If the agency is simply saying what the statute means, it is making a decision that at least ordinarily calls into play distinctly legal competence. The best inference is probably that Congress wants courts to answer these inquiries. But the agency's own capacities are conspicuously pertinent when it is applying law to fact, and in these cases the best reconstruction of legislative instructions is that the decision is for the agency. It is not surprising that several courts, including the Supreme Court in a post-Chevron opinion written by justice Stevens, have accepted precisely this line of argument.
There are, however, at least three problems with this approach. First, the resolution of statutory ambiguities may call for the agency's specialized capacities, even if the issue appears to be purely one of law. It is at least plausible that the agency's competence is relevant to the question whether a statute regulating carcinogens requires the agency to show a "significant risk." The resolution of the ambiguity might well call for an understanding of the disadvantages and advantages of any requirement of this sort. As we have seen, resolution of ambiguities often calls for an assessment of issues of policy and principle. That assessment is best made by agencies rather than courts.
Second, the line between purely legal and mixed questions is extremely thin. In some cases it will be hard to tell on which side of the line a particular question falls. A broader approach to Chevron, applying the rule of deference in all cases, has the virtue of simplicity and ease of application. Third, Chevron itself quite plausibly involved a pure question of law rather than application of law to fact.117 The distinction between the two is therefore in some tension with Chevron it2095
self. Even in pure questions of law, then, deference is probably due unless there is some independent reason for distrusting the agency.
3. Cases Involving the Agency's Specialized Competence. Even if the distinction between purely legal and mixed questions cannot be sustained, perhaps courts should use the considerations that it embodies in order to give deference when, simply, it is due. Deference is due when a matter within the agency's competence is at issue courts should review agency decisions independently when it is not. On this account, the problem with the distinction between mixed questions and pure questions of law is that it is too crude and indirect a proxy for the relevant question, which is the comparative competence of the agency and the court. In Chevron, deference was appropriate because the agency's competence was highly relevant, whether or not the question was a "pure" one of law. So too, an agency's competence is relevant in deciding, for example, whether newsboys qualify as employees within the meaning of the National Labor Relations Act," or whether there should be a de minimis exception to a statutory ban on the use of carcinogens as food additives. In the latter case, the consequences of the exception probably bear on the meaning of the statute.1 The line between independent review and Chevron's deference, then, should turn directly on questions of relative competence.
This position has much to be said in its favor. Indeed, it is difficult to quarrel with the proposition that courts should defer when, and only when, agencies have a comparative advantage. That proposition is one to which Congress is highly likely to subscribe and should therefore be attributed to Congress when the national legislature has not spoken. It is highly likely that some version of this idea is and will remain the law, whether or not it is explicitly adopted by reviewing courts.
The principal problem with the use of this idea as a test for determining whether deference is due is that the inquiry into comparative competence in particular cases will be complex. By contrast, a brightline rule of deference has the comparative virtue of simplicity. Moreover, a broader approach to Chevron would reflect a recognition that administrative competence is implicated in many hard cases of statutory
[Vol. 90:2071
others insistent on that distinction.1 In a few cases the Court appears to have deferred to agency decisions on questions that were at least plausibly jurisdictional.12 In a recent case, however, the Court said
[Vol. 90:2071
that while "agency determinations within the scope of delegated authority are entitled to deference," an agency" 'may not bootstrap itself into an area in which it has no jurisdiction.' The passage suggests that jurisdictional determinations will not receive deference. But it is somewhat ambiguous, and there is as yet no clear answer to this question.
Because congressional instructions are crucial here, courts should probably refuse to defer to agency decisions with respect to issues of jurisdiction-again, if we assume that the distinction between jurisdictional and nonjurisdictional questions is easily administrable. The principal reason is that Congress would be unlikely to want agencies to have the authority to decide on the extent of their own powers. To accord such power to agencies would be to allow them to be judges in their own cause, in which they are of course susceptible to bias.
Consider, for example, Dole v. United Steelworkers of America.128 There the issue was whether the Office of Management and Budget ("OMB") had the authority under the Paperwork Reduction Act of tities to disclose information directly to consumers, employees, or others. OMB argued that the statutory words allowing it to review rules regarding the "'obtaining or soliciting of facts by an agency closure rules.13 The Court concluded otherwise, saying that the words "by an agency" meant information gathered by the agency for its own use rather than for disclosure to others.13 Because the Court found the statute unambiguous in denying reviewing authority to OMB, it did not have to explore the issue of deference. But it would have seemed exceedingly odd to suggest that OMB should be allowed to resolve ambiguities in a statute governing its own jurisdiction. The danger of bias and self-dealing is so great as to make OMB an interested party.
As Justice Scalia has emphasized, however, there would be some difficulty in administering the sometimes elusive distinction between jurisdictional and nonjurisdictional questions.13 In some cases in which an agency is said to have exceeded its authority, or acted unlawfully, it might also be said to have exceeded its jurisdiction.13 Moreover, agency expertise and accountability are often relevant to the resolution
2099
128. 110 S. Ct. 929 (1990).
129. 44 U.S.C. §§ 3501-3520 (1988).
of a jurisdictional ambiguity. In the absence of a clear congressional answer to the question, for example, the comparative competence of the FCC might well bear on whether federal regulatory authority extends to cable television.1 When Congress has not spoken clearly, whether the Commodity Futures Trading Commission has adjudicative authority over common law counterclaims might well depend on the consequences of the exercise of that authority for the fair and efficient administration of the Commodity Exchange Act. For these reasons, it would be at least plausible to suggest that a general rule of deference would be preferable even on jurisdictional questions, because of its greater ease of application and because the agency's competence bears on the resolution of jurisdictional ambiguities.
Probably the best reconciliation of the competing considerations of expertise, accountability, and partiality is to say that no deference will be accorded to the agency when the issue is whether the agency's authority extends to a broad area of regulation, or to a large category of cases, except to the extent that the answer to that question calls for determinations of fact and policy.1 On this approach, there is no magic in the word "jurisdiction." Instead, the question is whether the agency is seeking to extend its legal power to an entire category of cases, rather than disposing of certain cases in a certain way or acting in one or a few cases. This distinction it is not always extremely sharp, and it will call for an exercise ofjudgment. But in the vast majority of cases, it is easily administered.
It should also follow that agencies will not receive deference when they are denying their authority to deal with a large category of cases.1 Here too the agency determination is jurisdictional. Here too there is a risk of bias, in the form not of self-dealing, but instead of an abdication of enforcement power. Because abdication has been a major legislative fear,13 and because deference doctrine should not contain an antiregulatory bias, Chevron should be inapplicable here as well.
(Vol. 90:2071
5. Agency Bias. We might generalize the discussion of jurisdictional determinations by supposing that the question at issue is one with respect to which agency bias is peculiarly likely to be at work. The agency might be deciding whether its own decisions are reviewable, whether it has the power to issue fines, whether its authority extends to new or unforeseen areas, or, perhaps more controversially, whether it is compelled to undertake action that it prefers not to undertake-for example, vigorous enforcement of federal environmental controlsperhaps because of the pressures imposed by well-organized private groups. In all of these cases, the likelihood of agency bias and selfdealing might be serious. It would be peculiar, therefore, to defer to the agency's views. This issue is one of particular importance, especially in a period in which Congress is likely to be enacting regulatory controls toward which the executive branch has expressed ambivalence.140
If Chevron applies only when the agency has been delegated lawmaking authority, much of this problem will disappear. To be sure, an agency's view that its own decisions are unreviewable, that it need not undertake certain action, or that it has (or does not have) the power to issue fines will amount to an "interpretation." But the expression of these views is unlikely to be part of the exercise of authority that has been congressionally granted. In these cases, an agency's claim of immunity from the judiciary could not easily be seen as part of its delegated rulemaking power. In rare cases, however, an agency might interpret a statute in a way that predictably lines up with agency selfinterest or bias even while exercising delegated authority. In these cases, the rule of deference should probably be inapplicable, since deference would be a poor reading of congressional instructions.
Chevron's principle of deference, then, is an attempted reconstruction of congressional instructions, one that is responsive to the comparative advantages of the agency in administering complex statutes. It follows that the principle is inapplicable when the best reconstruction argues against deference. We have seen that when the agency has not been accorded law-interpreting power, no deference is due. Independent judicial assessments are also appropriate in other contexts involving predictable bias, most notably jurisdictional determinations, but also in other cases in which the agency's self-interest is conspicuously at stake.
6. Agency Views that Are New or that Depart from Past Practices. Before Chevron, agency decisions were entitled to deference if they were longstanding, consistent, and contemporaneous but new interpreta1990]
tions were subject to more stringent judicial scrutiny.1 The reasons for this distinction never have been entirely clear. Perhaps the special deference accorded to longstanding interpretations embodied an effort to import principles of stare decisis into administrative processes in order to protect reliance and expectations. Perhaps the distinction was part of an effort to constrain administrative wilfulness or the use of "politics," perhaps understood as interest group power, to distort statutory meaning. Perhaps this distinction was built on a belief that a longstanding interpretation probably tracked congressional will, at the stage of enactment and after, and was therefore correct as a matter of statutory meaning. If these were the underlying ideas, an agency decision that was novel or merely one of an inconsistent line of decisions would not warrant deference. That decision would hardly protect expectations and reliance, and it could not confidently be said to be a correct understanding of what Congress wanted.
On several occasions after Chevron the Court has reasserted precisely this position. But if Chevron is right, this position is wrong, or at least it draws the distinction between longstanding and novel interpretations too sharply.' As we have seen, Chevron is best defended in part as a means of counteracting problems of rigidity, obsolescence, and changed circumstances in the regulatory process.' The problem of changed circumstances is a serious one for textual commands, which are difficult to amend in light of competing demands on the legislators' time. As a result, courts have sometimes taken account of changed circumstances in order to render a novel interpretation, one that makes sense of those commands or even remains faithful to them in light of new developments. But because of their fact-finding capacities, electoral accountability, and continuing attention to changed circumstances, agencies are far better situated than courts to soften statutory
[Vol. 90:2071
LAW AND ADMINISTRATION rigidities or to adapt their terms to unanticipated conditions.14
All this might suggest that an agency's new interpretations should be entitled to the same basic deference as old ones. Agency decisions about the meaning of ambiguous statutes often turn in part on questions of policy. For an agency to interpret a statute one way rather than another is for it to set out a view that is permissible rather than mandatory. Under Chevron, agency views receive deference not because they capture a unitary intended meaning, but because the resolution of statutory ambiguities should be undertaken by accountable, specialized administrators, not by courts. Under this approach, it matters relatively little whether the agency decision is longstanding and consistent or not. Regulatory shifts from one administration to another should be entirely expected and indeed welcomed as a healthy part of democratic selfgovernment or as a recognition of changed circumstances. So long as the statute is ambiguous, those shifts reflect legitimate changes of policy. One might expect, then, that after Chevron agency decisions will be entitled to deference even if they are novel.
The question is somewhat more complex, however, than the discussion thus far suggests. As we have seen, a longstanding agency interpretation might receive deference because of an interest in a form of administrative stare decisis. If this is so, a new interpretation is entitled to somewhat less deference than one that is longstanding. In a recent case, the Supreme Court has recognized this point and, indeed, gone somewhat further. In a partial qualification of Chevron, the Court held in Maislin Industries, U.S., Inc. v. Primary Steel, Inc. that agencies may not depart from an agency interpretation that the Court has upheld, even in the face of changed circumstances.' The case should probably be read to say that an agency may not depart from an interpretation that the Court has held to be statutorily mandated. It should not be taken to say that a merely permissible interpretation is set in stone, or that an agency may not take account of changed circumstances in giving meaning to an ambiguous mandate, or a mandate that new developments have rendered ambiguous. 1990]
Two conclusions follow. First, and most importantly, agencies should be allowed to depart from interpretations by prior administrations, certainly in the face of changed conditions, but also to reflect new views about policy. What is necessary is that the new interpretation be explained as reasonable in light of statutorily permissible factors. Second, new departures should be accorded somewhat less deference than longstanding interpretations, for reasons analogous to those that justify stare decisis in the judicial context.
C. Chevron's Second Step: The Reasonableness of the Agency's Interpretation
I have noted that Chevron sets out a two-step process for analyzing agency interpretations. Even if Congress has not directly addressed the issue in question, and even if deference is due, the agency's decision must be "reasonable." '1 The Supreme Court has given little explicit guidance for determining when interpretations will be found reasonable. In most of the cases rejecting an agency's view, the Court has relied on the first step of Chevron, finding an explicit congressional decision on the point.
On the question of reasonableness, it seems clear that the agency must be given considerable latitude. But this is not to say that the agency may do whatever it wishes. The reasonableness inquiry should probably be seen as similar to the inquiry into whether the agency's decision is "arbitrary" or "capricious" within the meaning of the APA. That inquiry requires the agency to give a detailed explanation of its decision by reference to factors that are relevant under the governing statute.1 And while some decisions will be reversed or remanded under this approach, it is clear that within a wide range the choice of policy is for the agency. 1990]
Thus far I have discussed the Chevron principle as if it stood alone-that is, as if it provided the only applicable interpretive principle, and was not in conflict with other possible principles. In fact, however, the principle of deference is merely one of a large number of interpretive principles or norms playing a major role in statutory construction as that process occurs in courts, agencies, and elsewhere. In some cases in which Chevron would otherwise govern, other interpretive norms may require a rejection of the agency's position.
In this Part, I discuss the relationship between Chevron and other relevant principles. I conclude that Chevron is plainly overcome by principles that help to ascertain congressional instructions. Norms calling for an explicit legislative statement before certain results may be reached also overcome the principle of deference the reason is that those norms are designed to ensure congressional deliberation on the questions involved. The same is true for other norms designed to counteract governmental bias or to protect legislative processes. Norms against regulatory irrationality or absurdity, however, are usually defeated by Chevron, since determinations of rationality are for agencies rather than courts.
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW A. In General
Notwithstanding Karl Llewellyn's celebrated effort to demolish the canons of construction by showing their tendency toward vacuity and self-contradiction, interpretive principles of various sorts continue to be an important part of current law.' Statutory ambiguity is common. In the face of ambiguity, outcomes must turn on interpretive principles of various sorts there is simply no other way to decide hard cases. Any volume of the Federal Reporter or the United States Reports will turn up a wide range of interpretive principles. These principles exist not only because they are indispensable to decision, but also because many of them ieflect grammatical, institutional, or substantive understandings that have or warrant widespread support.
The point goes deeper still. Whether there is ambiguity-the nominal trigger for deference under Chevron-is a function not "simply" of text, but of text as it interacts with principles of interpretation, some of them deeply engrained in the legal culture or even the culture more generally. A major current task is to assign Chevron its place within the universe of these principles. That task raises the question of what constitutes "ambiguity" and of why and when "ambiguity" is a sufficient reason for deference.
For present purposes it will be useful to begin by distinguishing among three sorts of interpretive principles. All of them are pervasive. Syntactic principles help to discern statutory meaning in the particular case. Courts sometimes rely on explicit and implicit interpretive instructions from Congress about how statutes should be construed. Substantive principles attempt to carry out policies, some of them with constitutional status, that cannot be tied to any legislative judgment.
Syntactic principles include a wide range of practices and ideas: not merely the ordinary rules of language, but also the frequently stated notions that a specific provision will trump a general provision when there is a conflict ' that when general words follow a particular
(Vol. 90:2071 2106
enumeration, they will be defined by reference to the particular enumeration that every word in a statute will be given effect that when Congress has specified the category of people entitled to a good, there might be an inference that the people not expressly mentioned are not so entitled. Some of these principles are controversial, and their application in particular cases will of course be a source of dispute. But the use of syntactic principles, as a way of discerning legislative instructions, is an ordinary part of statutory interpretation.
Interpretive instructions include, least controversially, explicit legislative guidance about statutory interpretation. The first provisions of the United States Code provide a long list of these instructions, and other more particular statutes furnish similar guidance. Some principles of interpretation reflect implicit rather than explicit interpretive instructions. Thus, for example, the idea that statutes will be construed to be valid rather than invalid, and the principle that appropriations statutes will be narrowly construed,' seem to be an accurate reconstruction of likely legislative wishes. Congress would prefer validation to invalidation, and its own rules and practices limit the consequences of appropriations measures.
Substantive principles are sometimes highly controversial, but they play an extremely prominent role in statutory interpretation. Some of these principles are designed to allocate authority among various governmental entities. Some of them are more frankly designed to produce particular outcomes. Many of these principles are constitutionally inspired, as in the idea that federal statutes will not lightly be construed so as to preempt state law that judicial review of agency action will be presumed available ' that statutes will be construed so as not to interfere with the power of the President. Some of these principles serve other defensible substantive goals these include the idea that exemptions from the antitrust and tax laws will be narrowly construed,' ' 1990]
that statutes will be interpreted so as not to apply retroactively, that implied repeals will be disfavored, and that federal statutes and treaties will be construed generously to the Indian tribes. The category of substantive norms is not fixed but changes over time, with new assessments of what norms are well adapted to the functions and failures of government.
[Vol. 90:2071 2108
B. Chevron and the Interpretive Principles
What bearing does Chevron have on the principles of construction? Notably, Chevron itself creates an interpretive principle, and if it is to be defended, it must probably be as one that reflects implicit interpretive instructions or that satisfies institutional goals.' It is not difficult to imagine a conflict between the Chevron principle and one or more of the other interpretive principles. Imagine, for example, that an agency interprets a statute in a manner that raises a serious constitutional question, preempt state law, or unfavorably to the Indian tribes. The problem has arisen specifically in cases in which agency interpretations competed with the norms against retroactivity and against implied exemptions from antitrust laws.
In these cases, the issue is whether Chevron will displace or be displaced by otherwise applicable interpretive norms. That issue in turn implicates a wide range of questions about the relationships among different interpretive norms, created as they were in vastly different periods and designed for dramatically different institutional arrangements and substantive concerns. Here as well the traditional legal culture is confronted by an administrative system built on a novel set of substantive and institutional premises.
In the discussion that follows, I propose to answer these questions by disentangling the functions of interpretive norms and by examining their relationship with Chevron. Not surprisingly, the answers require an assessment of the interaction between the original constitutional framework and governmental structures that self-consciously depart from that framework. Each of the norms outlined here might fall in more than one category, and the judgment about which category applies will be contestable. The particular judgments are less important than the general conclusion that norms that serve different functions will interact with Chevron in different ways. I order the norms in se-
quence, beginning with those that pose the strongest case for overcoming Chevron and ending with those that in all likelihood should be defeated by agency interpretations. C. Syntactic Norms and Interpretive Instructions
It seems clear that agency interpretations will not prevail when they conflict with syntactic norms. Chevron speaks of "the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress" as the basis for rejecting an agency's view, and many syntactic principles are explicitly designed to help capture legislative instructions. The idea that specific terms prevail over general, that each word in a statute will be construed to have independent meaning,' and that words will be taken in the context of the statute as a whole,' are part of the process of uncovering "legislative intent."1 These norms therefore overcome the agency's view, at least if they operate reliably in the case at hand. The Supreme Court has indicated as much in so many words.'
The agency interpretation will also be defeated when Congress has issued interpretive instructions. When explicit instructions appear in the statutory text, they should prevail over contrary agency interpretations. Interpretive instructions that do not appear on the face of the statute, but that derive from the legislative history or background of the statute, or from understandings about likely legislative desires, are also part and parcel of the process of discerning Congress's instructions (its "intent"). These instructions should also prevail over conflicting agency views.
The question is somewhat more difficult when the interpretive instructions are implicit rather than explicit-as, for example, in the notion that appropriations statutes will be narrowly construed, or that statutes will be construed so as to be valid rather than invalid. The 1990)
problem here is that implicit interpretive instructions are in a sense a judicial rather than a legislative creation-a formulation of legislative will that, while highly plausible, has been nowhere expressly stated, and that may therefore be controversial. As the interpretive instructions track legislative desires more controversially, they come closer to falling into the category of substantive or institutional principles, which provide a weaker case for rejection of Chevron. But when the principle is closely traceable to a likely congressional judgment, it plainly defeats the Chevron principle. The Court has so indicated in cases before and after Chevron. 2110 [Vol. 90:2071
D. Norms that Require an Explicit Legislative Statement
The discussion thus far has involved norms that are invoked to uncover congressional "intent." The remaining categories of norms do not involve legislative instructions or "intent" at all. It is plausible to suggest that these norms should always be trumped by Chevron. In Chevron, after all, the Court emphasized that the agency's view will prevail unless there is a direct congressional judgment to the contrary. When a court is dealing with norms that do not relate to congressional instructions, it seems reasonable that the agency's view should prevail. On this account, only intent and intent-related canons can defeat the agency's view.
On the other hand, Chevron does refer to and endorse the "traditional tools of statutory construction." This point has frequently been emphasized in subsequent cases. Constitutionally inspired norms, along with many others that serve institutional or substantive goals, stand as part of those traditional tools. If the traditional tools include the substantive norms, then these norms can defeat agency interpretations consistently with Chevron. In many cases, powerful arguments support this conclusion.
It will be useful to begin with norms designed to require that statutes contain an explicit statement from Congress. "Clear statement" principles are omnipresent in current law. A subset of the category of interpretive norms, they are designed to ensure an unambiguous state-
LAW AND ADMINISTRATION ment from Congress before allowing certain results to be reached. One of their targets is governmental outcomes that reflect views that can be traced only to the executive branch, and not to the national legislature as well. Principles that require a clear legislative statement, I argue, overcome Chevron.
1. Constitutionally Inspired Norms. - Many substantive norms have constitutional foundations. Examples include the principle that statutes ordinarily will be construed to be valid rather than invalid, to steer clear of serious constitutional doubts, so as not to intrude on the traditional power of the President or preempt state law. Principles of this sort require a clear statement from Congress before courts will interpret statutes as intruding into constitutionally troublesome areas.
If these principles cannot be understood as a way of discerning legislative instructions, and if Congress can displace them with a clear statement, how might they be defended? The process of statutory construction is often thought to be a means of discerning the meaning of statutory words, and here substantive principles might be considered irrelevant or indeed illegitimate. By using these principles, courts decide cases of statutory meaning by reference to something external to legislative desires, even though the interpretation in question would not ordinarily violate the Constitution.
There are, however, at least three reasons for the continued use of constitutionally inspired interpretive principles. First, it is sometimes impossible to decide hard cases without resorting to these principles. Some cases are genuinely in equipoise, and courts (or agencies) need tie breakers. It is hard to object to tie breakers that are rooted in constitutionally grounded structural principles.
Second, some principles are justified as an effort to ensure legislative rather than merely administrative deliberation about constitutionally troublesome issues. This idea is itself based on considerations of constitutional structure. For example, the Supreme Court no longer enforces the nondelegation doctrine with much vigor, and probably for good reasons.1 But in the wake of the downfall of that doctrine, the use of constitutionally based clear statement principles serves as a nar1990] 2111
rower and more targeted means of ensuring that Congress, rather than bureaucrats, will deliberate on questions that raise serious constitutional difficulties or intrude into constitutionally sensitive areas.
In this respect, clear statement principles operate like the nondelegation doctrine. Both have roots in article I, and these principles can be understood as a second-best surrogate for that doctrine-a surrogate that is responsive to the intrusiveness and unwieldiness of a largescale judicial revival of the nondelegation doctrine. In Kent v. Du~les,19 for example, the Supreme Court held that a seemingly open-ended grant of authority to the President to issue and deny passports did not include the power to refuse to allow Communists to leave the country because of their political commitments. The decision should be understood as an effort to ensure that the national legislature, not simply the executive branch, has deliberated on a question raising difficult constitutional questions relating to freedom of expression and the right to travel. This approach therefore responds to the delegation problem that would result from a decision to allow the executive branch to undertake constitutionally troublesome acts pursuant to an open-ended delegation of authority.
Third, clear statement principles help to promote fidelity to constitutional norms that, while having a solid constitutional pedigree, are judicially underenforced. Because judicial invalidation of statutes is troublesome in a constitutional democracy, courts are properly reluctant to enforce the Constitution with the vigor that might be appropriate for institutions having a better electoral pedigree. Since the Court "underenforces" the Constitution, certain constitutional norms in fact reach beyond the place where courts have vindicated those norms. It follows that an aggressive judicial role in statutory interpretation, one that removes statutes from the terrain of constitutional doubt, will promote greater conformity with norms that in fact do have constitutional status.
When constitutionally based norms conflict with an agency's interpretation, it is highly probable that the agency's view will not prevail. As we have seen, the Supreme Court has held that a statute apparently conferring broad power to forbid Americans from leaving the country would not be interpreted to allow the Secretary of State to deny passports to American citizens who were members of the Communist 2112
party. According to the Court, a general grant of authority to the executive branch should not allow the Secretary of State to intrude on what might be a constitutionally protected right to travel. If Congress intends to authorize this result, it must express its will clearly.' Indeed, in a large number of cases, many of them postdating Chevron, the Court has invoked constitutionally inspired principles in order to reject agency interpretations of law.' The most conspicuous of these principles is the idea that ambiguous statutes will be construed so as not to raise serious constitutional questions.
It is thus implausible that, after Chevron, agency interpretations of ambiguous statutes will prevail even if the consequence of those interpretations is to produce invalidity or to raise serious constitutional doubts. The very reason for the interpretive principle in favor of avoiding invalidity or serious doubts is to ensure explicit congressional authorization before certain results may be reached. As the Court held in unambiguous terms in DeBartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Building & Construction Trades Council,197 a statute should not be interpreted to confer that authority simply on the agency's say-so.
Other constitutionally inspired principles will produce a similar tension with Chevron. For example, the idea that judicial review of ad1990] 2113
ministrative action will be presumed available and the principle that federal statutes will not lightly be taken to preempt state law1 might well conflict with agency interpretations.
In these cases too, the Chevron principle will probably be held inapplicable.20 These norms are in significant part an effort to promote congressional-rather than executive or bureaucratic- deliberation on certain issues, and to cabin executive officials by calling for express legislative authorization. If constitutionally inspired interpretive norms are understood in this way, they cannot be trumped by Chevron. The comparative advantages of the agencies are not at stake when a constitutional norm that argues in favor of legislative deliberation is involved indeed, the institutional considerations counsel against acceptance of the agency's view.
2. Nonconstitutional Norms Designed to Require a Clear Congressional Statement. A number of norms without constitutional status are also designed to ensure a clear congressional statement before certain results might be reached. By limiting administrative discretion to make law, these interpretive principles also act as surrogates for, or particularized versions of, the nondelegation doctrine. This is so even though the principles cannot be linked cleanly to a constitutional provision.
Principles of this sort have been used throughout the history of American law. They require the legislature to express itself clearly if it wants to depart from ordinary understandings about the scope and nature of regulatory policy. Though these understandings are at best indirectly rooted in the Constitution, they draw considerable weight from history, usual practice, and time-honored notions of equity and comity. They require general legislative authorization for new departures.
Examples include the principle that appropriations statutes do not amend substantive statutes, the presumption against retroactivity, and the idea that laws will apply only within the territory of the United States. Because these norms also are designed to produce a clear 2114 [Vol. 90:2071
statement from Congress, they probably cannot be defeated by the agency's contrary view.
To be sure, the argument for this result is weaker than in the case of constitutionally inspired norms, and perhaps some nonconstitutional norms can be defeated by an agency interpretation. But if the norm is an effort to require a clear legislative statement, it should usually prevail. For example, the idea that statutes generally will apply only within the territory of the United States is an attempt to conform to the reasonable expectations of both the legislature and affected persons. It also performs an important function in sorting out the relations between domestic law and that of other nations. An administrative agency should not be permitted to displace a principle designed to ensure that if American law is to apply outside of American borders, Congress must say so explicitly. Quite similar ideas account for the presumption against retroactivity-a straightforward effort to promote reasonable expectations-and the notion that appropriations measures, usually assembled quickly and without much deliberation, will not be taken to amend substantive statutes. Since these norms are intended to require legislative deliberation, Chevron should not overcome them. 1990]
E. Norms Designed to Counteract Administrative or Governmental Bias
Some interpretive norms are intended to respond to systemic biases in governmental processes and thus to promote principles of fair dealing. These norms are not designed merely to require a clear statement from Congress they represent a quite general effort to resolve ambiguities in a way that fairly allocates both burdens and benefits in governmental processes. The idea that treaties and statutes should be construed generously to the Indian tribes is a prominent example. This principle is designed to require a clear congressional statement before allowing a statute to be interpreted unfavorably to a group that has been mistreated in the past. Similarly, criminal statutes are interpreted favorably to criminal defendants and to require mens rea.206 The same idea accounts for the notion that it is not for agencies to
decide whether statutes impose on them the duty to act at all. It would be odd to suggest that these principles can be overcome by an agency interpretation. Principles of this sort are self-conscious efforts to counteract administrative or governmental bias, by requiring an express congressional judgment on the point before allowing certain results to be reached. These principles should not be overridden simply because the agency wants them to be. F. Norms Designed to Protect Legislative Processes
Some norms are designed to protect the legislative process by increasing rationality and integrity in that process. In this category belong the ideas that implied repeals are disfavored that exemptions from taxation or antitrust will be narrowly construed and that appropriations statutes will rarely be understood to amend substantive statutes.
There is a legitimate argument that Chevron overcomes norms of this sort. Through these norms, courts attempt to coordinate statutes with one another and to promote the coherence of statutory law. The agency is in a superior position to perform that task. Its expertise and experience with related statutes make it better able to fit statutes with one another or to coordinate seemingly inconsistent enactments. Norms designed to promote the coherence of statutory law probably should counteract the agency's view if, but only if, the purpose of the relevant norm is to ensure a clear congressional statement or to carry out likely interpretive instructions from the legislature. If the norm merely reflects the court's own view about how statutes ought to be fit together, Chevron should require the agency's position to prevail. This conclusion is consistent with the Chevron Court's recognition that in the aftermath of the rise of the administrative state, the role of coordinating and making sense of regulatory enactments falls principally on agencies rather than judges. G. Norms Against Regulatory Irrationality
The strongest cases for allowing Chevron to prevail involve norms 2116 [Vol. 90:2071
that are designed to counteract absurd or unjust results. The judgment about what approach is absurd or unjust is likely to be made by reference to traditional legal understandings. At least in general, a contrary administrative judgment ought to be respected. Indeed, a decision by the court to apply its own judgment in this context would, in effect, substitute a judicial for an administrative determination in circumstances in which Congress has delegated policy-making power to the agency.
An example of the central idea here is the time-honored view that general language ought not lightly be taken to require irrational or absurd consequences. General language is quite frequently overinclusive-in the sense that it has unforeseen but perverse applicationsand courts usually will not interpret the statutory text to apply if it would produce absurdity that was not clearly intended by Congress. More particular versions of this idea, with some support in the cases, are that de minimis exceptions will be permitted and that the costs and benefits of regulation will usually be subject to some sort of weighing process.
In these areas, displacement of ordinary interpretive norms by the agency's view is highly plausible. The agency's specialized fact-finding capacity and policy-making competence are highly likely to be relevant in resolving any ambiguities. Here the court ought to be especially cautious in attributing irrationality or absurdity to the agency's view. It is the agency that is most likely to be in a good position to know whether the application, taken in context of the statutory scheme as a whole, is in fact irrational or absurd.
It follows that, while courts have held that de minimis exceptions to regulatory statutes are usually permitted, agencies should be permitted to decide that de minimis exceptions should not be allowed, because (for example) of the high costs of inquiry into whether a particular exception is or is not de minimis. Whether or not this is a persuasive argument, the agency is in a better position than the courts to decide. The salutary interpretive principle in favor of de minimis
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW exceptions, therefore, ought not to defeat an agency construction to the contrary.
For another example, there may be a question of whether courts are authorized to require a showing of "irreparable injury" and to conduct the ordinary form of balancing before issuing an injunction. The question is of considerable importance to environmental policy. One answer to this question can be found in the Supreme Court's interpretive principle in favor of equitable balancing. Whether or not this principle is justified, it should be defeasible upon a showing that the agency disagrees. The Court's choice of a background rule here is not realistically attributable to Congress it represents instead a contestable judgment about how the statute is best implemented. On that score, the agency's contrary judgment should prevail.
In many other cases, the meaning of a statute turns at least in part on the rationality of one or another interpretation. When this is so, deference is due to the agency's view, unless it is inconsistent with an interpretive norm having another source, or unless the absurdity or irrationality is so palpable as to be something on which reasonable people could not differ. Significantly, it would follow that an agency should be permitted to depart from the literal meaning of the statute in cases involving issues that Congress has not specifically considered, especially when such departures plausibly make sense of the statute in light of Congress's general purposes.
This idea has potentially broad consequences. In the period of common law ordering, courts often departed from the literal meaning of statutes in cases in which literalism produced absurdity or irrationality. In the modem period, similar departures should also be expected, but here the principal agent is the agency rather than the judiciary. The task of softening rigid statutes, and of adapting them to unantici2118 [Vol. 90:2071
LA WAND ADMINISTRATION pated or changed circumstances, has fallen principally to nonjudicial actors. 1990] 2119
Many disputes in contemporary public law involve the relationship between original constitutional principles and a twentieth century governmental apparatus that was created in self-conscious rejection of those principles. Chevron, a kind of counter-Marbu y for the administrative state, is one of many efforts at synthesis. Despite its seemingly technical character, the Chevron principle-in far more substantial ways than more visible decisions of the 1980s-has altered the fabric of modern public law, influencing an enormous range of substantive outcomes in the process.
In these circumstances, the controversy over the principle is hardly surprising. Chevron has been defended as a plausible reconstruction of legislative instructions, one that amounts to a desirable device for allowing the will of democratically controlled, specialized agencies to prevail over that of unaccountable, generalist judges. In particular, the principle might serve as a means of counteracting characteristic problems in the regulatory process-including, above all, the problems posed by lack of coordination, changed circumstances, statutory rigidity, and complex systemic effects. For the resolution of these problems, agencies have significant advantages over courts. On the other hand, Chevron has been criticized as an inaccurate reading of congressional instructions and as a departure from the principle, central to the system of checks and balances, that those limited by law ought not to be allowed to decide on the meaning of the limitation.
Both the defenses and the criticisms have force in particular contexts. The effort to mediate between them calls for an attempt to sort out the relationship between the New Deal reformation and the principles of institutional authority that preceded it. More narrowly, it calls for an assessment of likely congressional instructions, often undertaken in the absence of clear legislative guidance and therefore based on an understanding of relevant institutional capacities and biases. I have suggested that the Chevron principle does not apply unless Congress has given law-interpreting power to the agency. This basic principle, calls for deference to an agency's determination when the agency has been granted the basic authority to implement the statute through rulemaking or adjudication. It argues against deference most powerfully when there has been no grant of implementing power at all, but also when an agency has been granted but has not exercised implementing power, when it is deciding on its own jurisdiction, or when it is otherwise likely to have a bias.
Whether or not a narrow formulation of the Chevron principle is desirable, it is possible to find a place for the competing considerations by exploring ,the relationship between that principle and other norms
