University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1990 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Principles, Not Fictions Exchange 
Principles, Not Fictions Exchange 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Principles, Not Fictions Exchange," 57 University of Chicago Law Review 1247 (1990). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Principles,  Not  Fictions
Cass  R.  Sunsteint

How  are  courts  to  interpret  statutory  enactments?  A  time-
honored  answer  is that  they  should  do so  by reference  to  one  sim-
ple  thing:  the  statutory  "text."  Despite  its  salutary  recognition  of
legislative  supremacy  on  these matters,  the  answer  will  not suffice.
The meaning  of any  "text"  is  a function not  of the bare words,  but
of  its  context  and  the  relevant  culture.  Because  of  the  context,
words  sometimes  have  a meaning  quite  different  from what  might
be found in  Webster's or the Oxford English Dictionary. Courts  do
not and  should  not  "make  a fortress  out of  the  dictionary."'  Even
more  important,  the  culture  furnishes  the  interpretive  principles
that courts  and other  interpreters  use  in  order  to  give  meaning  to
any  "text."  Legal  words  are  never  susceptible  to  interpretation
standing  by  themselves,  and  in  any  case  they  never  stand  by
themselves.

The  actual  and  appropriate  role  of  interpretive  principles  in
legal  interpretation  remains  one  of  the  great  unresolved  areas  of
the  law.  But  this  much  seems  clear:  some  such  principles  are  not
subject  to  change  or  even  to  evaluation.  They  are  simply  part  of
what  it  means  to  be  a  lawyer,  or  even  to  speak  the  English  lan-
guage;  they  serve  as  conventions  that  determine  meaning.  Thus,
for  example,  the  notion  that  "animals"  do  not  include  inanimate
objects,  that  Congress  is  (usually)  not joking,  that  things  that  do
not move  are  not "vehicles,"  and  that interpreters  should not  con-
strue  statutes  to  mean  whatever  (they think) a good  statute would
say  are  taken  as  axioms,  and  rightly  so.2  But  some  interpretive
principles  conspicuously  reflect  deliberation  and  choice.

t  Karl N. Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  Law  School and Department  of Politi-
cal  Science,  The University  of Chicago.  I  am  grateful  to Larry  Lessig, Richard  Posner  and
Simon  Steel  for  extremely  helpful  comments  on  a previous  draft.

'  This aphorism  is  Learned  Hand's.  See  Cabell v  Markham, 148  F2d  737,  739  (2d  Cir

1945).

2 To use  a  classic  illustration,  a  provision  barring  vehicles  from  a park would  be  con-
strued  not  to  apply  to  a  statue  of a tank.  Indeed,  a  statute  barring  animals  would  not  re-
quire  public  officials  or  private  citizens  to  eliminate  rodents.  See  text  at  notes  10-16,  dis-
cussing statutory  ambiguity.

Some  of these  principles  are  not,  however,  simply  part  of what  English  words  mean.
The  idea  that courts  should  not understand  a  statute  to accomplish  whatever  they  want  it

1247

HeinOnline  -- 57 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1247 1990

1248

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[57:1247

Consider, for  example,  the  following  ideas:  courts  will not gen-
erally  infer  private  rights  of  action from silent  statutes;  judicial re-
view  is  presumed  available;  courts  will  defer  to  agency  interpreta-
tions  of  law;  statutes  will  be  construed  generously  toward  Indian
tribes;  a  clear  congressional  statement  is  necessary  to  support  dis-
placement  of  state  law.3  These  are  simply  a  few  examples  of  the
dozens  of interpretive  principles that can  be found  in even  a casual
reading  of any  two  or  three  volumes  of  the  United  States  Reports
or  the  Federal  Reporter.  All  of these  principles  reflect  substantive
judgments,  and  all  of these  judgments  should  be  brought  out  into
the  open  and  evaluated.

In  an  earlier  essay  on  this  subject,  I  attempted  to  outline  the
actual  and  appropriate  place  of the  conventional  sources  of  inter-
pretation,  to  describe  the  role  of  interpretive  principles  in  statu-
tory  construction,  to  catalogue  various  kinds  of  principles,  and  to
propose  principles  to  be  used  in  interpreting  regulatory  statutes.4
In  their  stimulating  and  thoughtful  response,5  Eben  Moglen  and
Richard Pierce  assemble  three  principal  objections  to  my proposed
approach.  First, they  argue  that  my  approach  would  confer  exces-
sive  power  on  the  federal  judiciary.  Second,  they  claim  that  my
approach  suffers,  even  more  than  the  alternative  positions,  from
incompleteness  and  indeterminacy.  Third,  and  perhaps  most  pro-
vocatively,  they  object  that  any  interpretive  system  rests  on  "fic-
tions"  and that I use the  wrong criterion to  evaluate  the  competing
fictions. I am  grateful to  Moglen  and  Pierce for their valuable  reac-
tions.  In  this  reply,  I  discuss  their  objections  in  turn.

to  requires  an  argument  rather  than  a  language  lesson.  In  a  democracy,  however,  the argu-
ment  is  so  straightforward  that  it  need  not  be  reconsidered  or  assessed  very  often.  The
problem  with  conventionalist  approaches  to interpretation  is that they  assimilate  all  inter-
pretive principles  to the category  of conventions,  and  thus treat practices  that require  justi-
fication  as  simply  parts  of  language.  See,  for  example,  Stanley  Fish,  Doing  What  Comes
Naturally (Duke,  1989).  In  their  use  of the  notion  of  "fictions,"  Moglen  and  Pierce's  ap-
proach  appears  to bear  some  resemblance  to conventionalism.  See  Eben  Moglen  and  Rich-
ard  J. Pierce,  Jr.,  Sunstein's New  Canons: Choosing the Fictions of Statutory Intepreta-
tion, 57  U  Chi  L Rev  1203  (1990).

3 See,  for  example,  Karahalios v  National Federation of Federal Employees,  Local
1263,  489  US  527  (1989)  (implied  causes  of action);  Johnson v  Robison, 415  US  361  (1974)
(judicial  review  presumed  available);  Chevron U.S.A.,  Inc.  v  Natural Resources Defense
Council, 467  US 837  (1984)  (deference  to agencies);  Montana v  Blackfeet Tribe, 471  US  759
(1985)  (statute and  treaties construed favorably  to Indians);  Puerto Rico Dept. of Consumer
Affairs  v  Isla Petroleum Corp., 485  US  495  (1988)  (preemption  of state  law).

'  Cass  R. Sunstein,  Interpreting Statutes in  the Regulatory State, 103  Harv L Rev  405
(1989).  The analysis  is extended  and  put in  the  context of a  broader  discussion  of the  aspi-
rations  and failures  of the regulatory  state  in Cass  R.  Sunstein, After  the Rights Revolution:
Reconceiving  the Regulatory State (Harvard,  1990).

1  Moglen  and  Pierce,  57  U  Chi L  Rev  at  1203  (cited  in  note  2).

HeinOnline  -- 57 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1248 1990

1990]

Principles, Not  Fictions

1249

I.  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  JuDIcIA  ROLE

With  respect  to  the  role  of  the  courts  in  statutory  construc-
tion,  I  do  not  believe  that  there  are  fundamental  differences  be-
tween  my  approach  and  that  suggested  by  Moglen  and  Pierce.  I
agree  that courts  must give  full  scope to the  unambiguous  meaning
of statutory words.  It follows  that  courts  may  not invoke  contesta-
ble or  controversial  interpretive  principles  when  there  is  no  ambi-
guity.'  In  this  respect,  courts  should  indeed  be  faithful  agents  of
the  legislature,  subject  to  the  (practically  unimportant)  qualifica-
tion that  the  interpretive  principles  that  make  unambiguous  stat-
utes unambiguous  will sometimes  be, at least in part, a judicial  cre-
ation.'  I  agree  that  Congress  may  displace  judicially  created
interpretive  principles  if  it  chooses  to  do  so. 8  I  agree  that  courts
should  defer  to  administrative  interpretations  where  Congress  has
told  courts  to  defer.  In  the  event  that  Congress  has  not  expressly
addressed  the  issue  of  deference,  I  agree  with  Moglen  and  Pierce
that courts  should  generally  defer  where  distinctive  administrative
policymaking  and  factfinding  competence  is  relevant. In  this latter
respect,  I  agree  that  Chevron was  entirely  correct.  Indeed-and
this  is  an  important  point-the  interpretive  principles  I  propose
are  directed  in the  first  instance  at regulatory  agencies,  not  at the
courts.9  In  the  modern  administrative  state,  it would  be  highly  in-
congruous  to  direct  a  set  of  interpretive  principles  solely  to  the
judges  who  review  agency  decisions,  and  not  to  the  administrators
themselves.  Where  we  disagree  is  on  two  questions  that  are  not
exactly  fundamental,  but  that  do  have  some  practical  impor-
tance-the  category  of  statutory  ambiguity  and  the  precise  degree
of deference  to  agency  interpretations.

6  See  Sunstein,  103  Harv  L Rev  at 464-66  (cited in  note  4).

The  fact  of clarity  reflects  agreement  or  consensus  about the  governing  interpretive
principles.  When  things  are  clear,  it  is  not  as  if no  such  principle  is  "there";  rather,  the
principle is simply  taken  so much  for granted  as to  be  invisible. In  such cases  there is  usu-
ally no need for  interpreters to consider the  source  of the governing  principle. The key point
is that  everyone  accepts  the  principle  and therefore  there  is  no  interpretive  doubt.

The  possibility of consensus  suggests that the agency  theory of the judicial role contains
a large  truth;  indeed,  it  is in  significant  part correct.  The  problems  are  that in  some  cases
the instructions  of the  principal  are  unclear,  and  in  many  cases  courts  should press  unclear
statutes  in  certain  directions.

'  In  some  rare  cases  there might  be  constitutional  obstacles  here.  Consider,  for  exam-
ple, an  effort  by Congress  to eliminate  clear statement  principles  calling  for  express  legisla-
tive  deliberation  on  certain  issues,  as exemplified  in  the  principle  that  ambiguities  in  the
area of foreign  affairs will  be  understood  not to intrude  on presidential  power. See Dames &
Moore  v Regan, 453  US  654  (1981).  But this  situation  will  be unusual.

I  Sunstein,  103  Harv L Rev  at 504  (cited in note  4);  Sunstein, After the Rights Revolu-

tion at  161-62,  232  (cited in  note  4).

HeinOnline  -- 57 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1249 1990

1250

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[57:1247

A.  Ambiguity

I  would  find  ambiguity  in  some  cases  in  which  Moglen  and
Pierce  think that  Congress  has  spoken  clearly.  For  example,  Con-
gress  enacted  the  Delaney  Clause  in 1955,  and  thereby  banned  the
approval  of any  color  additives  that  "induce  cancer  when  ingested
by man  or  animal."'10  When  Congress  enacted  the  Clause,  few  car-
cinogens  were  detectable,  and  those  carcinogens  that  could  be  de-
tected  were  extremely  dangerous.  By  1989,  thousands  of  carcino-
gens  could  be  detected,  and  many  of  them  posed  trivial  risks.  In
light  of  the  changed  circumstances,  the  consequence  of  a  literal
reading  of the  Delaney  Clause  was  actually  to  increase,  not  to  de-
crease,  health  risks."

In  these  circumstances,  the  FDA  found  an  ambiguity  in  the
1955  enactment.  Taken  in  its  context,  that  enactment  simply  did
not speak  to  the  question  whether  de  minimis  cancer  risks  should
be  regulated-especially  in  light  of the  principle,  deeply  engrained
in common  sense,  ordinary language,  and  law,  that  a literal  prohi-
bition  on  an  activity  need  not  foreclose  exceedingly  trivial  trans-
gressions.  (I tell  my  housesitter  to  make  sure  not  to  get  any  dust
on  the piano.  What  exactly  do  I  mean  by  this?  Must  he  cover  the
piano  with  a  sheet?  The  state  of  California  bans  the  drinking  of
alcoholic  beverages  on  college  campuses.  Does  this mean  that  bot-
tled water  with  some  alcohol  content  must  be  removed  from  Stan-
ford?)  I wonder  whether it  can  be  argued with  any seriousness  that
the  FDA's  invocation  of  the  very  old  principle  "de  minimis  non
curat  lex"-a  principle  that  would  actually  have  saved 
lives
here-would  have  violated  some  congressional  instruction.  I  won-
der  too  whether  it  might  not  instead  be  thought  that  the  FDA's
decision was  entirely consistent  with  congressional  instructions,  in-
deed more  consistent  than  a "literal"  interpretation  of the  Delaney
Clause.

Moglen  and  Pierce  also  invoke  the  Benzene  case,  in  which  a
plurality  of the  Court  found  an  implicit  "significant  risk"  require-
ment  in  the  OSHA  statute. 12  The  literal  reading  apparently  fa-
vored  by  Moglen  and  Pierce  would  have  required  OSHA  to  regu-
late  any  risk  posed  by  any toxic  substance,  no  matter  how  trivial
the  risk  and  no  matter  how  high  the  costs.  A  fifty  billion  dollar

10 21  USC  ยง  348(c)(3)(A)  (1982).
11 For  a more  detailed  explanation,  see  Sunstein, After  the Rights Revolution at 88-89,
198-99  (cited in  note  4);  Cass  R. Sunstein, Paradoxes of  the Regulatory State, 57  U  Chi L
Rev  407,  418-19  (1990).

12 Industrial Union Dept. v  American Petroleum Institute, 448 US  607  (1980).

HeinOnline  -- 57 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1250 1990

1990]

Principles, Not Fictions

1251

expenditure  to save  one life  per  decade would  be  legally mandated.
The  consequence  would  be  grotesque  overregulation  of  some  risks
and  predictable  underregulation  of  others."3  I  doubt  that  Moglen
and  Pierce  really believe  that a court  that  so held  would  be  follow-
ing  some  actual  congressional  instruction.

In  both  of  these  cases,  Moglen  and  Pierce  understate  the  in-
terpretive  problem  posed  by  generality,  which  can  indeed  produce
ambiguity.  In  a  famous  passage,  Wittgenstein  made  the  point:
"Someone  says  to  me:  'Shew  the  children  a  game.'  I  teach  them
gaming  with  dice,  and  the  other  says,  'I  didn't  mean  that  sort  of
game.'  Must the  exclusion  of the  game  with  dice  have  come  before
his  mind when  he gave  me the  order? 14  The  example  reveals  that
adherence  to  dictionary  definitions  can  produce  poor  interpreta-
tions.  In  the  law, the  point  is  an  old  one,  long  predating  Wittgen-
stein. Indeed,  many  cases  reflect  the  same  principle. 15  My  support
for  the  outcome  in  Benzene  and  my  criticism  of  the  Delaney
Clause  case  are  thus  nothing  new.

I should  reiterate  that  I  do  not believe  that  our  disagreement
on  these  matters  goes  to  anything  fundamental.  Where  there  is  no
ambiguity,  courts  must  defer.  To  say that  generality  creates  ambi-
guity  is  not  really  to  repose  an  "extraordinary  degree  of  policy-
making  power"1 '  in the federal judiciary.  It  hardly allows  courts  to
refashion  statutes however  they wish.  It  simply  acknowledges  that
generality  can  produce  an  interpretive  problem.

B.  Deference  to  Agency  Interpretations

Moglen  and  Pierce  would  give  greater  scope  than  I  would  to
the principle  that  courts  should  defer  to  administrative  interpreta-
tions  of  laws.  They  do  not  say  exactly  how  far  they  believe  this
principle  extends,  but if we  disagree,  it  must be  because  they think
that  that  principle  should  apply  (a)  even  in  the  face  of  counter-
vailing  principles  and  (b)  even  in cases  involving  pure questions  of
law  in  which  agency  bias  or  self-dealing  is  involved.  In  both  of
these  categories  of cases,  I believe  that the principle  of deference  is
inappropriate.

"  For an explanation,  see Sunstein,  After  the Rights Revolution at 91-92,  106  (cited in

note  4);  Sunstein,  57  U  Chi  L Rev  at  418-19  (cited  in  note  11).

14  Ludwig  Wittgenstein  (G.E.M.  Anscombe,  trans),  Philosophical Investigations 33

(Basil  Blackwell,  1953).

'5  For examples,  see  Sunstein,  103  Harv  L  Rev  at 420  nn  44-47  (cited in  note  4).
"  Moglen  and  Pierce,  57  U  Chi L  Rev  at  1223  (cited  in  note  2).

HeinOnline  -- 57 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1251 1990

1252

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[57:1247

The  first  point  here  is  that  the  principle  of  deference,  stated
most prominently  in Chevron, is one  of a large  number  of interpre-
tive  principles.  Under  current  law,  and  under  any  reasonable  sys-
tem  of interpretation,  it  does not stand  by  itself, or even  at the  top
of the list. Suppose,  for  example,  that an  agency's  interpretation  of
an  ambiguous  statute  raises  serious  constitutional  doubts,  or  en-
sures  that  its  own  decisions  are  unreviewable,  or  preempts  state
law,  or  unfavorably  affects  the  Indian  tribes.  It  is  implausible  to
think  that  the  agency's  view  would  or  should  prevail  in  all  such
cases.  In  cases  before  and  after  Chevron, the  rule  of deference  has
not been  applied  in  at  least  some  contexts  in  which  competing  in-
terpretive  principles  argue  against  the  agency's  view.17

Second,  the  key  question  on  the  problem  of  deference  is
whether  Congress  has  instructed  courts  to  defer.  Sometimes  Con-
gress  will not  have  answered  that  question  directly, and  when  this
is  so,  courts  must  reconstruct  legislative  instructions  on  the  basis
of an  assessment  of judicial  and  administrative  capacities.  In  cases
involving  agency  bias or  self-dealing  with respect  to  pure  questions
of law, it  seems unlikely  that  Congress  would want  courts  to  defer
to agencies.  Suppose,  for  example,  that the  question is  whether the
agency  is  under  an  affirmative  obligation  to  take  action  against
pollutants  shown to  cause  serious  harms.  In view of Congress's  con-
stant  effort  to  force  agencies  to  take  action  in  this  area,  it  seems
difficult  to  sustain  the  idea  that agencies  should  be  able  to  decide
whether  their  own  duties  are  mandatory.'"  Or  suppose  that  the
question  has  to  do with  the extent  of an  agency's  own jurisdiction.
When  Congress  has  not  spoken  on  the  matter, ought  courts  to  as-
sume  that  agencies  have  the  authority  to  decide  on  the  extent  of
their  own  legal  authority?

Whether  or  not  my conclusions  are  correct  on  these  points,  it
hardly  seems right  to  suggest that  exceptions  to the  rule  of  defer-
ence-for  countervailing  interpretive  principles  or  agency  bias  in
cases  of  pure  questions  of  law-would  produce  anything  but  a
modest  increase  in  judicial  power  over  administrative  processes.
These  exceptions  ought to  be  regarded  not  as  an  effort to  increase
the  authority  of the judges,  but as  a natural  outgrowth  of the  fun-
damental 
is
subordinate  to  that  of  Congress.

idea  that  the  authority  of  the  administrators 

17  See  generally Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Law and Administration After Chevron,  90 Colum  L

Rev  -

(forthcoming  December  1990),  and  cases  cited  therein.

1  For a  more  detailed  and precise  discussion  of these  and  related  issues, see  generally

HeinOnline  -- 57 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1252 1990

1990] 

Principles, Not Fictions 

1253

II.  PROBLEMS  OF  ADMINISTRABILITY

Moglen  and  Pierce  believe  that  the  system  of  interpretation
that  I propose  is  too  complex  for judicial  adoption.  In  their  view,
some  of the  suggested  norms  are  unjustified,  or  at least  controver-
sial  (with  "less  than  universal  acceptance" 19);  the  system  contains
too  many  norms;  and  some  of  the  relevant  norms  are  highly  gen-
eral  and  subject  to  conflicting  interpretations.  All  in  all,  Moglen
and  Pierce  conclude, 
its  un-
the  system  fails  because  of 
manageability.  Let  me  take  up  these  claims  in  sequence.

Some  of  the  norms  that  I propose  are  certainly  controversial.
This  is  true, for  example,  of the  norm  in favor  of  narrow  construc-
tion  of  statutes endangering  property  rights  and  the  norm  in favor
of  aggressive  construction  of  statutes  protecting  the  environment
and  endangered  species.  But the  fact  that  a  norm  is  controversial
does  not by itself count as  a good  argument  against it.  Surely  some
norms  that  are  widely  accepted  within  the  existing  legal  culture
ought  on  reflection  to  be  abandoned;  surely  some  norms  now  un-
supported  by  a consensus  ought to  be accepted  soon.  The phenom-
enon  of rejecting  old  norms  and  importing  new  ones  has  of  course
occurred  during  nearly  every  decade  of  American  law.  The  cate-
gory  of interpretive  principles  is  not static but is instead  a product
of  a  continuous  process  of  evaluation  and  choice.

Whether  interpretive  norms  are  acceptable  depends  not  on
consensus  but  on  the  reasons  that  can  be  marshaled  on  their  be-
half.2 0  In  all  likelihood  the  reasons  I  have  offered  for  the  many
norms  I discuss  are  frequently too thin, and in  any case it  would be
surprising if every  one of the  norms for which  I have  argued  can be
supported  by  reasons  that  should  ultimately  be  found  persuasive.
But this  is not a question  on which  Moglen and Pierce spend much
of  their  time,  and  surely  there  is  considerable  room  for  further
thought  here.

Moglen  and  Pierce  are  correct  in  suggesting  that many  of the
norms  I  propose  are  not  self-interpreting  and  that  there  is  a seri-
ous  potential  for conflict  among  the norms.2  But it  is  important  to

19 Moglen  and  Pierce,  57  U  Chi L Rev  at 1227  (cited in note  2).  Moglen and  Pierce  also
ask  whether  the  category  of norms  is  intended  to  be  closed  or  exhaustive.  Id  at  1233-34.
Although  the enumeration  of syntactic  norms is  designed  only to be  illustrative, the  institu-
tional  and  substantive norms  I develop  are  in  fact intended to be  complete,  though  it would
be  most surprising  if, on  reflection,  additional  norms  did  not  appear  justified.

20 Note  here that I  am discussing  norms with  substantive  foundations,  and  not  syntac-
tic  norms,  which  are  founded  on  the  rules  of  grammar.  Of course,  a  decision  to  reject  an
established  norm  or to  bring  about a  new  one  must be  based on  reasons.

21 Moglen  and  Pierce,  57  U  Chi L  Rev  at  1233-45  (cited  in  note  2);  see  Sunstein,  103

Harv  L Rev  at  443,  497-98  (cited  in  note 4).

HeinOnline  -- 57 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1253 1990

1254

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[57:1247

understand  that  my  effort  to  propose  norms  for  the  regulatory
state  is  descriptive  as well  as normative.  All  of my proposed norms
have  some  basis  in  current  law.  Almost  all  of  them  have  been  ex-
plicitly  recognized  as  such  in  the  cases.2 2  In  view  of  the  fact  that
some  version  of  this  system  is  already  in  place,  and  indeed  has
been  in place  for many  years,  Moglen  and  Pierce's  claim  of lack  of
administrability  seems  at least  overstated.

More  broadly,  almost any  approach  to  interpretation  will  con-
tain  norms  that are  on  occasion  susceptible  to  competing  interpre-
tations  and  in  potential  conflict  with  one  another.  This  is  true  in
ordinary  linguistic  practice  as  well  as  in  law.  The  fact  that  an  ap-
proach  to  interpretation  (normative  or  positive)  contains  a  multi-
plicity  of norms,  some  of them necessarily  stated  at a high  level  of
generality,  does  not  count  as  a  powerful  argument  against  it.  At
most,  that fact  is  a reminder,  salutary  to  be  sure,  of the  inherent
limitations  of any  effort to  describe  the  "principles"  of interpreta-
tion in  a  systemic  or  mechanical  way.2"

The  only  way  to  reduce  the  risk  of  conflicting  interpretive
principles  is  to produce  a system with  one  or  very  few  such  princi-
ples-as  in, for  example,  the  idea  that  agency  interpretations  will
always  prevail,  or  that  ambiguous  statutes  will  always  be  inter-
preted  favorably  to  the  plaintiff,  or  that  courts  will  resolve  hard
cases  unfavorably  to  those  whose  names  begin  with  the  letter  fall-
ing  first  in the  alphabet.  But the  dangers  of  simplicity in  this  set-
ting  should  be  self-evident.  Any  simple  system  will  contain  an
unacceptably  high  potential  for  an  unacceptably  large  number  of
errors. And  one might make  this point  while agreeing,  with Moglen
and Pierce,  that  one  goal of  a system of  interpretation  is to  reduce
the complexity,  unpredictability, and  cost associated  with  interpre-
tation.2 4  It  is  of course  possible  that  the  system  I propose  is  either
too  simple  or  too  complex  for  descriptive  or  normative  purposes,
and that some  alternative  system would have  a better level  of com-
plexity. But  this  would  call  for  a long  discussion.

One  final  point.  We  should  think  of  the  process  of  statutory
interpretation  as an  exercise  of practical reason,  not  as mechanical

22  See,  for  example,  cases  cited  in  note  3.  The  exceptions  include  the  norms  in  favor  of
generous  construction  of antidiscrimination  measures  and  against exemptions  from  welfare
programs.

22  Sunstein,  103  Harv  L  Rev  at 497-98  (cited  in  note  4).
24  See  also  Antonin  Scalia,  Judicial Deference  to  Administrative Interpretations of
Law, 1989 Duke  L J  511;  Peter L. Strauss, One Hundred Fifty Cases Per Year: Some Impli-
cations of  the Supreme Court's Limited Resources for Judicial Review  of  Agency  Action,
87  Colum  L  Rev  1093,  1117-29  (1987).

HeinOnline  -- 57 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1254 1990

1990]

Principles, Not  Fictions

1255

or  deductive.25  Since  statutory  interpretation  requires  practical
reason,  it  is  inevitable,  and  no  cause  for  embarrassment,  that  the
operative  principles,  stated  at  a  certain  level  of  generality,  are
themselves  subject  to  interpretation  and  in  potential  conflict  with
one  another.  To  outline  the  relevant  principles  and  to  provide
some  sense  of  their  relationship  is  indispensable  for descriptive  or
normative  purposes.  These  steps  structure  inquiry. They  foreclose
some  routes  and  open  others.  But  they  do  not  decide  concrete
cases.  An  outline  of  the  principles  and  their  general  operation  is
the  beginning,  not the  end,  of the  process  of  interpreting  any  par-
ticular  statute  in  any  particular  context.  The  applications  have  to
be discussed  and  thought through;  here  there will  be room  for  dis-
agreement  and  uncertainty.

15  See  Sunstein,  103  Harv  L  Rev  at  497-98  (cited  in  note  4);  see  also  William  N.  Es-
kridge,  Jr. and  Philip  P. Frickey,  Statutory Interpretation as Practical Reasoning, 42  Stan
L Rev 321,  322  (1990);  Richard  A.  Posner,  The Problems of Jurisprudence (Harvard,  1990).
For an  especially  helpful  treatment  outside  of the  legal context,  see  Martha  C. Nussbaum,
The Fragility of Goodness: Luck and Ethics in Greek Tragedy and Philosophy ch  10  (Cam-
bridge,  1986).

I  do  not  have  space  to  explore  all  of  the  (extremely  interesting)  cases  discussed  by
Moglen  and  Pierce,  but  it might be  helpful,  as an  illustration, to say  a few words  about the
question  whether  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA)  can  or  must  avoid  "scrub-
bing"  strategies  for  utilities  emitting  sulfur  dioxides.  See  Moglen  and  Pierce,  57  U  Chi  L
Rev  at 1235-38  (cited  in  note  2).

I  believe  that the  EPA  is  unquestionably  authorized  to reject  scrubbing  strategies  if it
can  show  (as  it  can,  and  to  some  extent  did  in  Sierra Club v  Costle, 657  F2d 298  (DC Cir
1981))  that  other  approaches  can  produce  equal  or  greater  environmental  protection  at
lower  cost.  This  conclusion  is  a  natural  product  of  (a)  the  norm  in  favor  of  considering
systemic effects,  which  argues  powerfully  against  scrubbing  strategies  (such  strategies  per-
petuate the life of old, especially  dirty plants  and impair technological  innovation),  see Sun-
stein,  103  Harv L Rev  at 480;  (b)  the norm  in  favor  of avoiding  interest group transfers-of
which scrubbing  strategies,  benefitting eastern  coal  without  improving the environment,  are
an egregious  example,  id at 486-87;  (c)  the norm in  favor  of giving the statutory  text priority
over the  legislative  history, id  at 474-75; (d) the  norm  in favor  of according  deference  to the
policymaking  competence  of the agency,  id  at 475;  and  (e)  the presumption against  irration-
ality, id  at 482-83.  The  norm  in  favor  of aggressive  construction  of statutes  protecting  the
environment  does not  argue  against this result, since scrubbing  strategies  do not  protect the
environment  more  than  the  alternatives,  other  things  being equal.

While  the  question  is a bit closer,  I also  believe  that a  universal  scrubbing  strategy,  or
something  like  it, would  be unlawful  even  if the EPA  endorsed  that strategy.  The  only dif-
ference  is  that norm  (d)  would  argue  in  the  other  direction,  but  I do  not  believe  that  the
agency  view  should  be accorded  deference  in  this  setting,  where  the  outcome  would not  be
compelled  by  the statutory text, would  be irrational,  and would  conspicuously reflect  inter-
est group pressures  rather than sensible  efforts to protect the environment.  For more  discus-
sion, see  Sunstein,  After  the Rights Revolution at 85  (cited  in  note  4);  Bruce  A.  Ackerman
and  William  T. Hassler,  Clean Coal/Dirty Air  (Yale, 1981).  A  particularized  analysis  of this
sort, deploying  the norms  in  a reasoned  rather  than  mechanical  way,  would be necessary  to
resolve  the  various  cases  that Moglen  and  Pierce  discuss.

HeinOnline  -- 57 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1255 1990

1256

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[57:1247

The  risk  of  uncertainty  and  the  need  to  attend  to  particulars
do  not  count as  a criticism  of  a  system  of  interpretation  that  em-
bodies  such  a  set  of  principles.  To  demand  more  is  to  demand
something  that  such  a  system  simply  cannot  provide,  and  that  it
should  not  attempt  to  provide  even  if it  could  do  so.

III.  FICTIONS  AND  PRINCIPLES

.

Moglen  and  Pierce's  broadest  claim  is  that I fail "to  recognize
the  necessarily  .
. fictive  nature  of the  enterprise  of  interpreting
texts. '26  For them, interpretive  fictions  help  make  "communication
comprehensible"  and  "generate  rules  for  understanding  speech. 2 7
Indeed,  the  source  of  canons  of  construction  "remains  fiction.' '
Moglen  and  Pierce  attempt  to  support  this  claim  by  reference  to
past and  present legal fictions  and to  a range  of conventional  ideas
about  statutory  interpretation  that  they  deem  "fictional":  collec-
tive  intent  on  the  part  of  the  legislature,  legislative  history,  the
assumption  that  legislators  are  reasonable  people  acting  reason-
ably,  and  the  principle  of  deference  itself.  For Moglen  and  Pierce,
statutory  interpretation  is,  in these  and  other  contexts,  filled  with
fictions.  For anyone  to challenge  a principle  as  fictional,  as I  do  on
occasion,  seems  no  argument  at all  in  these  circumstances.

21

Here  there  is  a  genuine  disagreement  between  us.  At  least  in
the  context  of statutory  interpretation,  and indeed  in the  law  gen-
erally,  I believe  that interpretive  fictions  are  unhelpful  and in  fact
harmful  to  legal  reasoning  and  results.  Fictions  are  not  indispen-
sable.  The law would be better  off without  any of them. Indeed, an
important  contribution  of  twentieth-century  jurisprudence  has
been  a  measure  of  self-consciousness  about  the  existence  of  legal
fictions,  and  an  understanding  that they  are  obstacles  to  thought.
We  do  not need  interpretive  fictions.  Instead we  need  interpretive
principles-ones  that  can  be  defended  in  substantive  or  institu-
tional terms.

In  each  of  Moglen  and  Pierce's  illustrations,  it  is  possible  to
restate  what  they call  a  fiction  in  a way  that  identifies  a  principle,
and  one  that, once  identified  as  such,  merits evaluation.  If, for  ex-
ample,  the principle  of deference  to agency  interpretations  is justi-
fied  on  the  ground  that  Congress  intends  to  give  law-interpreting
power  to  the  agencies,  it  is-just  as  Moglen  and  Pierce  sug-

" Moglen  and  Pierce,  57  U  Chi L  Rev  at  1205-06  (cited in  note  2).
27 Id  at  1208,  1209.
28 Id  at 1209.

HeinOnline  -- 57 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1256 1990

1990]

Principles, Not  Fictions

1257

gest-based  on  a  fiction.  And  if this  is  all  that  can  be said  for  the
principle  of  deference,  it is  wrong  precisely  because  its  foundation
is  fictional.  If the  notion  of  deference  to  agency  interpretations  is
acceptable,  in  the  absence  of  legislative  instructions,  it is  for  rea-
sons  that  call  up  the  comparative  advantages  of the  agency-the
capacity  to  respond  to  changed  circumstances,  administrative  ac-
countability  and  expertise,  and  other  reasons  nicely  discussed  by
Moglen  and Pierce  themselves.2 9 To make  these  arguments  persua-
sively,  there  is  no  need  to  refer  to  fictions.

Or  consider  the  notion  that  interpreters  should  assume  that
legislators  are reasonable  people  acting reasonably.  If this  assump-
tion is justified on  the ground that  it accurately  captures  the  legis-
lative process  in every case,  then its core  is fiction.  Surely it cannot
be justified  in  that  way  at all.  But if this  premise  is  defended,  in
principle,  as  a  means  of  improving  the  legal  system  by  assuming
and  thus helping  to  produce  reasonableness  and sense  rather  than
chaos  and  nonsense,  then  it  seems  sound.30  And  in that  event,  the
assumption  of  reasonableness  is  not  rooted  in  fictions  at all.

So  too,  if we  continue  to  rely  at  all  on  legislative  intent  and
legislative  history,  this  reliance  cannot  be  because  there  is  in  all
cases  a  unitary  collective  "intent"  or  because  the  legislators  know
and  consult  the  legislative  history. As  Moglen  and Pierce  suggest,
these  ideas  are  fictions.  Fictions,  I  repeat,  cannot  justify  interpre-
tive practices.  If reliance  on  intent  and history  is  to  be  continued,
it  is  because  in  the  face  of  textual  ambiguity,  courts  should  at-
tempt,  as  part  of  their  interpretive  activity,  to  use  whatever  evi-
dence  is  available  on  the  (highly  relevant)  question  of  how  the
words were  understood  at the  time  of enactment  and,  more  partic-
ularly, on  what  some  or  many of  the  people  who  enacted  the text
thought that it meant. It is  altogether  unnecessary  to  advert to fic-
tions  in  order  to  make  this  claim.

All  this  suggests  a  broader  point.  Legal  fictions  are  usually
founded  on  some  substantive  ground;  the  problem  with the  fiction
is  that  it buries  that ground.  The  way  to  handle  fictions  is  to  un-
cover  them  as  such  and  to  translate  them  into  principles  so  that
they can  be evaluated.  When  evaluated,  and treated as  the  norma-
tively-laden  devices  that  they  are,  some  of  these principles  will  be
accepted  and  others  will  be  rejected.  A  legal  system  that  yields  to
the  inevitability  of  "fictions"  will  be  disabled  from  carrying  out
this  indispensable  task.

11  Id  at  1212-14.
3"  See  Sunstein,  103  Harv  L Rev  at 435  (cited in  note  4).

HeinOnline  -- 57 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1257 1990

1258 

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

I  conclude  by  reiterating  that  some  or  even  many  of  my  pro-
posed  principles  might  ultimately be  found  unacceptable  and  that
the  proposed  framework  may  err  in  the  direction  of  undue  com-
plexity  or  undue  simplicity.  But  whether this  is  so  depends  on the
reasons  offered  for  and  against  the  relevant  principles  and  on
whether  an  alternative  system  can  produce  a  better  mix  of  good
outcomes, predictability,  and  low  decision costs. I hope  that  it  is to
those  concerns,  and  not  to  the  matter  of  fictions,  that  future  de-
scriptive  and  normative  work  on  statutory  construction  will  be
devoted.

HeinOnline  -- 57 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1258 1990

