University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1990 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Republicanism and the Preference Problem 
Republicanism and the Preference Problem 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Republicanism and the Preference Problem," 66 Chicago-Kent Law Review 181 (1990). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

REPUBLICANISM  AND  THE PREFERENCE  PROBLEM

CASS  R. SUNSTEIN*

INTRODUCTION

To  many  contemporary  observers,  the ratification  of the  American
Constitution  marked  the  end  of classical  politics  and  the start  of a  dis-
tinctive  modern  approach.'  On that  approach,  government  takes people
as  they  are.  Above  all,  it is  respectful  of divergent  conceptions  of the
good  life.  Recognizing  that  self-interest  is often  the basis of political  be-
havior,  it  creates  institutional  arrangements  and  substantive  rights  that
will  discipline  likely  abuses  of political power,  increase  the prospects  for
compromise,  and  create  spheres  of private autonomy  into which  govern-
ment  may  not enter.  Agnostic  about  the  good,  a  modern  polity  creates
the basic  rules  by which  people  can  order their private affairs.  Its  ambi-
tions  are  otherwise  quite  modest.

This  approach  is  often  contrasted  with  another  set  of understand-
ings,  sometimes  denominated  "republican."  For  republicans,  the  polity
is  supposed  to  benefit  from  and  to  inculcate  civic  virtue  in  its  people.
The  character  of both  the individual  and  the collectivity,  and  the  enjoy-
ment  of the  good life,  properly  conceived,  are  self-conscious  concerns  of
the  system.  From  the  standpoint  of  modern  observers,  such  systems
threaten  totalism,  or  the imposition  of a "comprehensive  view'" 2  on  the
population.  On  the republican  account,  however,  collective  engagement
with  individual  character  and  the  good  life  are  crucial  parts  of politics.
Republicans  also put a high premium  on active  citizen participation
in  public  affairs.  The  classical  republicans  placed  little  reliance  on  the

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  University of Chicago  Law  School and  De-
partment  of Political  Science.  Some  of the  arguments  in  this  essay  are  also  set  out  in  Sunstein,
Preferences and Politics, 20  PHIL.  & PUB.  AFF.  3 (Winter  1991)  and  in C.  Sunstein,  AFTER  THE
RIGHTS  REVOLUTION:  RECONCEIVING  THE REGULATORY  STATE  (Harvard University  Press  1990).
I  am  grateful  to  George  Loewenstein,  Jane  Mansbridge,  and  Frederick  Schauer  for  helpful
comments.

1. See  G.  WOOD,  THE  CREATION  OF  THE  AMERICAN  REPUBLIC  (1972);  T.  PANGLE,  THE
SPIRIT OF  MODERN  REPUBLICANISM  (1988);  Diamond,  Ethics and Politics" The  American  Way,  in
THE  MORAL  FOUNDATIONS  OF THE  AMERICAN  REPUBLIC  (R.  Horowitz  ed.  1979).

As the  discussion below  should  make clear,  I  do not by  any means  intend  to endorse all of the
details of this account.  There is reason  to question both  the picture of "classical  republicanism"  and
the  claims  about  the  nature  of the  shift  in  America.  But  these  issues  raise  questions  beyond  the
scope  of the  present  discussion.

2.  See  Rawls,  The Idea of an  Overlapping Consensus, 7 OxFoRD  J. LEGAL  STUD.  1 (1987).

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 181 1990

CHICAGO-KENT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  66:181

protection  of "rights"  against  the government.  Indeed,  these  very  cate-
gories  would  seem  a  bit  puzzling  to  the classical  tradition.

The  division  between  classical  republicans  and  the American  fram-
ers  should  not  be  drawn  too  sharply.  The  framers  of the  Constitution
drew  a  considerable  amount  from  classical  republicanism,  especially  in-
sofar  as  they  placed  a  high  premium  on  political  deliberation,  political
virtue,  political  debate,  and  citizenship.  Madison  and  Hamilton  in  par-
ticular  emphasized  the  need  for deliberation  among  the  differently  situ-
ated.  The  basic  institutions  of representation,  checks  and  balances,  and
federalism  are  best  understood  against  this background.  Even  the  indi-
vidual  rights  safeguarded  by  the  Constitution-the  right  to  a jury  trial
and  the  rights  of  assembly  and  petition,  for  example-owe  a  large
amount  to  the  republican  tradition.  The  framers  were  hardly  interest-
group pluralists,  welfare  economists,  or believers  in a  prepolitical  sphere
of private  rights.  They  were  republicans,  albeit  of  a  novel  stripe;  they
were  liberals  as  well. 3

The conventional  division between the American founders  and their
classical  predecessors  is  therefore  far  too  crude.  But  there  is  certainly
something to  the traditional view.  Respect  for private preferences,  rather
than  collective  deliberation  about  character,  public  values,  or  the  good
life,  seems  to  be a  distinguishing  feature  of American  constitutionalism.
It  is  here,  perhaps  especially  in  recent  years,  that  the  classical  legacy
seems  most remote and  least accessible  to modern  democratic  theory and
contemporary  constitutional  practice.

In this essay  I want to explore  the  question whether  a contemporary
democracy might  not do better  to concern itself directly  with some of the
concerns  of republicanism.  It  is  one  thing  to  affirm  competing  concep-
tions  of the  good;  it  is  quite  another  to  suggest  that  private  preferences
should  always  be  off-limits  to  politics.  My  goal  is  to  see  how  a  demo-
cratic  republic,  recognizing  the  value  and  even  the  inevitability  of  the
American  abandonment  of classical republicanism,  might nonetheless  at-
tempt to  take  advantage  of those  aspects  of republicanism  that have  the
strongest  claim  to  contemporary  support.  A  large  part  of  my  concern
here  is  the  phenomenon  of endogenous  preferences,  a  phenomenon  that
casts  doubt  on  the  idea  that  private  desires  and  beliefs  ought  to  be pro-

3.  Indeed,  participants  in  the  liberal  tradition,  in  its  classical  forms,  emphasized  the need  for
deliberation  in  government  and placed  a high  value  on  political  virtue.  Many  liberals  do not  take
private  preferences  for granted,  whatever  their  sources  and  consequences,  and  whatever  the reasons
that might  be  offered  in  their  support.  See  Sunstein,  Beyond  the Republican  Revival,  97  YALE  L.J.
1539  (1988).

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 182 1990

1990]

REPUBLICANISM AND  PREFERENCE PROBLEM

tected  in  all  contexts. 4

The  argument  is  divided  in  three  parts.  In  Part  I,  I  invoke  some
fairly  conventional  ideas  about  welfare  and  autonomy  in  order  to  draw
into  doubt the  claim  that  government  should base  social  choices  on  pri-
vate  preferences.  In  Part  II, I  set  out  three  categories  of cases  in which
private preferences,  as expressed  in consumption  choices, should be  over-
come.  The  first,  directly  traceable  to  republican  commitments,  includes
collective  desires,  including considered  social judgments  and  widely  held
aspirations;  the second,  also  with republican  roots,  involves  preferences
that  have  adapted  to  unjust  background  conditions  or undue  limitations
in available opportunities;  the  third, building on  classical ideas of myopia
or akrasia,  includes  intrapersonal  collective  active  problems  that, over  a
lifetime,  decrease  personal  welfare.  A  democratic  republic,  I  argue,
should  override  private  preferences  in  all  of  these  cases.  In  Part  III,  I
draw  on  the  republican  tradition  to  deal  with  two  current  controversial
issues:  government  efforts  to  promote  access  to  the  media  and  propor-
tional  representation.

I.  PREFERENCES,  DELIBERATION,  AND  POLrrIcs

Should  a  constitutional  republic  take  preferences  as given?  In  con-
temporary  politics,  law,  and  economics,  the  usual  answer  is  affirmative.
Modern  economics, for example, is dominated by  a conception  of welfare
based  on  the  satisfaction  of  existing  preferences;  in  politics  and  law,
something  called  "paternalism"  is disfavored  in both the public  and  pri-
vate  realms. 5  But  the idea  that  government  ought  to  take preferences  as

4.  On  the limits of preference-based  theories,  see Sen, Rational Fools" A  Critique of the Behav-
ioral Foundations of Welfare Economics, 6 PHIL.  & PUB.  AFP.  317  (1976);  J. ELSTER,  SOUR  GRAPES
(1983);  Roemer,  "Rational  Choice"  Marxism,  in  ANALYTICAL  MARXISM  (J. Roemer  ed.  1986).

It  might  well  be  that  literature,  in  addition  to  economics  and  political  theory,  is  fruitful  for
exploring  this  subject.  See  M. NUSSBAUM,  LOVE'S  KNOWLEDGE  (1990);  Nussbaum,  Shame. Sepa-
rateness, and Political Unity: Aristotle's  Criticism of Plato, in  ESSAYS  ON  ARISTOTLE'S  ETHICS  (A.
Rorty  ed.  1980)  [hereinafter  Nussbaum,  Shame.  Separateness,  and Political Unity].  It  is  thus  no
accident that  writers  in  politics  and  economics sometimes  draw  on  literature.  See,  e.g.,  J.  ELSTER,
supra.

5.  There are  of course criticisms within  all  of these fields.  In  economics, see  Sen, supra note 4.
In politics,  see  J. ELSTER,  supra note  4.  See,  on  the legal  issues,  Sunstein,  Legal Interference with
Private  Preferences, 53  U.  CH.  L.  REV.  1129  (1986).

It is  notable  that the great expositors  of liberalism  in  the nineteenth  and  twentieth centuries  are
emphatic  in  their  rejection  of the  view  that existing  preferences  should  be  taken as  given,  for  pur-
poses  of ethics  or politics.  See  J.  MILL,  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT
(1861);  J.  MILL,  THE  SuBJEcToN  OF  WOMEN  (1869);  J.  RAwLs,  A  THEORY  OF  JUSTICE  (1971).
Mill's  rejection  of that  view  is especially  emphatic  in  his essay  on Bentham,  when  he criticizes  Ben-
tham  for the view  that  "[t]o  say  either that  man  should,  or that  he  should  not, take  pleasure in  one
thing, displeasure  in  another,  appeared to him  as much an  act of despotism  in  the moralist as in  the
political  ruler."  J.  MILL,  MILL  ON  BENTHAM  AND  COLERIDGE  68  (F.R.  Leavis  ed.  1950).  By
contrast,  Mill  emphasized the need  to explore  the influences  "on  the regulation  of...  affections  and

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 183 1990

CHICAGO-KENT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  66:181

they are  is  a quite modem  one.  To  say this is hardly to  say  that  the idea
is  without  foundations.  Partly  a  function  of  the  perceived  (though
greatly overstated) difficulty  of making interpersonal  comparisons  of util-
ity, it is also a product of the epistemological  difficulties in  assessing  pref-
erences  in  terms  of their  true  connection  with  individual  welfare,  and,
perhaps most  of all, the genuine political  dangers  of allowing  government
to  engage  in  such  inquiries.

Notwithstanding  these  considerations,  an  initial  objection  to  the
view  that  government  should  take  preferences  as  they  are  might  point
out  that  whether  people  have  a preference  for  a commodity,  a  right,  or
anything  else  is  in  part  a  function  of whether  the government  has  allo-
cated it to  them in the first instance.  The decision  to grant a  right to one
person frequently  makes that person value  that right more  than he would
if the  right  had  been  allocated  to  someone  else.  The  initial  allocation
serves  to  reflect,  to  legitimate,  and  to  reinforce  social  understandings
about  presumptive  rights  of ownership,  and  that  allocation  has  a  causal
connection to  individual  perceptions  about the  good or right  in question.
For  example,  a  decision  to  give  employees  a  right  to  organize,  or
women  a  right  not  to be  subject  to  sexual  harassment,  will  have  an  im-
pact  on  social  attitudes  toward  labor  organization  and  sexual  harass-
ment.  The  allocation  therefore  has  an  effect  on  social  attitudes  toward
the  relevant  rights  and  on  their  valuation  by  both  current  owners  and
would-be  purchasers.  And when preferences  are a function  of legal rules,
the  rules cannot,  without circularity,  be justified by  reference  to  the pref-
erences. 6  Because  of the preference-shaping  effects  of the rules of alloca-
tion,  it  is  hard  to  see  how  a  government  might  even  attempt  to  take
preferences  "as  given"  in  any global  sense.

To  some degree  this  concern  might be put  to  one side.  Surely  there
is a  difference  between  a  government  that concerns  itself self-consciously
and on  an ongoing  basis  with private  preferences  and  a government  that
sets up the basic  rules of property,  contract, and tort and then  lets things
turn  out  however  they  may.  And  if this  distinction  can  be  sustained,
disagreements  about the relationship between  politics and preferences  ap-

desires,"  and  rejected  "the deficiencies  of a system of ethics which does not pretend to aid individuals
in the formation  of their own  character."  Id. at 70-71.  Of course  there is a difference  between what
a  system  of ethics  and  what  a  system  of  politics  should  say  about  that  question,  as  Mill  clearly
indicated.

6.  See  J. ELSTER, supra note 4;  J. RAWiS,  supra note  5.  Compare  the  "endowment  effect"
discussed  in  Thaler,  Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice,  1 J. ECON.  BEHAV.  & ORG.  39
(1980);  see also  Knetsch  & Sinden,  Willingess to  Pay and Compensation Demanded: Experimental
Evidence of an  Unexpected Disparity in Measures of Value, 99 Q.J. ECON.  507  (1984);  cf  Nussbaum,
Shame, Separateness; and Political Unity, supra note  4.

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 184 1990

1990]

REPUBLICANISM  AND  PREFERENCE  PROBLEM

pear  to  turn  on  competing  notions  of autonomy  on  the  one  hand  and
welfare  on  the  other.  Those  who  treat existing  preferences  as  sovereign
argue  that  this approach  is  most  likely  to  promote  both  individual  free-
dom,  rightly  conceived,  and  individual  or  social  welfare.

It will be useful to begin with welfare.  Even if one accepted  a purely
welfarist  view,  one  might  think  that  the  process  of  promoting  welfare
should  take  place,  not  by  satisfying  current  preferences,  but by  promot-
ing those  preferences  and satisfying  them  to  such  an  extent  as is  conso-
nant with the best  or highest conception  of human  happiness.  This view
is connected  with older (and some current) forms of utilitarianism;  it also
has  roots  in  Aristotle.7  Here  one  does  not  take  existing  preferences  as
given,  and  one  does  not  put all  preferences  on  the  same  plane.  A  crite-
rion  of welfare,  at least  in  some  sense,  remains the  ultimate  one, but  on
this view,  the system  is not  focused  solely  on preference  satisfaction.  Of
course  a  liberal  republic,  respectful  as  it  should  be  of  the  need  to  limit
government  and of divergent conceptions  of the good,  ought generally  to
refrain from  seeing private  preferences  as  an object  of collective  concern.
But the  promotion of utility, rightly understood,  does  not always  call  for
satisfaction  of existing  preferences.

A  central point  here, highly  congenial  to the republican tradition,  is

that  preferences  are  shifting  and  endogenous  rather  than  exogenous-
endogenous  to,  or  a function  of, current  information,  consumption  pat-
terns,  legal  rules,  and  social  pressures  most  generally.  Because  prefer-
ences  are  shifting  and  endogenous,  and  because  the  satisfaction  of
existing  preferences  might  lead  to unhappy  or  deprived  lives,  a  political
system  that  treats  all  preferences  as  fixed  will  lose  important  opportuni-
ties  for  welfare  gains.  At  least  if the  relevant  cases  can  be  confidently
identified  in  advance,  and if collective  action can  be justified by  reference
to particular good reasons,  the argument  for democratic  interference  will
be quite powerful.  Respect for preferences  that have  resulted from unjust
background  conditions  and  that  will  lead  to  human  misery  appears
hardly  the  proper  course  for  a liberal  republic.

For  example,  legal  rules  prohibiting  or  discouraging  addictive  be-
havior  may  have  significant  advantages  in  terms  of welfare.  Regulation
of heroin or  cigarettes-at  least if the regulation  can be made  effective-
might  well  increase  aggregate  social  welfare,  by  decreasing  harmful  be-
havior,  removing  the  secondary  effects  of  those  harms,  and  producing

7.  For  a  modem  utilitarian account  along  these  lines,  see  R.  BRANDT,  A  THEORY  OF  THE
GOOD AND  THE  RIGHT (198 1).  For an Aristotelian  account,  see  Sen,  Well-Being  Agency, and Free-
dom,  82  J.  PHIL.  169  (1985).

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 185 1990

CHICAGO-KENT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  66:181

more  healthful and  satisfying  lives.  Or government  regulation  of the  en-
vironment  or broadcasting-encouraging  or requiring,  for example,  pro-
tection  of pristine  areas, nonentertainment  broadcasting, or  high-quality
programs--may  generate  (or, better,  prevent  obstacles  to  generation  of)
new preferences,  providing increased  satisfaction  and in  the end  produc-
ing  considerable  welfare  gains.  The  same  may  well  be  true  of  antidis-
crimination  measures,  which  affect 
the  desires  and  attitudes  of
discriminators and victims alike.  A  system that takes  private preferences
for  granted  will  sacrifice  large  opportunities  for  social  improvement  on
welfarist criteria.  This  point was a crucial one in the early  stages  of utili-
tarian  thought;  it has  been  lost more  recently  with  the shift  from  older
forms of welfarism  to the  idea of  "revealed  preferences."

Moreover,  the  satisfaction  of  private  preferences,  whatever  their
content  and origins,  does  not respond  to a  persuasive  conception  of lib-
erty or  autonomy.  The  notion  of autonomy  should  refer  instead  to deci-
sions  reached  with a full  and vivid  awareness  of available  opportunities,
with  all  relevant  information,  or,  most  generally,  without  illegitimate
constraints  on  the process  of  preference  formation.  When  these  condi-
tions  are  not  met, decisions  might  be described  as unfree  or  nonautono-
mous.  If preferences  are  a  product  of available  information,  of existing
consumption  patterns,  of social  pressures,  and  of governmental  rules, it
seems  odd to suggest  that individual freedom  lies exclusively  or by  defini-
tion  in  preference  satisfaction.  It  seems  even  odder  to  suggest  that  all
preferences  should  be  treated  the  same,  independently  of  their  origins
and  consequences,  or  of the reasons  offered  in  their  support.

Consider, for example,  a decision  to purchase  dangerous  foods, con-
sumer products,  or  cigarettes  by  someone  unaware  of the serious  health
risks;  an employer's decision  not to deal with blacks because of the back-
ground  of public  and  private  segregation,  or  racial  hostility  in  his  com-
munity;  a  person  who  disparages  or  has  no interest  in  art  and  literature
because the culture in which  he has been reared  consists  mostly of televi-
sion;  a  decision of a woman  to adopt  a traditional  gender role because  of
the  social  stigma  of  refusing  to  do  so;  a  decision  not  to  purchase  cars
equipped with seatbelts  or not to wear  motorcycle  helmets because of the
social  pressures  imposed  by  one's peer  group;  a  lack  of interest in  envi-
ronmental  diversity  resulting  from  personal  experiences  that  are  limited
to industrialized urban areas;  a decision  not to employ  blacks at a restau-
rant because  of fear  of violence  from  whites.

These  examples  are  different  from  one  another.  The  source  of the
problem varies  in each.  In all of them, however,  the interest  in liberty  or
autonomy  does  not  call  for  governmental  inaction,  even  if that  were  an

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 186 1990

1990]

REPUBLICANISM  AND  PREFERENCE  PROBLEM

intelligible category.  Indeed, in many of these cases  regulation  removes a
kind of coercion.

One  goal  of a  democratic  republic,  in short,  is to  ensure autonomy
not  only in  the satisfaction  of preferences,  but  also  and more fundamen-
tally in the processes  of preference  formation.  Mill himself was  emphatic
on this point,  going so far  as  to suggest  that government  itself should  be
evaluated  by  its effects  on the  character  of the citizenry."  The  view  that
freedom  requires  an  opportunity  to choose  among alternatives  is supple-
mented  by  the  view that  people  should  not face  unjustifiable  constraints
on the  free  development  of their  preferences  and  beliefs.  It  is  not  alto-
gether  clear  what  such  a  view  would  require-a  point to  which  we  will
return.  At  the very  least,  however,  it  would  see  a  failure  of autonomy,
and  a  reason  for  collective  response,  in  beliefs  and  preferences  based  on
the  absence  of information  or  on  insufficient  opportunities.

Government  action  might  also  be justified  on grounds  of autonomy
when  the public  seeks  to  implement,  through  democratic  processes  cul-
minating in law, widely  held social aspirations  or collective desires.  Indi-
vidual  consumption  choices  often  diverge  from  collective  considered
judgments:  people  may  seek,  through  law,  to  implement  a  democratic
decision  about what  courses  to pursue.  If so, it is ordinarily  no violation
of  autonomy  to  allow  those  considered  judgments  to  be  vindicated  by
governmental  action.  Consider  a  law calling  for support of the arts  or of
high-quality  broadcasting,  sought by  a majority of the population  at large
and  making  available  opportunities  not provided  through  market order-
ing.  Ideas  of this  sort  can  be  connected  to  the  original  constitutional
belief, built  on  republican  foundations,  in  deliberative  democracy.  Col-
lective  aspirations  or considered judgments, produced  by a  process  of de-
liberation  in which  competing  perspectives  are brought  to bear,  reflect  a
conception  of political  freedom  having  deep  roots in  the American  con-
stitutional  tradition.

This  different  conception  of  autonomy  places  an  emphasis  on  the
freedom  of collectivities  or  communities-a  freedom  embodied  in  deci-
sions,  reached  by  the citizenry,  about  what  courses  to pursue.  This view
is closely  associated  with classical  republicanism,  but it has resonances  in
Madisonian  thought  as  well.  In  this  view,  political  autonomy  can  be
found  in  collective  self-determination,  as  citizens  decide,  not  what  they
"want,"  but  instead  who they are-what  their values  are and  what  those
values  require.  What  they  "want"  must  be  supported  by  reasons.  An

8.  See  J.  MILL,  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT,  supra  note  5.

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 187 1990

CHICAGO-KENT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  66:181

important  form  of freedom  consists  in  precisely  these  processes  of self-
determination.

Of  course  there  are  serious  risks  of  overreaching  here,  and  there
must  be  some  constraints-usually  denominated  "rights"--on  this  pro-
cess.  Checks  laid  down  in advance are  an indispensable  part of constitu-
tional  government.  Those  checks  will  include,  at  a  minimum,  basic
guarantees  of  political  liberty  and  personal  security.  Such  guarantees
may  not be  compromised  by  processes  of collective  self-determination,
but  citizens  in  any  polity  would  be  likely  to  make  some  space  for
processes  of this  sort.

II.  REPUBLICAN  REJECTION  OF  REVEALED  PREFERENCES

In  this  section  I attempt  to  particularize  the  claims  made  above  by
cataloging  cases  for democratic  rejection  of private preferences.  In  all of
these  cases,  I  claim  that  participants  in  a  liberal  republic  ought  to  be
concerned  with whether  its  citizens  are experiencing  satisfying  lives  and
that  the  salutary  liberal  commitment  to  divergent  conceptions  of  the
good  ought  not  always  to  be  taken  to  disable  government  from  expres-
sing  that  concern  through  law.  The cases  fall  in  three  basic  categories:
collective  desires, excessive  limitations  in opportunties, and intrapersonal
collective  action  problems.

A.  Collective Desires and Aspirations

Citizens  in a  democratic  polity  might  act to  embody  not  the prefer-
ences  that  they  hold  as  private  consumers,  but  instead  what  might  be
described  as  collective  desires,  including  aspirations,  "preferences  about
preferences,"  or considered judgments.  Measures  of this sort are a prod-
uct  of deliberative  processes  on the  part  of citizens  and  representatives.
In those processes,  at least sometimes  people do not simply  ask what  they
"want."  Such measures  cannot be understood  as  an attempt to aggregate
or  trade-off  private  preferences.

1.  Politics, Markets,  and  the Dependence  of Preferences  on  Context

Frequently,  political  choices  cannot  easily  be  understood  as  a  pro-
cess  of  aggregating  prepolitical  desires.  Some  people  may,  for  example,
want  nonentertainment  broadcasting  on  television,  even  though  their
own  consumption  patterns  favor situation comedies;  they may  seek strin-
gent laws  protecting  the environment  or endangered  species  even  though
they  do  not  use  the  public  parks  or  derive  benefits  from  protection  of
species;  they may  approve  of laws  calling  for social  security  and welfare

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 188 1990

1990]

REPUBLICANISM  AND  PREFERENCE  PROBLEM

even  though  they  do not  save  or  give  to  the poor;  they  may support  an-
tidiscrimination  laws  even  though  their  own  behavior  is  hardly  race-  or
gender-neutral.  The choices  people make as political  participants are  dif-
ferent  from those  they make  as  consumers.  Democracy  thus calls  for  an
intrusion  on  markets.

The  widespread  disjunction  between  political  and  consumption
choices  presents something of a puzzle.  Indeed,  it sometimes  leads  to the
view  that  market  ordering  is  undemocratic  and  that  choices  made
through  the  political  process  are  a preferable  basis  for  social  ordering.

A  generalization  of this  sort would  be  far  too broad  in  light  of the
multiple  breakdowns  of the political process  and the  advantages  of mar-
ket  ordering  in  many  arenas.  Respect  for private  markets  is  an  impor-
tant  way  of  respecting  divergent  conceptions  of  the  good  and  is  thus
properly  associated  with  individual  liberty.  Respect  for  markets  is  also
an  engine  of economic  productivity,  an important  individual  and  collec-
tive goal.  But it would be a mistake  to suggest,  as some  do,  that markets
always reflect  individual choice  more  reliably than politics, or that demo-
cratic  choices  differ  from consumption  outcomes  only because  of confu-
sion,  as  voters fail  to realize  that  they  must  ultimately  bear  the  costs  of
the programs  they  favor.

Undoubtedly  consumer behavior  is sometimes  a better or more  real-
istic  reflection  of actual  preferences  than  is  political  behavior.  But  in
light  of the  fact that  preferences  depend  on context,  the very  notion  of a
"better  reflection"  of  a  unitary  "actual"  preference  is  a  confusing  one;
there is  no such  thing as an  "actual"  (in  the sense  of acontextual)  prefer-
ence  in  these  settings.  Moreover,  the  difference  might  be  explained  by
the  fact  that  political  behavior  reflects  a  variety  of  influences  that  are
distinctive  to  the  context  of politics.

These influences  include  four closely related  phenomena.  First, citi-
zens may  seek to implement individual and collective aspirations  in  polit-
ical  behavior  but  not  in  private  consumption.  As  citizens,  people  may
seek  the aid of the law  to bring about  a social  state  that they consider  to
be  in some  sense  higher  than what  emerges  from  market  ordering.  Sec-
ond,  people  may,  in their  capacity  as  political  actors,  attempt  to  satisfy
altruistic  or  other-regarding  desires,  which  diverge  from  the  self-inter-
ested  preferences  characteristic  of  markets. 9  Third,  political  decisions
might  vindicate  what  might  be  called  meta-preferences  or  second-order
preferences.  People  have  wishes  about their wishes,  and sometimes  they
try  to  vindicate  those  second-order  wishes,  or  considered  judgments

9.  See  H.  MARGOLIS,  SELFISHNESS,  ALTRUISM,  AND  RATIONALITY  (1982).

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 189 1990

CHICAGO-KENT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  66:181

about  what  is  best,  through  law.  Fourth,  people  may  precommit  them-
selves,  in democratic  processes,  to  a  course  of action  they  consider  to  be
in  the  general  interest;  the  story  of Ulysses  and  the  Sirens  is  the  model
here.  The adoption  of a Constitution  is itself an  example of a precommit-
ment  strategy.

To  point  to  these  possibilities  is  not  at  all  to  deny  that  market  or
private behavior  frequently  reflects meta-preferences,  altruism,  or aspira-
tions.  There  are  countless  counterexamples  to  any  such  claim.  Diver-
gences  between  market  and  political  behavior,  however,  will  sometimes
be  attributable  to  phenomena  of this  sort.

Consider, as a possible example  of all these phenomena,  the fact that
people  seem  to  want  regulation  designed  to  secure  high  quality  broad-
casting  even  though  their  consumption  patterns  favor  situation  come-
dies-a  fact  that  helps justify  certain  controversial  regulatory  decisions
by  the  Federal  Communications  Commission  requiring  nonentertain-
ment  broadcasting  and  presentations  on  issues  of  public  importance.
Consider  as  well  measures  designed  to  protect  endangered  species  and
natural  preserves  in  the  face  of individual  behavior that  reflects  little  so-
licitude  for  them.

2.  Explanations:  Collective  Action  Problems,
Deliberation,  and Others

How  are  the  differences  between  choices  expressed  in  markets  and
those  expressed  in  politics  to  be  explained?  There  are  a  number  of
possibilities.

First,  the  collective  character  of  politics,  permitting  a  response  to
collective  action  problems,  is  critical  here.  People may  not want  to sat-
isfy  their  meta-preferences,  or  to  be  altruistic,  unless  there  is  assurance
that  others  will  be  bound  to  do  so  as  well.  More  simply,  people  may
prefer not  to contribute  to a collective  benefit if donations  are  made indi-
vidually,  with  no  guarantee  that  others  will  participate;  but  their  most
favored  system,  obtainable  only or best through democratic  forms, might
be  one  in  which  they  contribute  if (but  only  if)  there  is  assurance  that
others  will do so.  Perhaps  people feel ashamed  if others are  contributing
and  they  are  not;  perhaps  they  feel  victimized  if they  are  contributing
and  others  are  not.

In  any  case, the satisfaction  of aspirations,  altruistic  goals,  or  meta-
preferences  will  sometimes  have  the  characteristics  of the  provision  of
public  goods  or the  solution  of prisoners'  dilemmas.  Here,  however, the
public  good  is an unconventional  one.  The need  for government  is not to

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 190 1990

1990]

REPUBLICANISM  AND  PREFERENCE  PROBLEM

satisfy  private choices  but instead to  ensure  the expression  or satisfaction
of desires  that, precisely because  of the  political  setting, have a distinctive
character.  In  a democratic society,  government  controls are an appropri-
ate response.

Second,  the  collective  character  of  politics  might  overcome  the
problem, discussed below,  of preferences  and beliefs that have  adapted  to
an unjust  status  quo  or to  limits  in available  opportunities.  Without  the
possibility  of collective  action,  the  status  quo  may  seem  intractable,  and
private  behavior  will  adapt  accordingly.  If, however,  people  can  act  in
concert,  preferences  might  take  on  a  quite  different  form.  Social  move-
ments  involving  the environment,  labor,  and race and  sex  discrimination
are  examples  of this phenomenon.  Possible  democratic responses  include
recycling  programs,  energy conservation  programs,  and  contributions  to
the  arts,  to  the  poor,  and  to  environmental  protection.  The  collective
action  problem  thus  interacts with  aspirations,  altruistic  desires,  second-
order  preferences,  and  precommitment  strategies.  All  of these  are  more
likely  to  be  enacted  into  law  in  the  face  of collective  action.

Third,  social  and cultural  norms might  incline  people  to  express  as-
pirational  or altruistic  goals  more often in political behavior  than in  mar-
kets.  Such  norms  may  press  people,  in  their  capacity  as  citizens,  in  the
direction  of a  concern  for  others  or  for the  public  interest.

Fourth,  the deliberative  aspects  of politics, bringing additional  infor-
mation  and  perspectives  to  bear,  may  affect  preferences  as  expressed
through  governmental  processes.  A  principal  function  of  a  democratic
republic  is to  ensure  that  through  representative  processes,  new  or  sub-
merged voices,  or novel  depictions  of where interests  lie  and what  they in
fact  are,  can be heard  and  understood.  It should  hardly  be surprising  if
preferences,  values,  and  perceptions  of both  individual  and  collective  in-
terests  are  changed  as  a  result  of that  process.

Fifth, and  finally,  consumption  decisions  are  a product  of the  crite-
rion  of private  willingness  to  pay,  which  creates  distortions  of  its  own.
Willingness  to  pay  is  a function  of ability  to  pay,  and  it  is  an  extremely
crude proxy  for  utility. Political  behavior removes  this  distortion  (which
is  not  to  say  that it  does  not  introduce  distortions  of its  own).

These  general  considerations  suggest  that  citizens  in  a  republic
might attempt to  embody in law a considered judgment  on their part that
the  choices  reflected  in  consumption  patterns  ought  to  be  overcome.  A
related  but  more  narrow justification  is  that  statutes  safeguard  noncom-
modity  values-like  environmental  diversity-that  an  unregulated  mar-

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 191 1990

CHICAGO-KENT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  66:181

ket,  even  a  well-functioning  one,  might  protect  inadequately. 10  Social
ordering  through  markets  may  have  long-term,  world  transforming  ef-
fects  that reflect collective  myopia, an emphasis  on short-term  considera-
tions  at the expense  of the  future.  Possible  responses  include  promotion
of high quality  programming in broadcasting,  of the arts, and of diversity
through  protection  of the environment  and of endangered  species.  In all
these  respects,  political  choices  are  not  made  by  consulting given  or pri-
vate  desires,  but instead  reflect  a deliberative  process  designed  to  shape
and  reflect  values.

3.  Qualifications:  Risks  and  Distortions

Arguments  from  collective  desires  are  irresistible  if the  measure  at
issue  is adopted  unanimously.  But more serious  difficulties  are produced
if (as is usual)  the law imposes  on a minority  what  it regards  as  a burden
rather  than  a  benefit.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  majority  wants  to
require  high-quality  television  and  to  ban  violent  and  dehumanizing
shows,  but  that a  significant  minority  wants  to see  the  latter.  If we  put
the  first  amendment  questions  aside  for  now,  it  might  still  be  thought
that those  who  perceive  a need  to bind themselves,  or to express  an  aspi-
ration,  should not be  permitted to  do  so  if the consequence  is  to deprive
others  of an  opportunity  to  satisfy  their  preferences.

The  foreclosure  of  the  preferences  of  the  minority  is  unfortunate,
but in  general  it is  hard  to  see  what  argument there  is  for an across-the-
board rule  against  collective action  of this sort.  If the majority is prohib-
ited  from  vindicating  its  second-order  or  altruistic  preferences  through
legislation,  its  own  desires will  be  frustrated.  The  choice  is  between  the
preferences  of  the  majority  and  those  of  the  minority.  On  the  other
hand, the foreclosure  of the minority probably  should  be  permitted  only
when less  restrictive alternatives,  including  private arrangements,  are un-
available  to  serve  the same  end.

The  argument  for  democratic  outcomes  embodying  collective
desires  is  much weaker  in three  categories  of cases.  First, if the particu-
lar choice  foreclosed  has  some  special  character,  it is  appropriately  con-
sidered  a right, and  the majority  has no  authority to intervene.  Consider
political  expression  or  participation;  here  the equal  rights of members  of
the  minority  must be  respected  even  if a general  aspiration,  held  by  the
majority,  argues  for  selective  exclusions.  So too,  other rights  fundamen-

10.  See  Stewart,  Regulation  in a Liberal State:  The  Role  of Non-Commodity  Values,  92  YALE

L.J.  1537  (1983).

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 192 1990

1990]

REPUBLICANISM  AND  PREFERENCE  PROBLEM

tal  to  self-actualization  or  self-realization---consider  intimate  sexual  ac-
tivity--ought  generally  to  be  off-limits  to  government.

Second,  some  collective  desires  might be  objectionable  or distorted.
A  social  preference  against  racial  intermarriage  could  not  plausibly  be
justified  as  reflecting  an  aspiration  or  a precommitment  strategy.  To  ex-
plain  why,  it  is  of course  necessary  to  offer  an  independent  argument,
challenging  that  preference  and  sounding  in  justice.  But  the  example
suggests  that  the  mere  fact  of  a  collective  aspiration  is  insufficient  for
approval  of foreclosure  of private choice.  The  aspiration  itself must not
be  objectionable  on moral  grounds.

Third,  some  collective  desires  might  reflect  a  special  weakness  on
the part  of the  majority;  consider  a  curfew  law,  or  perhaps  prohibition.
In  such circumstances,  a legal  remedy  might remove  desirableincentives
for private self-control,  have  unintended  side-effects  resulting from  "bot-
tling  up"  desires,  or prove  unnecessary  in light  of the  existence  of alter-
native  remedies.  When  any  of these  three  concerns  arise,  the  case  for
protection of collective  desires is  weakened.  In many  contexts,  however,
these  concerns  are  absent,  and  democratic  controls  initiated  on  these
grounds  are justified.

4.  The  Sometimes  Strange  Idea  of "Rent-seeking"

If the  arguments  presented  in this  section  are  persuasive,  they  sug-
gest  reasons  to  be  skeptical  of some  normative  work  in  the  tradition  of
public  choice  theory.  According  to  at least some  of this  work, much  of
the  business  of politics  should  be  seen  as  "rent-seeking,"  understood  as
the  expenditure  of  funds  on  the  wasteful  redistribution  of  resources
through  politics  rather  than  the  production  of resources  through  mar-
kets.  The  notion  of "rent-seeking"  rejects  nearly  all  of the  basic  work-
ings  of  politics.  It  treats  citizenship  itself  as  an  evil.  Efforts  to  enact
public  aspirations,  to  counteract  discrimination,  to  protect  the  environ-
ment-all  these  are  seen  as  the  diversion  of  productive  energies  into  a
wasteful  place.

This view represents  a peculiar  reversal  of the liberal  republican  tra-
dition,  which  has  seen  political behavior  not  as  an evil,  but as  an  impor-
tant  arena  for  education,  for  deliberation  and  discussion  about  the
nation's  direction,  for the development  of the faculties,  and for  the culti-
vation of feelings  of altruism. On all of these scores, the liberal republican
tradition  remains extremely  vibrant in the United States, and  it continues
to  describe  a  wide  range  of individual  and  collective  behavior.  It would
of course  be foolish to deny that much political conduct  is an effort to use

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 193 1990

CHICAGO-KENT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  66:181

governmental  power  to  serve  selfish  ends  and  that the  concept  of "rent-
seeking"  can  often help  in  understanding  the governmental  process.  But
to collapse  all  political  behavior  into the category  of "rent-seeking"  is to
devalue  grotesquely  the  activities  of citizenship.

B.  Excessive Limitations in Opportunities or Unjust
Background Conditions

Citizens  in a democracy  might override  existing  preferences in order
to foster  and promote  diverse  experiences,  with  a  view  toward  providing
broad  opportunities  for the  formation  of preferences  and beliefs,  and  for
distance  on  and  critical  scrutiny  of current  desires.  This  rationale  sup-
ports private  ordering  and  freedom  of contract  as  well.  But  it calls  for
collective  safeguards  when  those  forces  push  toward  homogeneity  and
uniformity, as they often do in industrialized  nations.  Here the argument
for  governmental  controls  finds  a  perhaps  ironic  origin  in  Mill.  Such
controls are  necessary  to cultivate  divergent  conceptions  of the good  and
to ensure  a  degree  of reflection  on those  conceptions.

One might describe  a system that  took this goal  seriously as  embod-
ying  a  mild  form  of liberal  perfectionism.  Such  a  system  would  see  the
inculcation  of critical  and  disparate  attitudes  toward  prevailing  concep-
tions of the  good  as  part of the framework  of a liberal  republic.  Liberal
education  is of course  the principal  locus  of this concern.  The principles
embodied  in  liberal education  need  not be  confined  to the  school system.

Democratic  measures  with  respect  to  the  arts  and  broadcasting-

subsidizing  public  broadcasting,  ensuring  a range  of disparate  program-
ming,  or  calling  for  high-quality  programming  provided  only  a  little  or
not at all by the marketplace--can  be understood  in these terms.  Indeed,
the  need  to  provide  diverse  opportunities  for  preference  formation  sug-
gests reasons  to be quite skeptical of unrestricted  markets in communica-
tion  and  broadcasting.  There  is  a  firm  theoretical  justification  for  the
much-criticized,  and  now  largely  abandoned  "fairness  doctrine,"  which
required broadcasters  to  cover controversial  issues  and to ensure  compet-
ing views.  In light of the  inevitable  effects  of programming  on character,
beliefs,  and even  conduct,  it is hardly  clear that governmental  "inaction"
is  always  appropriate  in a constitutional  democracy;  indeed the  contrary
seems  true.  (I  take  up  this  issue  in more  detail  below.)

Moreover,  market  behavior  is  sometimes  based  on  an  effort  to  re-
duce  cognitive  dissonance  by  adjusting  to  undue  limitations  in  current
practices  and  opportunities.  When  this  is  so,  respect  for  preferences
seems  unjustified  on  grounds  of autonomy  and perhaps  welfare  as  well.

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 194 1990

1990]

REPUBLICANISM  AND  PREFERENCE  PROBLEM

In  these  circumstances,  preferences  are  nonautonomous  insofar  as  they
are  reflexively  adaptive"1  to  unjust  background  conditions;  collective  re-
sponses  to  such  preferences  might yield  welfare  gains  as  well.  The  point
has  large  implications.  For  example,  workers  appear  to  underestimate
the  risks  of hazardous  activity  partly  in  order  to  reduce  the  dissonance
that  would  be  produced  by  an  understanding  of the  real dangers  of the
workplace.1 2  Democratic  controls  might produce  gains  in  terms of both
welfare  and  autonomy.

Similar  ideas  help  account  for  antidiscrimination  principles.  Most
generally,  the beliefs of both beneficiaries  and  victims of existing injustice
are  affected  by  dissonance-reducing  strategies.1 3  The  phenomenon  of
blaming  the  victim  has  distinct  cognitive  and  motivational  foundations.
A  central  point here  is that the strategy  of blaming  the victim,  or  assum-
ing  that  an  injury  or an  inequality  was  deserved  or  inevitable,  tends  to
permit  nonvictims  or  members  of  advantaged  groups  to  reduce  disso-
nance  by  assuming  that  the  world  is  just-a  pervasive,  insistent,  and
sometimes  irrationally  held  belief.' 4  The  reduction  of cognitive  disso-
nance  is  a  powerful  motivational  force,  and  it  operates  as  a significant
obstacle  to  the recognition  of social  injustice  or  irrationality.

Victims also  participate  in  dissonance-reducing  strategies,  including
the lowering  of self-esteem  to accommodate  both the fact of victimization
and  the  belief  that  the  world  is  essentially  just.  Sometimes  it  appears
easier  to  assume  that  one's  suffering  is  warranted  than  to  believe  it  has
been  imposed  cruelly  or by  mere  chance.  Consider  here  the astonishing
fact  that after  a  draft lottery,  those with both  favorable  and unfavorable
results decided  that  the outcomes  of the purely  random process  were  de-

11.  There  is  a difference  between  self-conscious  adaptation  to an intractable  status quo  and  the
sorts of processes I  am describing.  If a person  without  musical talent decides  that he will  counteract
and  revise his  desire  to be  a world-famous  pianist,  it would  be  odd to find  that  (healthy) decision  to
be  inconsistent  with  personal  autonomy.  The  cases  under  discussion  involve  a  reflexive  process
based  on an  absence, socially produced,  of sufficient opportunities.  Of course  the notion of sufficient
opportunities  itself requires  a baseline;  every  system  contains  limited  opportunities.

12.  See  Akerlof  &  Dickens,  The  Economic  Consequences of  Cognitive  Dissonance, 72  Am.

ECON.  REv.  307  (1982).

13.  On  cognitive  dissonance,  see  L.  FESTINGER,  A  THEORY  OF  COGNITIVE  DISSONANCE
(1957);  on  its implications  for  social  theory,  welfare,  and  autonomy,  see  J. ELsTER,  supra note  4.
See  also M.  WOLLsToNEcRAFT,  A  VINDICATION  OF  THE  RIGHTS  OF  WOMEN  (1792),  which
can  be  seen  as  an extended  discussion  of the  social formation  of preferences  and the  phenomenon  of
the  adaptation  of  preferences,  beliefs,  and  desires  to  an  unjust  status  quo.  Thus  Wostonecraft
writes,  "I  will  venture  to  affirm,  that  a  girl,  whose  spirits  have  not  been  damped  by  inactivity,  or
innocence  tainted  by  false  shame,  will  always  be  a  romp,  and  the  doll  will  never  excite  attention
unless  confinement  allows her  no  alternative."  Id.  at  43.  Similar  points  are  made  in  J. MILL,  THE
SUBJECTION  OF WOMEN,  supra note  5,  as against  the claim  that the  existing desires  of women  are  a
product  of consent.

14.  See  M.  LERNER,  THE  BELIEF  IN  A  JUST  WORLD:  A  FUNDAMENTAL  DELUSION  (1980).

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 195 1990

CHICAGO-KENT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  66:181

served.' 5  The  phenomenon  of blaming  the victim also  reflects the  "hind-
sight  effect,"  through  which  people  unjustifiably  perceive  events  as  more
predictable  than they  in  fact  were,  and  therefore  suggest  that  victims  or
disadvantaged  groups  should  have been  able to  prevent  the  negative  out-
come.  All  this makes  reliance  on  existing  or  revealed  preferences  highly
problematic  in  certain  contexts.

There  is  suggestive  evidence  in  the  psychological  literature  to  this
effect.  Some work  here  reveals  that people  who engage  in cruel  behavior
change  their  attitudes  toward  the  objects  of their  cruelty  and  thus  de-
value  them;  observers  tend  to  do  the  same.1 6  Such  evidence  bears  on
antidiscrimination  law  in  general.  Aspects  of American  labor  and  race
discrimination  law  can  be  understood  as a  response  to  the basic problem
of distorted beliefs and preferences.  7  There are  implications here  for sex
discrimination  as well.  The movement  for the elimination  of sex discrim-
ination  is  informed  by  an  understanding  that  many  women-as  well  as
many  men-have  adapted  to  an  unjust  status  quo.

Sometimes,  moreover,  preferences  are  only  imperfectly adapted.  At
some  level there is a perception of an injury,  but a fear of social  sanctions
or  a  belief that  the  cause  is intractable  prevents  people  from  seeking  re-
dress.  Here  the  collective  character  of politics,  permitting  the organiza-
tion  of numerous  people,  can  be  exceedingly  helpful.

Standing by  itself, the  fact  that preferences  are shifting  and  endoge-
nous  is  hardly  a  sufficient  reason  for  democratic  controls.  All  prefer-
ences  are  to  some  degree  dependent  on  existing  law  and  current
opportunities,  and  that  fact  cannot  be  a  reason  for  government  action
without  creating  a  license  for  tyranny.  The  argument  for  democratic
controls  in  the face  of endogenous  preferences  must rely  on  a belief that
welfare  or autonomy  will thereby  be  promoted.  Usually,  of course,  gov-
ernmental  interference  should  be  avoided.  Too often,  however,  the  salu-
tary belief in respect  for divergent  conceptions of the good is transformed
into  an  unwillingness  to  protect  people  from  unjust  background  condi-
tions  or  a sheer  lack  of options.

The actual  content  of democratic controls will  be controversial,  and
it probably  should begin and usually  end with efforts  to provide  informa-
tion  and  to  increase  opportunities.  Thus,  for example,  governmentally
required  disclosure  of risks  in  the  workplace  is  a  highly  plausible  strat-

15.  Rubin  & Peplau,  Belief in a Just World and Reaction to Another's Lot: A  Study of Partici-

pants in the National Draft Lottery, 29  J. Soc.  IssuEs,  73,  84-85  (1973).

16.  See  M.  LERNER,  supra note  14.
17.  See  Gewirtz,  Choice  in  the  Transition: School Desegregation and the  Corrective Ideal, 86

COLUM.  L.  REv.  728  (1986).

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 196 1990

1990)

REPUBLICANISM  AND  PREFERENCE  PROBLEM

egy.  In a few  cases,  however,  these  milder  strategies  may be  inadequate,
and  coercion  is  necessary.

The  category  of democratic  responses  to endogenous  preferences  of
this sort  overlaps with that of measures  that  attempt to protect  collective
aspirations.  Frequently  aspirations  might  form  the  basis  for  laws  that
attempt  to  influence  processes  of preference  formation.

C.  Intrapersonal Collective Action  Problems

There is  also  a case  for democratic  controls  on  existing  preferences
when  such  preferences  are  a  function  of past  acts  of  consumption  and
when such acts alter desires or beliefs in such a way as to cause  long-term
harm.  Here  the  purpose  of collective  controls  is  to affect  the  develop-
ment  of certain  preferences.  Preferences  are  endogenous  not  to  existing
legal  rules  or to  limited  opportunities  but  to past consumption  decisions,
and  in  the  cases  at  hand,  the effect  of those  decisions  on  current  prefer-
ences  is pernicious.  For government  to act in this context, it is  important
that  it be confident  of its conclusions.  An  absence  of information  on  the
part  of the  private  actors  is  usually  a necessary  condition  for  collective
controls.

Regulation  of addictive  substances,  of myopia,  and of habits  are  fa-
miliar  examples.  In  the  case  of  an  addiction,  the  problem  is  that  the
costs  of nonconsumption  increase  dramatically  over  time, as  the benefits
of consumption  remain  constant  or  fall  sharply.  The  result  is  that  the
aggregate  costs,  over  time  or  over  a life,  of consumption  exceed  the  ag-
gregate  benefits,  even  though  the  initial  consumption  choice  provides
benefits  that  exceed  costs.  Individual  behavior  that  is  rational  for  each
individual  consumption  choice  ultimately  leads  people  into  severely  in-
ferior  social  states.  In  such  cases,  people,  if fully  informed,  would  in all
likelihood  not  want  to  become  involved  with  the good  in  the first  place.
Government  action  is  a  possible  response.

Menachem  Yaari  offers  the  example  of a  group  of traders  attempt-
ing  to  induce  alcoholism  in  an  Indian  tribe.18  At  the  outset  alcoholic
beverages  are  not  extremely  valuable  to  consumers.  The  consumers  are
willing  to buy only  for a low  price, which the  traders willingly  offer.  But
as a result  of past consumption,  the value  of the beverages  to the consum-
ers  steadily  increases,  to  the  point  where  they  are  willing  to  pay  enor-
mous  sums  to  obtain  them.  Thus the  traders  are  able:

to  manoeuvre  the  Indian  into  a  position  where  rationality  conflicts

18.  Yaari,  Endogenous  Changes  in  Tastes:  A  Philosophical  Discussion,  in  DECISION  THEORY

AND  SOCIAL  ETHICS:  ISSUES  IN  SOCIAL  CHOICE  59  (H.  Gottinger &  W.  Leinfellner  eds.  1978).

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 197 1990

CHICAGO-KENT LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  66:181

with  Pareto efficiency,  Le.,  into  a  position  where  to be  efficient  is to  be
irrational  and  to be  irrational  is to be  efficient  ....  The  disadvantage,
for  an economic  unit,  of having endogenously  changing  tastes  is  that,
even  with  perfect  information  and  perfect  foresight,  the unit  may find
itself forced to  follow  an  action  which, by  the unit's  own standards,  is
Pareto-dominated.  19
Because  of  the  effect  of  consumption,  over  time,  on  preferences,
someone  who  is  addicted  to  heroin  is  much  worse  off even  though  the
original  decision  to  consume  was  not  irrational  if one  looks  only  at  im-
mediate  costs  and  benefits.  Statutes  that  regulate  addictive  substances
respond  to  a  social  belief  that  the  relevant  preferences  should  not  be
formed  in  the  first place.

We  might  describe  this  situation  as  involving  an  intrapersonal  col-
lective  action  problem,20  in  which  the costs  and benefits,  within  a partic-
ular person,  of engaging  in the  relevant activity  change dramatically  over
time.  Related  phenomena  were  of course  an  important  part  of classical
philosophy,  particularly  in  the treatment  of the problems  of myopia  and
akrasia.  A  central  point is that consumption  patterns induce a significant
change  in preferences,  and  in  a way  that  makes  people  worse  off in  the
long-run. 21  An  addiction  is  the  most  obvious  case, but  it is  part  of a far
broader  category.  Consider, for  example,  myopic  behavior,  defined  as  a
refusal-because  the short-term  costs  exceed  the short-term  benefits-to
engage  in  activity  having  long-term benefits  that  dwarf long-term  costs.
Another  kind  of intrapersonal  collective  action  problem  is  produced  by
habits,  in  which  people  engage  in  behavior  because  of the  subjectively
high short-term costs of changing their behavior notwithstanding  the fact
that  the  long-term  benefits  exceed  the  short-term  benefits.  Akrasia,  or
weakness  of the will,  has a related structure, and some laws respond to its
individual  or  collective  forms.

For the  most  part,  problems  of this  sort  are  best  addressed  at  the
individual  level  or  through  private  associations,  which  minimize  coer-
cion;  but  social  regulation  is  a  possible response.  Statutes  that subsidize
the arts  or public  broadcasting,  or that discourage  the  formation of some
habits  and  encourage  the  formation  of others,  are  illustrations.  So  too
with  legal  requirements  that  manufacturers  install  seat  belts  or that  peo-
ple  buckle  them.  The  subjective  costs  of buckling  decrease  over  time.

19.  Id. at  82.
20.  Elster,  Weakness of Will and the Free-Rider Problem,  1 ECON.  & PHIL.  231  (1985);  Schel-

ling, Egonomics, or the Art of Self-Management, 68  AM.  ECON.  REv.  290  (1978).

21.  Of course all  consumption  has  an  effect  on  preferences.  For example,  exposure to  classical
music  usually  increases  appreciation.  But  the pattern  under  discussion is  a  rare  one;  it  is  that pat-
tern,  producing  miserable  lives,  to  which  a democracy  might  respond.  To  be sure,  in  practice  the
response  might  make  things  worse  rather  than  better.

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 198 1990

19901

REPUBLICANISM  AND  PREFERENCE  PROBLEM

Once people are in the  habit of buckling,  the costs become  minimal.  The
fact  that the  costs  shrink  rapidly  after  the habit  of buckling  has  formed
counts  in  favor of regulation,  certainly  on welfare  grounds,  and  perhaps
on  autonomy  grounds  as  well.  There  is  a similar argument  for compul-
sory  recycling  programs  and  for  democratic  restrictions  on  smoking
cigarettes.

22

The  problem with  collective  controls  in this context  is  that they  are
unlikely  to  be  fine-tuned;  they  often  will  sweep  up  so  many  people  and
circumstances  as to  create  serious  risks of abuse.  In  some settings,  how-
ever,  citizens  will  be  able  to  say  with  confidence  that  the  effect  of con-
sumption  on  preferences  will  lead  to  severe  welfare  or  autonomy  losses.
In  such  cases  democratic  controls  are justified.

III.  EXAMPLES:  OVERRIDING  PREFERENCES  IN  A
DEMOCRATIC  REPUBLIC

A.  Government and the Airwaves

There  is  a  growing  consensus  that the  government  should  not con-
cern  itself with  the  airwaves  and  that  total  reliance  on  private  markets
and consumer  preferences  is the appropriate  strategy  for government.  In
this  view,  broadcasting  should  be  treated  like  soap,  or  cereal,  or  any
other commodity.  Indeed,  there is a growing  consensus  that this result is
ordained by the first amendment.  If the claims  made here are  persuasive,
however,  the  consensus  is  misguided.

The  consequence  of market-based  strategies  in broadcasting  is a  sys-
tem  in  which  most  viewers  see  shows  that  deal  rarely  with  serious
problems;  are  frequently  sensationalistic,  prurient,  dehumanizing,  or ba-
nal;  reflect  and  perpetuate  a  bland,  watered-down  version  of  the  most
conventional views about politics  and morality;  are  influenced  excessively
by  the concerns  of advertisers;  and  often  are  riddled  with  violence,  sex-
ism, and racism.  It simply  defies belief to  suggest that such shows  do not
affect the beliefs and even  the character of the  citizenry. Is  it so clear  that
a  constitutional  democracy  ought  to  consider  itself  disabled  from  re-
sponding  to  this situation?  Is  it so  clear  that  a  first  amendment  enacted
in  order  to ensure  democratic  self-determination  bars  a  democratic  cor-
rective  here?

In  my view,  the considerations  marshaled  thus far  suggest  that  citi-
zens  in a  constitutional  democracy  ought  to be  conceded  the power,  and
ought to  exercise the power, to engage  in  a wide range of controls.  These

22.  See  R.  GOODIN,  No  SMOKING:  THE  ETHICAL  ISSUEs  (1989).

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 199 1990

CHICAGO-KENT  LAW  REVIEW

(Vol.  66:181

include the power  to  regulate advertising  on  television,  certainly  for chil-
dren, but  for others  as  well;  to  require  broadcasters  to  pay  attention  to
public  affairs,  as  in,  for  example,  an  hour  of compulsory  programming
per night;  to ban  gratuitous  or  prurient violence  on  television,  especially
when  it is  sexualized;  to require,  as a condition  for licensing,  a subsidy  to
public television;  and to impose  a broad  fairness doctrine, in the form  not
only of an obligation  of attention  to important issues  but also a chance  to
speak  for divergent  sides.  There  would be a  wide range of collective  and
external  benefits  from  such  controls,  which  would  thus  carry  forward  a
strand  of the  liberal  tradition  that  calls  for  government  action  in  such
cases.

2 3

At  least in principle,  rights of private  access to  the  media for  differ-
ing  positions  ought to  be thought  congenial  to the free  speech guarantee.
Surely this is  so if that guarantee  is understood  as a protection  of a delib-
erative process  centered  on public  values  rather  than  of a mere  "market-
place."  The  first  amendment  should  not  be  seen  as  an  obstacle  to  such
efforts.  If anything,  the existing system  might be  thought to raise  serious
constitutional  questions.  A  system  in  which  access  to  the  media,  with
inevitable  consequences  for  the  shaping  of  preferences  and  beliefs,  is
made  dependent  on  private  willingness  to  pay  raises  genuine  problems
for  free  expression. 24

B.  Proportional Representation

In  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  revival  of  interest  in  systems  of
proportional  or  group  representation.  Blacks,  women,  the  handicapped,
and  other  disadvantaged  groups often  have  had  little success  in  the ordi-
nary  electoral  process.  There  is  a solid  constitutional  pedigree  for  group
representation,  notwithstanding  the constant  and  emphatic  rejections  by
the  Supreme  Court  of  constitutionally-based  arguments  for  representa-
tion  of  members  of racial  minority  groups.  Despite  the  rigidity  of  the
"one  person,  one vote"  formula,  with its majoritarian  and  individualistic
overtones,  group  representation  always  has  been  an important  feature  of
American  constitutionalism. 25

Moreover, the basic  constitutional  institutions  of federalism, bicam-

23.  See,  e.g.,  J.  MILL,  PRINCIPLES  OF  POLITICAL  ECONOMY  (1871).
24.  The Supreme  Court  seemed  to recognize  this  point  in Red  Lion  Broadcasting  Co.  v. FCC,

395  U.S.  367  (1969),  but  the point  has  dropped  out  of the  current  debate.

25.  At the  time  of the framing,  for example, geography  was  thought  to  define  distinct  commu-
nities with distinct  interests;  representation  of the  states  as  such  seemed  only  natural.  It  would  not
be impossible to  argue that racial  and  ethnic groups  (among others)  are the contemporary  analogue
to groups  that  were  defined  in  geographical  terms  during  the  founding period.

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 200 1990

REPUBLICANISM  AND  PREFERENCE  PROBLEM

eralism,  and  checks  and  balances,  share  some  of the  appeal  of propor-
tional  representation,  and  owe  their  origins  in  part  to  notions  of group
representation.  These institutions  proliferate  the points  of access  to gov-
ernment,  increasing  the ability of diverse  groups to influence  policy,  mul-
tiplying  perspectives 
in  government,  and 
improving  deliberative
capacities.  In  this  respect,  they  ensure  something  in  the  way  of group
representation,  at least when  compared  with unitary  systems.  Of course
both  the separation  of powers  and  bicameralism  grow  in  part  out  of ef-
forts  to promote  representation  of diverse  groups:  bicameralism  allowed
representation  of the  wealthy  and  the  masses;  the  notion  of  separation
derived  from  notions  of  mixed  government,  which  was  designed  to  en-
sure  a  measure  of  representation  of  groups  defined  in  social  and  eco-
nomic  terms.

Proportional  representation  might be designed  to  ensure  representa-
tion  in  the legislature  of all  groups  able  to  attain  more  than  a  minimal
share  of the  vote.  In another  form,  the system  might be designed  to en-
sure  that  members  of disadvantaged  groups  are  given  the  power  to exert
influence  on  political  outcomes.

There  are  serious  problems  with both  of these  efforts,  and  I  do not
mean  to evaluate  them  in detail  here.  I  do  suggest  that efforts  to  ensure
proportional  representation  become  much  more plausible  if they  are jus-
tified  on grounds that do not take  preferences as given  and if they empha-
size  the  preference-shaping  effects  of  discussion  and  disagreement  in
politics.2 6  The  argument  here  is  that  deliberative  processes  will  be  im-
proved, not  undermined,  if mechanisms  are instituted to ensure that mul-
tiple  groups  have  access  to the  process.  Group  representation,  precisely
by having this effect,  would ensure that diverse  views are expressed  on an
ongoing  basis  in  the  representative  process,  where  they  might  otherwise
be  excluded.  In  this  respect,  group  representation  would  be  a  kind  of
second-best  solution  for  the  real-world  failures  of Madisonian  delibera-
tion.  And  the  purpose  of access  is  not primarily  to  allow  each  group  to
have its "piece  of the action"-though  that is not entirely  irrelevant-but
instead  to  ensure  that  the  process  of deliberation  is  not  distorted by  the
mistaken  appearance  of a  common  set  of interests  on  the part  of all  con-
cerned.  In  this  incarnation,  proportional  representation  is  designed  to
increase  the likelihood  that  political  outcomes  will  incorporate  some  un-
derstanding of the perspectives  of all those affected.  That process should

26. 

In part  this  is Mill's  defense of such  efforts.  See  J. MILL,  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  REPRESEN-
TATIVE GOVERNMENT,  supra note  5.  See also Young, Polity and Group Difference: A  Critique of the
Ideal of  Universal Citizenship, 99  ETHics  250  (1989).

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 201 1990

CHICAGO-KENT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  66:181

facilitate  the healthy  expression  of collective values  or aspirations  and the
scrutiny  of preferences  adaptive  to  unjust background conditions  or  lim-
ited  opportunities.

For  this  reason,  proportional  representation  may  be  the  functional
analogue  of the institutions of checks and balances  and federalism, recog-
nizing  the  creative  functions  of  disagreement  and  multiple  perspectives
for  the governmental  process.  In  this  sense  there  is  continuity  between
recent  proposals  for proportional  representation  and  some  of the  attrac-
tive features of the original  constitutional regime.  Indeed,  Hamilton him-
self  emphasized  that  in  a  system of checks  and  balances,  the  "jarring of
parties...  [will]  promote deliberation. ' 27  If this  is so,  proportional  rep-
resentation  is  most  understandable  in  a  democracy  that  does  not  take
preferences  as  given.

IV.  CONCLUSION

Much  of the  appeal  of the  republican  tradition  lies  in  its  emphasis
on a  conception  of political  life  that does not treat  private preferences  as
the  foundation  of  social  choice.  Those  who  partake  of  the  republican
tradition-for  these  purposes,  a  capacious  category  including  writers
from  Aristotle  to  Rawls-insist  that political  institutions have inevitable
consequences  for  preferences  and  beliefs.  A  large  task  of constitutional
design,  and for the development of legal rules in general,  is to  ensure that
those  consequences  are  favorable  rather  than  unfavorable.

To say  this is  not  at all  to  suggest  that a republican  polity  ought  to
impose  on  its  citizens  a  unitary  conception  of the  good.  A  general  re-
spect  for  diversity  in  individual  choice  is  indispensable  in  modern  sys-
tems.  Such  respect  does  not,  however,  entail  protection  for  existing
preferences,  regardless of their origins or  consequences,  or of the  reasons
that  might  be  offered  in  their behalf.

I have suggested that the classical tradition  continues to provide  gui-
dance  for those interested in  the evaluation  of preferences  and beliefs and
in the connections  between  these and existing  institutional  arrangements.
Above  all, perhaps,  the  classical tradition suggests reasons  not to tolerate
a system  without property  rights  or containing  systemic  poverty.  A  sys-
tem  without property, or with  property, has  stultifying  effects  on the  free
development  of personality  and  simultaneously  poses  a threat  to  the  in-
dependence  and security  of its people,  which  are  prerequisites  for  repub-
lican  citizenship.  But  the  classical  tradition  also  suggests  the  need  to

27.  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  70,  at 427  (A.  Hamilton)(C.  Rossiter  ed.  1961).

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 202 1990

1990]

REPUBLICANISM  AND  PREFERENCE  PROBLEM

respect  collective  aspirations,  to  respond  to  preferences  and  beliefs
formed  by  unjust  background  institutions,  and  to  overcome  the sorts  of
intrapersonal  collective action  problems  manifested  in addiction,  myopic
behavior,  and  akrasia.

To  warrant respect, such a system  should be liberal  as well  as  repub-
lican.  Indeed,  it  should  see  its  liberalism  as  operating  in  close  alliance
with  its republicanism.  To  say  that  preferences  ought not  always  be the
basis of social  choice is  hardly  to  say  that  collectivities generally  should
override  individual  choices.  It  is,  however,  to say  that government  can-
not  avoid  the  task  of allocating  rights  and  entitlements  in  the  first  in-
stance,  that  existing  institutions  and  allocations  will  inevitably  affect
preferences  and  beliefs,  and  that  a  political  system  ought  to  attempt  to
ensure  that  preferences  will  be  formed  and  expressed  under  conditions
that promote  rather  than undermine  liberty and  welfare,  and that reflect
the diverse  social  goods that  lie underneath both  of these,  properly  con-
ceived.  It is on this issue,  perhaps above  all,  that the republican  tradition
has  much  to  offer  contemporary  legal  and  political  thought.

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 203 1990

HeinOnline  -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 204 1990

