 To many contemporary observers, the ratification of the American Constitution marked the end of classical politics and the start of a distinctive modern approach.' On that approach, government takes people as they are. Above all, it is respectful of divergent conceptions of the good life. Recognizing that self-interest is often the basis of political behavior, it creates institutional arrangements and substantive rights that will discipline likely abuses of political power, increase the prospects for compromise, and create spheres of private autonomy into which government may not enter. Agnostic about the good, a modern polity creates the basic rules by which people can order their private affairs. Its ambitions are otherwise quite modest. The conventional division between the American founders and their classical predecessors is therefore far too crude. But there is certainly something to the traditional view. Respect for private preferences, rather than collective deliberation about character, public values, or the good life, seems to be a distinguishing feature of American constitutionalism. It is here, perhaps especially in recent years, that the classical legacy seems most remote and least accessible to modern democratic theory and contemporary constitutional practice. 3. Indeed, participants in the liberal tradition, in its classical forms, emphasized the need for deliberation in government and placed a high value on political virtue. Many liberals do not take private preferences for granted, whatever their sources and consequences, and whatever the reasons that might be offered in their support. See Sunstein, Beyond the Republican Revival, 97 YALE L.J. 1539 (1988). The argument is divided in three parts. In Part I, I invoke some fairly conventional ideas about welfare and autonomy in order to draw into doubt the claim that government should base social choices on private preferences. In Part II, I set out three categories of cases in which private preferences, as expressed in consumption choices, should be overcome. The first, directly traceable to republican commitments, includes collective desires, including considered social judgments and widely held aspirations; the second, also with republican roots, involves preferences that have adapted to unjust background conditions or undue limitations in available opportunities; the third, building on classical ideas of myopia or akrasia, includes intrapersonal collective active problems that, over a lifetime, decrease personal welfare. A democratic republic, I argue, should override private preferences in all of these cases. In Part III, I draw on the republican tradition to deal with two current controversial issues: government efforts to promote access to the media and proportional representation. Should a constitutional republic take preferences as given? In contemporary politics, law, and economics, the usual answer is affirmative. Modern economics, for example, is dominated by a conception of welfare based on the satisfaction of existing preferences; in politics and law, something called "paternalism" is disfavored in both the public and private realms. 5 But the idea that government ought to take preferences as they are is a quite modem one. To say this is hardly to say that the idea is without foundations. Partly a function of the perceived (though greatly overstated) difficulty of making interpersonal comparisons of utility, it is also a product of the epistemological difficulties in assessing preferences in terms of their true connection with individual welfare, and, perhaps most of all, the genuine political dangers of allowing government to engage in such inquiries. desires," and rejected "the deficiencies of a system of ethics which does not pretend to aid individuals in the formation of their own character." Id. at 70-71. Of course there is a difference between what a system of ethics and what a system of politics should say about that question, as Mill clearly indicated. that preferences are shifting and endogenous rather than exogenousendogenous to, or a function of, current information, consumption patterns, legal rules, and social pressures most generally. Because preferences are shifting and endogenous, and because the satisfaction of existing preferences might lead to unhappy or deprived lives, a political system that treats all preferences as fixed will lose important opportunities for welfare gains. At least if the relevant cases can be confidently identified in advance, and if collective action can be justified by reference to particular good reasons, the argument for democratic interference will be quite powerful. Respect for preferences that have resulted from unjust background conditions and that will lead to human misery appears hardly the proper course for a liberal republic. Moreover, the satisfaction of private preferences, whatever their content and origins, does not respond to a persuasive conception of liberty or autonomy. The notion of autonomy should refer instead to decisions reached with a full and vivid awareness of available opportunities, with all relevant information, or, most generally, without illegitimate constraints on the process of preference formation. When these conditions are not met, decisions might be described as unfree or nonautonomous. If preferences are a product of available information, of existing consumption patterns, of social pressures, and of governmental rules, it seems odd to suggest that individual freedom lies exclusively or by definition in preference satisfaction. It seems even odder to suggest that all preferences should be treated the same, independently of their origins and consequences, or of the reasons offered in their support. intelligible category. Indeed, in many of these cases regulation removes a kind of coercion. In this section I attempt to particularize the claims made above by cataloging cases for democratic rejection of private preferences. In all of these cases, I claim that participants in a liberal republic ought to be concerned with whether its citizens are experiencing satisfying lives and that the salutary liberal commitment to divergent conceptions of the good ought not always to be taken to disable government from expressing that concern through law. The cases fall in three basic categories: collective desires, excessive limitations in opportunties, and intrapersonal collective action problems. Citizens in a democratic polity might act to embody not the preferences that they hold as private consumers, but instead what might be described as collective desires, including aspirations, "preferences about preferences," or considered judgments. Measures of this sort are a product of deliberative processes on the part of citizens and representatives. In those processes, at least sometimes people do not simply ask what they "want." Such measures cannot be understood as an attempt to aggregate or trade-off private preferences. Frequently, political choices cannot easily be understood as a process of aggregating prepolitical desires. Some people may, for example, want nonentertainment broadcasting on television, even though their own consumption patterns favor situation comedies; they may seek stringent laws protecting the environment or endangered species even though they do not use the public parks or derive benefits from protection of species; they may approve of laws calling for social security and welfare even though they do not save or give to the poor; they may support antidiscrimination laws even though their own behavior is hardly race- or gender-neutral. The choices people make as political participants are different from those they make as consumers. Democracy thus calls for an intrusion on markets. How are the differences between choices expressed in markets and those expressed in politics to be explained? There are a number of possibilities. satisfy private choices but instead to ensure the expression or satisfaction of desires that, precisely because of the political setting, have a distinctive character. In a democratic society, government controls are an appropriate response. ket, even a well-functioning one, might protect inadequately. 10 Social ordering through markets may have long-term, world transforming effects that reflect collective myopia, an emphasis on short-term considerations at the expense of the future. Possible responses include promotion of high quality programming in broadcasting, of the arts, and of diversity through protection of the environment and of endangered species. In all these respects, political choices are not made by consulting given or private desires, but instead reflect a deliberative process designed to shape and reflect values. Arguments from collective desires are irresistible if the measure at issue is adopted unanimously. But more serious difficulties are produced if (as is usual) the law imposes on a minority what it regards as a burden rather than a benefit. Suppose, for example, that a majority wants to require high-quality television and to ban violent and dehumanizing shows, but that a significant minority wants to see the latter. If we put the first amendment questions aside for now, it might still be thought that those who perceive a need to bind themselves, or to express an aspiration, should not be permitted to do so if the consequence is to deprive others of an opportunity to satisfy their preferences. 10. See Stewart, Regulation in a Liberal State: The Role of Non-Commodity Values, 92 YALE If the arguments presented in this section are persuasive, they suggest reasons to be skeptical of some normative work in the tradition of public choice theory. According to at least some of this work, much of the business of politics should be seen as "rent-seeking," understood as the expenditure of funds on the wasteful redistribution of resources through politics rather than the production of resources through markets. The notion of "rent-seeking" rejects nearly all of the basic workings of politics. It treats citizenship itself as an evil. Efforts to enact public aspirations, to counteract discrimination, to protect the environment-all these are seen as the diversion of productive energies into a wasteful place. governmental power to serve selfish ends and that the concept of "rentseeking" can often help in understanding the governmental process. But to collapse all political behavior into the category of "rent-seeking" is to devalue grotesquely the activities of citizenship. Citizens in a democracy might override existing preferences in order to foster and promote diverse experiences, with a view toward providing broad opportunities for the formation of preferences and beliefs, and for distance on and critical scrutiny of current desires. This rationale supports private ordering and freedom of contract as well. But it calls for collective safeguards when those forces push toward homogeneity and uniformity, as they often do in industrialized nations. Here the argument for governmental controls finds a perhaps ironic origin in Mill. Such controls are necessary to cultivate divergent conceptions of the good and to ensure a degree of reflection on those conceptions. subsidizing public broadcasting, ensuring a range of disparate programming, or calling for high-quality programming provided only a little or not at all by the marketplace--can be understood in these terms. Indeed, the need to provide diverse opportunities for preference formation suggests reasons to be quite skeptical of unrestricted markets in communication and broadcasting. There is a firm theoretical justification for the much-criticized, and now largely abandoned "fairness doctrine," which required broadcasters to cover controversial issues and to ensure competing views. In light of the inevitable effects of programming on character, beliefs, and even conduct, it is hardly clear that governmental "inaction" is always appropriate in a constitutional democracy; indeed the contrary seems true. (I take up this issue in more detail below.) Moreover, market behavior is sometimes based on an effort to reduce cognitive dissonance by adjusting to undue limitations in current practices and opportunities. When this is so, respect for preferences seems unjustified on grounds of autonomy and perhaps welfare as well. 11. There is a difference between self-conscious adaptation to an intractable status quo and the sorts of processes I am describing. If a person without musical talent decides that he will counteract and revise his desire to be a world-famous pianist, it would be odd to find that (healthy) decision to be inconsistent with personal autonomy. The cases under discussion involve a reflexive process based on an absence, socially produced, of sufficient opportunities. Of course the notion of sufficient opportunities itself requires a baseline; every system contains limited opportunities. 15. Rubin & Peplau, Belief in a Just World and Reaction to Another's Lot: A Study of Partici There is also a case for democratic controls on existing preferences when such preferences are a function of past acts of consumption and when such acts alter desires or beliefs in such a way as to cause long-term harm. Here the purpose of collective controls is to affect the development of certain preferences. Preferences are endogenous not to existing legal rules or to limited opportunities but to past consumption decisions, and in the cases at hand, the effect of those decisions on current preferences is pernicious. For government to act in this context, it is important that it be confident of its conclusions. An absence of information on the part of the private actors is usually a necessary condition for collective controls. to manoeuvre the Indian into a position where rationality conflicts The problem with collective controls in this context is that they are unlikely to be fine-tuned; they often will sweep up so many people and circumstances as to create serious risks of abuse. In some settings, however, citizens will be able to say with confidence that the effect of consumption on preferences will lead to severe welfare or autonomy losses. In such cases democratic controls are justified. A. Government and the Airwaves There is a growing consensus that the government should not concern itself with the airwaves and that total reliance on private markets and consumer preferences is the appropriate strategy for government. In this view, broadcasting should be treated like soap, or cereal, or any other commodity. Indeed, there is a growing consensus that this result is ordained by the first amendment. If the claims made here are persuasive, however, the consensus is misguided. In my view, the considerations marshaled thus far suggest that citizens in a constitutional democracy ought to be conceded the power, and ought to exercise the power, to engage in a wide range of controls. These At least in principle, rights of private access to the media for differing positions ought to be thought congenial to the free speech guarantee. Surely this is so if that guarantee is understood as a protection of a deliberative process centered on public values rather than of a mere "marketplace." The first amendment should not be seen as an obstacle to such efforts. If anything, the existing system might be thought to raise serious constitutional questions. A system in which access to the media, with inevitable consequences for the shaping of preferences and beliefs, is made dependent on private willingness to pay raises genuine problems for free expression. 24 B. Proportional Representation In recent years, there has been a revival of interest in systems of proportional or group representation. Blacks, women, the handicapped, and other disadvantaged groups often have had little success in the ordinary electoral process. There is a solid constitutional pedigree for group representation, notwithstanding the constant and emphatic rejections by the Supreme Court of constitutionally-based arguments for representation of members of racial minority groups. Despite the rigidity of the "one person, one vote" formula, with its majoritarian and individualistic overtones, group representation always has been an important feature of American constitutionalism. 25 Moreover, the basic constitutional institutions of federalism, bicam Much of the appeal of the republican tradition lies in its emphasis on a conception of political life that does not treat private preferences as the foundation of social choice. Those who partake of the republican tradition-for these purposes, a capacious category including writers from Aristotle to Rawls-insist that political institutions have inevitable consequences for preferences and beliefs. A large task of constitutional design, and for the development of legal rules in general, is to ensure that those consequences are favorable rather than unfavorable.