 Many of the most vexing questions in constitutional law result from the rise of the modem regulatory state, which has allowed government to affect constitutional rights, not through criminal sanctions, but instead through spending, licensing, and employment.1 It may well be in these areas that constitutional doctrine is least well developed. It is here that constitutional law promises to receive its most serious tests in the next generation. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This essay is a revised version of a speech in the Boston University School of Law Distinguished Lecturer Series, delivered at Boston University on December 1, 1989. I am most grateful to my hosts at Boston University for their hospitality and help during that occasion. ticipate in government programs have "waived" their constitutional objections, and also to the claim that the government's power not to create a regulatory program necessarily includes the power to impose on that program whatever conditions it chooses. The various puzzles produced by the doctrine have created considerable doctrinal confusion and provoked a wide range of commentary.' It is notable that for all their differences, participants in the debate, both on and off the bench, treat the unconstitutional conditions doctrine as the appropriate device for approaching disputed questions. The differences can be found not on that point, but only in the description of the scope and nature of the doctrine.' This Article comes in two parts. In Part I, I argue that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine should be abandoned. The doctrine, I suggest, is an anachronism; it cannot do th work expected of it. During the transition from the common law system to the modern regulatory state,' the unconstitutional conditions doctrine represented an awkward and never fully explicated effort to protect constitutional rights in a dramatically different institutional environment. The peculiar legacy of this transition and its outmoded foundations continue to pervade current approaches to the problem of unconstitutional conditions. The idea that the system of common law and criminal prohibition provides the basic, even natural state of affairs, and that "intervention"-the Indeed, the very idea of a unitary unconstitutional conditions doctrine is a product of the view that the common law is the ordinary course and that state-is exceptional.6 governmental Despite its pervasiveness,7 this view is misconceived. It is inconsistent with both the realities of contemporary government and the principles that gave rise to it. Instead of a general unconstitutional conditions doctrine asking whether there has been "coercion" or "penalty," what is necessary is a highly particular, constitutionally-centered model of reasons: an approach that asks whether, under the provision at issue, the government has constitutionally sufficient justifications for affecting constitutionally protected interests. To make the analysis as concrete as possible, I will focus throughout on three cases involving selective funding. In the first, government decides to fund public schools but not private schools, and it does so even though there is a constitutional right to send one's children to private schools.8 In the second case, government funds some artistic projects but not others, excluding, for example, projects containing sex or nudity, criticizing the government, or proclaiming the virtues of Nazism or Communism. In the third, government funds childbirth but not abortion in cases in which pregnancy results from rape or incest. In this section, I explore what sort of directions the current understandings of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine might provide in these cases. Doctrine I have said that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is an artifact of the collision of the regulatory-welfare state with the preexisting common law framework. To understand that claim, it will be useful briefly to review the collision. Most of the story will be familiar. ing that the common law and private markets were regulatory systems and that those systems sometimes produced both inefficiency and injustice. efficiency or distributive justice, is necessary to support displacement of freedom of contract or indeed of any system. in current doctrine. 17 There has been broad agreement on the importance of inquiring into the burdens that governmental activities place on rights. See, e.g., Epstein, supra note 3, at 7-8; Sullivan, supra note 3, at 1500; Van Alstyne, supra note 3, at 1442. See also infra text accompanying notes 46-53. The second position was prominent in the early twentieth century; though it has echoes in many places," it has perhaps only one full-fledged defender today.2' Here the connection between the unconstitutional conditions doctrine and its earliest pre-New Deal manifestations is perhaps clearest. 20 See Sunstein, Lochner's Legacy, supra note 6, at 882. 21 For a recent example, see Nollan v. California Coastal Comm'n, 438 U.S. 825 (1987) (holding the Commission's conditioning the right to develop private beachfront property on landowner's providing public easement to be an invalid taking of property). had been conferred upon government officials in the first instance." Id. at 28. This understanding of the doctrine would suggest-to take one examplethat a government that funds public schools must also fund private schools. On this account, some version of a voucher system, in which the government would also finance students who chose to attend religious schools, would be constitutionally compelled.' If government funds only public schools, it works an impermissible redistribution from one group of taxpayers to another; and it is redistribution against which the doctrine must guard. The third position, represented by the current constitutional mainstream,32 sees the unconstitutional conditions doctrine as an effort to preserve legal requirements of governmental neutrality under different social and economic conditions. It is in this requirement of government neutrality that one finds the staples of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine: the government may not do indirectly what it may not do directly; government may not "penalize" the exercise of constitutional rights; and government may not coerce people into relinquishing constitutional rights through regulation, spending, and licensing, any more than it may do so through criminal sanctions. In some respects, 30 For Epstein, that role is to preserve economic liberties and private property. that conditioning they are highly salutary, especially insofar as they recognize the possibility that non-criminal sanctions often affect constitutional rights in ways that government is unable to justify. Above all, these ideas operate as a corrective both to approaches that see common law rights as the general baseline against which an unconstitutional conditions doctrine must operate, and those who, following Holmes, suggest that courts should not limit the intrusions on constitutional rights that occur through spending and employment decisions. But how does one decide whether the refusal to pay for medically necessary abortions is a "subsidy" or a "penalty" in the face of government funding of childbirth and almost all other medically necessary expenditures? Perhaps government action should be deemed a penalty rather than a subsidy when the government prevents someone from obtaining something to which she would "otherwise" be entitled. This formulation, however, makes the distinction between "subsidy" and "penalty," like the very category of ''coercion," rely on a baseline defining the ordinary or desirable state of affairs." The courts must rely on some status quo to decide what people would "otherwise" receive. In a post-Medicaid world, is not a poor woman seeking an abortion "otherwise" entitled to payment for medically necessary expenditures, including abortions? The Harris dissenters made precisely this All this suggests that the development of the relevant baseline is enormously difficult. In Harris, the Court appeared quite reflexively to use a common law baseline that assumed government funding to be exceptional rather than ordinary,' but the common law may simply no longer be appropriate in these cases. Once the common law touchstone is abandoned, however, it is not at all clear what standard is to replace it. If the subsidypenalty line is crucial, development of proper baselines is the key issue; but it is also an issue on which the unconstitutional conditions doctrine and the subsidy-penalty distinction, standing by themselves, have absolutely nothing to say.41 The problem goes deeper. Sometimes, as I argue below, the government the exercise of constitutional rights through can legitimately "penalize" selective funding.' Some constitutional provisions do indeed permit regulation through funding but not through criminalization. It is hardly self-evident, in any case, that all penalties must be unconstitutional. Served in Other Ways The discussion thus far suggests that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine has taken the shape that it has and produced the debates that it has only in reaction to a set of particular, quite distinctive historical conditions. In short, the doctrine filled a particular gap in post-New Deal constitutional theory by offering a means of placing limits on novel governmental activities. We might make this point by imagining a different society in which collective constraints were, from time immemorial, carried out through licensing, funding, and employment decisions. In such a society, the criminal law would be absent, and constitutional safeguards would be applied to the familiar kinds of sanctions. Suppose that after many generations, the society created a new set of sanctions--call them criminal fines and confinementas a supplement to its basic regulatory system. 44 Although this is usually so, it is not necessarily so as a logical matter. At least in theory, one could define the status quo not by reference to current practice or to history, but instead by reference to some baseline justified as a matter of principle. But there would be enormous difficulties in establishing the foundations for any such justification. Cf Kreimer, supra note 3, at 1359-74 (developing a baseline analysis grounded in considerations of history, equality, and prediction); Simons, Offers, Threats, and Unconstitutional Conditions, 26 SAN DIEGO L. REv. 289 (1989) (arguing that the proper baseline for measuring threats and offers is what the government would have provided if it could not impose conditions). instead take For modern observers, then, the question has to do with what genuine, nonobfuscating work the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is necessary to perform. I suggest here that it is possible to identify three such functions. But because the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is not necessary to discharge these tasks, and because the tasks can be carried out through other, more particular, approaches, I argue that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine should be abandoned.45 1. Identifying a Technique of Burdening The first function the unconstitutional conditions doctrine performs is to identify a technique by which government affects or burdens constitutional rights.6 The doctrine serves to alert courts to the fact that a government spending decision-for example, a decision to condition the receipt of welfare benefits on a waiver of first or fourth amendment rights-often affects constitutional rights in ways that call for persuasive justification or perhaps invalidation. The second function of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is to provide a shorthand and sometimes persuasive response to two familiar arguments. The first is that if government has no duty to create a program at all, it may create the program with certain conditions. The greater power, in short, necessarily includes the lesser. The second argument invokes the language of voluntariness. If, for example, a person has freely chosen to forego 45 It would follow that the approaches in Kreimer, supra note 3, and L. TRIBE, supra note 2, are misguided, and for the same reason. It remains true, however, that there will be some commonalities in judicial treatment of constitutional attacks on funding and licensing decisions, once those attacks are seen as raising not unconstitutional conditions questions, but instead, for example, first, fifth, and fourteenth amendment questions. The third function of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is to reveal something true, important, and perhaps surprising about the character of some substantive rights and the nature of government justifications. In short, the doctrine reveals that some constitutional rights are not rights to government neutrality at all. In some contexts, government has available to it certain justifications that allow it to be selective in decisions with respect to funding, licensing, or employment. 49 Pierce v. Society of Sisters, 268 U.S. 510 (1925). 10 In Pierce, the sanction involved a state statute making it a misdemeanor for parents not to send their children to public schools. See also Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205 (1972) (holding that the state may not enforce a criminal statute against Amish families refusing to send children to public school beyond the eighth grade). indeed But is an unconstitutional conditions doctrine necessary to accomplish this task? It would be far more straightforward to ask whether the government has available to it distinctive justifications because of the context in which the relevant burden is imposed. Nothing in the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is helpful in answering that question, or even in suggesting the need to ask it. The doctrine should be abandoned. Thus far my discussion has been quite general. I have argued in favor of a shift from an emphasis on whether there has been "coercion" or "penalty" to an inquiry into the nature of the interest affected by government and the reasons offered by government for its intrusion. The inquiry into both interis not unconstrained. The Constitution identifies a ests and reasons restricted category of protected rights and limits the category of justifications that government may offer. taxpaying public. In general, such objections often provide a legitimate reason for funding decisions. What is the status of those objections in funding that involves constitutionally troublesome areas? Perhaps surprisingly, I argue that for the most part, moral objections ought not to play a significant role. We have seen that under current law, government is constitutionally obliged to permit people to send their children to private schools; but it is under no obligation to fund private schools even if it pays for public schools. Neutrality as between public and private schools is not a constitutional imperative.' Financial pressures that induce people to send their children to public school raise no constitutional problem. The second reason for this general conclusion is that any government has strong and legitimate reasons to favor public over private education, in order, for example, to foster the development of an integrated national or state polity, to promote citizenship, 7 and to break down barriers of race, 4 See L.TRIBE, supra note 2, at 1275 & n.138. 5 Pierce, 268 U.S. at 510. o A possible response to this argument is that private schools are not necessarily religious schools, and that as a result, a decision not to fund private schools cannot be supported by the desire to prevent taxpayer funding of religion. But it is probably sufficient for these purposes that the vast majority of private schools are religious. It would of course follow that there would be no constitutional problem if the government decided to fund only secular schools, whether public or private. religion, and class.' These reasons are of course insufficient to permit an outright governmental prohibition of private schools. But they are significant enough to permit the government to fund public but not private schools, and through that route to encourage attendance at public schools. 9 Government is thus constitutionally authorized to be neutral toward private and public schools, but it is under no obligation to do so. A system in which government may fund public schools but not private schools, and allows its citizenry to opt out of the public school system at its own expense, seems to be the best reconciliation of the competing interests-understood through the lens of the constitutional structure generally and the first amendment in particular. In this context, then, governmental selectivity is permitted, not because of the absence of "penalty," but because of the presence of legitimate justifications. The question of governmentally funded speech and art has become especially controversial in recent years, because of troublesome selectivity in funding decisions in the first instance and because of several highly visible efforts to withdraw federal or state money from publicly disapproved projects."° The general issue is likely to become even more heated in the future. Government is quite frequently implicated in the funding and promotion of the arts, and there are both legitimate and illegitimate reasons for refusing to fund or withdrawing funds from certain programs. Some of these cases are exceptionally difficult, and my conclusions should be regarded as especially tentative. indeed, in order to improve the quality of its citizens, physically, mentally and morally is clear .... ). Second, funding decisions that are based on qualitative or aesthetic grounds should be entirely legitimate, at least presumptively and in most cases. The government might properly decide to fund projects that it considers to be of high caliber. Indeed, such judgments are inescapable for those who allocate limited resources. 6 Of course there must be procedural guarantees to ensure that the speech at issue actually falls in the unprotected class. If these claims are broadly correct, it is possible to develop some tentative conclusions. The clearest constitutional violation consists of discrimination on the basis of point of view." Most other decisions will be permissible, for they will involve subject matter or aesthetics. The hardest cases arise when the relevant discrimination seems to involve judgments about subject matter or aesthetics but is in fact an effort to control a particular point of view. 63 It follows that the action of the Chicago City Council in removing the offensive painting of Harold Washington was unconstitutional because it was based on official disapproval of a private decision to ridicule the former Mayor. 61 And that standpoint is rarely without political content. For an especially. good ernment might have sufficient reason to refuse to fund such speech even if it may not criminalize it. The Supreme Court has held that the existence of a right to an abortion does not imply a correlative right to public funding of abortion, even if the government is also funding childbirth. 7 In this respect, the right to have an abortion stands on the same footing as the right to send one's children to public schools. In neither case is neutrality required. 67 Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297, 316-17 (1980) (stating that a woman's right to choose an abortion does not carry with it a constitutional entitlement to the financial resources necessary to exercise that right). been presented to it. 70 See supra text accompanying notes 54-59. 71 See McConnell, The Selective Funding Problem: Abortions and Religious Schools (unpublished manuscript) [hereinafter McConnell manuscript]; McConnell, supra note 59, at 265-71. There are, however, notorious difficulties in treating the abortion right as one of privacy, not least because the Constitution does not refer to "privacy" and because the abortion decision does not involve conventional privacy at all.75 Certainly, in the case of abortions involving rape or incest, the best argument on behalf of the relevant right is based on principles of equal protection rather than on due process.76 This argument stresses issues of sex discrimination and views a prohibition on abortion as an involuntary cooptation of women's bodies in the service of third parties.77 13 See McConnell manuscript, supra note 71. 74 Id. 75 Perhaps the right is one to liberty or autonomy. Liberty is of course protected by the due process clause, and the notion that that clause has a substantive component, though textually and historically controversial, is well-engrained in American law. But if the argument that follows in the text is correct, that understanding inadequately captures the dynamics of the abortion question. The first point here is that restrictions on abortion uniquely burden women. A statute that is addressed at women by plain terms is of course a form of sex discrimination. A statute that involves a biological correlate of being female should be treated in the same way.7" The fact that what is to many another life-that of the fetus-is involved is of course extremely important. The practice of abortion plausibly involves the death of another human being, one who is especially defenseless; and conscientious objections that invoke fetal protection deserve a response. But that fact goes to the issue of justification, not to the question whether there is discrimination in the first instance. third party may do, and what a mother may do, if mentioned at all, is reduced to an afterthought ...."). Issues of sexual inequality are not, however, sufficiently emphasized in those treatments. Two additional factors support this line of argument. First, outside of the abortion context, the government never imposes similar obligations on its citizens, even when human life is uncontroversially at stake.82 In the abortion context, the striking inequality of imposing the burden of bodily cooptation on women alone suggests that the interest in protection of human lifeif invoked as the basis for selective impositions and when pregnancy is involuntary-is inadequate, or can be found adequate only as a result of impermissible sex role stereotypes. that for those seeking to restrict abortions, "abortion is wrong because by giving women control over their fertility ... it fosters and supports a world view that deemphasizes... the traditional roles of men and women"). The connection is an historical one, rather than a logical or necessary one. treated as an artificial supplement to a natural or spontaneous social orderthe central instinct behind Harris v. McRae 8 7-and if the ideas that gave rise to the regulatory state are taken seriously. Viewed through the lens of the New Deal period, the failure to fund is not inaction at all. It represents a conscious social choice, one that conscripts women in the cause of incubation, rather than simply letting "nature" take its course.' If poverty is seen not as part of nature, but instead as a predictable consequence of a system of collective choices, governmental decisions that turn poverty and biology into a basis for the creation of the status of involuntary incubators seem to run afoul of the equal protection clause. 81 Indeed, a refusal to fund abortion at all, in cases of rape and incest, might raise serious constitutional questions.