University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1990 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Political Economy, Administrative Law: A Comment Comment 
Political Economy, Administrative Law: A Comment Comment 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Political Economy, Administrative Law: A Comment Comment," 6 Journal of Law, 
Economics and Organization 299 (1990). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Political  Economy,  Administrative  Law:
A  Comment

CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN
University of Chicago

In  the  last  generation,  writings  on  the  regulatory  state  have  taken  three
principal forms.  The  first,  coming mostly  from  academic  lawyers,  consists  of
efforts  to discern  the logic of judge-made public law  and to make  recommen-
dations  to  federal  courts  reviewing  administrative  action.  The  second,  com-
ing  mostly from  economists,  consists  of efforts  to  explain  regulatory  law  by
reference  to  the  self-interest  of  participants  in  the  legislative  process.  The
third,  coming  from  a quite  eclectic  group,  consists  of efforts  to  compare  the
current administrative  state with  approaches  that  show a better  appreciation
of the appropriate  nature of government  intervention  and,  especially,  of the
proper  relationships  among  democratic  self-government,  bureaucracy,  and
private  rights.

Jerry  Mashaw's  paper  on  the  different  "stories"  of  legal  development
attempts  to  mediate  among  what  he  sees  as  the  rival  claims  of  these  three
different  kinds  of  work.  Mashaw  suggests  that  the  three  schools  generate
different  explanations  or  predictions  about  the  administrative  process;  he
wants  to  compare  and  test  their  claims.  His  conclusion  is  that  none  of  the
predictions  ultimately  holds  up.

I  agree  with  a large  number of  Mashaw's  particular  arguments,  and  I  find
many  of his  criticisms  of  the  three  approaches  both  valuable  and  entirely
persuasive.  What  I  want  to  ask  here  is  whether  the  task  of  mediation,  as

Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization vol.  6,  Special  Issue  1990
©  1990  by  Oxford  University Press.  All  rights  reserved.  ISSN  8756-6222

HeinOnline  -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 299 1990

300  /  JOURNAL  OF  LAW,  ECONOMICS,  AND  ORGANIZATION  VI:  1990

Mashaw  understands  it,  might  not  be  misguided.  If it is,  there  is  a  simple
reason:  only  one of the different  efforts  amounts  to  an effort  at explanation  or
prediction  at all.  There  are  no competing  hypotheses  here.  For  this  reason,
the  task  of  mediation  comes  at  a  high  price.  It converts  a  large  amount  of
work  on  the  regulatory  state  into  positive  social  science,  when  in  fact  it  is
something  quite  different.

I  also  want to  suggest,  however,  that  Mashaw  has  provided  an  important
service  in  bringing the three forms  of work into contact  with one another and
in  suggesting  some  of  their  tensions  and  interrelations.  In  Section  2  of this
comment,  I  make  some  observations  about  what  participants  in  the  three
enterprises  might be  able  to  learn  from  one another.  In  the process,  I  hope
to  join  Mashaw  in  suggesting  some  of the  ingredients  of a  unified  political
economy  for  the  regulatory  state.

1.  REGULATORY  STORIES

Let me begin  by attempting  to  characterize  the three  "stories" around which
Mashaw's  efforts  revolve.  I will stay with  his basic  categories,  but, as we shall
soon  see,  in  some  ways  my  descriptions  will  depart from  his.

What Mashaw  describes  as  the work  of the  "legal idealist"  might  be seen
as  the  ordinary, day-to-day,  mid-level  enterprise  of the  legal  academic  oper-
ating  largely  within  the  existing  legal  culture.  For  the  internal  expositor  or
critic  of administrative  law,  the  central  task is  to  discern  the  logic  of judge-
made  doctrines,  to  unpack  their  assumptions,  and to  evaluate  them.  In  this
category  one  can  find  a  large  number  of claims,  amounting  to  the  staple  of
academic  work  in  administrative  law.  Herewith  a  sample,  taken  randomly
from  recent  writing  on  judge-made  public  law:  the  courts'  hostility  to  ex
parte  contacts  in  notice-and-comment  rule-making  reflects  on  emerging,
quasi-adjudicative  model  of  administration;  the  courts  have  been  far  more
hospitable  to  administrative  decisions  that  comport  with  traditional  prin-
ciples  of  compensatory  justice  than  with  decisions  that  reject  those  prin-
ciples;  post-1980  doctrines  of standing  and  reviewability  embody  pre-New-
Deal  assumptions  and  indeed  reflect  hostility  to  government  regulation;
judicial  deference  to  administrative  interpretations  of law  reflects  an  under-
standing  that  the  resolution  of  statutory ambiguities  is  actually  a decision  of
policy;  judicial  requirements  of  elaborate  explanations  from  administrators
bring  about  substantial  delays  in  the  rule-making  process  or  (alternatively)
serve  to  decrease  the  risk  of factionalism  in  government.

These sorts  of claims  do have serious  limitations,  for reasons  suggested  by
Mashaw and  taken  up  further  below.  But do  they even  attempt  to  "explain"
administrative  processes?  To  the  extent  that  the  evaluations  they  offer  are
favorable,  some  of  this  work  indeed  tends  to  describe  administrative  law
doctrines  as  if they were  "designed" to  accomplish  some desirable social  end.
But  these  claims  should  not,  I  think,  be  taken  as  explanatory  ones  in  the

HeinOnline  -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 300 1990

COMMENT  ON  MASHAW  /  301

sense  indicated  by  Mashaw.  They  are  more  on  the  order  of  the  claim  that
Brown v.  Board of Education was  "designed"  to  impose  a  general  principle
of color  blindness.  In other words,  they are  interpretive  rather  than positive
claims.  They  attempt to  make  the best  possible sense  out of a line  of judicial
decisions.  They  are  falsifiable  in  the  sense  that  they  attempt  to  fit  their
claims  with  the  data  (i.e.,  with  existing judicial  decisions).  Among  the  vari-
ous possible  accounts  that have  a plausible  claim to  fit, however,  the choice is
made  on  value-laden  grounds.  In  this  respect,  interpretive  claims  are  not
positive  in  the  sense  that  Mashaw  understands  the  term.

When  doctrinal  analysts  describe  what  a  doctrine  is  "intended"  to  do,
they  should  not be  thought to  be making  a claim  about the  subjective  moti-
vations  of  the  judges  or,  much  less,  about  what  really  accounts  for  that
doctrine  as  a  matter of social  science.  They are  not  making  the functionalist
error  of explaining  a  result  by reference  to  its  consequences.  Instead,  they
are  attempting  to bring  out the  logic of legal doctrine  by positing the  sorts of
claims  that might  be invoked  in  its favor.  This  is  a time-honored  approach  to
law.  It  should  hardly be  disparaged,  but  it is  not positive  social  science.

If  this  is  right,  Mashaw  goes  wrong  in  treating  efforts  of this  sort  as  an
effort  to  provide  a predictive  or  positive  guide  at all.  More  fundamentally,  I
think  that  Mashaw  is  mistaken  in  suggesting  that what  he  calls  the  idealist
conception  would  predict  a  range  of judicial  (rather  than  legislative  and
bureaucratic) controls  on  the  administrative  process.  For the  most part,  the
academic  lawyers  are  not  engaged  in  that  enterprise  at  all. 1

What  Mashaw describes  as  the  "CLS  description  of administrative  law" I
prefer  to  see  as  a  far  broader  effort,  from  a  range  of  starting  points,  to
evaluate  regulatory  substance  and  process  by  reference  to  first  principles
with  respect  to  (a)  democratic  theory  and  (b)  substantive  ideas  about  the
proper extent  and form  of regulatory  controls.  In this  category  fall a number
of  claims  about  the  democratic  or  antidemocratic  character  of the  modern
regulatory  state  and  about  the  ways  in  which  that  state  does  more  or  less
than  it ought to  do.  Thus,  for  example,  it  might be  said  that the  category  of
public-interest justifications for legislation is  very large,  including not simply
responses  to  market  failures  but  also  a  recognition  of the  endogenous  char-
acter  of certain  preferences;  an  endorsement,  through  law,  of social  aspira-
tions;  a  powerful  antidiscrimination  principle;  and  certain  forms  of  re-
distribution.  In  one  version,  coming  from  the  far  left,  the  administrative
state  is  said  to have  been  defended  on  the  basis  of a  number  of  ultimately
unsuccessful  strategies  of  legitimation. 2  On  this  account,  administrative

1.  Of course,  it would be  possible to  recast  some  such claims  in  those  terms and then  to test
them:  for example,  do the  courts  consistently  defer  to  political  choices?  Do they  systematically
disfavor  regulatory  beneficiaries?  I  do  not deny  that  some  claims  of academic  lawyers  take  the
form  of falsifiable  predictions.

2.  In  fact,  there  is  no  developed  work  from  the  critical  legal  studies  movement  on  admin-

istrative  law.  Mashaw  relies  on  Frug.

HeinOnline  -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 301 1990

302 /  JOURNAL  OF  LAW,  ECONOMICS,  AND  ORGANIZATION  VI:  1990

dominance  and  discretion  are  concealed  by arguments  that attempt,  unsuc-
cessfully,  to  discern  a  pedigree  for  modern  administration  in  the  form  of
democratic  self-governance  or  neutral  legal  constraint.

Mashaw  attempts  to  translate  this  latter  sort  of  claim  into  an  argument
"predicting"  that  administrative  law  doctrine  will  "maintain  the  relatively
unconstrained  power  of  bureaucratic  officials  to  exercise  state  power."  I
doubt,  however,  that  the  critics  have  made  any  such  predictive  argument.
Normative  arguments  about failed  efforts  at legitimation  should not  be taken
as  positive  claims about what it is that administrative  law  doctrines will do.  It
would be perfectly  plausible  to  say  that efforts  at the  legitimation  of bureau-
cratic  authority  fail,  while  at  the  same  time taking  no  position  on the  ques-
tion  whether  administrative  law  will,  in  general  or  in  particular,  maximize,
minimize,  or  take  some  middle  course  on  the  question  of bureaucratic  dis-
cretion.  Much  depends,  of course,  on what  the  notion  to  "relatively  uncon-
strained  power"  is  intended  to  comprehend.  But  unless  any  amount  of dis-
cretionary  authority  at  all  is  thought  to  fall  in  this  category-and  perhaps
Frug  and others  can  be read  to  make  this puzzling  suggestion-the  predic-
tive  claim  is  difficult  to  find  in  the  literature.

Indeed,  it would  be  extremely surprising  if the critics  attempted  to  make
a  positive  claim  to  the  effect  that  administrative  law  will  maintain  uncon-
strained  bureaucratic  discretion.  That claim  would  be hard  to  sustain.  There
are  multiple  actors  in  the  administrative  state,  and,  even  if failed  legitima-
tion is  the  ultimate  point of one's  story,  it  would  be peculiar  indeed  if all  of
those  other  actors-courts,  Congress,  the  president-were  simultaneously
embarking  on  the  pursuit  of unconstrained  bureaucratic  power.

All  this  suggests  that the  critics,  taken  as  a broad group  or as  participants
in  something  more narrow  like  CLS,  are  not  making a claim with  any power-
ful  positive  implications  about  the  structure  of bureaucratic  decision-mak-
ing.  As in  the  case of the  legal idealist,  Mashaw  seems  to  me to  be mistaking
a  set  of  essentially  normative  claims  for  predictive  or  explanatory
judgments.

3

With  respect  to  positive  political  theory,  Mashaw  is,  of course,  on  firm
ground.  Here the  task is  indeed  to  explain  why  administrative  process  takes
the form  that it does.  Moreover,  a number of Mashaw's  criticisms  of positive
work  on administration  seem  to me  correct.  I  think,  however,  that  Mashaw
may  be  mischaracterizing  the  relevant  work  when  he  suggests  that it posits
"legislative  control"  as  the  overarching  theme  of positive political  science  in
this  area.  Any  positive  theory  of the  regulatory  state will  acknowledge  that
there  are  other  actors,  with  other  agendas,  in  the  process.  And,  as  several
positive  analysts  have  argued,  legislative  control  may  be  something  that

3.  Of course,  these  sorts  of normative claims  do involve  some  views  about the  data,  includ-

ing  the  decided  cases.

HeinOnline  -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 302 1990

COMMENT  ON  MASHAW  /  30'

legislators  themselves  will  work  against-in  favor  of, for  example,  bureau-
cratic  or  state  authority,  which  in  some  contexts  will  be  in  the  interest  of
legislators  focused  on  reelection.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  think  that  all
positive  political  science  in  this  area is designed  to  prove that  administrative
processes  can  be  explained  as  if  they  were  an  effort  to  increase  legislative
control  of  the  administrative  process.

If I  am  correct  on  this,  the  three  enterprises  with  which  we  are  dealing
are 
in  fact  incommensurable,  not  because  they  have  different  meth-
odologies,  but  because  they  set  for  themselves  different  tasks.  Only  one  ol
them  amounts  to  an  "explanation"  in  the  positive  sense  at  all.  Both  the
idealist and  the critical  approaches  are  largely  normative.  To  the extent  that
they offer explanations,  it is with  an eye  toward  describing,  respectively,  the
logic around  which some  of the  cases  might  be organized  and evaluated,  and
the  foundations  from  which  one  might  understand  the  correspondence  or
noncorrespondence  between  the administrative  state  and ideals  of democrat-
ic self-governance.  These are  explanations  in a  sense,  but of a quite  different
order  from  those  involved  in  positive  social  science.  They  do  not  predict
judicial  or  administrative  control  at  all.

2.  NOTES  TOWARD  A  UNIFIED  POLITICAL  ECONOMY
OF ADMINISTRATIVE  LAW

The considerations  treated  thus far  do  not suggest  that the three enterprises
might  not learn  something  from  one  another, nor  do I  deny  that all  of them
might be  making serious  mistakes  that an engagement  with  the others might
help  to remedy. In this  section,  I want  to  say  a few words  about  some of the
limitations of each  of these enterprises,  and to  speculate on  how work  in each
of them  might  be  enriched  through  an  understanding  of the  others.

2.1.  THE  MYOPIA  OF  ACADEMIC  ADMINISTRATIVE  LAW

Administrative  law  in  the  law  schools  remains  largely  in  the  grip  of  the
tradition  set  by  Kenneth  Culp  Davis  and  Louis  Jaffe.  Focused  on  judicial
control  of administrative behavior,  it sees  the purposes  of administrative  law
as  embracing  a  constellation  of  related  concerns:  to  guarantee  legality;  to
promote  procedural  regularity;  and  to  ensure  against  irrationality  and  in-
justice,  defined  by  reference  to  common-sense  intuitions.

These  ideas  are  far  too  vague  to  provide  a  full  sense  of  the  appropriate
nature  of  judicial  controls  on  the  regulatory  state.  An  understanding  of
positive  political  science  might  provide  significant  help.  Some  regulatory
statutes  should,  for  example,  be  seen  as  "deals"  among  self-interested  pri-
vate  groups;  they are  not public-regarding  at  all.  Moreover,  regulatory  stat-

HeinOnline  -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 303 1990

304  /  JOURNAL  OF  LAW,  ECONOMICS,  AND  ORGANIZATION  VI:  1990

utes  have  a variety  of malfunctions,  some of them counterintuitive. 4  Statutes
are  often  poorly  coordinated  with  one  another.  Sometimes  they  become
obsolete.  They also  have  complex  systemic  effects.  Overregulation  produces
underregulation;  concentration  on  new  risks  perpetuate  old  risks;  re-
distributive  regulation  often  hurts  those at  the  bottom  of the  economic  lad-
der;  legal  requirements  of  the  "best  available  technology"  can,  ironically,
retard  technological  development.

An  understanding  of these  various  phenomena could  prove  most  helpful
to  doctrinal  analysis  in  administrative  law.  It  might  show, for  example,  that
the  consequences  of  regulatory  statutes  are  quite  different  from  what  is
anticipated,  and  an  understanding  of the  consequences  might well  bear  on
statutory interpretation  and on  the decision  about what courses  of action  are
"arbitrary"  within  the  meaning  of  the  Administrative  Procedure  Act.  For
example,  an  understanding  of the  ways  in  which  regulatory  controls  on  new
risks  perpetuate  old  risks  might  well  affect  judicial  analysis. 5  The  fact  that
statutes  are  sometimes  "deals"  among  private  actors  might  also  bear  on
statutory  construction,  although  here  the  implications  are  uncertain.  Fur-
thermore,  if problems  in  aggregating  multiple  views  in  the  legislature  pro-
duce  irrationality  or  incoherence,  perhaps  there  is  much  to  be  gained  by
ensuring  regulation  via  the  president  rather  than  the  Congress.

To  the  extent  that  criticisms  of  administrative  legitimacy  have  weight,
those  criticisms,  too,  might  play  a role  in  judge-made  doctrines.  For  exam-
ple,  attacks  on  policy-making  by  bureaucrats  (again,  if they  are  persuasive)
might  lead  to  a  reinvigoration  of  the  nondelegation  doctrine  or  at  least  to
"clear statement"  principles,  forbidding  administrators  to  engage  in  certain
activity  unless  Congress  has  expressly  authorized  it.  In  such  cases,  admin-
istrative  doctrines  always  depend  on  understandings  about  political  legiti-
macy,  even  if such  understandings  are  tacit;  and  an  engagement  with  theo-
inevitably  enrich  such
ries  about 
understandings.  This  is  true  even  if judge-made  doctrines  are  highly  un-
likely  to  respond  in  a  serious  way  to  the  most  extreme  versions  of  the
"legitimation"  complaint.

legitimation  will 

legitimacy  and 

2.2.  THE  NARROWNESS  OF  POSITIVE  POLITICAL  SCIENCE

A  considerable  amount  of positive  political  science  on the  subject  of regula-
tion  is  organized  around  the  notion  of  "rent-seeking."  The  notion  is  not
always  clearly  explicated;  at  least  in  some  hands,  it  seems  to  refer  to  the
wasteful  expenditure  of  funds  on  the  redistribution  of  resources  through
politics  rather  than  the  healthy  production  of  resources  through  markets.
Thus,  for  example,  efforts  to  obtain  environmental  controls,  or  to  obtain  a

4.  See  Sunstein  (1990a,b).
5.  See  Sunstein  (1990b:407-41).

HeinOnline  -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 304 1990

COMMENT  ON  MASHAW  / 30,

"fairness"  doctrine  to  control  broadcasting,  are  thought  to  represent  the
diversion  of resources  into an  unproductive  place.

So  described,  the  notion  of rent-seeking  rejects  most  of the  basic  work-
ings  of politics.  It treats  citizenship  itself as  an  evil.  And while  it is intended
as  a tool  of positive  analysis,  in  fact  it is based  on  a  set  of premises  that  arc
rarely  disentangled  and  that  amount  to  tacit,  and exceedingly  peculiar,  un-
derstandings  of democratic  theory. It assumes  that  the  status  quo-existing
distributions-are  not themselves  a product of politics  or in  need of defense.
It treats politics  as  a system  for the transfer of wealth  rather than for delibera-
tion  about  values.  Indeed,  it  assimilates  the  second  to  the  first,  and  thu,
renders  it invisible.

More  generally,  the  notion  of rent-seeking  represents  a peculiar  reversa
of the liberal  tradition,  which has seen  political behavior  not as an  evil,  but a!
an  important  arena  for  education,  for  deliberation  and discussion  about  th(
nation's  direction,  for the  development  of  the  faculties,  and for  the  cultiva.
tion  of  feelings  of  altruism.  On  all  of  these  scores,  the  liberal  traditior
remains  reasonably  vibrant in  the  United  States;  and  it continues  to describ(
a  wide  range  of individual  and  collective  behavior.  It would,  of course,  b(
foolish  to deny  that  much political  conduct  is  an  effort  to  use  governmenta
power  to  serve  selfish  ends.  But  to  collapse  all  political  behavior  into  th(
category  of  "rent-seeking"  is  grotesquely  to  devalue  the  activities  of  cit
izenship.  An  effort by  those who  practice positive  political  science  to  engag(
with  the  literature  of democratic  theory  would  be  most  helpful  here.

As  Mashaw  properly  points  out,  moreover,  much  of  positive  politica
science  represents  a crude  form  of functionalism.  Prominent  in  such  divers(
areas  as  Marxism,  economics,  and  sociology,  work  of  this  sort  deduces
cause  of  a  phenomenon  from  its  effects.  But  this  is  bad  social  science.  I
amounts  to  the telling  of plausible  stories,  but it is  really no  more than  that
The  fact  that  a  regulatory  system  has  the  effect  of,  for  example,  helpin t
Eastern  industry does  not demonstrate  that  the system was  enacted becaus(
of that  effect.

2.3.  CRITICAL  WORK  AND  POLITICS

Some  work  in  the  critical  tradition  seems  naive  about  a  range  of  issues
including  the  consequences  of  governmental  intervention  in  the  mar
ketplace.  Such  intervention  does  not  create  simple  ex  post  winners  an(
losers.  It  has  a  range  of  distributive  consequences,  some  of them  unantici
pated  and  perverse.  An  understanding  of  the  complex  systemic  effects  o
regulatory  enactments-inevitable  in  a  market  (or nonmarket)  economy-
would  be  extremely  helpful  here.

Moreover,  positive political  science  helps  to produce  a healthy skepticisn
about the possibilities  of democratic politics,  at least in  any polity  that we ar
likely  to  have.  Social  choice  theory  has  revealed  a  number  of difficulties  ii

HeinOnline  -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 305 1990

306  /  JOURNAL  OF  LAW,  ECONOMICS,  AND  ORGANIZATION  VI:  1990

describing any  outcome  in  a multimember  body as  reflecting a unitary  "pub-
lic  will."  An  understanding  of collective  action  problems,  cycling,  strategic
behavior,  agenda  manipulation,  and economies  of scale  should at least weak-
en  the  enthusiasm  of some  critical  theorists  for  small-scale  systems  of par-
ticipatory  democracy.

To  say  this  is  not  at all  to  suggest  that an  engagement  with  positive  work
on  the  regulatory  state  leads  directly  to  any  particular  set  of ideas  on  the
appropriate  relationship  between  bureaucracy  and  democracy.  But  it  does
suggest that critical  approaches  to  that question  would  be much  improved if
they  took account  of that  work.

3.  CONCLUSION

It  is  a mistake,  I think,  to  translate  either the work  of the doctrinal  analyst  or
the  various  critiques  of the  democratic  theorist  into  a set  of positive  claims
about  how  administrative  processes  actually  come  about.  At  most,  the  doc-
trinal analyst  is  arguing,  for example,  that there  is  a discernible  logic behind
otherwise  mysterious  developments  in  the  case  law;  and  the  democratic
theorist  is  arguing  that,  for  example,  participants  in  modern  liberal  states
make  unsuccessful  claims by which they attempt to  legitimate  the exercise of
discretionary  power  by  bureaucrats.  But  neither  of  these  arguments  is  a
prediction  or  explanation  at  all.

To  say  this is  not  to  say  that  the  three perspectives  on administrative  law
have  nothing  to  learn  from  each  other.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  a pressing
need  for  a  more  unified  political  economy  of  administrative  law.  Such  a
political  economy  would  reflect  an  understanding  of  the  principles  and
pathologies  of the  regulatory  state;  of the forces that have  brought it about;  of
the  devices  by  which  various  actors  have  attempted  to  discipline  it;  and  of
the  failures  and  successes  of  regulation,  assessed  by  reference  both  to  its
real-world  performance  and to  democratic  theory. A  unified  political  econo-
my  would  indeed  attempt  to  mediate  among  different  perspectives  on  the
regulatory  state.  It would  do so  not by  seeing which one is  more sound  than
the others,  but instead by appreciating  that each of them attempts  important
(although  quite  different)  tasks,  and  by  taking  advantage  of  the  work  that
performs  each  of those  tasks  well  rather  than  poorly.

REFERENCES
Frug,  Gerald  E.  1984.  "The  Ideology of Bureaucracy  in American  Law,"  97 Harvard

Sunstein,  Cass  R.  1990a.  After  the Rights Revolution.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard

1990b.  "Paradoxes  of  the  Regulatory  State,"  57  University of Chicago Law

Law  Review  1276-388.

University  Press.

--. 
Review  407-41.

HeinOnline  -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 306 1990

