 Cass R. Sunsteint The Soviet Constitution guarantees a right to secede.' The American Constitution does not. Although some secessionists in the American South, invoking state sovereignty, claimed to find an implicit right to secede in the founding document, it was more common to invoke an extratextual and nonjusticiable "right to secede" said to be enshrined in the Declaration of Independence.' In any case, no serious scholar or politician now argues that a right to secede exists under American constitutional law.3 It is generally agreed that such a right would undermine the Madisonian spirit of the original document, one that encourages the development of constitutional provisions that prevent the defeat of the basic enterprise.4 Eastern European countries are now deciding about the contents of proposed constitutions. They are often doing so in the context of profound cultural and ethnic divisions, both often defined at least roughly in territorial terms. These divisions have propelled t Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence and Co-Director, Center for the Study of Constitutionalism in Eastern Europe, The University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Akhil Amar, Marcella David, Jon Elster, Larry Kramer, Bernard Manin, and Michael McConnell for helpful comments, and to Sean Donahue and Simon Steel for research assistance. This paper was originally prepared for a conference sponsored by the Liberty Fund, Inc., at the University of Arizona in December 1990, and I am most grateful to the participants in that conference for valuable assistance. claims for local self-determination that could readily be transformed into attempts to guarantee a right to secede or even into secession itself. In Eastern Europe in particular, debates over the right to secede have already played an extraordinarily important role in discussions of new institutional arrangements. Various political actors have vigorously asserted a right to secede in Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union, and the Czech and Slovak Republics.5 Active secession movements have played a central role in current efforts to establish democratic governance. Such movements have led to claims for a constitutional right to secede, paralleling the Soviet right but to be respected in practice. A draft of the Slovak constitution, for example, creates a right to secede.6 It is likely that these claims will be asserted all the more vigorously in the future. The claims for secession, or for a right to secede, raise exceptionally large questions about the theory and practice of constitutionalism. It is therefore an especially important time to explore the relationship between secession claims and constitutionalism in general. irrelevant introduce decisions; and 5 See, for example, Celestine Bohlen, East Europe's Past Imperils 3 Nations, NY Times A16 (Dec 16, 1990) ("East Europe's Past"). The Croatian Parliament has adopted a constitution that would give it a right to secede from Yugoslavia upon a two-thirds vote of the local legislature and a simple majority vote in a plebiscite. See Croatia Takes the Right to Secede, NY Times A9 (Dec 22, 1990). In October 1990, Slovenia passed a constitutional amendment creating a right to secede. Constitutionalism and Secession embodying as it does a set of precommitment strategies, is frequently directed against risks of precisely this sort. Political or moral claims for secession are frequently powerful, but they do not justify constitutional recognition of a secession right. admissable; so that, rejecting the majority principle, anarchy or despotism in some form is all that is left. ment is usually unjustified. Part III discusses qualified rights to secession, arguing that even though these are superior to a general right of exit for subunits, they are inferior to an across-the-board waiver of that right by all subunits in a nation.9 It is often said that constitutionalism is in considerable tension with democracy. Thomas Jefferson was emphatic on the point, arguing that constitutions should be amended by each generation in order to ensure that the dead past would not constrain the living present. 10 Many contemporary observers echo the Jeffersonian position, claiming that constitutional constraints often amount to unjustified, antidemocratic limits on the power of the present and future.1 Responding to Jefferson, James Madison argued that a constitution subject to frequent amendment would promote factionalism and provide no republican selfgovernment. 2 firm basis for Madison envisioned firm and lasting constitutional constraints as a precondition for democratic processes, rather than a check on them. This vision captures a central goal of American constitutionalism: to ensure the conditions for the peaceful, long-term operation of democracy in the face of often-persistent social differences and plurality along religious, ethnic, cultural, and other lines. This goal is highly relevant to constitutional developments in Eastern Europe, where religious and ethnic hostilities are especially intense. Madison saw differences and diversity as strengths rather than weaknesses, if channeled through constitutional structures that would promote deliberation and lead groups to check, rather than exploit, other groups. It may be possible for Eastern Euro 9 My argument builds largely on the theory and practice of constitutionalism in the United States and, to a lesser extent, on more general western political and constitutional theory. By so concentrating, of course, I do not mean to suggest that American and western traditions and approaches provide the only basis for evaluating the constitutional implications of a right to secede. In view of the underlying issues, however, it would be surprising if other traditions and approaches did not reach similar conclusions. pean countries to replicate this approach, although they face far more profound differences of language, ethnicity, history, and religion than those that confronted the Framers of our Constitution. To approach the question of secession, it will be useful to provide a brief outline of some of the reasons for entrenching institutional arrangements and substantive rights.' 3 On such questions, constitutional theory remains in a surprisingly primitive state.1 4 I begin by examining what sorts of considerations might lead people forming a new government to place basic rights and arrangements beyond the reach of ordinary politics. The crucial idea here is that for various reasons, people in a newly formed nation might attempt to do so as part of a precommitment strategy. 'a By using the word "entrenching" here and elsewhere, I refer to simple constitutional ization, not to a decision to immunize a constitutional provision from amendment. I assume throughout that constitutional provisions are much more difficult to change than ordinary statutes, but nonethelsss amendable if there is a consensus that they should be. eds, Constitutionalism and Democracy (Cambridge, 1988). The University of Chicago Law Review Institutional arrangements can also be understood as an effort to protect a private sphere from majoritarianism. Often this effort stems from a fear of democratic processes. A decision to divide government among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches might be regarded as an effort to check and limit government by requiring a consensus among all three before the state can interfere with the private sphere. 17 Private liberty flourishes because government is partially disabled. So too, a federal system might ensure that the nation and its subunits will check each other, generating a friction that enables private liberty to flourish.' 8 if structural provisions Structural provisions of this sort limit the political power of present majorities (or minorities), and in this sense raise difficulties for those who believe that the only or principal purpose of constitutionalism is to provide a framework for, democratic governance. But seen as precommitment strategies, some of them can be enabling as well as constraining. 9 We can understand both individual rights and structural provisions in this way. Like the rules of grammar, such provisions set out the rules by which political discussion will occur, and in that sense free up the participants to conduct their discussions more easily. The system of separation of powers, for example, does not merely constrain government, but also helps to energize it, and to make it more effective, by creating a healthy division of labor. This was a prominent argument during the framing period in America.2 ° A system in which the executive does not bear the burden of adjudication may well strengthen the executive by removing from it a task that frequently produces public opprobrium. Indeed, the entire framework might enable rather than constrain democracy, not only by creating an energetic executive 2 ' but, more fundamentally, "8 See id at 323 (federalism and the separation of powers create a "double security" for individual rights because "[t]he different governments will control each other, at the same time that each will be controlled by itself."). Constitutionalism and Secession by allowing the sovereign people to pursue a strategy, against their government, of divide and conquer. So long as it is understood that no branch of government is actually "the people," a system of separation of powers can allow the citizenry to monitor and constrain their inevitably imperfect agents. In general, the entrenchment of established institutional arrangements enables rather than merely constrains present and future generations by creating a settled framework under which people may make decisions. For example, the initial decision to create a system of private property places severe constraints on the scope of any political deliberations on that fundamental issue, and often serves to keep issues of private property off the political agenda completely. Indeed, Madison understood the protection of rights of property largely as a mechanism for limiting factional conflict in government, not as a means of protecting "rights" and much less as a means of ensuring against redistribution.2" The removal of the issue from politics serves, perhaps ironically, to ensure that politics may continue. note 17) (describing need for a vigorous, unitary executive). ing question will intrude into and thus disable the political process. This idea has played a large role in the American constitutional experience. The leading example is the Full Faith and Credit Clause,26 which requires each state to enforce judgments rendered in other states. Every state might have an incentive to refuse to enforce the judgments of other states; if Massachusetts chooses not to honor the judgment of a New'York court against a Massachusetts citizen, then Massachusetts receives a short-term gain because the resources its citizen needs to satisfy any judgment remain within the borders of Massachusetts. But all states would be better off if the law bound each of them to respect the judgments of others. The Full Faith and Credit Clause ensures precisely this outcome, effectively solving a conventional prisoners' dilemma. 24 See generally Jon Elster, The Cement of Society (Cambridge, 1989); Edna Ullmann interest is sufficient for purposes of this argument. Constitutionalism and Secession Especially in light of the strong emotional attachments that fuel perceptions of state self-interest, a system in which each state can choose whether to initiate protectionist measures might well lead many states to do so. But an agreement by all states to refrain from protectionism, and thus to waive their antecedent right under the Articles of Confederation, should further the collective interest. The constitutional decision to remove control of interstate commerce from state authority solves the problem.3 ' In this case, as with the Full Faith and Credit Clause, a relinquishment of what appears to be state sovereignty very likely furthers the interest of all states concerned. Finally, constitutional precommitment strategies might serve to overcome myopia or weakness of will on the part of the collectivity, or to ensure that representatives follow the considered judgments of the people. Protection of freedom of speech, or from un and tonnage acts, began to make commercial war upon one another."). For a revisionist view, see Edmund W. Kitch, Regulation and the American Common Market, in A. Dan Tarlock, ed, Regulation, Federalism, and Interstate Commerce 9-19 (Oelgeschlager, Gunn & Hain, 1981) (states under Articles of Confederation actually cooperated to promote freedom of trade). reasonable searches and seizures, might represent an effort by the people themselves to provide safeguards against the impulsive behavior of majorities. Here the goal is to ensure that the deliberative sense of the community will prevail over momentary passions.34  Similarly, a constitution might firm acknowledgement that the desires of the government, even in a well-functioning republic, do not always match those of the people.3 5 Constitutional limits, introduced by something like the people themselves, therefore respond to the agency problem created by a system in which government officials inevitably have interests of their own. This problem arises in all systems of government, including democracies. In countries emerging from communist rule, without established principles of democratic representation, it is likely to pose a special danger, against which constitutional provisions should guard. In all of these cases, the decision to take certain questions off the political agenda might be understood as a means not of disabling but of protecting politics, by reducing the power of highly controversial questions to create factionalism, instability, impulsiveness, chaos, stalemate, collective action problems, myopia, strategic behavior, or hostilities so serious and fundamental as to endanger the governmental process itself. In this respect, the decision to use constitutionalism to remove certain issues from politics is often profoundly democratic. 31 This theme runs throughout. The Federalist. See, for example, Federalist 10 (Madison), in Rossiter, ed, The Federalist Papers 77-84 (cited in note 17) (representative rovernment, spread over a large and diverse electorate, can prevent factional passions from lominating public affairs); Federalist 78 (Hamilton), in id at 464-69 (independent, life-tenired judiciary with authority to proclaim unconstitutional acts void is an important check )n majority power). on the attempts of Eastern European countries to meld constitutionalism with democracy in the midst of extraordinary diversity and pluralism.3 6 B. Secession 1. Eastern Europe: Some background. 6 See Federalist 51 (Madison), in id at 320, 324-25 ("multiplicity of interests, and... multiplicity of sects" can promote democratic government through a system of checks and balances). war. 5 Widespread ethnic violence and ultimate disintegration seem possible," despite recent signs of greater moderation.4 7 The federal structure of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic is also under considerable pressure. The current solution is a new provisional, nonconstitutional arrangement that dramatically limits the authority of the national government, placing it in the two republics.4 Under the new arrangement, the national government has power over defense, foreign policy, and monetary policy, with most other powers placed elsewhere.49 It appears that only a small percentage of the Slovakians favor secession.5 0 In December 1990, however, President Vaclav Havel sought dramatic new powers to respond to the claim by leaders in Slovakia that their laws had primacy over those of the national parliament. 5' Vladimir Meciar, until recently the Prime Minister of the Slovak Republic, had on occasion argued for Slovakian legal primacy. 52 According to Havel, the consequence of such primacy would be that "our constitution will be broken and our state would inevitably fall into legal chaos."5 Indeed, Havel argued, a system of Slovenian legal primacy would "destabilize all of Europe.15 4 The Soviet Union, of course, is in the most jeopardy of all. Here some believe that civil war is a realistic threat. In all, fourteen of the fifteen Soviet republics have asserted their sovereignty in one form or another. Citizens of the Baltic states and several other Soviet republics overwhelmingly support independence. 55 15 See, for example, David Lawday, Croatia braces itself for the expected civil war, 1o Bohlen, East Europe's Past (cited in note 5) (noting that recent poll showed 16 per 52 John Tagliabue, Slovakia's Separatist Premier Facing Political Counterattack, NY '3 Greer, Havel Seeks Extra Powers (cited in note 51). " Simon Pellar, Czechs Fear for Federation as Slovaks Press for Sovereignty, Reuters The most highly publicized secession movements have occurred in the Baltic states, and secessionist pressures have placed the future of the Soviet Union in serious doubt. Article 72-guaranteeing a right of secession-has been an important part of the debate. Until recently, however, it provided no firm basis for secession, in part because of the absence of a legal mechanism for its enforcement.5 6 Unilateral secession movements were said to violate Articles 73 and 74, which provide for the supremacy of Soviet law and for Soviet sovereignty. 57 In April 1990, however, legislation was enacted to provide for secession through a two-thirds majority in a referendum and a five-year transition period .5 The most vigorous secession movements have taken place in Lithuania, Estonia, and Latvia. The Soviet Union incorporated these states by force in 1940, after they had enjoyed two decades of independence. All three have seen vigorous secession movements. The Estonian Congress has asked the United Nations and the Soviet Parliament to restore "the free and independent republic of Estonia."5 9 There was 78 percent support for independence among Estonians." The Lithuanian Parliament unanimously approved a formal declaration of independence." Over 90 percent of Lithuanian citizens support independence.2 The Soviet Union responded with a damaging economic blockade, 3 and also with military force. 64 Soviet troops captured the main publishing center in Vilnius and also assaulted broadcasting stations, killing and *' Dobbs, Latvians, Estonians Vote to Support Independence (cited in note 58). *" Bill Keller, Parliament in Lithuania, 124-0, Declares Nation Independent, NY wounding unarmed civilians in the process6 5 Non-binding plebiscites in Latvia showed 77 percent support for independence.6 An important opposition movement in the Ukraine has asked for complete independence from Moscow and the creation of an independent Ukrainian state.6 7 The actual government of the Ukraine has not gone so far, but it did proclaim itself a sovereign state, one whose laws took precedence over those issuing from Moscow and extended to the control of troops on Ukrainian territory.68 Without issuing a formal statement of independence, the Parliament of the Ukraine invoked the "supremacy, independence, fullness and indivisibility of the republic's power on its territory and its independence and equality in external relations. 6 9 Arguments for eventual secession have been made in Soviet Georgia as well.70 In March 1991, the citizens of Georgia voted overwhelmingly (with 95 percent in favor) for independence,7 1 and in April, the Parliament unanimously declared independence.7 2 The Soviet Parliament responded with a recommendation that Gorbachev impose a state of emergency, 73 and troops have been dispatched to stop internal fighting. 74 The Chuvash Autonomous Republic has claimed sovereignty over its own natural resources; the Mari Autonomous Republic has declared sovereignty; and Russia itself has considered the possibility of secession.75 Buryatia has proclaimed that its laws take precedence over those of the Soviet Union. Moldavia has sought greater autonomy.7 6 Byelorussia has declared its sovereignty as well.7 7 65 Id. 6 Dobbs, Latvians, Estonians Vote to Support Independence (cited in note 58). 67 Michael Dobbs, Group Calls for Ukrainian Independence, Wash Post Al (Oct 29, 73 Send Army to Georgia (cited in note 71); Dobbs, Soviet Georgians Vote For Inde ("Dizzying Disunion"). Constitutionalism and Secession Movements for secession in the Soviet Union promise to bring about substantial changes in existing institutional arrangements. President Gorbachev attempted to respond with a union plan 78 and an ambiguously worded referendum question. 79 Even if all 15 Soviet republics ultimately remain part of a federal union, it seems certain that secessionist pressures will diminish the central government's power over its subunits in major and potentially destructive ways.80 In any case, these pressures have diverted energy and attention from the effort to bring about democratic self-government and economic prosperity in the wake of the downfall of the previous system. This seems clear even if the grounds for secession are in some or many cases substantial-a question I take up below.8 ' 2. Precommitment and secession. 7 The referendum asked: "Do you consider it necessary to preserve the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as a renewed federation of equal Soviet republics, in which the rights and freedoms of people of any nationality will be fully guaranteed?" Michael Dobbs, Gorbachev Appeals to Preserve Union; President Launches Campaign For Referendum, Hits Separatists, Wash Post Al (Feb 7, 1991). Union (cited in note 78). 81 See Part II. 82 The Soviet Constitution guarantees a panoply of individual rights that makes our Bill of Rights pale by comparison, though neither the courts nor other branches of government have traditionally respected or enforced most of these rights. Article 39, for example, guarantees full "social, economic, political and personal rights"; Article 40 guarantees the right to work; Article 41 recognizes a right to rest and leisure; Article 49 guarantees a right to petition for redress of grievances; and Article 50 guarantees freedom of speech, press, and assembly. See generally Chapter 7 of the Soviet Constitution, reprinted in Hazard, The The University of Chicago Law Review At first *glance, the argument for a right to secede seems straightforward. If a subunit no longer wants to exist within the nation, why should it have to do so? This initial challenge draws strength from a number of arguments, spelled out below, including the need for local self-determination, the history of unjust acquisition in Eastern Europe and elsewhere, the claims of ethnic and cultural integrity, and the threat of abridgement of basic rights and liberties. A right to secede will encourage strategic behavior, that is, efforts to seek benefits or diminish burdens by making threats that are strategically useful and based on power over matters technically unrelated to the particular question at issue. Subunits with economic power might well be able to extract large gains in every Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 27-30, in Blaustein and Flanz, eds, 18 Constitutions of the World (cited in note 1). If the minority will not acquiesce, the majority must, or the government must cease. Constitutionalism and Secession decision involving the geographic distribution of benefits and burdens. A constitutional system that recognizes and is prepared to respect the right to secede will find its very existence at issue in every case in which a subunit's interests are seriously at stake. In practice, that threat could operate as a prohibition on any national decision adverse to the subunit's interests. 85 See, for example, Jon Elster, Sour Grapes (Cambridge, 1983) (discussing adaptive preferences). Family law also supplies a ready counter-argument: restrictions on divorce may increase the power of the stronger party by denying exit to the weaker. It may also, by adapting desires, produce one of the most pernicious forms of inequality, in which the dis The University of Chicago Law Review make no sweeping comment here on the structure of divorce law; I argue only that in the secession context there are strong reasons for making exit difficult. advantaged accept their fate because there is no alternative. There are undoubtedly parallels here as well in the secession setting. make the ordinary work of politics-not to mention day-to-day interactions in other spheres-extremely hard to undertake. s6 In Eastern Europe, divisions of this kind promise to be among the most important questions for constitutional resolution in the next generation."' Those divisions threaten not only to split nations into subunits-which may or may not be good-but also to paralyze national and local governments and to deflect them from dealing with the enormous current social and economic problems. Deliberation is often an inadequate check, and it comes at a high price. A waiver of the right to secede protects against inflamed or impulsive behavior."' On some occasions, the emotional stakes should be raised in precisely this way. But constitutional recognition of a right to secede accomplishes the relevant goals at great risk to the fundamental task of creating healthy, long-term constitutional structures. For Eastern European countries, it is imperative to develop institutions that can ensure confidence in the long-term health of the newly democratized governmental systems. Without such institutions, the emerging market economies will fail. 9 A waiver of the right to secede should be seen as part of a set of strategies designed to bring about stable institutional arrangements. In this light it should be unsurprising to observe proposed institutional reforms designed to foster stability in the face of separatist appeals, such as the Czechoslovakian plan to allocate much more power to the republics and the "union treaty" proposal in the Soviet Union.90 There is an analogy here in the history of the American Constitution. The Framers deemed it necessary to protect contractual agreements against state impairment not to help creditors as a class, but to ensure that commercial interactions would occur in the first place." A system in which states can impair contracts will discourage their formation in the first instance, and thus have harmful long-term effects on the economy as a whole. So too, legal protection of national unity should have an important coordinating effect, creating expectations of long-term interaction indispensable to national self-government. This rejoinder may be correct. Under certain circumstances, recognition of a right to secede would probably make little difference. But the rejoinder seems too optimistic. Sometimes secession may well further the economic interest of the subunit, or the threat might be credible because an economic loss would be counteracted by gains in terms of symbolism or subunit autonomy. Moreover, national politics affecting multiple subunits are subject to unpredictable and often highly emotional factors. Technocratic rationality does not characterize deliberations in which the specter of secession is involved. The mere possibility of secession may prevent calm negotiation.2 There can be no assurance that secession will not be threatened simply because things are generally going well and there is mutual interdependence. Inflamed subunit sentiments have been a characteristic feature of recent developments in constitution-making, in Eastern Europe and elsewhere.9 3 And in Eastern Europe in particular, social, economic, and environmental problems-many demanding strong action from the central government-have been quite severe, further fueling ethnic and regional conflicts. In these circumstances a right to secede would be especially dangerous. Is For an example from the American experience, see David M. Potter, The Impending Crisis, 1848-1861 209-11 (Harper & Row, 1976) (describing the breakdown of reasoned deliberation that occurred when Senator Charles Sumner, the prominent Massachusetts abolitionist, was beaten with a cane by South Carolina Representative Preston Brooks after Sumner ridiculed the "loose expectoration" in the speech of Brooks's relative, Senator Andrew Butler, a supporter of slavery). voked only in- cases in which it is an important safeguard. Even if a constitutional right to secede would create risks for democratic politics, the case against such a right has hardly been completed. It might well be that the countervailing considerations, justifying a right to secede, outweigh any such adverse effects. Constitutionalism and Secession republics of Yugoslavia and also in the Soviet Union.9 4 Economic exploitation has been relevant in the Ukraine.9 5 The injustice of the original acquisition is of special importance in Lithuania, Estonia, and Latvia. Claims of cultural and ethnic integrity have played a role in the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, and the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic." Many of these arguments provide plausible grounds for secession as a matter of political morality.97 I evaluate them briefly here, with special attention to their relationship to a claimed constitutional right to secede. A subunit might want to secede because its people are being oppressed, according to (let us assume) traditional liberal underIn the Soviet Union, for example, the standings of oppression. Rivalries (cited in note 93); Pellar, Czechs Fear for Federation (cited in note 54). history of widespread abridgement of free speech, of political liberty as a whole, and of basic guarantees of individual independence an security might well have supported a claim to secede, certainly before the increasing freedom encouraged by the Gorbachev regime in the late 1980s. 99 In America, judicial review-itself an extratextual practice-did not take root until fourteen years after the enactment of the written Constitution. Marbury v Madison, 5 US 137 (1803). be understood as an indirect, second-best means of reducing the risk of oppression. The oppression is not by itself a sufficient ground for secession, but the secession right is necessary to forestall it, buttressing the other constitutional safeguards. A possible preliminary conclusion, then, is that the risk that a central government will abridge the liberties of members of a subunit, or a history of such abridgement, combined with the infeasibility of eliminating the oppression, can justify both secession as a matter of political morality and the creation of a right to secede. We can find a parallel to this argument in the continuing debates over federalism and rights of interstate mobility. Any society that constitutes its government through a federal system-one that embodies a decision to allow for movement among states and to limit the scope of national law-necessarily creates a built-in safeguard against political or economic oppression. A government that oppresses its citizenry will soon find itself without citizens at all. In Eastern Europe, for example, the existence of national controls that could not be escaped through rights of exit served as an extremely powerful check against change. The denial of the right to travel was therefore the denial of a crucial political right, one that belongs on the same plane as voting.10' The recent history of Germany powerfully illustrates this proposition. a state statutory provision denying welfare to residents who have not resided in the jurisdiction for at least one year on grounds that personal liberty includes freedom to travel throughout country without unreasonable burdens or restrictions); Kramer v Union Free School District, 395 US 621 (1969) (invalidating state statute limiting right to vote in school district elections to those who own or lease taxable real property in the district or who are parents of children enrolled in the schools). the secession right is usually not founded on this form of oppression at all. Secession was not a feasible option in Eastern Europe as long as central governments consistently denied civil rights and liberties. For this reason, an attempted justification of a secession right based on those grounds seems unpersuasive. A subunit might want to secede because economic self-interest suggests it ought to proceed on its own. The subunit may be subsidizing other people of the nation in various ways; for example, it may have valuable natural resources that are being used by outsiders at costs lower than the subunit would like to charge, or its members may be especially productive. Members of the subunit might come to believe that they will be financially better off if they create their own country. This is especially so in light of the fact that to allow self-interest to be a justification would produce a range of risks, canvassed above, to the successful operation of the polity. Economic self-interest is an especially weak basis for creating a constitutional right to secede in light of the multiple deleterious effects that such a right would have for the process of national self-government, which may well be in the long-term interest of all subunits of the country. A precommitment strategy is therefore appropriate. A more serious argument for a right to secession would stress economic exploitation. By this term I mean not that a subunit is simply losing, but that it can claim, with reasons, that the central government is treating it unfairly. We might hypothesize that the nation is systematically depleting the subunit's resources for the general good, thus reducing the subunit's wealth far below what it would be if the subunit stood alone; or the nation might be unfairly discriminating against the subunit in the distribution of general benefits and burdens. A claim for secession might well be based on this sort of behavior from the nation's center. Indeed, a right to secede-as in the case of abridgement of civil liberties and civil rights-might be justified as a means of deterring economic exploitation of subunits. In Yugoslavia, this idea has played an important role. Slovenia and Croatia are economically advantaged, and they fear that they will have to submit to a Serbian-controlled national government, which they will have to subsidize. Constitutionalism and Secession the nation may unite against visions will make a right to secede unnecessary. The subunit should, for example, be granted full representation in the legislature; this is a built-in, if partial, corrective. (It is only partial bethe cause other parts of subunit-hardly an unfamiliar phenomenon.) The United States Constitution achieves this goal in part through the establishment of a bicameral legislature in which all states, regardless of size, have equal representation in one house. This requirement is, in fact, the only element of the Constitution specifically protected by the document itself against amendment without the consent of the affected state.102 The constitution could also ban discriminatory taxation, or require unanimous consent to certain measures raising a risk of exploitation. Injustice of the Original Secession might be sought by a subunit that claims that its membership in the nation originally resulted from unjustified aggression, and that sees itself as having territorial integrity as a matter of history and international law, properly construed. Often some understanding of this kind plays a role in secession claims. Suppose Subunit A existed as an independent entity at an earlier period. The larger unit absorbed Subunit A through war or aggres sion. The subunit now seeks to separate from the nation as a way of undoing an historical wrong. 103 The Iraqi annexation of Kuwait is a recent example, though here it was necessary to resort to force to bring about compliance with principles of international law. Secession: The Legitimacy of Self-Determination at 8-20 (cited in note 100). The principle of self-determination, recognized in the United Nations Charter and in numerous U.N. Declarations, came to have great importance in the era of decolonization, though the contours of the right-particularly with respect to armed intervention by third parties intent on furthering the right-remain unclear. See also United Nations Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation Among States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, which proclaims "The principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples" ("[A]ll peoples have the right freely to determine, without external interference, their political status . . . and every State has the duty to respect this right in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.") UN Res 2625 (Oct 24, 1970), in Dusan J. Djonovich, ed, 13 United Nations Resolutions, Series I (General Assembly Resolutions) 337, 339 (Oceana, 1976). spect any right to secede that it has formally recognized. The Soviet Union is at least a partial example." 5 In the event of incorporation by force, a right to secede is especially prone to becoming an ineffectual "parchment barrier."' 0 6 The third problem is that the drigins of many, perhaps most, nations often involve aggression and abuse at some point in the past, and it is not easy to decide which such abuses provide a sufficient basis for a right to secede. The category of cases in which secession can plausibly be justified on such grounds is simply enormous, and if secession is generally to be permitted, the result would be an intolerable disruption of established arrangements. This consideration suggests that while the injustice of the original acquisition will often provide a good basis for a secession right, a system that would allow secession in all such circumstances would be hard to defend. 0 7 In cases of subunits absorbed through aggression, then, the preferable remedy is a system of international law, including an internationally recognized right to restore original borders when sufficiently little time has passed and when exercise of that right would not unduly disrupt existing arrangements. 10 8 Sometimes a right to secede is in fact justified on this ground as a matter of political morality, and this factor argues in favor of some secession movements now occurring in Eastern Europe, especially in the Baltic states. But a domestic constitutional provision guaranteeing the right to secede is both too small and too large a way to deal with this problem. and other distinctions. Subunits initially absorbed by aggression or other unjust means often become well-integrated into a union over time and come to enjoy many benefits from membership in the union. (Hawaii is an example.) At least when a good deal of time has passed, it is hardly clear that injustices of several generations past by themselves justify secession. annexed through aggression have a good moral justification for secession would take me far beyond the current discussion. For a valuable discussion of the crucial territorial dimension to secession claims, see Lea Brilmayer, Secession and Self-Determination: A Territorial Interpretation, 16 Yale J Intl L 177 (1991). E. Cultural Integrity and Self-determination Often a claimed right to secede is built on an understanding that the subunit has a cultural integrity that entitles it to self-determination. The subunit perceives itself as both homogeneous and -substantially different in terms of basic norms and commitments. The very fact that it is governed by a broader entity appears to be a form of tyranny, or an unjustifiable absorption by foreigners. Rule by outsiders eviscerates the subunit's distinct identity. Here, as before, any legitimate claims that underlie a right to secession might be accommodated by narrower and less dangerous strategies-in particular, federalism and representation mechanisms. A system of federalism often guards against precisely the problem of rule by remote leaders having insufficient identification with or knowledge of subunits. In the Amdrican experience, federalism was designed to ensure local self-determination while at the same time providing and thus benefiting from governance at the national level. Federal systems can allow a large degree of govern 109 The attempt at secession by the American South is an example. In such a case, secession would be unjustified even as a matter of political morality. A desire to oppress all or part of the citizenry is not a good basis for secession. The American Civil War was of course fought partly over these grounds. ance by subunits claiming cultural and territorial integrity. Indeed, the national constitution may restrict the central government to certain enumerated powers, including provision of national defense or regulation of interstate commerce,1 0° or it may expressly reserve certain powers of internal self-governance to the subunits. It may well be that through these routes, federal systems can accommodate many of the concerns that underlie claims to secession based on cultural integrity. 110 This is, of course, the strategy followed by the United States Constitution. See US dangers to national self-determination that are not counterbalanced by the advantages to the various subunits themselves. Whether or not the interest in cultural integrity provides a good moral justification for secession, it does not support a decision to place a right to secede in a founding document. A possible response to the discussion thus far would be that the right-to secede should indeed be constitutionalized, but hedged with qualifications and limitations that minimize the risk of strategic behavior. At least four possibilities seem plausible. One strat 112 US Const, Art V. 113 Such a settlement might of course be blocked with a constitutional prohibition against secession, even of the voluntary kind. But it is unclear how such a prohibition could be beneficial. egy would allow secession if and only if a large majority of the subunit sought it. Another would allow secession only under certain enumerated circumstances, as, for example, in cases of suspension of civil liberties or economic exploitation. Yet another would create a requirement of prolonged deliberation before secession would be lawful. Such a system might involve, for example, multiple popular votes, with substantial waiting periods between votes.1 14 A fourth approach would create a right to secede, either absolute or qualified, but make it nonjusticiable. Each of these possibilities raises difficult and general questions about constitutionalism. I deal with them only briefly here. 114 The State of New York has created such a process for dealing with the secessionist demands of Staten Island, a subunit of the City of New York that may prefer to become an independent municipality. Staten Island residents must first approve secession in two referenda, with a period for hearings between the two votes; the state legislature would then have to pass legislation approving the secession. See City of New York v State of New York, 557 NYS2d 914, 158 AD2d 169 (1990) (rejecting equal protection challenge to this scheme). commitments to civil rights and liberties will probably not respect its textual commitment to secession. "' Part IV of the Indian Constitution includes "Directive Principles of State Policy," which are nonjusticiable. See Art 37: "The provisions contained in this Part shall not be enforceable by any court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws." These provisions include minimalization of inequalities in income and elimination of inequalities in status, facilities, and opportunities (Art 38, cl 2); "equal pay for equal work for both men and women" (Art 39(d)); free and compulsory elementary education (Art 45); the securing of a "living wage" for all workers (Art 43). The right to subsistence is most directly stated in Art 39, which provides: "The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing: (a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood. . . ." Constitution of India (1949), reprinted in Albert P. Blaustein, et al, India 62-64, in Blaustein and Flanz, eds, 7 Constitutions of the Countries of the World (cited in note 1). the vagueness of the right and, more fundamentally, the obvious problems in its judicial definition and implementation. Perhaps the right to secede should be placed in this category. Claims for recognition of a constitutional right to secede raise large questions about the nature of constitutional protections in the emerging Eastern European democracies. I have suggested that constitutional protections should often be understood as an effort to facilitate rather than merely to frustrate democratic processes. Such efforts take many forms: the protection of rights central to self-government; the creation of fixed and stable arrangements by which people might order their affairs; the removal of especially charged or intractable questions from the public agenda; the creation of incentives for compromise, deliberation, and agreement; and the solution of problems posed by collective action problems, myopia, impulsiveness, and prisoners' dilemmas. Ideas of this sort provide a helpful if partial foundation for considering possible provisions in new constitutions. In any case, they suggest that a right to secede does not belong in a founding document. The University of Chicago Law Review the contrary, I have attempted to catalog the reasons for secession and in the process to show that those reasons are often powerful. But the existence of occasionally powerful moral claims supplies insufficient reason for constitutional recognition of the right to secede. A nation that recognizes this right, and is prepared to respect it,-may well find that it has thereby endangered ordinary democratic processes. A decision to allow a right of exit from the nation will divert attention from matters at hand, allow minority vetoes on important issues, encourage strategic and myopic behavior, and generally compromise the system of self-government. For this reason, a waiver of the right to secede should be seen as a natural part of constitutionalism, which frequently amounts to a precommitment strategy directed against problems of precisely this sort. People deciding on constitutional provisions often choose, in advance, to waive seemingly important rights when the waiver would serve the general interest.