 Cass R. Sunstein* T HE recent resignation of Justice William Brennan from the United States Supreme Court is merely the most dramatic symbol of a now-familiar truth: The Warren Court is dead. Its death is of course in large part a result of political victories by conservative presidents, victories that have produced a Supreme Court whose members self-consciously reject the methods of its recent predecessors. But the death of the Warren Court also represents a victory of ideas. The aggressive role of the Supreme Court in bringing about social reform-a role without precedent in the history of the adjudicative branch of government-has been criticized as a usurpation of democratic authority; as a departure from the original understanding, the cornerstone of judicial legitimacy; and most fundamentally, as hardly law at all. This con * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. This is the text of a speech delivered at the University of Connecticut Law School on September 26, 1990 as part of the Day, Berry & Howard Visiting Scholar Program. I am grateful to the students and faculty there for their extraordinary kindness and hospitality on that occasion. The reader is asked to make allowances for the informality that characterizes an essay originally written for the lecture format. Some of the ideas found in the second half of this essay also appear in Sunstein, Constitutional Polities and the Conservative Court, I THE AMERiCAN PROSPECT 51 (1990). 1. R. BORK, THE TEMPTING OF AMERICA: THE POLITICAL SEDUCTION OF THE LAW (1989). 2. Judge Bork does of course recognize that his interpretive principle is the original understanding. What he does not recognize is: (a) that the decision to make that understanding decisive is itself an interpretive principle, one that must be defended rather than identified with the Constitution; and (b) that any characterization of the original understanding requires other, supplemental interpretive principles. A. The Legacy of the Warren Court Now that the era of the Warren Court is over, it is worthwhile to pause briefly to examine its legacy. It is surprising but true that many of the principles of constitutional liberty most prized by Americans were created, not by the founders, but by the Supreme Court during this cefitury. At the very least, the particular understandings of those principles-understandings that have given those principles their current life and content-are recent creations. Indeed, for most of the country's history the liberties for which our Bill of Rights is so widely celebrated and revered, here and abroad, were sharply circumscribed. The overriding reason for their expansion has been the interpretive practices of the modern Supreme Court.3 If contemporary Americans looked at the charter of constitutional freedom in America as it existed in 1940, or if they could imagine an emerging democracy (say, in Eastern Europe) committing itself to that charter, they would see a system falling far short of their ideals. It is because of the Warren Court that constitutional liberty includes the right to freedom from discrimination on the basis of race, including segregation; to broad protection of political speech, subject to a sharply limited "clear and present danger" exception; to political participation, including equality in voting; to hearing rights for those receiving government benefits, including employment, licenses, and social security; to freedom from sex discrimination; and to broad protection of religious conscience. Even those who reject-as almost everyone does--some as 3. To say this is not at all to say that they have reached their appropriate place. See Infra Part The Tempting of America sets out a distinctive approach to constitutional interpretation. In its broad outlines, the argument is quite straightforward. Some judges are "neutral"; 4 they follow the law. Other judges are political; they participate in "a major heresy,"5 that is, they deny "that judges are bound by law." 8 The line between the two depends on whether a judge "is bound by the only thing that can be called law, the principles of the text, whether Constitution or statute, as generally understood at the enactment."17 No one who disagrees with this view "should be nominated or confirmed." 8 According to Judge Bork, judges who reject this view "not only share the legislative power of Congress and the state legislatures, in violation both of the separation of powers and of federalism, but assume a legislative power that is actually superior to that of any legislature."9 The heresy is particularly indulged by "people [who] see the Constitution as a weapon in a class struggle about social and political values," 10 are "egalitarian and socially permissive,"', "hold only contempt for the limits of respectable politics, ' u 2 or invoke "a kind of restless and unprogrammatic radicalism that does not share but attacks traditional values and assumptions."1" The "philosophy of original un derstanding" has the large contrasting value of "political neutrality in judging."15 One might expect that the "fall"'u from neutrality to politics would be a recent phenomenon, but in fact Judge Bork describes it as something that immediately followed the ratification of the Constitution. Not merely Justice Brennan, and not merely the "liberals" on the Warren Court, but also-to mention simply a few-Chief Justice Marshall and Justices Holmes, Brandeis, Frankfurter, Jackson, and Harlan were seduced by the temptation to substitute politics for law. They too were tempted to abandon the Constitution. some of the rhetoric appear out-of-date. Perhaps most dramatically, the Bill of Rights probably would not apply to the states, though here Judge Bork is unaccountably cautious. 26 Of course, flag desecration could be criminalized; 27 creches could be displayed in public buildings; 28 states could exempt profits from the sale of Bibles and religious literature from taxation. 2 One need not disagree with all of these conclusions in order to recognize that Judge Bork's Constitution would be dramatically different from the document as it is now understood. It might be tempting, or even correct, to think that the meaning of the Constitution is settled by the original understanding held by its ratifiers. But surely an argument is necessary before one should accept that position, especially, perhaps, in view of its repudiation by so many leading members of the Court,3 0 and of the extent to which that position would undermine principles of constitutional liberty that have and only one place does he squarely address the question: argumentation: Why should the Court, a committee of nine lawyers, be the sole agent for overriding democratic outcomes? The man who prefers results to processes has no reason to say that the Court is more legitimate than any other institution capable of wielding power. If the Court will not agree with him, why not argue his case to some other group, say the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a body with rather better means for enforcing its decisions? No answer exists.3 5 Judge Bork seems to be arguing here that a decision deserves respect if it can be connected to a judgment by "the people"; it does not if it cannot. There is, however, no way to avoid "moral decisions," even major and controversial ones. The view that the original understanding is binding requires a moral or political theory, and thus acceptance of that view rests on a (disputable and disputed) moral foundation. The very fact that Judge Bork's theory of interpretation is controversial among the citizenry attests to the fact that it rests on such a foundation. In this respect his approach, like any other, relies on moral decisions that require substantive defense. Reliance on the original understanding does not avoid recourse to a moral system at all. The claim of lack of authorization is merely another version of the claim of illegitimacy, and it is no more productive here than there. It is true that there is disagreement about morals and politics among the citizenry, but the fact of disagreement does not mean that the conflicting positions are not subject to mediation, as they in fact have been in multiple areas, including those of race and sex discrimination. The fact that a decision has moral dimensions does not imply that it is not subject to reason. As we have seen, Judge Bork's own view rests at bottom on moral and political choices, having broadly to do with the perceived value of (his conception of) democratic self-determination and fear of judicial willfulness. But The Tempting of America does not acknowledge that these are moral and political choices, and so spends almost no time in defending them.41 Judge Bork sometimes defends his position by general references to democratic self-determination, and here he is on firm ground. Any plausible theory of constitutional interpretation must pay a great deal of attention to the democratic aspirations of the American constitutional tradition. But the principle of democracy is too vague, standing by itself, to justify any particular conception of the judicial role. For example, that principle might call for an exceptionally aggressive judicial role in protecting rights of political participation and in safeguard 40. Thus, for example, Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), cannot be resolved by reference to the original understanding; it is necessary to translate the requirement of equal protection into the conditions of the 1950s, in which public education had attained a quite novel status. So too, the original understanding that the equal protection clause does riot forbid sex discrimination need not resolve the question in light of the generality of the framers' language, the difficulty of determining whether they understood by that language a general concept or their particular conceptions, and the extreme difficulty of sorting out that question without resorting to extratextual and extrahistorical considerations. I have not dealt in detail with the particular positions on constitutional questions set out by Judge Bork, but it is revealing that those positions generally line up, not with some original understanding, but with the conservative wing of the Republican party: no affirmative action, fewer restrictions on governmental power to aid religion, no abortion rights, greater constraints on national power, greater constraints on pornography, fewer intrusions on presidential power, and greater protection of property rights."" D. Legal Authoritarianism The Tempting of America is the most prominent recent illustration of what might be called "legal authoritarianism," a term that I use in a special sense. I mean the term to refer to all approaches to law that ultimately trace legal legitimacy exclusively to an exercise of power, or to the view that might makes right, or to some prior settlement among those with political power. On this view, legal legitimacy need not, and indeed must not, be justified by reference to substantive claims about the right or the good. Thus understood, the category of authoritarianism is a broad one, encompassing highly democratic approaches as well as others that are far less palatable. Authoritarianism in law has no necessary alliance with liberalism or conservatism. Indeed, democratic authoritarianism in Justices Oliver Wendell Holmes and Hugo Black, both of whom emphasized, as a centerpiece of their approaches to law, the need for judges to ratify prior agreements among those with political power.45 For Black in particular, interpretive principles seemed unnecessary and indeed hubristic, since they introduced a measure of discretion and nonneutrality into law.46 For Black, the constitutional text was usually self-interpreting.47 finds prominent expression If legal authoritarianism is understood in these terms, its antonym 43. Cf. the very different approach in Scalia, Originalism: The Lesser Evil, 57 U. CIN. L. REV. 849 (1989) (acknowledging criticisms of originalism and attempting to defend it on substantive and institutional grounds). There is a distinctive authoritarian style in constitutional law as well. Authoritarianism provides the foundation for one conception of judicial restraint. Because ordinary legislative outcomes reflect the play of social forces, they should not be disturbed unless the interference is itself the result of some other, superior decision by such forces. Authoritarianism is also drawn to firm linguistic anchors-"the text"-and for two reasons. First, the text is the best evidence of how the social forces in the community have resolved themselves. Second, departures from the text leave interpreters in the world of unfettered value judgments, or prejudices. Moreover, the authoritarian position tends to see social outcomes expressed in authoritative texts as embodying the will of some collective "us"--even if the text were written many years ago and even if important segments of the community were excluded from the decision. I want now to shift gears. Judge Bork's nomination was of course defeated, but his ideas are shared, perhaps increasingly, by influential members of the legal community, and the position of the current Court has many commonalities with that of Judge Bork. We might obtain a useful angle on the problem by exploring the sort of constitutional agenda that would be set by a modern-day successor to the Warren Court. If the Supreme Court, for our time, brought to bear on current practices the kind of critical eye that the Warren Court brought to the 1950s and 1960s, what kinds of changes might be expected? I do not mean to endorse all of these proposed results, some of which strike me as inadvisable or even preposterous; I do mean to obtain a sense of what has been lost or gained by the abandonment of an aggressive role for the Supreme Court in the area of social reform. One of the unfortunate consequences of the constitutional attack on the Warren Court is that it has preoccupied its participants so much as to distract them from the task of imagining the ingredients of a different constitutional order, mandated judicially or not. The following is an admittedly hypothetical agenda. central to sex discrimination, and the effort to forbid abortion is closely connected (simply as a matter of actual legislative motivation) with fears about women's rejection of their traditional role. A Warren Court successor might well have seen public and private behavior that bears on pregnancy-in the workplace and in the criminal law-as raising serious problems of sexual equality. right to protection against domestic violence). rules-in such areas as education, employment, and welfare-to a requirement of justification or to a showing that alternatives without discriminatory consequences would be less effective. Would it be desirable for the Court to embark upon courses of this sort? Should the Supreme Court engage in social reform in such areas? If what I have said thus far is correct, the Court's unwillingness to involve itself in these issues cannot be justified by reference to "legitimacy," at least not without substantial additional arguments. A judicial role in some or many of these areas would fall within the boundaries of the text. Moreover, invocation of the Constitution in many of these settings could be connected to the general understandings for which the document stands; for at least most of them, there would be no greater strain here than in cases creating (for example) a wholesale prohibition on racial discrimination and a right to be free from discrimination on the basis of gender. 1. Efficacy The first point is that judicial decisions are of limited efficacy in bringing about. social change. Study after study has documented this basic conclusion.55 Brown v. Board of Education56 itself is usually taken as a counterexample, but it is in fact the most conspicuous confirmation of the point.5 7 Ten years after the decision, no more than about two percent of black children in the South attended desegregated schools.58 It was not until 1964, after the involvement of Congress and the executive branch, that widespread desegregation actually occurred. The Court is far more effective in vetoing a decision than in attempting to bring about social change on its own.59 The decision in Roe v. Wade6° may be another illustration, though the picture here is mixed. It is undoubtedly true that the decision increased women's access to safe abortions, 61 and to some extent increased the legitimacy of the practice of abortion. Surprisingly, however, it did not dramatically increase the actual rate of abortions. 62 It is thus inaccurate to say that there have been significantly more fetal deaths as a result of the Supreme Court's decision. Perhaps more fundamentally, the decision may well have created the "moral majority," helped defeat the Equal Rights Amendment, prevented the eventual achievement of consensual solutions to the abortion problem, and severely undermined the women's movement both by spurring and organizing opposition and by demobilizing potential adherents. In two ways, reliance on the courts may operate as an alternative to democratic channels. It might divert energy and resources from politics, and the eventual judicial decision may foreclose a political outcome. On both counts, the substitution has large costs. The resort to politics can produce a kind of citizen mobilization that is a public and private good, inculcating political commitments, broader understanding, feelings of citizenship, and dedication to the community. An emphasis on the judiciary that compromises these values will carry with it large attendant disadvantages. In this connection it is important to recall that Martin Luther King was quite possibly a far more important source of constitutional change than any or even all of the Warren Court's decisions concerning race.6 5 pressure was imposed by the pro-choice movement. The Court, in short, is not the only "forum of principle" in American government.6 9 On the contrary, the major reflections of principled deliberation in the history of American government have come from Congress and the President, not from the judiciary. In the last generation it has become commonplace to contrast a principled, deliberative judiciary with a reflexive, interest-ridden political process." ° But this position amounts not merely to a counsel of despair. It disregards the phenomenon, frequently observed in practice, of deliberative politics, in which existing conventions are subject to critical scrutiny. The belief in deliberative politics through institutions other than courts has, of course, been central to American constitutionalism since its inception. 1 To say all this is not to deny that judicial review can make up for systemic inequalities in majoritarian processes or introduce principles that come to such processes only with difficulty. But it is to say that an aggressive Court is, on traditional liberal grounds, the furthest thing from an unambiguous good, and this is so even if the Court's goals are sound. Adjudication is an exceptionally poor system for achieving largescale social reform. Courts are rarely expert in the area at hand, and the focus on the litigated case makes it hard for judges to understand the complex systemic effects of legal intervention. A decision to require expenditures on school busing might, for example, divert resources from an area with an equal or greater claim to the public fisc. Creation of a legal right against pollution may have a variety of harmful and unintended effects on the public and private sectors, including unemployment and higher prices--effects that are difficult, especially for courts, to anticipate. Ideas of this sort provide some support for the Court's aversion to the recognition of positive rights. the 4. Judiciary These criticisms of the judiciary are hardly novel. Though voiced principally by conservatives in the last decades, analogous complaints played a major role in the New Deal period, in which it would have seemed extremely peculiar to suggest that social reform on behalf of If social reform in the various areas discussed thus far is to happen outside of the courts, on what institutions might reliance be placed? There are many possibilities. States and localities have shown, in the last decade, an impressive degree of initiative and imagination, going well beyond the Supreme Court and the Congress in many areas-by, for example, enacting aggressive measures forbidding discrimination on the basis of disability, sex, and sexual orientation. At the national level, the principal civil rights gains have occurred through legislative action in the context of discrimination on the basis of sex, disability, age, and race. It is important to recognize that the Supreme Court is not the only institution in government charged with fidelity to the Constitution. irony in But the Supreme Court has itself concluded that Congress's power under section five is extraordinarily broad.7 8 Indeed, the Court has permitted Congress to invoke section five to proscribe practices that the Court has itself upheld. In allowing Congress to invalidate literacy tests that the Court had permitted, the Court explicitly said that Congress could, under section five, strike down practices that the Court would allow.7 9 This conclusion turns out to be no puzzle if it is recognized that the Court's decisions are a product not only of substantive theory but also of institutional constraint. Precisely because of its lack of democratic pedigree, the Court is sometimes unwilling to enforce the Constitution as vigorously as it would if it were not so constrained. Congress faces no such constraints.8" However ironic it might seem, there would be little reason for surprise if the Court found that Congress acted well within its constitutional authority in using its powers precisely in order to overrule the most restrictive recent decisions of the Court itself.