University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1991 

Cass R. Sunstein 

What Judge Bork Should Have Said 
What Judge Bork Should Have Said 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "What Judge Bork Should Have Said," 23 Connecticut Law Review 205 (1991). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

CONNECTICUT
LAW  REVIEW

VOLUME  23 

WINTER  1991 

NUNMER  2

WHAT  JUDGE  BORK  SHOULD  HAVE  SAID

Cass R. Sunstein*

I. 

INTRODUCTION

T  HE  recent  resignation  of  Justice  William  Brennan  from  the
United  States  Supreme  Court is  merely  the most  dramatic  symbol
of  a  now-familiar  truth:  The  Warren  Court  is  dead.  Its  death  is  of
course  in  large  part  a  result  of political  victories  by  conservative  presi-
dents,  victories  that  have  produced  a  Supreme  Court  whose  members
self-consciously  reject  the  methods  of  its  recent  predecessors.  But  the
death  of the  Warren  Court  also  represents  a  victory  of ideas.  The  ag-
gressive  role  of the Supreme  Court  in  bringing  about  social reform-a
role without  precedent  in  the history  of the adjudicative  branch of gov-
ernment-has  been  criticized  as  a  usurpation  of democratic  authority;
as a departure  from  the original understanding,  the cornerstone  of judi-
cial  legitimacy;  and most fundamentally,  as hardly  law  at all. This  con-

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  University  of Chicago,  Law School  and  De-
partment  of Political Science. This  is  the text of a speech  delivered  at the University  of Connecti-
cut  Law  School  on  September  26,  1990  as  part  of  the  Day,  Berry  & Howard  Visiting  Scholar
Program.  I  am  grateful  to  the  students  and  faculty  there  for  their  extraordinary  kindness  and
hospitality  on  that  occasion.  The  reader  is  asked  to  make  allowances  for  the  informality  that
characterizes  an essay  originally  written  for  the  lecture  format.  Some  of the  ideas  found  in  the
second  half  of this  essay  also  appear  in  Sunstein,  Constitutional  Polities  and  the  Conservative
Court,  I THE  AMERiCAN  PROSPECT  51  (1990).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 205 1990-1991

CONNECTICUT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23:205

stellation of ideas has  played  an important role  in transforming  the per-
formance  and  self-conception  of the  federal  judiciary.

In  this  essay  I  have  two.purposes.  The  first  is  to respond  to a  stan-
dard  criticism  of the  sort  of judicial  role  that  was  represented  by  the
Warren  Court.  This  form  of criticism  is  stated  most  straightforwardly
in Judge  Robert  Bork's  bestseller,  The  Tempting of America: The  Po-
litical Seduction of the Law.'  Despite  the  Senate's  rejection  of Presi-
dent  Reagan's  nomination  of Judge  Bork for  the Supreme  Court,  views
similar to  those of Judge  Bork  have  increasing  influence  within  the  fed-
eral judiciary  and perhaps  the nation as  well.  In  particular,  there  seems
to  be  mounting  agreement  with  Judge  Bork's  particular  understanding
of the distinction  between  the neutral, apolitical  invocation  of the  origi-
nal  understanding  on  the one  hand  and  the subjective,  value-laden  use
of the judge's  own  preferences  on the  other.  For  Judge  Bork,  departure
from  the  original  understanding  amounts  to  abandonment  of  the  Con-
stitution  and  political  judging,  that  is,  the  illegitimate  substitution  of
judicial  values  for  democratic  ones.

I  want  to  suggest  here  that  this  position  is  barely  an  argument  at
all,  serving  instead  as  a  misleading,  albeit  popular,  rallying  cry.  Its
principal  defect  lies  in  its  failure  to  acknowledge  the need  for  interpre-
tive principles  for use  in construing  any legal  (or other)  text. Because  it
relies  on  some  such  principles  without  defending  or  even  recognizing
them,2  it  provides  no  basis  for  its  own  approach.

My second  purpose  is  to suggest that  even  for those  sympathetic  to
many  of  the  Warren  Court's  decisions,  there  are  good  reasons  to  be
ambivalent  about  social  reform  through  the judiciary.  Judges  are  likely
to  be  ineffectual  in  promoting  social  reform;  their  methods  and  proce-
dures  are  best  suited  to  compensatory  justice.  Reliance  on  the  court
system  may  divert  resources  from  other,  better  channels  for  reform.
Moreover,  judicial  involvement  may  well  undermine  the  very  causes
that it purports  to  help.  For example,  the withdrawal  of the Court from
areas  of  discrimination  on  the  basis  of  disability  and  race,  and  from
abortion  as well,  appears  to  be fueling democratic  engagement  on  those
questions  in  ways  that  will  have  more  substantial  and  healthy  long-

1.  R.  BORK,  THE  TEMPTING  OF  AMERICA:  THE  POLITICAL  SEDUCTION  OF  THE  LAW  (1989).
2.  Judge  Bork  does  of course  recognize  that  his  interpretive  principle  is  the  original  under-
standing.  What he  does not recognize  is:  (a) that the decision  to make  that understanding decisive
is  itself an interpretive  principle,  one that must be defended  rather  than identified  with the Consti-
tution;  and  (b) that  any  characterization  of the  original understanding  requires  other,  supplemen-
tal  interpretive  principles.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 206 1990-1991

1991]

WHAT  JUDGE  BORK  SHOULD  HAVE  SAID

term  implications  for  social  reform  than  anything  that  could  be  ex-
pected  from.'a  Warren  Court successor.  These  sorts  of  pragmatic,  con-
sequentialist  considerations,  I  suggest,  provide  a  legitimate  basis  for
concerns  about  an  aggressive  role for  the  Supreme  Court in  promoting
social  reform.  These  concerns  should  in  turn  play  a  role  in  developing
interpretive  principles  with  which  to  give  meaning  to  the  Constitution.
In  any case,  it is those  concerns,  rather  than  the backward-looking
arguments  made  by Judge  Bork and  others, that  should  be foremost  in
the  minds  of  those  interested  in  the  appropriate  role  of  the  Supreme
Court in the constitutional  order. The rhetoric of "political  seduction  of
the  law"  is  a  misleading  and  unhelpful  diversion.

II. 

JUDGE-MADE  CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHTS

A.  The Legacy  of the  Warren Court

Now  that the  era  of  the Warren  Court  is  over,  it  is  worthwhile  to
pause briefly  to  examine  its  legacy.  It is  surprising  but  true that  many
of  the  principles  of  constitutional  liberty  most  prized  by  Americans
were  created,  not  by  the  founders,  but  by  the  Supreme  Court  during
this  cefitury.  At  the very  least,  the  particular  understandings  of  those
principles-understandings  that  have  given  those  principles  their  cur-
rent  life  and  content-are  recent  creations.  Indeed,  for  most  of  the
country's  history  the liberties  for  which  our  Bill  of Rights  is  so  widely
celebrated  and  revered,  here  and  abroad,  were  sharply  circumscribed.
The  overriding  reason  for  their  expansion  has  been  the  interpretive
practices  of the  modern  Supreme  Court.3

If contemporary  Americans  looked  at the charter  of constitutional
freedom  in  America  as  it  existed  in  1940,  or if  they could  imagine  an
emerging  democracy  (say,  in Eastern  Europe)  committing  itself to  that
charter,  they  would  see  a  system  falling  far  short  of their  ideals.  It is
because  of  the  Warren  Court  that  constitutional  liberty  includes  the
right  to  freedom  from  discrimination  on  the  basis  of  race,  including
segregation;  to  broad  protection  of political  speech,  subject  to a  sharply
limited "clear  and  present  danger"  exception;  to political  participation,
including  equality  in voting;  to  hearing  rights  for  those  receiving  gov-
ernment  benefits,  including  employment,  licenses,  and  social  security;
to freedom  from sex discrimination;  and  to broad  protection of religious
conscience.  Even  those who  reject-as  almost  everyone  does--some  as-

3.  To  say this is  not at all to say  that they have reached  their appropriate  place. See  Infra Part

in.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 207 1990-1991

CONNECTICUT  LAW  REVIEW

(Vol.  23:205

pects  of the  Warren  Court's  legacy  will  probably  treat  the  bulk  of  its
work  as  an  indispensable  part  of our  constitutional  heritage.

Speaking  realistically,  a  return  to  a  narrowly  described  "original
understanding"  would  result  in  the  elimination,  in  one  bold  stroke,  of
central  parts  of existing  constitutional  safeguards,  producing  constitu-
tional  protections  that  would  be  judged-both  by  Americans  and  by
those  who  seek to  emulate  our  practices-as  extremely  thin  indeed.  All
this  does  not count  by  itself as  a  sufficient  argument  in  favor  of the role
set by  the Warren  Court.  But it is,  perhaps,  a useful  prelude  for  under-
standing  current  disputes.

B.  The  Argument  of The  Tempting  of America

The  Tempting of America sets  out  a  distinctive  approach  to  con-
stitutional  interpretation.  In  its  broad  outlines,  the  argument  is  quite
straightforward.  Some  judges  are  "neutral"; 4  they  follow  the  law.
Other  judges  are  political;  they  participate  in  "a  major  heresy,"5  that
is,  they  deny  "that  judges  are  bound  by  law." 8  The  line  between  the
two  depends  on  whether  a judge  "is  bound  by  the  only  thing  that  can
be  called  law,  the  principles  of the  text,  whether  Constitution  or  stat-
ute,  as  generally  understood  at  the  enactment."17  No  one  who  disagrees
with  this  view  "should  be  nominated  or  confirmed." 8

According  to  Judge  Bork,  judges  who  reject  this  view  "not  only
share  the  legislative  power  of  Congress  and  the  state  legislatures,  in
violation  both  of  the  separation  of  powers  and  of  federalism,  but  as-
sume  a  legislative  power  that  is  actually  superior  to  that of any  legisla-
ture."9  The  heresy  is  particularly  indulged  by  "people  [who]  see  the
Constitution  as  a  weapon  in  a  class  struggle  about  social  and  political
values," 10  are  "egalitarian  and  socially  permissive,"',  "hold  only  con-
tempt  for  the limits  of respectable  politics, ' u 2  or  invoke  "a kind  of rest-
less  and  unprogrammatic  radicalism  that  does  not  share  but  attacks
traditional  values  and  assumptions."1"  The  "philosophy  of original  un-

4.  R.  BORK,  supra  note  1,  at  2.
5.  Id. at 4.
6. Id.
7. Id. at 5.
8. Id. at 9.
9. Id. at 6-7.
10.  Id. at 8.
11.  Id. at 6.
12.  Id. at  11.
13. 

Id. at  10.  The  1960s  appear  to  loom  large  in  The  Tempting of America, which  makes

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 208 1990-1991

1991]

WHAT  JUDGE  BORK  SHOULD  HAVE  SAID

derstanding"  has  the large contrasting  value of "political  neutrality  in
judging."15

One  might  expect  that  the  "fall"'u 

from  neutrality  to  politics
would  be  a recent  phenomenon,  but in  fact  Judge  Bork  describes  it  as
something  that  immediately  followed  the  ratification  of  the  Constitu-
tion. Not  merely  Justice Brennan,  and  not merely  the "liberals"  on  the
Warren  Court, but also-to mention  simply  a  few-Chief Justice Mar-
shall  and Justices  Holmes,  Brandeis,  Frankfurter,  Jackson,  and  Harlan
were  seduced  by the  temptation  to substitute  politics  for  law.  They too
were  tempted  to  abandon  the  Constitution.

Judge  Bork's  position  is  thus  uncomplicated.  It  begins  with  the
proposition  that  the  Constitution  is  law  and  that  those  who  ignore  the
Constitution  are  acting  lawlessly.  It  adds  to  this  uncontroversial  claim
a  thesis about  interpretation,  that is,  an  identification  of "the  Constitu-
tion"  with the understanding  about its  meaning  held  by those  who  rati-
fied  it.  On  this view,  a judge  who  rejects  the original  understanding  of
meaning  rejects  the  Constitution  itself, or  is,  in  effect,  in  a  free-fall  in
which  meaning  is supplied  by  his own  predilections  or value judgments.
For  such  a judge,  the  Constitution  becomes  irrelevant.  Only  his  own
views  count.  It is here  that neutrality,  and  hence legitimacy,  is wanting
on  the judge's  part.  For  Judge  Bork,  avoidance  of value judgments  is  a
crucial  part of the task of law,  and reliance  on  the original  understand-
ing  alone  serves  that  function.

Substantive  outcomes  follow  from  this  conclusion.  There  is  no
right  of  privacy.  Indeed,  liberty  receives  no  substantive  protection
under the fourteenth  amendment.  Rational  basis  review  would  apply to
all  forms  of discrimination  other  than  those  based  on  race  and ethnic-
ity. 7  The  consequence  is  that  discrimination  on  the basis  of gender,  or
on  almost  any  other  basis,  is  extremely  likely  to  be  upheld  (though
Judge  Bork is  not  entirely  forthcoming  here).28  Poll taxes  are permissi-
ble,19  as  are  violations  of  the  principle  of  one  person-one  vote.2 0  Be-

some  of the  rhetoric  appear  out-of-date.

14.  Id.
15.  Id.
16.  And  it is  described  in very much  these terms.  Religious imagery-anguage  of heresy,  fall.
and  so forth-runs  throughout  The  Tempting  of America  and  of course  is  recalled  by its  title as
well.  There  may  be  a  connection  between  the  repeated  notion  of heresy  and the  failure  to  offer
substantive  arguments  against  the  heretical  position.

17.  Id. at  330.
Id.
18. 
Id. at 90-91.
19. 
20.  Id. at  84-87.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 209 1990-1991

CONNECTICUT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23:205

cause  the  equal  protection  clause  applies  only  to  the  states,  the  federal
government  can  discriminate  on  the  basis  of  race  or  indeed  on  any
other  ground.  If  it  chose,  it  could  segregate  on  the  basis  of  race  or
exclude  blacks  from  federal  employment. 21  Compulsory  sterilization  of
some  criminals  would  be  acceptable.2 2  Many  federal  programs  of  the
New  Deal  period  and  after  would  be  unconstitutional.23  Congress
would  have  more  limited  authority  under  section  five  of the  fourteenth
amendment  than  it  now  does,  and  would  be  barred  from  invalidating
state  literacy  requirements.24  Affirmative  action  would  be  banned.20

Perhaps  most  dramatically,  the  Bill  of Rights  probably  would  not
apply  to  the  states,  though  here  Judge  Bork  is  unaccountably  cau-
tious. 26  Of  course,  flag  desecration  could  be  criminalized; 27  creches
could  be  displayed  in  public  buildings; 28  states  could  exempt  profits
from  the  sale  of  Bibles  and  religious  literature  from  taxation. 2  One
need  not  disagree  with  all  of  these  conclusions  in  order  to  recognize
that  Judge  Bork's  Constitution  would  be  dramatically  different  from
the  document  as  it  is  now  understood.

C.  Arguments for Adherence  to  Original Understanding

It might  be tempting,  or even  correct,  to think  that the meaning  of
the Constitution  is  settled  by  the original  understanding  held  by  its ra-
tifiers.  But  surely  an  argument  is  necessary  before  one  should  accept
that position,  especially,  perhaps,  in  view  of its  repudiation  by  so  many
leading  members  of the  Court,3 0  and  of  the  extent  to  which  that  posi-
tion  would  undermine  principles  of constitutional  liberty  that  have  and

21. 

Id. at  83.  Judge Bork  does  argue  that states  cannot  segregate  and  that  Brown  v. Board  of
Education,  347  U.S.  483  (1954),  was  therefore  correct.  R. BORK,  supra note  1, at 81-83.  But  his
discussion  of the  point  seems  rather  tortuous,  and  many  readers  will  emerge  from  the discussion
with  the firm  impression  that  on  Bork's own  method,  neutrally  applied,  Brown was  wrongly  de-
cided.  See  Posner,  Bork  and Beethoven,  42  STAN.  L. REV.  1365  (1990).

Id. at  56-57.
Id. at 91-93.
Id. at  107-10.

22.  R.  BORK,  supra note  1, at  66.
23. 
24. 
25. 
26.  Id. at 93-95.
27. 
Id. at  127-28.
28. 
Id. at  128.
29. 
Id.
30.  Many  members  of  the  Court,  of  course,  have  accepted  the  original  understanding  but
characterized  it differently  from  Judge  Bork-as  including,  for  example,  principles  whose  shape
changes  over  time. This  category  includes  all  justices  who  have  treated  the free  speech  clause  in
roughly  this  way-that  is, all  modem  justices.  See, e.g.,  New  York  Times  v.  Sullivan,  376  U.S.
254  (1964).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 210 1990-1991

1991]

WHAT  JUDGE  BORK  SHOULD  HAVE  SAID

deserve  widespread  support.

Those  who  believe  that  the  original  understanding  is  not  decisive
do not,  of course, reject  the Constitution.31  They do  not believe  that the
Constitution  is  not  binding.  They do  not  reject the actual  Constitution.
Instead  they  suggest  that the  proper  interpretation  of  the  Constitution
requires  resort  to  other  considerations.  Often  they  claim  that  this  con-
ception  of interpretation  is  itself  historically  required.  In  any  case  they
propose,  not to  abandon  the  Constitution,  but  instead  to understand  its
meaning  by reference  to  something  other  than the original  understand-
ing  conceived  as  Judge  Bork  does.

What  argument  does  Judge  Bork  offer  on  behalf  of  his  view?  In

only  one  place  does  he  squarely  address  the  question:

It has  been  argued  ... 

that  the  claim  of proponents  of
original  understanding  to  political  neutrality  is  a  pretense
since  the choice  of that  philosophy  is  itself  a political  decision.
It  certainly  is,  but  the  political  content  of  that  choice  is  not
made  by  the  judge;  it  was  made  long  ago  by  those  who
designed  and  enacted  the  Constitution. 3
It is  worthwhile  to  pause  over  this  passage.  In  brief:  The  original
understanding  is  binding  because  the  original  understanding  was  that
the  original  understanding  is  binding.  The  historical  claim  is  itself
highly uncertain. 33 The  text of the  Constitution  invites  the view  that its
meaning  is  capable  of change  over  time,  and  there is  evidence  that  the
framers  did  not  believe  that  their original  understanding  would  control
the  future. 34  But  I  want  to  put  that  point  to  one  side.  Judge  Bork's
claim  is  that the binding  character  of the original  understanding  is  set-
tled  by the  original  understanding.  This  is  not an  argument  at  all;  it  is
circular,  or  an axiom,  or a rallying  cry. To  those  who  believe  that it  is
necessary  to  defend  the view that the original  understanding  is  binding,
it  will  be  less  than  unpersuasive.

31.  See  Dworkin,  Bork's  Jurisprudence (Book  Review),  57  U.  Cia.  L  REv.  657  (1990).
32.  R.  Boa.K,  supra note  1, at  176-77.
33.  See, e.g.,  J. ELY,  DEMocRACY  A  DLSRUST  22-41  (1980)  (discussing  privileges  and  im-
munities  clause,  equal  protection  clause,  and  ninth  amendment);  Fairman,  Does  the  Fourteenth
Amendment Incorporate the Bill of Rights?, 2  STAN. L Rnv. 5 (1949)  (discussing  intended  dele-
gation  to the  courts);  Powell,  The  Original Understanding of Original Intent,  98  HAnv. L  Rnv.
885  (1985)  (discussing  framers'  own  failure  to rely  on  original  intent).

34.  See generally sources  cited  supra note  33.  It  is  most  surprising  that  Bork  says  so  little
about the actual history.  In fact, his historical references consist almost  exclusively  or sources  that
can  be  found  in  introductory  casebooks.  See  Ackerman,  Robert  Bork's  Grand  Inquisition, 99
YALE  LJ. 1419  (1990).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 211 1990-1991

CONNECTICUT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23:205

I  have  searched  The  Tempting of America for  a  more  substantial
justification  for  the  book's  central  proposition.  There  appear  to  be  sev-
eral  different  strategies,  whose  relationship  to  one  another  is  obscure,
and whose  role in  defense  of the original  understanding  is  never  clearly
articulated.

On  several  occasions  Judge  Bork  argues  by  shifting  the  burden  of

argumentation:

Why  should  the  Court,  a  committee  of  nine  lawyers,  be
the  sole  agent  for  overriding  democratic  outcomes?  The  man
who  prefers  results  to  processes  has  no  reason  to  say  that  the
Court  is  more  legitimate  than  any  other institution  capable  of
wielding  power.  If the  Court will  not  agree  with  him, why  not
argue  his  case  to  some  other  group,  say  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff,  a  body  with  rather  better  means  for  enforcing  its  deci-
sions?  No  answer  exists.3 5

Judge  Bork  seems to  be  arguing here  that a  decision  deserves  respect  if
it  can  be  connected  to  a  judgment  by  "the  people";  it  does  not  if  it
cannot.

But this  is  a  crude  approach  to  the  question  of legitimacy.  Obedi-
ence  to  the  Court  is  not justified  simply  because  its  decisions  are  com-
pelled  by  a  judgment  made  in  some  sense  by  the  people-especially
when  the  relevant  people  died  long  ago.  Ultimately  obedience  is justi-
fied,  if it is,  for  some  amalgam  of substantive  reasons:  The  Constitution
is  a  good  one;  it  has  a  fair  degree  of  democratic  pedigree,  both  in  its
original  adoption  and  in the  possibility  of amendment;  the  consequence
of a  decision  to  abandon  the  Constitution  would  be  intolerable  chaos.
By  itself, the fact  that there was  agreement  on some  document  by  some
people  many  generations  ago is  insufficient  for  "legitimacy."  A decision
by  the  Supreme  Court  does  not  warrant  obedience  for  that  reason
alone.

So too,  Supreme  Court  decisions  do  not lose  their  rightful claim  of
allegiance  merely  because  they  are  not  connected  to  a  particular  deci-
sion  of  the  Constitution's  ratifiers.  To  say  that  only  Supreme  Court
decisions  that  are justifiable  by  reference  to  the original  understanding
warrant  allegiance  is  to  mistake  a  conclusion  for  an  argument.  On this
score,  Judge  Bork's  claims  about  legitimacy  mirror  his  (circular)  re-
sponse  to  the contention  that  it  is necessary  to  defend  adherence  to  the

35.  R.  BORK,  supra note  1,  at  265.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 212 1990-1991

1991]

WHAT  JUDGE  BORK  SHOULD  HAVE  SAID

original understanding  in political  terms.  In fact,  a judicial  decision  de-
serves  allegiance,  if it  does,  for  a  complex  mixture  of reasons,  roughly
analogous  to those  that support  a  decision  to be bound  by  the Constitu-
tion  itself. Those  reasons  involve  the  need  for  stability,  the justness  of
the system  as  a whole,  the possibility  of democratic  corrections,  and  (to
some  limited  extent)  the  substance  of  the  decision  itself.  A  tight  con-
nection  with a previous  decision  of the polity  is  neither  a  necessary  nor
a  sufficient  condition  for  legitimacy.

Judge  Bork  also  suggests  that  adherence  to  the  original  under-
standing  is  justified  because  abandonment  of  that  understanding  will
lead  judges  to  make  "moral  choices"  that  they  have  not  been  author-
ized  to make, and  that cannot in  any  case  be made in  the face  of moral
disagreement  among  the populace.  A  key point,  for  Judge  Bork,  is that
"revisionist"  theorists  require  a  judge  "to  make  a  major  moral  deci-
sion."  6  Legitimate judges,  by  contrast,  are simply  agents  of the people.
Because  people  cannot  "all  agree  to  a  single  moral  system," 37  judges
cannot  properly  invoke  morality  at  all,  on  which  the citizenry  is  hope-
lessly  divided:  "Why  is  sexual  gratification  more  worthy  than  moral
gratification?  Why  is  the  gratification  of low-cost  electricity  or  higher
income  more worthy  than  the  pleasure  of clean  air?" 38

There  is,  however,  no  way  to  avoid  "moral  decisions,"  even  major
and  controversial  ones.  The  view  that  the  original  understanding  is
binding  requires  a  moral  or  political  theory,  and  thus  acceptance  of
that  view  rests  on  a  (disputable  and  disputed)  moral  foundation.  The
very  fact  that  Judge  Bork's  theory  of  interpretation  is  controversial
among  the  citizenry  attests  to  the  fact  that  it  rests  on  such  a  founda-
tion.  In  this  respect  his  approach,  like  any  other,  relies  on  moral deci-
sions  that  require  substantive  defense.  Reliance  on  the  original  under-
standing  does  not  avoid  recourse  to  a  moral  system  at all.

No  text,  constitutional  or  otherwise,  has  meaning  apart  from  the
precepts  held  by  those  who  interpret  it,  and  those  precepts  cannot  be
found  in the  text  itself."  The  selection  of precepts  must itself  be justi-
fied  in  moral  and  political  terms.  To  say  this  is  not  at  all  to  say  that
language  imposes  no  constraints  or  that  meaning  lies  solely  with  the
interpreter.  But  it  is  to  say  that  meaning  is  a  function  of culture,  and

36.  Id. at 252.
37.  Id. at 253.
38.  Id. at 258-59.
39.  See Dworkin,  supra note 31; for a  detailed  discussion  in the context  of statutory construc-

tion,  see C. SuNsmIN.  AFTER  THE  RiGHTS  REVOLUTIoN  ch.  3  (1990).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 213 1990-1991

CONNECTICUT  LAW  REVIEW

(Vol.  23:205

that  aspects  of  culture  are  subject  to  evaluation.

In addition,  it is  impossible  to decide  how  to characterize  the origi-
nal  understanding  without  adverting  to  moral  considerations.  History
itself will  not  do  the job. To  reiterate  some  familiar  points:  It  is  neces-
sary  to  decide  whether  the  clause  embodied  a  general  concept  capable
of  change  over  time  or  instead  the  particular  understandings  held  by
those who  ratified it. It is  also necessary  to translate  the original  under-
standing  into  conditions  that  the  ratifiers  could  not  have  anticipated.
To carry  out both these  tasks, interpreters  must  invoke  something  other
than  the  historical  record.  No  final  answers  can  be  found  there.40

The  claim  of lack of authorization  is  merely  another  version  of the
claim  of illegitimacy,  and it  is no  more  productive  here  than  there.  It is
true  that  there  is  disagreement  about  morals  and  politics  among  the
citizenry,  but  the  fact of disagreement  does  not  mean that  the conflict-
ing  positions  are  not  subject  to  mediation,  as  they  in  fact have  been  in
multiple  areas,  including  those of race  and sex  discrimination.  The  fact
that  a  decision  has  moral  dimensions  does  not  imply  that  it is  not sub-
ject  to reason.  As  we have  seen,  Judge  Bork's  own  view  rests  at bottom
on  moral  and  political  choices,  having  broadly to  do  with  the perceived
value  of  (his  conception  of)  democratic  self-determination  and  fear  of
judicial  willfulness.  But  The  Tempting  of America  does  not  acknowl-
edge  that these are moral  and political  choices,  and so  spends  almost  no
time  in  defending  them.41

Judge  Bork  sometimes  defends  his  position  by  general  references
to  democratic  self-determination,  and  here  he  is  on  firm  ground.  Any
plausible  theory  of constitutional  interpretation  must  pay  a  great  deal
of  attention  to  the  democratic  aspirations  of  the  American  constitu-
tional  tradition.  But  the  principle  of democracy  is  too  vague,  standing
by  itself,  to justify  any  particular  conception  of  the judicial  role.  For
example,  that  principle  might  call  for  an  exceptionally  aggressive  judi-
cial  role  in protecting  rights  of political  participation  and  in  safeguard-

40.  Thus,  for example,  Brown v.  Board  of Education,  347  U.S.  483  (1954),  cannot be  resolved
by  reference  to  the  original  understanding;  it  is  necessary  to  translate  the requirement  of  equal
protection  into  the  conditions  of the  1950s,  in which  public  education  had  attained  a quite  novel
status.  So  too,  the  original  understanding  that  the  equal  protection  clause  does  riot  forbid  sex
discrimination  need  not resolve  the question  in light of the generality of the framers'  language, the
difficulty  of determining  whether  they  understood  by  that  language  a  general  concept  or  their
particular conceptions,  and  the extreme  difficulty of sorting  out that  question without  resorting  to
extratextual  and  extrahistorical  considerations.

41.  See  supra text  accompanying  notes  26-29.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 214 1990-1991

1991]

WHAT  JUDGE  BORK  SHOULD  HAVE  SAID

ing  the interests  of groups  likely  to  be  disfavored  in politics. 4 2  Without
much  more,  the  principle  of democracy  does  not  require  adherence  to
the  original  understanding.

It is, I think, no  accident that the position  set out  in  The Tempting
of America is  not so  much defended  as  proclaimed.  If the position  were
actually  to  be  defended,  its  central  claims  would  take  on  entirely  new
dimensions.  The  rhetoric  of  heresy  and  seduction  would  have  to  be
abandoned;  the  line  between  neutrality  and  moral judgments  would  be
unsettled;  the  defense  would  have  itself  to partake  of moral  and  politi-
cal judgments.  An  argument  for  originalism,  or  (what  is  not the  same
thing)  for a  modest judicial  role,  will  have  to speak  of political  theory,
and not  only of the framers.  To make  that argument  would  be to aban-
don the moral  high ground  on which  The Tempting of America tries  to
stand.

I want  to  conclude  this  section  with  a  summary  that  slightly  gen-
eralizes  the  point.  Every  text  requires  interpreters  to  draw  on  back-
ground  norms  or  principles  that  they  themselves  must  supply.  To  say
that  a text  has  a  plain  meaning,  or  that  there  is  no  room  for  interpre-
tive  doubt,  is  often  to  say  something  true;  but  when  it  is  true,  it  is
because  there  is  no  disagreement  about  the  appropriate  background
principles.  Those  who  deny  the  existence  of such  principles  are  in  fact
without  self-consciousness.  They  believe  that  their  own  views  are  so
self-evident  that  they do  not amount to  interpretive principles  at all  but
instead  are  "part"  of the text.  Interpretive  principles  are,  however,  al-
ways  operative.  That  is  no  embarrassment  to  constitutional  law,  or in-
deed  to law  itself,  but instead  an  inevitable  part  of the exercise  of rea-
son  in  human  affairs.

The  question  is  not  whether  interpretive  principles  exist,  but
whether  they  can  be  defended  in substantive,  value-laden  terms.  Many
imaginable  Supreme  Court decisions  would  not be susceptible to such  a
defense,  and  surely  some  of  Judge  Bork's  particular  conclusions  are
sound.  But  because  he  never  defends  his  own  interpretive  principles,
asserting  instead  that those who  do not share them  would  abandon  "the
Constitution,"  he  offers  no  reason  for  anyone  to  agree  with  him.

I conclude  that  originalism  is  merely  the latest  version  of formal-
ism  in  the  law.  It  represents  the  pretense  that  one  can  decide  hard
cases  in  law  by  reference  to  value  judgments  made  by  someone  else.
Those  who indulge  in  that  pretense  usually  end  up  not  by  abandoning

42.  See  J. ELY,  supra note  33,  at  24-41.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 215 1990-1991

CONNECTICUT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23:205

value judgments  but by  making  them covertly.  The  real  fault  of Judge
Bork's  version  of  originalism 
is  that  it  attempts  to  mask  its  own
foundations.43

I  have  not  dealt  in  detail  with  the particular  positions  on  constitu-
tional  questions  set  out  by  Judge  Bork,  but  it  is  revealing  that  those
positions  generally  line  up,  not  with  some  original  understanding,  but
with  the  conservative  wing  of the  Republican  party:  no  affirmative  ac-
tion,  fewer  restrictions  on governmental  power  to  aid  religion,  no  abor-
tion  rights,  greater  constraints  on  national  power,  greater  constraints
on  pornography,  fewer  intrusions  on  presidential  power,  and  greater
protection  of  property  rights.""

D.  Legal Authoritarianism

The  Tempting  of America is  the  most  prominent  recent  illustra-
tion  of what might  be called  "legal  authoritarianism,"  a  term that  I use
in  a  special  sense.  I  mean  the  term  to  refer  to  all  approaches  to  law
that  ultimately  trace  legal  legitimacy  exclusively  to  an  exercise  of
power,  or  to  the view  that  might  makes  right,  or  to  some  prior  settle-
ment  among  those  with  political  power.  On  this view,  legal  legitimacy
need  not,  and  indeed  must not,  be justified  by  reference  to  substantive
claims  about  the  right  or  the  good.  Thus  understood,  the  category  of
authoritarianism  is  a  broad  one,  encompassing  highly  democratic  ap-
proaches  as  well  as  others  that  are  far  less  palatable.  Authoritarianism
in  law  has  no  necessary  alliance  with  liberalism  or  conservatism.  In-
deed,  democratic  authoritarianism 
in
Justices  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  and  Hugo  Black,  both  of  whom  em-
phasized,  as  a  centerpiece  of  their  approaches  to  law,  the  need  for
judges  to  ratify  prior  agreements  among  those  with  political  power.45
For  Black  in particular,  interpretive  principles  seemed  unnecessary  and
indeed  hubristic,  since  they  introduced  a  measure  of  discretion  and
nonneutrality  into  law.46  For  Black,  the constitutional  text  was  usually
self-interpreting.47

finds  prominent  expression 

If legal  authoritarianism  is  understood  in these  terms,  its  antonym

43.  Cf. the  very  different  approach  in  Scalia,  Originalism: The  Lesser  Evil,  57  U.  CIN.  L.
REV.  849  (1989)  (acknowledging  criticisms  of originalism  and attempting  to defend  it on  substan-
tive  and  institutional  grounds).

44.  See  supra text  accompanying  notes  17-29;  see also R.  BORK,  supra note  1, at  205.
45.  See Adamson  v.  California,  332  U.S.  46  (1947)  (Black,  J.,  dissenting);  Rogat,  The  Judge

as  Spectator, 31  U.  CmI.  L.  REV.  213  (1964).
46.  See Adamson, 332  U.S.  at  70-71.
47.  See, e.g.,  Youngstown  Sheet  & Tube  Co. v.  Sawyer,  343  U.S.  579  (1952).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 216 1990-1991

1991]

WHAT  JUDGE  BORK SHOULD  HAVE  SAID

is  not  democracy.  For  this  reason,  the  term will  be misleading  to those
who  identify  authoritarianism  with  an  absence  of  legitimate  electoral
processes.  But  I hope  that it  is  not  unfair  to  contrast authoritarianism,
as  understood  here,  with  all  approaches  that  demand  of  law,  and  of
government  through  law,  some justification  that  goes  beyond  the exer-
cise  of political  power.  Such  approaches  also  span  a  wide  range.  The
antonym  of  authoritarianism  is  not  allied  with  any  political  program.
Because  such  approaches  require governmental  action  to be justified  by
something  other  than the will of the majority,  and because  they empha-
size  the need  for  interpretive principles,  which  often must be justified  in
substantive  terms,  they  frequently  appear,  from  the  authoritarian  per-
spective,  to  be  irremediably  antidemocratic.

Legal  authoritarianism  has  a  number  of characteristic  features.  It
sees  laws  as  deals  among  self-interested  actors.  It is  commonly  skepti-
cal  of normative  argument  altogether,  or  of efforts  to  reason  about  so-
cial  and  economic  problems.  It  commonly  disparages  such  efforts  as  a
mere  mask  for  self-interest,  or  as  incapable  of  mediating  social  and
political  disputes,  which  it  treats  as  based  on  premises  too  fixed  and
incommensurable  to  be a  subject of  deliberation.  Mediation  is  possible
only  by  warfare  or  compromise  among  self-interested  bargainers.  Dis-
agreements  about  ethical  and  political  problems  are,  for  the  legal  au-
thoritarian,  not  an  occasion  for  shared  reasoning  but  instead  proof  of
its  impossibility.  Value  judgments,  understood  as  prejudices,  are  seen
as  the  consequence.  Authoritarianism  thus  tends  to  have  a  positivist
understanding  of law  and legal  authority.  The source  of law is  an  exer-
cise  of sovereign  power,  constituted  as such  by  other people  with  sover-
eign  power,  in  a  chain  ultimately connected  to  some foundational  exer-
cise of power.  The disjunction  between  law  and politics  is  understood  in
these  terms.,

There  is  a  distinctive  authoritarian  style  in  constitutional  law  as
well.  Authoritarianism  provides  the  foundation  for  one  conception  of
judicial  restraint.  Because  ordinary legislative  outcomes  reflect  the play
of social  forces,  they  should  not  be  disturbed  unless  the interference  is
itself the result of some  other, superior  decision  by such  forces. Author-
itarianism is  also drawn  to  firm linguistic anchors-"the  text"-and for
two  reasons.  First,  the text is  the best  evidence  of how  the social  forces
in  the  community  have  resolved  themselves.  Second,  departures  from
the text  leave  interpreters  in  the world  of unfettered  value judgments,
or  prejudices.  Moreover,  the  authoritarian  position  tends  to  see  social
outcomes  expressed  in  authoritative  texts  as  embodying  the  will  of

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 217 1990-1991

CONNECTICUT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23:205

some collective  "us"--even  if the text were written  many  years  ago and
even  if important  segments  of  the community  were  excluded  from  the
decision.

Finally,  and  perhaps  most  important,  the  authoritarian  position
treats most  of its  claims  as axioms,  in need  of no real  defense.  The very
call  for  a defense  is  often said  to mark people  as  heretics  or as  demand-
ing  their  exclusion  from  the  relevant  community.  When  defended  in
substantive  terms,  the  authoritarian  claim  takes  on  altogether  new
dimensions  and  ceases  to  be authoritarian  at  all. And  for  the  next  gen-
eration  of  legal  studies,  perhaps  the  most  crucial  task  is  the  develop-
ment  of modes  of analysis  that  resist  the  authoritarian  temptation  and
do  not  purport  to  be  purely  deductive,  but  that  nonetheless  recognize
and  exemplify  the possibility  of mediating  social  disputes  through  good
reasons  rather  than  poor  ones.

III.  NEW  CONSTITUTIONAL  PRINCIPLES?

I  want  now  to  shift  gears.  Judge  Bork's  nomination  was  of course
defeated,  but  his  ideas  are  shared,  perhaps  increasingly,  by  influential
members of the legal  community,  and the position  of the current  Court
has  many  commonalities  with  that  of Judge  Bork.  We  might  obtain  a
useful  angle  on  the  problem  by  exploring  the  sort  of  constitutional
agenda  that  would  be  set  by  a  modern-day  successor  to  the  Warren
Court.  If the Supreme  Court,  for  our  time, brought  to  bear  on  current
practices  the kind  of critical  eye  that the  Warren  Court  brought  to  the
1950s  and  1960s,  what  kinds  of  changes  might  be  expected?  I  do  not
mean  to  endorse  all  of these  proposed  results,  some  of which  strike  me
as  inadvisable  or  even  preposterous;  I  do  mean  to  obtain  a  sense  of
what  has  been  lost  or  gained  by  the  abandonment  of an  aggressive  role
for the Supreme  Court  in the area  of social reform.  One of the unfortu-
nate  consequences  of the constitutional  attack  on  the  Warren  Court  is
that  it  has  preoccupied  its  participants  so  much  as  to  distract  them
from  the  task  of imagining  the ingredients  of  a  different  constitutional
order,  mandated  judicially  or  not. The  following  is  an  admittedly  hypo-
thetical  agenda.

(1) The  area  of  sex  discrimination  is  probably  the  place  to  start.
Under  current  law,  principles  of  "formal  equality"  bar  attack  on  a
number  of  candidates  for  serious  constitutional  review.  Consider  the
problem  of reproductive  freedom,  which  is  now  treated  as  a  matter  of
"privacy,"  even  though  issues  of sexual  equality  loom  at  the  surface  of
the  debate.  Legal  control  of women's  reproductive  capacities  has  been

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 218 1990-1991

1991]

WHAT  JUDGE  BORK  SHOULD  HAVE  SAID

central  to sex  discrimination,  and the effort  to forbid  abortion is  closely
connected  (simply  as  a  matter  of  actual  legislative  motivation)  with
fears  about women's  rejection  of their  traditional role.  A Warren  Court
successor  might  well  have  seen  public  and  private  behavior  that  bears
on  pregnancy-in  the  workplace  and  in  the  criminal  law-as  raising
serious  problems  of  sexual  equality.

There  are  many  other  examples.  It  is  widely  reported  that  the
criminal justice  system  deals  inadequately  with  domestic  violence,  sex-
ual  harassment,  rape,  and  abuses  in  the  production  of  pornography.
Often  it is  alleged  that the  inadequate  treatment  is  a reflection  of  dis-
crimination.  It would  not  be  at all  difficult  to  imagine  a  constitutional
attack, rooted  in principles  of equality,  against police  practices  that fail
to  redress  domestic  violence.  Such  attacks  might  be based  on  a  promi-
nent  part  of  the  original  understanding  of  equal  "protection"  of  the
laws,  which  was  designed  to  ensure  equality  in  the  administration  of
the  criminal  justice  system.

Another  example  is  provided  by  the  current  rules  of  family  law,
which  ensure  that  after  divorce,  the welfare  of  most  men  will  increase
dramatically  and  the welfare  of most women  will decrease  correspond-
ingly.4'  The  current  rules  do  not  reward  women  but  indeed  punish
them for  their  contributions  to  childcare  and  housework.  Because  most
women  receive  custody  of children  but  low support  payments  upon  di-
vorce,  a  constitutional  attack  would  be  quite  plausible  here.

Additional  illustrations  are  provided  by the presence,  in the United
States,  of a  social security  system  that benefits  people  the  more closely
they come  to traditional  male  career  paths,  and  that keeps weakest  and
most  defenseless  those  who  have  assumed  traditional  female  roles;' 0
and  of workplaces  that  continue  to  be  structured  on  the  basis  of male
norms  and  expectations,  captured  in, for  example,  the  exclusion  of fer-
tile women  from  certain jobs  and halfhearted  childcare  policies  in gen-
eral.50  All  of  these  problems  could  be  seen  as  raising  issues  of  sex
discrimination.

(2)  As currently  interpreted,  the  Constitution  has  little or nothing
to  offer the  handicapped.  Discrimination  against  the mentally  retarded

48. 

In  California,  for  example,  a  man's  standard  of living  increases  by  42%  after  divorce,

while  a woman's  falls  by  73%.  See  L  WmztAN.  THE DIVORcE  RBvoLmtno 

338  (1985).

49.  See  Becker,  Obscuring  the  Struggle: Sex  Discrimination,  Social  Security,  and Stone.

Seidman, Sunstein & Tushnet's Constitutional Law,  89  CoLUM  L  REv.  264  (1989).

50.  See  International  Union  v.  Johnson  Controls,  110  S.  Ct.  1522  (1990);  Becker,  From

Muller  v.  Oregon  to  Fetal Vulnerability Policies, 53  U. Cm.  L  REv.  1219  (1986).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 219 1990-1991

CONNECTICUT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23:205

is  subject  to rational  basis review. 5'  Moreover,  disabled  people  face  nu-
merous  obstacles  in  a  world  made  by  and  for  the able-bodied;  many  of
these  obstacles  are  embodied  in  law.  An  attack  on  seemingly  neutral
standards,  based on  able-bodied  norms that  effectively  exclude  disabled
people,  could  well  be  marshalled  under  principles  of  constitutional
equality.

(3)  The  sexual  privacy  of homosexuals  is  unprotected. 2  Probably
the  best  guess  is  that  the  current  Court  would  find  discrimination  on
the basis  of sexual  orientation,  including wholesale  exclusions  from gov-
ernmental  employment,  to  raise  no  serious  constitutional  question.  A
different  Court  would  have  taken  this  issue  much  more  seriously.

(4)  People who  are  homeless,  poor,  starving,  or victims  of domestic
violence  have  no  right  to  relief in  the  Constitution,  which  is  said  to  be
exclusively  a  charter  of negative  liberties.5"  Another  Court  would  have
made  at  least some  inroads  on the positive-negative  distinction,  furnish-
ing  a  degree  of  protection  here.  At  a  minimum,  the Court  might  have
said  that selective  exclusions  from  funding  programs  have  to be persua-
sively  justified.  Such  a  Court  would  have  been  closely  attuned  to  the
ways  in  which  selective  funding  can  pressure  the  exercise  of  constitu-
tional  rights.

(5)  Under  current  interpretations,  the Constitution  has  no bearing
on  efforts  to  control  environmental  degradation.  In  the  1960s  and
1970s,  environmental  groups  argued  that  the  founding  document  im-
poses  on  government  some  obligation  to  protect  the  citizenry  against
the  environmental  damage  brought  about  by  industrial  development.
Although  such  arguments  attempted  to  draw  on  common  law  ideas
about  the  integrity  of  property  and  person,  they  were  unsuccessful  in
the  courts.  Of course  there  would  be  considerable  difficulties  in  mark-
ing  out  a  judicial  role  in  this  setting.  But -one  might  have  expected
some  success  from  a  different  set  of judges  and  justices.

(6)  In  the area  of race  discrimination,  seemingly  neutral  practices
that have  the effect  of excluding  blacks  from  important  arenas  of pub-
lic  life  are  subject  to  little  scrutiny.  Tests,  educational  qualifications,
electoral  systems,  and  other requirements  are  permitted  so  long  as  they
are  minimally  rational.54  Another  Court  would  have  subjected  these

51.  See  City  of Cleburne  v.  Cleburne  Living  Center,  Inc.,  473  U.S.  432  (1985).
52.  See  Bowers  v.  Hardwick,  478  U.S.  186  (1986).
53.  See  DeShaney  v.  Winnebago  County  Dep't  of Social  Services,  489  U.S.  189  (1989)  (no

right  to  protection  against  domestic violence).

54.  The  key case here  is of course  Washington  v.  Davis, 426  U.S.  229  (1976).  See also  Rogers

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 220 1990-1991

1991]

WHAT  JUDGE  BORK  SHOULD  HAVE  SAID

rules-in  such  areas  as  education,  employment,  and  welfare-to  a  re-
quirement  of justification  or to  a  showing  that  alternatives  without dis-
criminatory  consequences  would  be  less  effective.

Taken  as  a whole,  an  agenda  of this sort  would  provide  an impres-
sive  set  of  proposals  for  constitutional  reform;  this  is  so  even  if,  as
seems  likely, some  of the  proposals  should  not  be accepted  by  a  court.
Such  an  agenda  would  confront  the  contemporary  Constitution  with
the  same sorts  of pressures,  dilemmas,  and  opportunities  that were fur-
nished to  the Warren  Court in  the period  beginning  in the  1950s.  If the
agenda  seems overly ambitious,  perhaps  we might  remember  how  much
more  ambitious  were  the  changes  that  the  Court  actually  brought
about  in  the  period  between  1950  and  1980--changes  that  would  in-
deed  have  seemed  inconceivable  to  observers  in,  say,  1940.

IV.  AGAINST  SOCIAL  CHANGE  THROUGH  COURTS

Would  it be desirable  for  the Court to embark  upon courses  of this
sort?  Should the Supreme  Court  engage in social reform  in such  areas?
If what  I  have  said  thus  far  is  correct,  the  Court's  unwillingness  to
involve  itself  in  these issues  cannot  be justified  by  reference  to  "legiti-
macy,"  at  least  not  without  substantial  additional  arguments.  A  judi-
cial  role in  some  or  many of these  areas  would  fall  within  the  bounda-
ries  of the  text.  Moreover,  invocation  of  the  Constitution  in  many  of
these  settings  could  be  connected  to  the  general  understandings  for
which  the  document  stands;  for  at  least  most  of  them,  there  would  be
no greater  strain  here  than  in cases  creating  (for  example)  a  wholesale
prohibition  on racial discrimination  and a right  to be free from  discrim-
ination  on  the  basis  of gender.

I  want  to  argue  that judicial  involvement  in  most  of  these  areas
would  indeed  have  been  unjustified,  and  that in  any  case  the shift from
constitutional  adjudication  to  constitutional  politics  has  a  great  deal  to
be  said  in  its  favor.  I want,  in  short,  to  outline  some  of  the considera-
tions  that  Judge  Bork avoided  in  his  argument  for  a  constrained  judi-
cial  role.  These  arguments  do  not  sound  in  neutrality;  they  are  self-
consciously  value-laden.  But  they  suggest  that  an  aggressive  role  for
the Supreme Court  in social reform  carries  with  it significant  disadvan-
tages,  and  that  a judicial  withdrawal  promises  significant  benefits  as
well.  The  relevant  considerations  fall  into  three overlapping  categories:

v.  Lodge,  458  U.S.  613  (1982)  (voting).  A  greater  burden  is,  however,  imposed  under  federal
statutes.  See,  e.g.,  42 .U.S.C.    2000e  to  2000e-17  (1982)  (employment).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 221 1990-1991

CONNECTICUT LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  231205

efficacy,  democracy  and  citizenship,  and  the  narrowing  focus  of
adjudication.

A.  Difficulties in  Court-Led Reform

1.  Efficacy

The  first  point  is  that judicial  decisions  are  of limited  efficacy  in
bringing  about.  social  change.  Study  after  study  has  documented  this
basic  conclusion.55  Brown  v.  Board of  Education56  itself  is  usually
taken  as  a  counterexample,  but it is  in fact the most  conspicuous  confir-
mation  of the  point.5
7  Ten  years  after  the  decision,  no more  than  about
two  percent  of  black  children  in  the  South  attended  desegregated
schools.58  It  was  not  until  1964,  after  the  involvement  of Congress  and
the executive  branch,  that  widespread  desegregation  actually  occurred.
The  Court  is far more  effective  in vetoing  a decision  than  in attempting
to  bring  about  social  change  on  its  own.59

The  decision  in Roe  v.  Wade6 may  be another  illustration,  though
the  picture  here  is  mixed.  It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  the  decision  in-
creased  women's  access  to  safe  abortions, 61  and  to  some  extent  in-
creased  the  legitimacy  of  the  practice  of  abortion.  Surprisingly,  how-
ever,  it did not  dramatically  increase  the actual  rate  of abortions. 62  It is
thus  inaccurate  to  say  that  there  have  been  significantly  more  fetal
deaths  as  a  result  of  the Supreme  Court's  decision.  Perhaps  more  fun-
damentally,  the  decision  may  well  have  created  the  "moral  majority,"
helped  defeat  the  Equal  Rights  Amendment,  prevented  the  eventual
achievement  of  consensual  solutions  to  the  abortion  problem,  and  se-
verely  undermined  the  women's  movement  both  by  spurring  and  or-
ganizing  opposition  and  by  demobilizing  potential  adherents.

Some evidence  for  all  of these  propositions  has  been  provided  rela-

55.  See  D.  HOROWITZ.  THE  COURTS  AND  SOCIAL  POLICY  (1977);  R.S.  MELNICK,  REGULA-
TION  AND  THE  COURTS:  THE  CASE  OF  THE  CLEAN  AIR ACT  (1983);  G.  ROSENBERG.  THE  HOLLOW
HOPE  (forthcoming  1991).

56.  347  U.S.  483  (1954).
57.  See  G.  ROSENBERG,  supra note  55.
58.  See  G.  STONE,  L.  SEIDMAN,  C.  SUNSTEIN  &  M.  TUSHNET,  CONSTITUTIONAL  LAW  474

(1986).

59.  Of course  it  is  possible  that  the legislative  and  executive  actions  would  not  have  occurred
without  the spur of Brown, but  even  this  is  uncertain.  See  G.  ROSENBERG,  supra note  55,  at  107-
156.

60.  410  U.S.  113  (1973).
61.  G.  ROSENBERG.  supra note  55,  at  175-201;  see  also H.  RODMAN.  B.  SARVIS  &  J. BONAR.

THE  ABORTION  QUESTION  (1987).

62.  H.  RODMAN,  B.  SARVIS  & J.  BONER,  supra note  61,  at  23.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 222 1990-1991

1991]

WHAT  JUDGE  BORK  SHOULD  HAVE  SAID

tively  recently,  with the  extraordinary  public  reaction  to the  Webster v.
Reproductive Health Services's  decision."  The  Court's  partial  retreat
from  Roe may  well  have  galvanized  the  women's  movement  in  a  way
that will  have  more  favorable  and  fundamental  long-term  consequences
for  sexual  equality  than  anything  that  could  have  come  from  the  Su-
preme  Court. To say this  is not to say  that Roe was  necessarily  wrongly
decided,  either  as  a matter  of constitutional  interpretation  or as  a  mat-
ter  of principle.  But  it  is  to  say  that  its  effectiveness  has  been  limited,
largely  because  of its  judicial  source.

More  generally,  it  is not  clear  that in terms  of civil  rights  and civil
liberties,  the United  States  has  developed  significantly  differently  from
other  liberal  democracies  'that  lack  judicial  review  (most  notably
France,  England  and,  until  recently,  Canada)  or  those  that  have  such
review  but  have  quite  different  constitutions  (most  notably  West  Ger-
many).  Of  course  judicial  review  has,  in  some  settings,  accomplished
considerable  good  and  even  introduced  important  changes  into  Ameri-
can  society.  But  the post-Warren  Court  focus  on  the  rulings  of the Su-
preme  Court  has  often  been  myopic.  The  fate  of  civil  rights  and  civil
liberties  in  a  democracy  depends  more  fundamentally  on  a  range  of
cultural,  social,  and  economic  factors  than  on  the  nine justices.

2.  Democracy,  Citizenship,  Compromise,  Legitimacy

In  two  ways,  reliance  on  the  courts  may  operate  as  an  alternative
to  democratic  channels.  It  might  divert  energy  and  resources  from
politics,  and  the eventual judicial  decision  may  foreclose  a  political  out-
come.  On  both  counts,  the  substitution  has  large  costs.  The  resort  to
politics  can  produce  a kind  of citizen  mobilization  that is  a  public  and
private  good,  inculcating  political  commitments,  broader  understand-
ing,  feelings  of citizenship,  and  dedication  to  the  community.  An  em-
phasis  on  the judiciary  that compromises  these  values  will carry  with  it
large  attendant  disadvantages.  In  this  connection  it is  important  to  re-
call  that  Martin  Luther  King  was  quite  possibly  a  far more  important
source  of  constitutional  change  than  any  or  even  all  of  the  Warren
Court's  decisions  concerning  race.6 5

63.  492 U.S.  490  (1989).
64.  Thus  many  of  the  1988  elections  featured  abortion  as  a  central  issue,  and  considerable

pressure  was  imposed  by  the  pro-choice  movement.

65.  The  common  view  that  the Court's  decisions  helped  to  mobilize  political  actors  and  pro-
test,  or to  pave  the way  for  King,  appears  to  have  strikingly  little  empirical  support.  See  G.  RO-
SENBERG,  supra note  55,  at  107-156.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 223 1990-1991

CONNECTICUT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23:205

In  any  case,  political  channels  are  often  a  far  better  channel  for
sensible  and  effective  reform.  Individual  preferences,  and  their  intensi-
ties,  can  more  easily  be  reflected  in  mutually  advantageous  accommo-
dations.6"  And  if questions  of morality  tend to  become  questions  of con-
stitutional  law,  their  resolution  before  nine  judges  can  be  harmful  to
the practice  of citizenship.  As  noted,  some  of this  effect  is  already  visi-
ble  in  the context  of the  abortion  controversy. 7  The  same  may  also  be
true  in  the context  of race  discrimination,  though  the evidence  is  mixed
here. 8

The  Court,  in  short,  is not  the only  "forum  of principle"  in  Ameri-
can  government.6 9  On  the contrary,  the  major  reflections  of principled
deliberation  in  the  history  of  American  government  have  come  from
Congress  and the  President,  not  from  the  judiciary.  In  the  last  genera-
tion  it  has  become  commonplace  to  contrast  a  principled,  deliberative
judiciary  with  a  reflexive,  interest-ridden  political  process."   But  this
position  amounts  not  merely  to  a  counsel  of  despair.  It  disregards  the
phenomenon,  frequently  observed  in  practice,  of deliberative  politics,  in
which  existing  conventions  are  subject  to  critical  scrutiny.  The  belief in
deliberative  politics  through 
institutions  other  than  courts  has,  of
course,  been  central  to  American  constitutionalism  since  its  inception. 1
To  say  all  this  is  not  to  deny  that judicial  review  can  make up  for
systemic  inequalities  in  majoritarian  processes  or  introduce  principles
that  come  to such  processes  only  with  difficulty.  But  it is  to say  that  an
aggressive  Court  is,  on  traditional  liberal  grounds,  the  furthest  thing
from  an  unambiguous  good,  and this  is  so  even  if the  Court's  goals  are
sound.

66.  Two  qualifications  are  necessary  here.  First,  I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  preference-
aggregation  is  an  appropriate  model  for  politics.  Second,  systemic disabilities  in the  political  pro-
cess--collective  action  problems  and  other  disparities  in political  influence--make  it  hazardous  to
identify  a  deferential  judicial  role  with  democratic  self-government.

67.  See G.  ROSENBERG,  supra note  55,  at  175-201.
68.  The  Civil  Rights  Act  of 1990  passed  the  Senate  on  July  18,  1990.  S.  2104,  101st  Cong.,
1st  Sess.  (1990).  It  passed  the  House  on August  3,  1990, with  one amendment.  H.R. 4000,  101st
Cong.,  1st  Sess.  (1990).  President  Bush  vetoed  the  Act  on  October  22,  1990,  and  the  Senate
sustained  the  President's  veto  on  October  24,  1990.  48  CONG.  Q.  3672  (Oct.  27,  1990).

69.  See R.  DWORKIN,  A  MATTER  OF  PRINCIPLE  (1985),  which  defends  an  aggressive  judicial
role  by  reference  to  the  need  to  insert  principle  into  political  processes,  a  defense  that  seems
plausible but perhaps  historically  myopic  and  insufficiently ambitious with  respect  to politics itself.
70.  See A. BICKEL, THE  LEAST  DANGEROUS  BRANCH  (1962);  R. DWORKIN,  supra note  69;  M.

PERRY,  THE  CONSTITUTION,  THE  COURTS,  AND  HUMAN  RIGHTS  (1982).

71.  See THE  FEDERALIST  No.  10  (J.  Madison).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 224 1990-1991

1991]

WHAT  JUDGE  BORK  SHOULD  HAVE  SAID

3.  The Narrowing  Focus  of Adjudication

Adjudication  is  an  exceptionally  poor  system  for  achieving  large-
scale  social  reform.  Courts  are  rarely  expert  in  the  area  at  hand,  and
the focus  on  the  litigated  case  makes  it  hard  for judges  to  understand
the complex  systemic effects  of legal  intervention.  A  decision  to  require
expenditures  on  school  busing  might,  for  example,  divert  resources
from an  area with  an  equal or greater  claim  to the public  fisc.  Creation
of  a  legal  right  against  pollution  may  have  a  variety  of  harmful  and
unintended  effects  on  the  public  and  private  sectors,  including  unem-
ployment  and  higher  prices--effects  that  are  difficult,  especially  for
courts,  to  anticipate.  Ideas  of  this  sort  provide  some  support  for  the
Court's  aversion  to  the  recognition  of  positive  rights.

Moreover,  legal  thinking  and legal  procedures  are  most  comforta-
ble  with  ideas,  growing  out  of  the  tradition  of  compensatory  justice,
that  are  poorly  adapted  to  the  achievement  of  serious  social  reform.7 2
In  the  compensatory  model,  if A  injures  B,  B  must  restore  the  status
quo  ante  by  making  payment.  But  this  model  is  ill-suited  to  many  is-
sues  of social  reform  that  might  be  treated  as  a  matter  of  law.  Con-
sider, for  example,  problems  of pollution,  in which  numerous  people  are
harmed  to  a  small degree.  Here  the  purpose of  legal  controls  is  not  to
ensure compensation,  but to  manage  and reduce  risks. The inevitability
of complex  trade-offs,  involving  impositions  on  numerous  other  people,
usually makes  a  rights-based  approach  highly  unrealistic.7 3  So  too,  the
problem  of  discrimination  is  usually  not  the  commission  of  tort-like
acts  of  discrimination  by  identifiable  actors  at  identifiable  times  to
identifiable  victims.  It is  instead  the existence  of structures  or systems
of subordination that should  be reformed.  Constitutional adjudication  is
ill-adapted  to  undertaking  the  necessary  changes.

Summary:  The  Difficulties  of  Social  Reform  Through 

the

4. 
Judiciary

These  criticisms  of the judiciary  are  hardly  novel.  Though  voiced
principally  by  conservatives  in  the  last  decades,  analogous  complaints
played  a  major  role  in  the  New Deal  period,  in  which  it  would  have
seemed  extremely  peculiar  to  suggest  that  social  reform  on  behalf  of

72.  See  generally  Sunstein,  The  Limits  of Compensatory  Justice, COmPENSATORy  JUSnc:

73.  See  Reaume,  Individuals.  Groups,  and  Rights  to  Public  Goods,  38  U.  TORONTo  L.  1

NOMOS  (forthcoming  1991).

(1988).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 225 1990-1991

CONNECTICUT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23:205

the  disadvantaged  should  come  from  the  courts. 4  Indeed,  the  rise  of
modern  regulatory  agencies  was  largely  a  product  of  a  belief  that  the
judiciary  lacked  the  will,  the  means,  and  the  democratic  pedigree  to
bring  about  social  reform  on  its  own.  The  period  that  we  are  entering
will  see  a  similar  constellation  of ideas.

These  considerations  bear  on  the development  of interpretive  prin-
ciples  with  which  to  give  meaning  to  ambiguous  constitutional  provi-
sions.  They  suggest  that  courts  ought  to  be  cautious  in  giving  broad
meaning  to  open-ended  phrases,  at  least  if such  a  meaning  would  re-
quire  courts  to  undertake  large-scale  social  reform  on  their  own.  To-
gether  with  the  obvious  fact  that  interpretive  principles  should  attempt
to  reduce  judicial  discretion,  they  indicate  that  a  constitutional  democ-
racy  ought  not  to  place  heavy  reliance  on  the judiciary  for  such  tasks.
If all  this  is  correct,  there  are  significant  advantages  to  the  current
institutional  shift.  It is  important  to  recall  here  that  of the  three  most
dramatic  periods  of  aggressive  social  reform  in  the  twentieth  century,
two  occurred  during  the  progressive  period  and  the New  Dbeal.71  Here
the  Supreme  Court  was  mostly  hostile  to  the  relevant  changes,  but  it
was  unable  to stop  them,  and its  very hostility  may  have  fueled  them.70
And  in  the  third  period-the  environmental,  consumer,  and  antidis-
crimination  movements  of  the  1960s  and  1970s-by  far  the  most  im-
portant  changes,  of  both  degree  and  kind,  were  driven  principally  by
Congress.  The  courts  played  a  subsidiary  role.

B.  Other Institutional and Democratic Possibilities

If social  reform  in the various  areas  discussed  thus  far is  to happen
outside  of  the  courts,  on  what  institutions  might  reliance  be  placed?
There  are  many  possibilities.  States  and  localities  have  shown,  in  the
last  decade,  an  impressive  degree  of  initiative  and  imagination,  going
well  beyond  the Supreme  Court  and  the  Congress  in  many  areas-by,
for  example,  enacting  aggressive  measures  forbidding  discrimination  on
the  basis of disability,  sex,  and  sexual  orientation.  At  the  national  level,
the  principal  civil  rights  gains  have  occurred  through  legislative  action
in  the context  of discrimination  on  the  basis  of sex,  disability,  age,  and
race.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that  the  Supreme  Court  is  not  the
only  institution  in  government  charged  with  fidelity to  the  Constitution.

74.  See  J. LANDIS,  THE  ADMINISTRATIVE  PROCESS  123-55  (1938).
75.  See  C. SuNsTmIN,  AFTER  THE  RIoHs  REVOLUTION  Ch.  1 (1990).
76.  See,  e.g.,  Adkins  v.  Childrens  Hosp.,  261  U.S.  525  (1923);  Lochner  v.  New  York,  198

U.S.  45  (1905).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 226 1990-1991

1991]

WHAT  JUDGE  BORK  SHOULD  HAVE  SAID

If the Court,  for  institutional  or other  reasons,  interprets  the  Constitu-
tion narrowly,  this  responsibility  becomes  all  the  more  insistent.

The  principal  constitutional  sources  of  national  legislative  power
here  are  the commerce  clause-granting  Congress  the authority  to reg-
ulate  all  actions  having  a  significant  effect  on 
interstate  com-
merce-and,  perhaps  most  notably,  the  great  underused  provision  of
the  Constitution,  section  five  of the  fourteenth  amendment.  The  four-
teenth  amendment  has,  of course,  been  the source  of the  overwhelming
majority  of the important  Supreme  Court  decisions  in  the  area of civil
rights  and  civil  liberties,  including  the application  of the Bill  of Rights
to  the  states,  Roe  v.  Wade,7  and  all  discrimination  cases.  It  is  too  in-
frequently  remarked  that the last sentence of this  amendment  says  that
"[t]he  Congress  shall  have  power  to  enforce,  by appropriate  legislation,
the  provisions  of  this  article."  Despite  this  injunction,  Congress  has
taken  up the  invitation  exceptionally  rarely.  Indeed,  the judicial  rather
than  legislative  enforcement  of the fourteenth  amendment  may  qualify
as 
the  history  of  American
constitutionalism.

the  most  profound 

irony 

in 

But  the Supreme  Court has  itself concluded  that Congress's  power
under  section  five  is  extraordinarily  broad.7 8 Indeed,  the Court has  per-
mitted  Congress  to  invoke  section  five  to  proscribe  practices  that  the
Court has  itself upheld.  In allowing  Congress  to  invalidate literacy  tests
that  the  Court  had  permitted,  the  Court  explicitly  said  that  Congress
could,  under  section  five,  strike  down  practices  that  the  Court  would
allow.7 9

This  conclusion  turns  out  to  be  no  puzzle  if it  is  recognized  that
the  Court's  decisions  are  a  product  not  only  of  substantive  theory  but
also  of  institutional  constraint.  Precisely  because  of  its  lack  of  demo-
cratic  pedigree,  the Court  is sometimes  unwilling  to enforce  the Consti-
tution  as  vigorously  as  it would  if it were  not  so  constrained.  Congress
faces  no  such  constraints.8"  However  ironic  it  might  seem,  there  would
be little  reason  for  surprise if the Court found  that  Congress  acted  well
within  its  constitutional  authority  in using  its  powers  precisely  in  order
to  overrule  the  most  restrictive  recent  decisions  of the  Court  itself.

77.  410  U.S.  113  (1973).
78.  Katzenbach v.  Morgan,  384  U.S.  641  (1966).  Ironically,  Katzenbach  is a  principal  target

of The  Tempting  of America.  R.  BORK,  supra note  1, at  91-93.

79.  See  Katzenbach,  384  U.S.  at  648-49,  658.
80.  Cf. Sager, Fair Measure:  The  Legal  Status of Underenforced  Constitutional  Norms,  91
HARv.  L. Rav.  1212  (1978)  (discussing judicial  underenforcement  of the  Constitution  for institu-
tional  reasons).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 227 1990-1991

CONNECTICUT  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23:205

V.  CONCLUSION

The  Constitution  does  not  contain  the instructions  for  its  own  in-
terpretation.  Those  who  see  the  original  understanding  as  decisive
should  not  claim  that  people  who  disagree  are  abandoning  the  Consti-
tution.  Instead  they  bring  to  bear  on  the  document  a  different  set  of
interpretive  principles.  A  commitment to  the original  understanding  re-
flects  a  commitment  to  a  particular  set  of interpretive  principles,  and
those  principles,  like  its  competitors,  must  be  justified  in  substantive
terms.

Because  The  Tempting of America does  not  defend  its  own  inter-
pretive  principles,  instead  treating  them  as  self-evident,  it  provides  no
reason  for  anyone  to  accept  them.  In  this  sense,  it  is  one  version  of
legal  authoritarianism:  the  view  that  legal  outcomes  are  legitimate  if
and  because they  are  traceable  to a  prior  exercise  of power.  Because  it
does  not  acknowledge  its  own  dependence  on  interpretive  principles,
this approach  to  constitutional  interpretation  is  not an  argument  at  all.
These  considerations  do  not,  however,  provide  a  reason  for  re-
jecting  the  original  understanding  or  for  accepting  an  aggressive  judi-
cial role in  social  reform."1  The  limited  efficacy  of the  courts, the  conse-
quences  of  such  a  role  for  self-government  and  citizenship,  and  the
adjudicatory  form  all  suggest  that  such  a  role  is  at  best  a  mixed  bless-
ing.  Concerns  of this  sort  do not  by  themselves  point  in  the  direction  of
a  particular  set  of interpretive  principles.  But  they  do  suggest  that  an
aggressive  judicial  role  should  not  be  seen  as  representing  the  natural
or  best  form  of  constitutional  democracy  in  America.  A  withdrawal  of
the federal judiciary  from  social  reform  in the  name  of the  Constitution
might  ultimately  amount  to  an  important,  albeit  partial,  step  in  reviv-
ing  democratic  forms;  and  it  might  aid  in  spurring  passive  or  weak
groups  toward  greater  participation  in  resolving  the  important  ques-
tions  of  the  day.  Such  a  step  would  constitute  a  movement-ironic,
modest,  ambiguous,  and  tentative,  to  be  sure-in  aligning  constitu-
tional  practices  in  America  with  the  far  more  conspicuous  develop-
ments  in  self-government  now  occurring  throughout  the  globe.

81.  R. DWORKIN,  supra note  69,  powerfully  challenges  believers in  the original understanding
on  the ground  that they  assert rather  than  defend  their  interpretive practices;  but  it  perhaps  fails
sufficiently  to  explain  why a  constitutional  democracy  should  be committed  to an  aggressive  judi-
cial  role,  aside  from  reasonable  but  conjectural  remarks  about  comparative  competence.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Conn. L. Rev. 228 1990-1991

