 2. Market-Based Incentives for Occupational Safety For the last generation, work in administrative law has generally followed the path marked out by Kenneth Culp Davis' and Louis Jaffe. 2 Judicial review of administrative action has been the principal focus of 3. There are prominent exceptions. See, eg., S. BREYER, REGULATION AND ITS REFORM (1982) (constructing a framework for the analysis, evaluation, and development of regulatory programs); Rose-Ackerman, Progressive Law and Economics-And the New Administrative Law, 98 YALE L.J. 341 (1988) (urging broader perspective based on political science and economics). Christopher Edley's recent book helpfully focuses on the question of improved regulation rather than control of discretion; but it too is perhaps unduly preoccupied with the judiciary. See C. EDLEY, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW: RETHINKING JUDICIAL CONTROL OF BUREAUCRACY (1990). I approach some of these questions by exploring the general problem of so-called "social" regulation, principally in the areas of health, safety, broadcasting, discrimination, and the environment.7 The purpose of the discussion is to shift the focus away from procedure and instead to obtain a preliminary sense of administrative substance-an area in which, I suggest, we should predict large eventual gains in the study of administrative law. I propose a shift not only from procedure to substance,8 but also from courts to legislators and administrators as the major audience of legal work on administration. I also set forth some general principles by which to operate regulatory systems to control pollution, occupational risk, discrimination, in broadcasting. 9 insufficient quality and diversity and In the last decade, it has become fashionable to decry the regulatory system that has grown up in response to the consumer, labor, anti-discrimination, and environmental movements of the 1930s, 1960s, and 1970s. Under one quite prominent view, government regulation in these areas is often indefensible in principle-because it amounts to unjustified paternalism or public meddling in private affairs-and is, in any case, intolerable in practice because it predictably makes things worse rather than better. 10 But this view is myopic. A number of solid arguments justify regulation, and those arguments are not paternalistic at all." Moreover, social regulation has not always failed: it has protected endangered species, 6. See infra notes 137-50 and accompanying text. 7. I do not discuss economic regulation, which raises a distinctive set of concerns. 8. The effort to move the study of administrative law in this direction is not an entirely new theme. See, e.g., S. BREYER & R. STEWART, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AND REGULATORY POLICY 910 (2d ed. 1985) ("We have selected a range of examples designed to introduce students to the substance of 'economic regulation'. .. because such examples often will illustrate the interaction of 'substance' and 'procedure' that lead a court or an agency to reach a particular result."); S. BREYER, supra note 3, at 341-68 (discussing regulatory substance); J. MASHAW & D. HARFST, THE STRUGGLE FOR AUTO SAFETY (1990) (analyzing history of auto regulation); G. ROBINSON, E. GELLHORN & H. BRUFF, THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS 3-4 (3d ed. 1986) (calling for study of substantive regulatory law). Part V briefly describes how an understanding of regulatory aspiration and regulatory performance might affect judicial review. In this discussion, I set forth principles of statutory interpretation that may be used A. Notes on First Principles Administrative law is peculiarly concerned with the distribution of social benefits and burdens in such important areas as social security, taxation, the environment, occupational safety and health, employment, nuclear power, energy, and national defense. Large substantive debates lurk behind even apparently mundane doctrinal will controversies. For this reason, any approach to administrative law ultimately rests on quite general substantive choices. Consider, for example, the claim for a presumption against judicial review of administrative inaction. 14 Often this claim is defended by reference to purely institutional concerns. 15 In fact, however, the presumption against judicial review of administrative action stems in large part from a substantive (and highly contested) view that courts should more seriously scrutinize "regulation" than "failure to regulate."' 1 This view implies that courts should be more hospitable to an agency's refusal to implement congressional programs than to its zealousness in the enforcement process. 1. Liberal Republicanism. Liberal republicanism embodies several commitments that are designed to be "important in the world."' 8 Predictably, then, reformers in areas as diverse as labor, the environment, electoral representation, political restructuring, broadcasting, and antidiscrimination law have long invoked the commitments of liberal republicanism in making concrete suggestions for change. 19. Madison emphasizes this theme throughout his work, most famously in THE FEDERALIST Three additional commitments follow from this view of political deliberation. First, liberal republicanism prizes citizenship. It does not require that all decisions be made by town meeting, 22 but it does not view political participation as dispensable in a well-functioning democracy. 23 Liberal republicans seek to ensure that the political process benefits from widespread participation by the citizenry. 24 A system without such participation is, to that extent, a failure. The final commitment is to political equality, and here things are more complex. At a minimum, the commitment to political equality prohibits large disparities in the political influence of different social groups. 27 Actual or virtual disenfranchisement of citizens is therefore banned. A guarantee of political equality does not, however, translate into a guarantee of economic equality. Indeed, the political creed of eco 21. See Manin, On Legitimacy and Political Deliberation, 15 POL. THEORY 338, 340-41 (1987) (discussing the universalist theory of justice that represents the interests of all members of society by requiring unanimity only for the "larger principles" and not for each individual decision). 28. I understand the term "egalitarianism" to connote an effort to ensure against large dispari ties in wealth and resources. The commitments of liberal republicanism to deliberation, citizenship, universalism, and political equality draw from a wide range of starting points; this is no sectarian creed. The liberalism of Mill 36 and Rawls 37 is entirely compatible with the account I have offered. Taken seriously, 38 it calls for large-scale changes in existing arrangements. In addition, certain forms of utilitarianism place a high premium on political deliberation, prize political equality, and do not take existing prefer 2. The New Deal Reformation. An understanding of American administrative law cannot be obtained through a study of liberal republicanism alone. It is also necessary to explore the New Deal reformation of the constitutional framework. 43 For purposes of the present discussion, the central aspect of the New Deal reformation was its attack on the system of laissez-faire. (discussing capacity of the Rawlsian view of liberalism to draw from range of starting points), 45. Many New Deal reforms have of course failed. For example, the effort to ensure cartelization, prominent in the early New Deal, was notoriously unsuccessful on pragmatic grounds. See E. HAWLEY, THE NEW DEAL AND THE PROBLEM OF MONOPOLY (1966). pragmatism and willingness to experiment). No industrialized democracy does or could operate without a substantial regulatory state. To be sure, private markets usually promote Second, a healthy recognition of the constructed or contingent character of most of the social world points in no particular direction. In its logic, it need hardly be allied with desirable social movements. In its logic, it points nowhere at all. individual freedom and economic welfare. Sometimes, however, private markets fail to provide either.4 8 When markets fail, democratic controls are the only viable option. Although the arguments for social regulation are quite straightforward, they have often been derided in the last decade, particularly by the Reagan and Thatcher Administrations, as well as welfare economists and others who invoke pre-New Deal principles of private right.49 It is therefore worthwhile to provide a brief outline of the reasons for social regulation. In outlining those reasons, I make no claim to special originality. My goal is simply to categorize some of the foundations for regulatory controls. nal, agricultural, educational, and recreational benefits to human beings. This point helps support government controls, not only in the environmental arena, but in energy conservation, automobile safety, and other areas. In these settings, governmental coordination of private behavior structures and organizes private choices, and should not be seen as rejecting them. modem states elect rules that solve coordination and collective action problems). Similarly, political action can and sometimes should overcome existing private preferences and beliefs. Preferences, desires, and beliefs do not exist in a vacuum; they often adapt to existing legal rules and social practices. Without the possibility of government action, current practices sometimes seem intractable, and people resign themselves to them.57 People adapt their behavior and even their desires and beliefs to the status quo. In such cases, there is a serious obstacle to political freedom. Freedom consists not merely in satisfying one's desires, but also in ensuring that desires are not formed under unjust conditions, or under circumstances that impede their free development.5 8 This concept of freedom is highly congenial to American public law.59 If people can act in concert through government, they can remove some of these obstacles. Social movements that involve the environment, labor, employment, poverty, anti-discrimination, and occupational health and safety are conspicuous examples. Through the process of collective action, government can counteract constraints on preference formation. BEYOND SELF-INTEREST, supra note 55, at 44; Jencks, Varieties of Altruism, in BEYOND SELFINTEREST, supra note 55, at 53. The collective character of politics helps to explain this phenomenon. People may seek to achieve altruistic aspirations only if they are assured that other citizens will do so as well. For example, some people may not value environmental diversity or endangered species simply because the market does not provide them in sufficiently visible places. A regulatory response is entirely appropriate. All of this suggests that notwithstanding the frequent objection that governmental regulation is "paternalistic" or insufficiently respectful of private choice, 6 1 substantial regulatory controls are often fully justified. First: In cases of inadequate information, harms unaccounted for by the market, and governmental coordination of private behavior, regulation sometimes facilitates the satisfaction of private desires and does not reject individual choice. Second: Regulation can vindicate democracy by protecting collective aspirations and altruistic goals that override the outcomes of markets. This hardly constitutes an objectionable interference with freedom. Third: Government can properly play a role in increasing available opportunities and information, and in doing so it can improve market outcomes. This is so even in a system that prizes (as all systems should) private property, freedom of contract, and other voluntary arrangements. A. Successes How effective has regulation proved in practice? In fact the record shows many successes. 62 Despite its popularity, the view that social regulation has generally failed is far too crude. In numerous areas-including environmental protection, automobile safety, civil rights, and the protection of endangered species-regulation has resulted in substantial improvements. all major pollutants. 64 Although substantial room remains for improvement, air in the United States is much cleaner and healthier than it would have been without regulatory controls. Table 1. National Ambient Concentration of Nitrogen Dioxide, Total Suspended Particulates Nitrogen Dioxide Table 2: National Ambient Concentrations of Sulfur Dioxide, Carbon Monoxide and Ozone by Parts Per Million Sulfur Dioxide Carbon Monoxide Regulatory successes have not been limited to the environment. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 has produced gains for blacks, including decreases in employment discrimination based on race. 70 Similar gains have been achieved in combatting sex discrimination. 7 1 Several other regulatory programs impressively accomplished their goals. For example, the automobile safety regulations promulgated in the late 1960s and early 1970s 72 have prevented numerous injuries and saved lives. According to one estimate, automobile fatalities would have been about forty percent higher in 1983 if not for governmental controls.73 In addition, an estimated 34,000 lives were saved between 1966 and 1974 as a result of occupant safety standards. 74 The annual benefits of automobile regulation are extremely high-estimated at over $10 billion.75 Moreover, there is a favorable ratio of benefits to costs in this area. 76 B. Failures To emphasize regulatory successes is not to deny that regulation has frequently failed. In some cases, regulatory controls have accomplished little or nothing. In others, regulation has imposed enormously high costs for speculative benefits. Moreover, regulation has sometimes aggravated the very problem that it was designed to solve. 77 Regulatory strategies often produce insufficient benefits, and sometimes they create affirmative harm. Regardless of how the gains and losses from social regulation are valued, there can be little doubt that there is far too much government regulation in some areas, and far too little in others.83 Even more funda have also saved lives cheaply. The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) regulation of trihalomethanes saves a life at only $315,000. The Consumer Product Safety Commission's mandatory smoke detector rule costs between $0 and $85,000 for every life saved. See C. SUNsTEIN, supra note *, at app. B, for an outline and discussion. mentally, in many areas the question is not whether the level of government regulation is appropriate, but whether the government has chosen the suitable strategies to accomplish its goals. 84 I have discussed cases in which regulation has been both inefficient and ineffective. From the standpoint of democracy, regulation has frequently failed as well. First, education about the nature and level of risks in the environment and in the workplace has not been a high priority for regulators. On this score, the public is poorly informed and thus extremely ill-served. Partly because of the absence of education and disclosure, public participation and real accountability on questions of regulation have not characterized the rise of modern bureaucracy. Instead, sensational but misleading anecdotes and interest-group pressures have played a far too prominent role. The preceding examination of the regulatory state reveals a range of successes and failures. Prevention of the failures is a central challenge for those concerned about improving the system for the future. In meeting this challenge, the first step is to identify the sources of failure. federal law. Indeed, they are a defining characteristic of the regulation of the air, water, and workplace conditions.8 6 One of the many problems with BAT strategies is that they systematically ignore the enormous differences among plants, industries, and geographical areas in the United States. In view of these differences, nationally uniform technological requirements are wildly inefficient. It does not seem sensible to impose identical technological requirements on diverse industries-regardless of whether they are polluted or clean, populated or empty, or expensive or cheap to clean up. Perhaps worse, by focusing on the technology at the end of the pipe, BAT strategies are aimed at superficial symptoms rather than underlying causes of pollution. For example, the EPA has forced coal-fired power plants to adopt costly "scrubbing" strategies to deal with sulfur dioxide emissions that cause acid rain.8 8 A far better approach would use financial incentives to encourage American consumers and industries to increase energy conservation and efficiency, and to shift to cleaner, renewable fuels. 89. See Ackerman & Stewart, supra note 86. 90. See generally Sunstein, supra note 77 (suggesting reforms to restructure regulatory institutions). Ironically-and here is the paradox-stringent controls produce underregulation as well. The threat of draconian regulatory requirements gives industries powerful incentives to fight regulation wherever they can, and gives agencies a powerful incentive not to promulgate or enforce them. If Congress requires any regulation mandating multi-million dollar expenditures that will save but one life per year, the agency will predictably promulgate stringent, but few, regulations. 91. See R. CRANDALL, H. GRUENSPECHT, T. KEELER & L. LAVE, supra note 73, at 89. For instance, a good way to increase automobile pollution in the short run is to impose extremely costly pollution control requirements on new cars. Some existing motor vehicle regulations do precisely that. See, eg., 42 U.S.C.A. §§ 7521-7554 (West Supp. 1991) (establishing new motor vehicle emission and fuel standards). This account of regulatory performance should help produce a set of entirely feasible reform strategies. Above all, new strategies would seek to ensure that regulation is efficient and effective, in the sense that the programs would promote their own purposes at reasonable costs. These reforms would also promote democratic goals, by ensuring accountability, visibility, and participation in the administrative process. There is no reason to believe that these strategies cannot be implemented through existing institutions. In fact, Congress and administrative agencies have already moved in precisely this direction. 97 Legislative incentives will sometimes push toward the status quo, but recent history shows that there is no reason to believe that this is an insuperable problem. At the most general level, an examination of regulatory performance demonstrates that regulators should pay attention to the incentive effects of regulatory statutes. Policymakers should be aware of the possibility of Regulators should encourage industry to address harms at their source. In general, regulators should adopt strategies that will reduce the introduction of dangerous substances, instead of merely controlling substances that have already been introduced. In this regard, strategies that leave the means of obtaining reduction to industry, rather than specifying them in detail, will prove most effective in eliminating social harms. Rather than imposing complex technological requirements on pollutants as they exit the tailpipe, it would be best to eliminate lead and other dangerous pollutants from gasoline before they enter the tank. Pollution prevention, rather than technological fixes, should guide environmental policy. Moreover, Congress should provide industries with incentives that favor regulation, where this is desired, rather than giving them reason to oppose government controls. Existing law makes regulation extremely costly for industry and puts an enormous premium on countermeasures and delay. The best way to ensure that regulations will be issued is to create incentives for industry to favor them. This strategy allows the burden of inertia to work for the establishment of safety levels rather than against it. In the area of toxic substances, for example, regulators might (as California currently does 10) require industries to disclose the existence of risks to the public until a regulation has been issued that establishes that the risks are insignificant. Unfortunately, however, most existing law creates powerful incentives for inaction and delay.101 98. For this reason many observers have concluded that Congress actually sought the failures. See Stigler, The Theory of Economic Regulation, in CHICAGO STUDIES IN POLITICAL ECONOMY, supra note 10, at 209 (on the interaction of party politics and industry regulation); Pashigian, Environmental Regulation: Whose Self-Interests Are Being Protected?, in CHICAGO STUDIES IN POLITICAL ECONOMY, supra note 10, at 498 (elevating the role of self-interest in explaining the regulation of stationary sources). The evidence does not, however, clearly support this view. See R. ARNOLD, THE LOGIC OF CONGRESSIONAL ACTION 225 (1990) (asserting that congressional action in energy regulation cannot be explained through standard interest group or ideological models; such action has resulted from complex interaction among citizen, expert, and politician attitudes and restructuring of legislative situations by coalition leaders). A focus on ultimate ends also promotes coordination and rationality in regulation, by giving government an incentive to attend to appropriate risk levels in different areas,10 5 and by bringing a salutary measure of 102. The new Clean Air Act amendments take several steps in this direction. See 42 U.S.C.A. §§ 7403-7431 (West Supp. 1991) (toxic substances provision focuses on emissions levels rather than means of reduction); id. §§ 7651-7651o (acid deposition provisions focus on emission levels). It is extremely unfortunate that in its regulation of automobile pollution, the Act specifies means. See id. § 7545(k) (requiring reformulated gasoline-likely a reflection of pressures from agricultural community). Rather than requiring reformulated gasoline or increasing mileage standards, a better approach would simply tax gasoline, or tax the use of high-polluting vehicles. demonstrating the irrationality of modem regulatory programs across different areas). texts, health, labor, and broadcasting. 1. Market-Based Incentives in the Environmental Area. A system in which polluters must pay for the harms they cause leads government to focus on the right questions. To ask how much pollution reduction should be obtained, and at what price, will create strong incentives to improve knowledge of the effects of pollution and pollution control. This increased premium on knowledge would be yet another gain. I focus here on emissions trading, taxation, and disposal systems. most dangerous pollutants, pollution prevention is the preferred strategy. that there are no This objection raises complex issues, and I restrict myself to some brief observations here. As a first approximation, a flat ban on an activity may well be preferable to a cash payment for resulting harm, assuming (such as enforcement expenditures), when and only when the right level of the underlying activity is zero. The right level of assaults and poisonings seems to be zero. It would therefore be absurd to allow people to assault and poison others as long as they are willing to compensate people for the harm. Such a strategy would be inconsistent with the underlying goal of eliminating the conduct altogether.1 12 transaction costs By contrast, the appropriate emissions level for many pollutants is well above zero. For example, complete elimination of sulfur dioxide emissions would cause a severe energy shortage--one that would dramatically increase poverty, health risks, unemployment, and inflation. In this respect, a ban on sulfur dioxide emissions would be difficult to justify. For those pollutants whose continued emission is necessary to Still, emissions trading has critics, including many environmentalists.114 To be sure, implementation of such programs would require careful design and administration to ensure (among other things) that large numbers of polluters who receive permits through trades do not locate in the same areas, thus creating dangerous "hot spots"-that is, environmentally disastrous concentrations of harmful substances. 115 In general, however, most of the criticisms are unpersuasive or illinformed. For example, emissions trading programs will not increase pollution levels. Such programs simply achieve the desired degree of pollution reduction at the lowest possible cost. If the ultimate goal is to reduce pollution sharply, then we should simply issue few permits. As noted, emissions trading systems offer the great advantage of putting the power of deciding pollution levels back into the hands of the citizenry, rather than focusing on the often unintelligible question of what control technology is "best" or "available." '1 16 Public institutions will decide the ultimate and most important environmental policy issues, rather than the confusing and only indirectly relevant questions that current law makes 113. This proposition is only a first approximation. A decision to allow harmful activity as long as the actor is willing to pay for it might be objectionable on other grounds. Such decisions might treat the relevant interests as commodities, and it may be wrong to do so. Decisions to allow harm. ful conduct at a price might also have undesirable preference-shaping effects. In the context of socially necessary activities that produce incidental pollution, however, these objections seem unpersuasive. 115. For an especially good discussion of this and other problems, see S. BREYER, supra note 3, These basic ideas also support an emissions trading system in the international arena. Under such a system, some countries would pay others-in cash, retirement of debt, or new technology-to reduce emissions levels or to protect biological diversity. In the frequent cases in which pollution crosses national boundaries, a trading system would produce more efficient reduction techniques and would also be more equitable than an approach that would require all countries to use the same control technology. Increased gasoline taxes are an especially promising strategy because they would promote energy conservation and independence while effectively combatting pollution. The gasoline tax in the United States is currently the lowest of any industrialized nation; it should be raised to ensure that gasoline users internalize the environmental costs of their ac 117. See generally Ackerman & Stewart, supra note 86. 118. For example, pest control strategies involving biological techniques have proved quite suc It is not sufficient to respond that gasoline taxes (or any other efforts that require actors to internalize the social costs of their harmful activity) would be "regressive," in the sense that the poor would feel their effects more sharply than the well-to-do. To be sure, any effort to use incentives is likely to be harder on those with few resources than on those with many. Indeed, any strategy to control many social problems will increase prices, and thus hit the poor especially hard. For at least three reasons, however, a system requiring an activity to reflect its true social costs should not be deemed illegitimate merely because it has more severe consequences for the poor. When government refuses to ensure that products (like energy) reflect their environmental costs, the result is analytically the same as a government decision to fix prices. Such a refusal will lower the price of the resulting products, and some poor people will always benefit from lower prices. But such a result is hardly a desirable approach to the problem of poverty, any more than an across-the-board, governmentally 122. See id. at 182-85. Determination of the amount of the tax of course poses difficulties. The relevant inquiry requires more than purely scientific calculations; it must involve judgments of social values as well, for there is of course no value-free way to ascertain the damage done by pollution. 123. See R. CRANDALL, H. GRUENSPECHT, T. KEELER & L. LAVE, supra note 73, at 89-90. 124. For example, government price controls contributed to the energy crisis of the early 1970s. See generally S. BREYER, supra note 3, at 64-68 (arguing that government-imposed price controls lead to shortages by keeping prices artificially low and allowing few upward price adjustments as the seller's costs inevitably increase over time). 125. The costs of command-and-control strategies are more arbitrary because they are less connected with antipollution goals. We cannot know whether antipollution technology achieves pollution benefits commensurate with the costs, because the technology will invariably be placed on all new cars, regardless of the amount of pollution in the relevant area or the consequences for old cars. 126. Even the term "regressive tax" is misleading in light of the fact that the goal of pollution taxes is to require that goods reflect their true social costs. A regulatory system that accomplishes this goal should not be characterized as a "regressive tax" system. Strategies of this general sort can also promote democratic goals. A tax or fine system ensures that someone in a position of public accountability will decide on appropriate levels of risk. Disclosure strategies allow workers to learn about risks and risk levels, and to take action accordingly. 129 In the workplace, such strategies enlist employee support in reducing occupational risks, and in a highly decentralized manner. 130 This step would greatly improve the current system, which relies on the national dictation of risk levels. 13 1 Nationalized risk decisionmaking prevents employees from becoming involved in the choice among risk levels, salaries, and other goals,1 32 and it is particularly vulnerable to interestgroup pressures. Greater decentralization would these difficulties. A system that promotes disclosure of occupational risks also fortifies the political processes at all levels of government. Disclosure ensures options for worker participation). form obligations, the licensing agency might award extra "points" to applicants who provide high-quality broadcasting or who attend to public issues-even if those applicants were less competitive in the marketplace. This type of "point" strategy would not dictate outcomes, but it would create market-like incentives to engage in desirable behavior. Alternatively, government could require that ordinary broadcasters give a specified percentage of their profits either to public broadcasting or to private companies that are willing to sacrifice some of their advertising revenues and audience to provide higher-quality fare. This system would introduce some of the virtues of environmental emissions trading systems into broadcasting regulation. The suggestions made thus far are principally directed at legislators and administrators. As I have indicated, a focus on substance requires a movement away from the traditional preoccupation with the judiciary to a focus on congressional and bureaucratic processes. These remain illunderstood despite the fact that they have far more important roles in government regulation. 137 Concern with regulatory substance does, however, have consequences for judicial review as well. Concentration on regulatory results may require an adjustment in statutory interpretation and in decisions about which regulatory approaches are "arbitrary" within the meaning of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). 138 I offer a few suggestions here. 139 Statutory interpretation usually involves an ascertainment of meaning through an examination of the statutory text, structure, and history. 14° When the meaning of a statute is otherwise clear, courts should not rely on any substantive ideas about the regulatory state to subvert that meaning. Statutory meaning is, however, a function of interpretive principles, without which text and history are unintelligible. Some of these principles are simply parts of language, some can be traced to constitutional norms; and others are a product of judicial understandings about institutional concerns. be protected from monopolization, whether by government or by private licensee); L. BOLLINGER, IMAGES OF A FREE PRESS (1991); Sunstein, supra note 135. (examining these sources). 141. See e.g., Mansell v. Mansell, 490 U.S. 581, 587-88 (1989) (in areas of traditional state law preeminence, such as domestic relations, a federal law will not be read so as to preempt state law unless preemption is "positively required"); Puerto Rico Dep't of Consumer Affairs v. Isla Petroleum Corp., 485 U.S. 495, 499-501 (1988) (the Court looks for a "clear and manifest" purpose by Congress to supersede existing state law, before preemption by a federal statute is allowed); Hillsborough County v. Automated Medical Laboratories, 471 U.S. 707, 715-16 (1985) (where local health and safety regulations are concerned, there is a presumption that the local regulations coexist with similar federal regulations). technology can Other principles might be derived from considerations of regulatory goals and failures. To allow de minimis exemptions from regulatory requirements would do much more good than harm. 14 The failure to permit such exemptions may cause inefficiency and produce risks, not benefits, to health and safety. In most cases, courts should assume that Congress wants at least some form of balancing of the various effects of regulatory statutes.1 49 Statutes that forbid balancing are usually underenforced or have unanticipated, but serious, adverse consequences. Courts should also construe statutes generously on behalf of disadvantaged groups, which, by definition, face systematic obstacles in the implementation process.1 50 To say this is not to say that such interpretive principles should overcome unambiguous statutory text and history. But a better understanding of regulatory substance will inevitably affect the practice ofjudicial review in difficult cases. The basic commitments of contemporary administrative law find their source in the liberal republicanism of the founding generation and In evaluating reforms, little is to be gained by generalities that point to the frequent problems in either government regulation or in private markets. Even the question whether there should be "more" or "less" regulation tends to confuse, rather than clarify, matters.1 5 2 Questions about the existence and extent of current problems are too dependent on context to allow for global prescriptions. It is far more helpful to rely on particularized understandings of how markets and regulation are likely to break down-to learn, in short, from the past. Ultimately, the proposals suggested here would create a system unembarrassed to use government to promote democratic aspirations and economic welfare, but insistent on strategies that embody the flexibility, adaptability, productive potential, and decentralization characteristic of private markets. incompatible. 153. 5 U.S.C. §§ 551-559, 701-706 (1988). 154. A large advantage of a generic statute is that it diminishes the power of interest groups over particular areas. Two Executive Orders, Exec. Ord. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. § 127 (1981), reprinted in 5 U.S.C. § 601 note (1988), and Exec. Ord. 12,498, 3 C.F.R. § 323 (1985), reprinted in 5 U.S.C. § 601 note (1988), which set forth substantive principles of cost-benefit analysis and cost-effectiveness, might be seen as forerunners of this sort of approach. In addition, the implementing guidelines of the Office of Management and Budget, along with the coordination of authority within that agency, are steps in the right direction. See OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET, REGULATORY PROGRAM OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT, April 1, 1990-March 31, 1991 (1991). The guidelines have usefully counteracted problems of overregulation, lack of accountability, and lack of coordination. They also make some progress in dealing with the related problems of poor incentives and inefficiency. One remaining difficulty, however, is that the guidelines do not respond to the important problem of failure to regulate.