University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1991 

Three Civil Rights Fallacies 
Three Civil Rights Fallacies 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Three Civil Rights Fallacies," 79 California Law Review 751 (1991). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Three Civil  Rights  Fallacies

Cass  R.  Sunsteint

From the early  1950s until the present day,  three  propositions have
permeated  the arguments  of lawyers  and  others  interested  in  advancing
the  cause  of civil  rights.

The first proposition  is that the target  of the civil rights movement is
discrimination,  which  is always  or usually  a product of irrational  hatred,
fear,  or prejudice.  In this view, the purpose of civil rights law is to  elimi-
nate these  forms  of irrationality  from  the public  and  private realms.

The  second proposition  is  that the principal  function  of civil  rights
law  is  compensatory.  Just  as  an  injured  person  in  a  tort  action  has  a
right to  be made whole, so victims of a history  of discrimination  (includ-
ing slavery)  are  entitled  to  be put into  the place  they would  have  occu-
pied  if discrimination had  never occurred.  Restoration  of the status  quo
ante is  a substantial  part of the reasoning  and rhetoric of civil rights  law.
The third proposition is that the judiciary  is the appropriate  institu-
tion for the making  and enforcement  of civil rights  law.  Reliance on the
courts, principally  through interpretation  of the Constitution, has been  a
distinctive  feature  of the  civil  rights  movement  since  the middle  of this
century.

In this essay,  I argue  that these  three propositions, which are mutu-
ally reinforcing, are fallacies.  They misconceive  the nature of discrimina-
tion  and  offer  prescriptions  that are  ill-adapted  to  its  elimination.  This
was  so even  in the period  in which they  arose and  helped to  accomplish
considerable  good.  But their  fallacious  character  will  be especially  con-
spicuous  in the last decade  of the twentieth  and the early  decades  of the
twenty-first century.  In this period, the consequences  of the fallacies will
probably  be pernicious.

I do  not mean  at all to deny that prejudice  still plays  a major role  in
many  realms  of social  and  economic  life, that  the history  of discrimina-

t  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  University  of Chicago  School  of Law  and
Department  of Political  Science.  B.A.  1975,  Harvard  University;  J.D.  1978,  Harvard  University.
Mary  Becker, Anne-Marie  Burley,  Jon Elster, and  Abner  Greene provided  helpful  comments on  an
earlier draft.  For financial support,  I am  grateful to the James  H. Douglas, Jr., Fund  for the Study
of Law  and  Government,  the  Pritzker  Family  Faculty  Fund,  and  the  Jerome  F.  Kutak  Faculty
Fund.

Some  of this  essay  unites,  draws  on,  and  redirects  arguments  presented  elsewhere:  Sunstein,
ConstitutionalPolitics and the Conservative Court, AM.  PROSPECT,  Spring  1990,  at 51;  Sunstein,  The
Limits  of Compensatory Justice,  in  NOMOS  XXXIII:  COMPENSATORY  JUSTicE  (forthcoming);
Sunstein,  Why  Markets Don't Stop  Discrimination, 8  SOC.  PHIL.  & POL. -

(forthcoming).

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 751 1991

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  79:751

tion is relevant  to present problems,  or that  courts have a continuing  role
to  play  in  the area  of civil  rights.  But  surely  these  claims  are  thin  and
unhelpful  in  a  period  when  civil  rights  policy  must  concern  itself with
such  problems  as  lack  of  opportunities  for  education,  training,  and
employment;  inadequate  housing  and  health  care;  vulnerability  to  and
incentives  for participation  in crime;  and teenage  pregnancy  and  single-
parent  families.  For  these  problems,  the traditional  claims  of  the  civil
rights  movement  provide at best limited guidance.  I conclude  with  some
brief remarks  on  future  directions  for  civil  rights  theory  and  practice.

I

FALLACY  #  1:  DISCRIMINATION  Is  ALWAYS  A  PRODUCT  OF
HOSTILITY,  IRRATIONALITY,  OR  PREJUDICE

In the last generation,  it has  frequently been suggested that discrimi-
natory  behavior  is  a  product  of irrational  bigotry  or  hostility.  In  this
account,  people treat blacks  differently from whites, or women  differently
from  men,1  because  of a  form  of prejudice.  The  term  "prejudice"  is,  of
course,  not self-defining.  As  conventionally  used,  the  term  includes  not
simply  hatred, but also a wide variety of negative judgments about a class
of people  defined  by  race  or  gender.

For  present  purposes,  perhaps  we  can  understand  "prejudice"  to
encompass  three  sorts  of  mistakes.2  The  first  consists  of a  belief  that
members  of a group have certain characteristics  when in fact they  do not.
Here  the  relevant  belief has  no  basis  in  reality,  and  its  irrationality  is
especially  conspicuous.  The  second  consists  of  a  belief  that  many  or
most members  of a group have  certain  characteristics  when  in fact  only
some  or  a few do.  Here the error is  an extremely  over-broad generaliza-
tion.  The  third  mistake  consists  of  reliance  on  fairly  accurate  group-
based  generalizations  when  more  accurate  (and  not  especially  costly)
classifying  devices  are available.  Here  the members of the group actually
have  an undesirable characteristic  in comparatively  large numbers-sup-
pose,  for example,  that they weigh  less,  or are  less well  educated-but  it
is possible and more rational to use other, more  direct devices to filter out
that characteristic.  The failure to use those more  direct devices reflects  a
kind  of prejudice.

In  all  these  cases,  it is  reasonable  to  say that  someone  is  acting  on
the  basis  of  irrational  prejudice.  Indeed,  taken  together,  these  cases

1.  My  focus  here  is  on  discrimination  against  blacks,  women,  and  (to  a  lesser  extent)  the
handicapped.  Of course,  other groups are  and should be protected  by antidiscrimination  laws,  but at
least  some  of these  groups  raise  distinctive  considerations  that  I cannot discuss  here.

2.  Cf PosnerAn  Economic Analysis of Sex Discrimination, 56 U. CmI.  L.  REV.  1311,  1318-21
(1989)  (discussing  the  various  forms  of prejudice  that  cause  sex-based  discrimination  in  the work
place);  K. Greenawalt,  Law  and  Objectivity  ch.  7  (unpublished  manuscript)  (on  file with  author).

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 752 1991

1991]

THREE CIVIL  RIGHTS FALLACIES

probably  exhaust  the  category  of  prejudice  as  that  term  is  generally
understood.'

The  theory  of civil  rights  law  has  often identified  "discrimination"
with prejudice,  and defined  an act as  discriminatory when  it is caused by
prejudice.  To  understand  the  importance  of identifying  discrimination
with  prejudice,  it is  necessary  to  understand  "discrimination,"  which  is
also,  of course,  a  contested  concept.  For present  purposes, I will  under-
stand  discrimination  to  include  a  decision  to  treat  a black  person  or  a
woman  differently  from  a  white  person  or  a  man,  regardless  of  the
motivation.

An  influential  approach  attributes  the practice  of discrimination  to
the  existence  of prejudice  or  irrationality,  in  the  form  of  a  "taste"  for
discrimination.4  In  the  workplace,  for  example,  employers  might  dis-
criminate  because  they  do  not  like  to  associate  with blacks,  women,  or
others.  The engine that drives discrimination  is employer irrationality  or
prejudice-not  economic  self-interest,  narrowly  defined  as  monetary
gain.  Indeed,  economic  self-interest  conflicts  with  employers'  taste  for
discrimination.  According to a traditional  understanding, discriminators
will  ultimately  be  driven  from  the  market  because  they  indulge  their
prejudices  at  the expense  of profits.'

This idea has  some  truth to  it;  in  some  situations,  discrimination  is
costly.  But  sometimes  discrimination  is  caused  by  employer  practices
that  stem  directly  from  economic  self-interest  rather  than  from  the
employer's  prejudice  or  irrationality.' 
Indeed,  discrimination  may  be
fueled  by  considerations  unrelated  to  the animus  of the employer  or dis-
criminator.  It may,  instead,  reflect  (1)  the  desires  of  third  parties;  (2)
statistically  accurate  generalizations;  or  (3) the consequences  of an  une-
qual status  quo  for investments  in human capital  and  for preference  for-
mation.  To  disregard  these  points  is  to  produce  understandings  and

3.  Strauss, Discriminatory Intent and the Taming of Brown,  56 U.  CHI.  L. REv.  935,  956-59

(1990),  suggests that there may be prejudice  in the selection  of the criteria used to make judgments-
that is, the decisionmakers  might not  have  selected the same criteria to make  the contested  decision
had the shoe been  on the other foot.  This might  well count as another form  of prejudice,  and  if so,
the category  is broader  than what I have  described  here.  It  is  difficult, however,  to incorporate  this
notion  of prejudice  into  antidiscrimination  law  (as  Strauss emphasizes),  and  Strauss'  efforts  go well
beyond  conventional  understandings  of "prejudice"  and  "discrimination."

4.  This view finds its origins in G. BECKER,  THE ECONOMICS  OF DISCRIMINATION  14 (2d ed.

1971).

5.  But see Akerlof, The Economics of Caste and of the Rat Race and Other Woeful  Tales, 90
Q.J.  ECON.  599,  608-10  (1976)  (despite  its  apparent  inefficiency,  a  caste  system  may  remain  in
equilibrium  through  the use  of powerful  sanctions  against  those who  threaten  the social system).

6.  Becker  in  fact  recognizes  this point, describing  those  with  a  "taste"  for discrimination  as
including  fellow  workers  and  customers  as  well as  employers.  G. BECKER,  supra note  4, at  14-15;
see also Arrow, Models of Job Discrimination, in  RACIAL  DISCRIMINATION  IN  ECONOMIC  LIFE 83,
88  (A. Pascal  ed.  1972)  (fellow  workers and  customers  may  also  discriminate).

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 753 1991

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  79:751

ultimately  prescriptions  that are  ill-suited  to  the problem  of discrimina-
tion  in the United  States in  the late  twentieth  century.

A.  Third Parties

The  clearest  illustration  of discrimination  not  driven  by  economic
irrationality  occurs  when  third  parties  are in  a  position  to impose  finan-
cial punishments  on  nondiscriminatory  employers. 7  Suppose, for  exam-
ple,  that purchasers  or fellow  employees  refuse  to  buy  from  or  to  work
for  a  company  that  does  not  discriminate.  Even  if  employers  would
themselves  choose  not  to  discriminate  or  have  no  particular  view  about
whether  or  not  to  discriminate,  third  parties  can pressure  employers  to
discriminate.

The phenomenon  is hardly unusual.  Consider, for example, the  case
of  a  shopkeeper  whose  customers  do  not  like  dealing  with  blacks  or
women,  a  commercial  airline  whose  patrons react  unfavorably  to female
pilots,  a  law  firm  whose  clients  prefer  not  to  have  black  lawyers,  or  a
hospital  whose  patients  are  uncomfortable  with female  doctors  or black
nurses.  The persistence,  for a long period, of private segregation  in major
league  baseball  is  a familiar  example  of this  basic phenomenon. 8

In  all  these  cases,  an  employer  who  introduces  norms  of  equality
into  the  work  force  will  be punished,  not  rewarded.  For  the  employer
faced with consumers or employees  who prefer discrimination,  a decision
to engage in discrimination  is in an important respect neutral.  He is sim-
ply maximizing  his  profits  by  respecting  consumer  demand.  Indeed,  an
employer  who  refuses  to  discriminate  will  be  engaging  in  what  is,  from
his  point  of  view,  a  form  of  affirmative  action.  If  he  must  become  a
nondiscriminator,  it will  be to  promote  the long-range  goal  of race  and
sex  equality. 9

All this  suggests that  discrimination  can  be  a  product not  of preju-
dice, but of responses  to market  pressures from  third  parties.  Of course,
prejudice  is in  some sense  at work-by  customers  or fellow  employees-
but the discriminator is not himself acting from prejudice  or irrationality.

7.  Here I largely follow Akerlof, supra note 5, at 608-10  (threat  of sanctions by third  parties
may  keep  apparently  inefficient  caste  system in equilibrium);  see  also id.  at  610  ("those  who  fail  to
follow ...  the caste customs do  not gain the profits of the successful  arbitrageur but instead  suffer the
stigma  of the outcast").

8.  Customer  discrimination  also  has  become  apparent  quite  recently  in  the  market  for
baseball  cards,  which  shows  a  10%  to  13%  "racial  discount"  for  the cards  of black  players.  See
Nardinelli  &  Simon,  Customer Racial Discrimination in the Market for Memorabilia: The  Case of
Baseball, 105  Q.J.  ECON.  575,  594 (1990).

9.  The idea  that discrimination  is a result of hostility or prejudice  lies at  the root of attacks  on
affirmative  action.  In  fact,  discrimination is  sometimes based  on  rational self-interest.  If this is so,
the  distinction  between  affirmative  action  and  an  antidiscrimination  principle  becomes  much
thinner.  See  infra text  accompanying  notes  16-18.

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 754 1991

1991]

THREE CIVIL  RIGHTS FALLACIES

It is  here  that the traditional  understanding  is  misconceived. 10

B.  Statistical or Economically Rational Discrimination

Sometimes  discriminatory  behavior  is  a result  of generalizations  or
stereotypes  that, although  over-broad  and perhaps  invidious,  provide  an
economically  rational basis  for employment  decisions. 1  Stereotypes  and
generalizations  are,  of course,  a  common  ingredient  in  day-to-day  deci-
sions.  There are  informational  costs  in making  distinctions  within  cate-
gories,  and  sometimes  people  prefer  to  avoid  the  often  far  more  costly
examination  of the merits  of the particular  employee.

Such categorical judgments are not only pervasive,  but they are also
entirely legitimate  in most settings.  We  all  depend  on them.  Employers
rely  on  "proxies"  of  many  sorts,  even  though  those  proxies  are  over-
broad  generalizations  and far  from  entirely accurate.  Test scores,  previ-
ous  employment,  college  or  high  school  education,  prestige  of  college
attended-all these are part of rational employment  decisions.  Emphasis
on  these factors  is  a  common  form  of stereotyping,  and at least  in  ordi-
nary  circumstances,  it would be  odd to  say that such factors  reflect hos-
tility  or prejudice  of the invidious  kind.

At least  in  some  contexts,  race  and  sex  operate  as  similar  proxies.
In various  ways, blacks  differ from  whites  and women from  men.  There
are  real differences  between  the two groups.  Indeed,  in light  of past and
present discrimination  against blacks  and women,  it would be shocking if
there  were no  group-based  differences.  Women,  for  example,  are  more
likely than  men to be the primary  caretakers  of children  and more likely
to leave the employment market because  of that role. 2  Along every indi-
cator of social  welfare-poverty,  education,  employment, vulnerability to
private  (or  public)  violence,  participation  in  violent  crime-blacks  are
proportionally  less well off than whites.  In light of those differences,  it is
fully possible  that in certain  settings, race- and  sex-based  generalizations

10. 

In  one  respect,  courts  have  acknowledged  this  point.  In  title  VII  litigation,  customer
preferences  do not  count  as  a  "bona  fide  occupational  qualification"  (BFOQ)  sufficient  to justify
facially  discriminatory  hiring  practices.  See, eg.,  Diaz  v.  Pan  Am. World  Airways,  442  F.2d 385,
389  (5th Cir.)  (holding  that customer  preference  for male  flight attendants  was  not a  BFOQ),  cert.
denied, 404  U.S.  950  (1971);  Fernandez  v.  Wynn  Oil  Co.,  653  F.2d  1273,  1276-77  (9th  Cir.  1981)
(customer  preference  not  BFOQ);  see  also  29  C.F.R.  ยง  1604.2(a)(1)(iii)  (1990)  (preferences  of
coworkers  or customers  not  BFOQ).

11.  Arrow, supra note 6,  at 96-97  (stating that  costs  of acquiring  more  accurate  information
may make  discrimination economically  "rational");  Strauss,  The Myth of Colorblindness, 1986  Sup.
Cr. REv.  99,  108-10 (defining  and illustrating  concept of "rational"  discrimination); see also Phelps,
The  Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism,  62  AM.  ECON.  REv.  659,  660  (1972)  (presenting  a
model for  "economically  rational"  discrimination).

12.  This  phenomenon  of course  does  not  mean  that  differential  treatment  is  permissible.
Whether  such  treatment  should  be  allowed  need  hardly  depend  solely  on  its  being  economically
rational.  See infra text  accompanying  notes  63-64.

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 755 1991

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[V/ol.  79:751

are  economically  rational  as  proxies  for relevant  characteristics.  More-
over, race  or sex in  some contexts  may  be every bit  as  accurate a  predic-
tor  of  job  performance  as,  say,  test  scores,  education,  and  previous
employment.  And  in some cases,  reliance on  more direct  and individual-
ized  devices  might  be too costly  to  be worthwhile.

If race  or sex  can be  a good  predictor of performance,  an employer
may  discriminate not because  he hates  or devalues  blacks  or women,  or
because  he has  a general  desire  to  avoid  them,  or is  prejudiced  in  any  of
the senses I have  discussed, but because he believes  (on the basis either of
plausible  assumption  or  actual  experience)  that the relevant  stereotypes
have sufficient  truth to provide a rational basis for employment  decisions.
An employer  might,  for example,  believe  that women  are  more  likely to
leave a high-pressure job than men,  or that blacks  are  less likely  to have
the  necessary  training.  For  the  handicapped,  the  same  scenario  is  of
course  readily  predictable;  real  differences  call  for differential  treatment.
Ordinary  prejudice  and irrationality  are  thus not  at  work.

It is  important  to  be  careful  with  this  point.  As  I  understand  it,
statistical discrimination  occurs  when the employer does not harbor  irra-
tional hatred  or discriminatory  feelings,  but instead acts  according to ste-
reotypes  of the sort market  actors  typically  rely  on,  which  are of course
false  in some  or many  cases,  but which cannot readily  be abandoned  for
more  direct  inquiries.  I  do  not  mean  to  deny  that  ordinary,  irrational
prejudice accounts  for a significant  amount  of discrimination.  Nor do  I
deny  that  it  is  hard  both  in  practice  and  in  principle  to  distinguish
between  ordinary  prejudice  and economically  rational  stereotyping.

Sometimes,  of course,  employers  who  refuse  to  follow  a  stereotype
may  find job  candidates  who  will  move  them  far  ahead  in  the  market-
place.  Moreover, the decision about what kinds  of economically  rational
stereotypes  to  adopt  might  itself  reflect  prejudice. 3  People  are  highly
selective  in  creating  and  using  the  very  categories  through  which  they
view  people-as  college  graduates?  as  children  of successful  parents?  as
nonreligious?  as white  males?  as  tall?  as good-looking?  by  what  criteria?
People are also selective  in deciding which  categories  ought to count
in various  sectors.  Thus, for example,  the use of sex as  a proxy  for flexi-
bility with respect  to  overtime  work  may  be fully  rational;  but  as  I  have
noted,  selectivity in the choice  of the proxy is a product of prejudice  if, as
is  usual,  other  equal  or  better  proxies  are  available.  Indeed,  like  the
selection  of stereotypes,  the selection  of criteria might itself be a  product

13.  Cf  G.  LAKOFF,  WOMEN,  FIRE, AND  DANGEROUS  THINGS:  WHAT  CATEGORIES  REVEAL
ABOUT  THE MIND  12-57  (1987)  (discussing processes of categorization);  M.  MINOW,  MAKING  ALL
THE  DIFFERENCE  19-48  (1990)  (discussing  use  of categories  as  lens  through  which  difference  is
viewed).

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 756 1991

1991]

THREE  CIVIL  RIGHTS FALLACIES

of a  kind  of prejudice.14  Finally,  people  tend  to  notice  events  that  are
consistent  with previously  held  stereotypes  and to  disregard  events  that
are inconsistent  with them. 5  Here there is a built-in obstacle  to changes
in  social  norms  even  when  those  norms  decreasingly  mirror  reality.

One  might  agree  with  all  this  and  still  acknowledge  what  seems
undoubtedly  true,  that  discrimination  sometimes  persists  because  it  is
economically  rational to  rely on a race- or sex-based  generalization.  And
because  contemporary  law  singles  out  one kind  of rational  stereotyping
to  ban  it, the  distinction between  affirmative  action  and  antidiscrimina-
tion  norms  becomes  extremely  thin  and perhaps  invisible  in principle. 6
The  antidiscrimination  principle-of  course,  widely  accepted-forbids
government  from* discriminating  against blacks  and  women,  even  when
such  discrimination  is  economically  rational.  Affirmative  action-of
course,  a  highly  controversial  practice-calls  for  employment  and other
preferences  for  members  of  disadvantaged  groups.  The  two  ideas  are
often  thought  to  be  in  severe  tension,1 7  and  indeed,  for  advocates  of
affirmative  action,  the  antidiscrimination  principle  sometimes  seems  an
embarrassment.

In some settings, however,  an antidiscrimination norm,  conceived as
a barrier  to  economically  rational  behavior,  has  the same  purposes  and
effects  as  affirmative  action.  Affirmative  action  is  controversial  partly
because it can be economically  irrational,  can impose serious  social costs,
and harms innocent  victims."  But an  antidiscrimination  principle  often
does  precisely the same  as what  affirmative  action  does,  and  also does  it
in the interest  of long-term social  goals.  For example,  an antidiscrimina-
tion  norm may  require  innocent  victims  to  sacrifice-customers  may be
required  to  pay  higher  prices-in  order to  produce  long-term  equality.

A great  failure  of the assault  on  affirmative  action is  its inability  to
account  for  the  ways  in  which  a  requirement  of  nondiscrimination
involves  very  much  the  same  considerations.  Indeed,  the  distinction
between  affirmative  action  and antidiscrimination  is  sharp  only to  those
who  see  discrimination  as  always  grounded  in hostility  and irrationality,
which it  clearly  is  not.

14.  See  Strauss, supra note 3,  at 957-58 (suggesting  a "reversing  the groups"  test to determine

whether  the choice  of classification  criteria  reflects  discriminatory  intent).

15.  See E. ARONSON,  THE SOCIAL ANIMAL  174-76  (1972).  "Prejudice[d]  people  see the world

in  ways  that are  consistent  with their  prejudice."  Id. at  174.

16.  See  Strauss,  supra  note  11,  at  130  ("There  are  fundamental  similarities  between

nondiscrimination  and  affirmative  action.").

17.  See  Van  Alstyne, Rites of Passage" Race, the Supreme Court, and the Constitution, 46  U.
CHI.  L.  REv.  775,  802-03  (1979)  (equating  affirmative  action  with  discrimination);  id.  at  809
(referring  to affirmative  action  as  a  "suggestion  to  relicense  racial  discrimination").

18.  See,  e-g.,  id.  at  801-02  (affirmative  action  program  in  Regents  of  the  University  of
California  v. Bakke, 438 U.S.  265 (1978),  harmed  innocent victims);  id  at 805-08 (no rational  way  to
determine  racial eligibility for affirmative  action program); see also Strauss, supra note  11,  at  110-11.

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 757 1991

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  79:751

C.  The Effects of Discrimination on Human Capital and Problems of
Preference Formation

Suppose  that  there  has  been  widespread  discrimination  for  any
number  of reasons:  employers  have  a taste for discrimination;  third par-
ties impose pressure  on  employers to  discriminate; employers  use statisti-
cal  generalizations  that  are  rational.  Once  the  discrimination  becomes
established,  members  of  disadvantaged  groups  will  suffer  from  harmful
effects  on  investment  in human  capital  and  on  preference  formation. t9

L  Human Capital

The  productivity  of participants  in  the labor  market  is  endogenous
to, or partly  a  product of, discrimination  in that market.  It  is a  mistake
to  take  productivity  within  any  social  group  as  static  or  unaffected  by
employer  decisions.  Such  decisions  will  have  important  dynamic  effects
on  how  blacks  and  whites,  or  women  and  men,  choose  to  invest  in
human  capital. Decisions  about education,  child care,  training,  drug use,
employment  programs,  and  tradeoffs  between  work  and  leisure  will  be
affected  by  existing patterns  of discrimination.  In a  market  having  such
discrimination,  members  of  disadvantaged  groups  will  invest  relatively
less  in  education  and  training  programs.  Indeed,  lower  investments  on
their part are perfectly  rational.  As market  actors, women  should invest
less  than  men  in  training  to  be  (for  example)  pilots,  economists,  politi-
cians,  lawyers,  or law  professors  if these professions  discriminate  against
women  and  thus  reward  their investment less  than  that  of men.

The result  will often be a  vicious circle  or even  a  spiral.  Because  of
existing discrimination,  the relevant groups will invest less in human  cap-
ital;  because  of this  lower  investment,  the  discrimination  will  persist  or
perhaps  increase  as  its  statistical  rationality  itself increases;  because  of
this  effect,  investments  will  decrease  still  further,  and so  on.

Undoubtedly,  this  picture  is  too  bleak  in  many  situations.  Other
proxies,  not rooted  in sex  and race,  have frequently  evolved  and employ-
ers  have  used them.  Such  proxies  are  ordinarily  far more  accurate,  and
employers  who  use  them  sometimes  prosper.  More  generally,  the
extraordinary  persistence  of  blacks  and  women  in  attempting  to  enter
professions  dominated by  white men is one of the  most striking phenom-
ena  of  the  post-World  War  II  period.  Blacks  and  women  frequently
appear  to  invest  huge  amounts  in  human  capital,  even  in  sectors  that
treat them  inhospitably.20  But there  is little question  that discrimination
does  have  a  large  effect  on  investments  in  human  capital  in  many  con-

19.  Arrow,  supra  note  6,  at  88;  Lundberg  &  Startz,  Private Discrimination and  Social

Intervention in  Competitive Labor Markets, 73  AM.  ECON.  REv.  340,  342  (1983).

20. 

In fact,  some people  in  some circumstances  respond  to discrimination  by increasing  rather
than  decreasing  their  investments  in  human  capital.  In  Western  history,  some  racial  and  ethnic

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 758 1991

1991]

THREE CIVIL  RIGHTS FALLACIES

texts,  and  that the hostile  reception  given  to  disadvantaged  groups  per-
petuates  their  exclusion  from  certain  sectors  of  the  economy.  In  that
case,  inequality will be the result of discrimination  that is itself the prod-
uct not only of past irrational hostility or prejudice,  but also of a far more
complex  system  of interactions  with economically  rational  employment
decisions.

2.  Preferences

An additional  problem  is  that private preferences,  of both  discrimi-
nators and their victims,  tend  to adapt  to  the status quo,  and to do  so  in
such a way  as to make significant  change hard to achieve.  The reduction
of cognitive  dissonance  is a powerful motivating  force:  people  attempt to
bring  their beliefs  and  perceptions  in  line with  existing  practice.2 1  The
victims of inequality  tend  to reduce  dissonance by  adapting their prefer-
ences  to  the  available  opportunities.  Consider  the story  of the fox  who
concludes  that he does  not want  unavailable  grapes because  he considers
them  sour:  he  considers  them  sour  because  they  are  unavailable.2 2  Or
people may  adapt their aspirations to the persistent  and often irrationally
held belief that the world is in fact just.23  The beneficiaries  of the status
quo  tend to  do  the same, concluding  that the victims  deserve  their fate,
that they are  responsible  for it, or that the current  situation  is  part of an
intractable,  given,  or  natural  order.24

There is  extremely  powerful  evidence  in the psychological  literature
to  support  these  claims. 25  For  example,  people  who  behave  cruelly
change  their  attitudes  toward  the  objects  of  their  cruelty  and  thus
devalue  them.  Observers  of cruelty  and  violence  tend  to  do  the same.
the  victim  has  clear  cognitive  and
The  phenomenon  of  blaming 

groups  have  prospered  as a result of such investments,  notwithstanding  discriminatory  tastes on the
part of employers,  customers,  and  fellow  employees.

21.  See  L.  FESTINGER,  A  THEORY  OF  COGNITIVE  DISSONANCE  18-19  (1957).  On  the
phenomenon  in this  particular  context,  see  Arrow,  supra note  6,  at 97.  See generally J. ELsTER,
SOUR  GRAPES  15-26  (1983).

22.  See  AESOP'S  FABLES  21  (Hague  ed.  1985);  see  also J. ELSTER,  supra note  21,  at  110-40

(describing  "sour  grapes"  response  as  a way  to  reduce  cognitive  dissonance).

23.  See  J. ELSTER,  supra  note  21,  at  101-08  (asserting  that  the search  for  explanations  for
injustice  stems  from  theology  and  biology);  M.  LERNER,  THE  BELIEF  IN  A  JUST  WORLD:  A
FUNDAMENTAL  DELUSION  123-26  (1980)  (because  of the belief that  the world  is just, victims  may
blame  themselves  in order  to  assert control  over their  otherwise  meaningless  misfortune).

24.  See generally M.  LERNER,  supra note 23,  at  50  (results  of experiment  show  that people
tend to condemn  an apparently  blameless  victim to  reassert their belief in a just world  and  to lessen
cognitive dissonance).

25.  See,  eg.,  sources  cited  supra  notes  21  &  23;  E.  ARONSON,  supra note  15,  at  89-137
(discussing  numerous  experiments  of people  trying  to  reduce  cognitive  dissonance);  Furnham  &
Gunter, Just World Beliefs and Attitudes  Towards the Poor, 23 BRrr. J. Soc.  PSYCHOLOGY  265, 268
(1984)  (noting  that  observers  tend  to  view  the  poor  as  responsible  for  their  fate);  Janoff-Bulman,
Timko  & Carli, Cognitive Biases in Blaming the  Victim,  21  J. EXPERIMENTAL  SOC.  PSYCHOLOGY
161  (1985)  (discussing  sources  of the phenomenon  of "blaming  the victim").

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 759 1991

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  79:751

motivational  foundations.  The  notion  that  the  world  is  just,  and  that
existing inequalities  are deserved or desired,  plays a large  role in forming
preferences  and beliefs.  All  these phenomena  have  played  an  enormous
part  in  the history  of racial  and  sexual  discrimination.

The  inevitable  effect  of a  discriminatory  status  quo  on  preferences
and beliefs  is closely  related  to  the phenomenon  of decreased  investment
in human capital.  In both cases,  the response to discrimination  is endog-
enous  rather  than  exogenous  and  has  the  consequence  of perpetuating
existing  inequalities.  But  with  respect  to  preferences  and  beliefs,  the
effect is  especially pernicious.  And  when there are harmful  effects  on  the
development  of preferences and beliefs,  discrimination will  occur for rea-
sons  that are  not directly  traceable  to  acts  of irrationality  or prejudice.26

D. 

In  General: Reinforcing Effects

The  arguments  I have  offered  thus  far build  on  standard  economic
accounts  of discrimination.  It is  notable  that  none of the various  effects
reflects  an  uncontroversial  market  failure  in  the  conventional  sense.
The  incorporation  of racist  or  sexist  preferences  is  efficient,  if the  effi-
ciency  criterion  is based  on  private willingness  to pay; 28  the same applies
with profit-maximizing  reactions  to the desires  of third  parties  and with
statistical  discrimination.  In  all  these  cases,  governmental  interference
will  probably  produce  an  efficiency  loss,  at  least in  the short  term.2 9

The  most  likely  exception  is  the  effect  of discrimination  on  human
capital  and  preference  formation. 0  In  that  case,  it is  possible  that  dis-
crimination  will  produce  a  serious  externality  in  the  form  of  harmful
effects  on  prospective  labor  market  entrants,  with  a  corresponding  effi-
ciency  loss.  If  discrimination  discourages  members  of  disadvantaged
groups from investing in human capital, it will produce  large social  losses
by decreasing  potentially  large  sources  of productivity.  Ideas  of this sort
may  provide  the  basis  for  a  fully  plausible  efficiency  justification  for
antidiscrimination  law.

26.  Of course  prejudice and  irrationality are in  the background here,  in  that they  helped  create
the conditions  under which  the relevant  acts take place.  In this sense, prejudice  and irrationality  are
hardly irrelevant.  But  to say that existing distributions  of benefits and  burdens  between  blacks  and
whites  is in significant part  a legacy of prejudice  is quite different  from saying  that particular  acts of
present  discrimination  are  produced  by  prejudice  or irrationality  on  the part  of the  discriminator.
See supra text  accompanying  note  10.

27.  My  use  of the term  "market  failure"  here  builds  on  the conventional  economic  analysis.
28.  But cf. Donohue, Is Title VII Efficient?, 134 U. PA.  L. Rav. 1411,  1430 (1986)  (concluding
that title VII  increases  "total  social  welfare,"  apparently  relying  on  a conception  of efficiency  based
on  a  notion  of  social  output  or  production).  The  same  criterion  can  be  found  in  Schwab,  Is
Statistical Discrimination Efficient?, 76  AM.  ECON.  REV.  228,  233  (1986)  (noting  that  statistical
discrimination  may  be "socially  inefficient").

29.  But see Donohue, supra note  28,  at  1420-21,  1430;  Schwab, supra note  28,  at  233.
30.  See  Lundberg  & Startz, supra note  19,  at  342.

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 760 1991

1991]

THREE CIVIL  RIGHTS FALLACIES

There is,  however, an  optimal level of investment  in human  capital,
and it is  not  entirely  clear  why  and  to  what extent  investments  that  are
adaptive  to  employer  behavior  in  the  labor  market  should  be  seen  as
suboptimal.  Any generalization  relied on in the labor market will have  a
signaling  effect that will shift investments  in human capital. It is not easy
to  develop  a model to  explain  which of those signals produce suboptimal
investments.  Often, then, markets will perpetuate  discrimination  for rea-
sons  that  are  unrelated  to  the  market  failures  that  provide  traditional
economic  grounds  for legal  intervention.

More  importantly,  each  of  these  effects  reinforces  the  others  in
potentially  powerful  ways.  If there  is  ordinary prejudice,  it will interact
with  statistical  discrimination  to  produce  more  of both.  People tend  to
notice events  consistent with their prejudice and to  disregard  events that
are  inconsistent  with  them,  thus  resulting  in  more  prejudice  and  more
statistical discrimination.  If third parties attempt  to promote discrimina-
tion,  they  will  increase  both  prejudice  and  statistical  discrimination.
Employers  will hire fewer members of disadvantaged  groups, who  will in
turn  appear  less  frequently  in  desirable  positions,  with consequent  rein-
forcing  effects  on  both  prejudice  and  statistical  discrimination.

In addition,  if there is prejudice and statistical discrimination,  and if
third parties promote  discrimination,  there will be decreased investments
in human  capital  and increasing  adaptation  of preferences  and beliefs to
the  status  quo.  These  will  be  perfectly  reasonable  responses.  And  if
there  are  decreased  investments  in  human  capital,  the  result  will  be
increases  in  prejudice,  statistical  discrimination,  and  third-party  effects.
Statistical discrimination  will become  all the more rational;  prejudice will
continue;  and  consumers  and  employers  will  be  more  likely  to
discriminate.

Of course, it would be necessary to compile  detailed factual  evidence
to assess  the magnitude  of these  effects.  Analysis of that  issue is  difficult
in the abstract.  But  the general  point  should be clear.  Discrimination is
not a simple  result of prejudice  or hostility, but instead reflects  a far more
complex  interplay  of  past  and  present  discrimination,  social  and  eco-
nomic  factors,  and  economically  rational  decisions.  If  civil  rights  law
treats  decisions  to  discriminate  as based  on  prejudice  or irrationality,  it
will  badly  misconceive  the  problem  and  produce  remedies  that  are  ill-
suited  to  its elimination.

II

FALLACY  #2:  PRINCIPLES  OF  COMPENSATORY  JUSTICE  SHOULD
PLAY  A  GUIDING  ROLE  IN  CIVIL  RIGHTS  POLICY

Much of the rhetoric  of the civil rights movements  is built on princi-
ples  of  compensatory justice.  According  to  these  principles,  those  who

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 761 1991

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  79:751

have  caused harm to  a person or group must repair the harm.  For exam-
ple,  slavery  and segregation  have played a large role  in producing  second-
class  citizenship  for  blacks  in  America.  A  principal  purpose  of  civil
rights  law  is  to  undo  the  historical  wrong,  thus returning  to  the  status
quo  ante.

Those  who  base  civil  rights  law  on  principles  of compensatory  jus-
tice  attempt  to  link  public  and  private  law,  assimilating  the problem  of
discrimination  to  the problems  that arise  in  ordinary  tort  actions.  And
there  is  certainly  something  valuable  to  the  effort.  If a  person  is  in  a
subordinate  position  because  of wrongs  done  to  her, or  even  to  her par-
ents,  that person's  inequality is  a product of a  morally irrelevant  factor3 1
in the form of an  injustice,  and for that reason  she has  a legitimate claim
to  redress.  In  this  way,  the  compensatory  rhetoric  of  the  civil  rights
movement  properly  links contemporary  efforts  to  past injustices.

In  important  respects,  however,  the model  of compensatory  justice
inadequately  captures the nature of the problem  and is therefore  a recipe
for  confusion.  The  confusion  arises  in  the  many  cases  in  which  courts
approach  questions  of equality  by  way  of traditional  principles  of com-
pensatory  justice.  For  example,  the  requirement  of  "discriminatory
intent"3  might well  be  understood  as  an  effort  to  adhere  to  compensa-
tory  principles  in  this  setting.  The  question,  thus conceived,  is  whether
an  identifiable  actor  has  harmed  an  identifiable  person  in an  identifiable
way.  To abandon the touchstone of intent would lead courts far from the
compensatory  model.  It would  lead  courts  to  require  redress  of social
wrongs  committed  by  third  parties  in  the  distant  past,  which  would
involve  conspicuous  social  reordering  and  harms  to  innocent  persons,
rather  than a  restoration  of some  well-defined  status  quo  ante.3 3

To  be  sure,  the  approach  of  the  courts-and  especially  of  the
Supreme  Court-has  been  based  on  a  narrow  conception  of compensa-
tion.  A broader  compensatory  principle  would  promote  far  more  legal
victories for members of disadvantaged  groups.34  In this more  expansive
view,  the  redress  of harms  other  than  those  created  by  the  particular
practice  in  question  would  be  the  goal  of  the  equality  principle.  The
notion  of compensation  would  remain,  but it  would  require  public  and
private employers  to  ensure  that the distribution  of benefits  and burdens

31.  See  J. RAwLS,  A  THEORY  OF JUSTICE  100-04  (1971);  see also infra  text  accompanying

note  61.

32.  E.g.,  Village  of Arlington  Heights  v.  Metropolitan  Hous.  Dev.  Corp.,  429  U.S.  252,  265

(1977);  Washington  v.  Davis,  426 U.S.  229, 239  (1976).

33.  The  point is  suggested  by  the Court in  Davis, 426  U.S.  at 248.
34.  The  Court's  discriminatory  intent  test has  been  subject  to  criticism.  See, e.g.,  Lawrence,
The Id, the Ego, and Equal Protection: Reckoning With  Unconscious Racism, 39  STAN.  L.  REv.  317
(1987);  Strauss,  supra note  3,  at  954-56.

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 762 1991

1991]

THREE CIVIL  RIGHTS FALLACIES

between  blacks  and  whites  would  be  roughly  what  it  would  have  been
without  the legacy  of discrimination.

It  is  doubtful,  however,  that  such  an  approach  would  be  feasible.
What would the world look like if it had been unaffected by past discrim-
ination  on  the basis  of race  and  sex?  The  general  problem  is  that  the
compensatory  model,  in  any  form,  is  based  on  notions  of  causation,
injury,  and restoration  to the status quo ante that are well adapted to tort
or contract setting, but singularly  ill-suited to  the problem  of discrimina-
tion  in  the United  States.

We  might begin with the issue  of school  desegregation,  where  com-
pensatory  ideas  play  a  prominent  role.  Suppose  that  a  school  district
engaged  in  de  jure  segregation  until  1954,  and  that  in  1958,  1968,  or
1978,  a judge  issues  a finding  to  that  effect.  What  remedy  ought  to  be
imposed?  The  Supreme  Court's cases  are  exceptionally  complex  on  this
point.35  The  Court's basic  approach  seems  to  be  an  attempt  to  restore
the status  quo  ante.  In  desegregation  cases,  the Court asks  whether  the
proposed remedy  will restore the system to what it would have been were
it  not for past  acts  of segregation.  Under  this  rationale,  the  Court  has
invalidated  "freedom  of choice"  desegregation  plans,  emphasizing  that
they  will  bring  about  less  desegregation  than  would  have  occurred  if
there  had  been no  segregation  in  the first  instance.3 6

Principles  of compensatory justice  play  a  prominent,  indeed central
role here.  They  define  the very nature  of the inquiry.  Some Justices,  for
example,  emphasize  the  difficulty  of finding  a  good  causal  connection
between  post-1970 or  1980  practices  and  pre-1954 discrimination.37  For
them,  the weak  causal  connection  means  that the law  should  not  make
people  restructure  present  practices.  By  contrast,  other  Justices  empha-
size the legacy  of past discrimination  and what they see  as its undeniable
causal  connection  to  present  patterns  of segregation. 38

Both sides appear,  however, to miss the fact that issues of causation,
and  the  compensatory  principles  that  underlie  them,  have  little  coher-
ence  in  this  context.  An  inquiry  into  the  amount  of racial  integration
that  would  have  occurred  in  a  world unaffected  by  racial  segregation  is
likely  to be empirically  unanchored,  indeed,  chimerical.  Social scientists,
let  alone judges,  are  simply  not equipped  to  answer  that  question-not
because  they lack  appropriate  tools,  but because  the  question  itself is  of

35.  See,  eg.,  Dayton  Bd.  of Educ.  v.  Brinkman  (Dayton  11),  443  U.S.  526,  537-39  (1979)
(intentional  establishment  of  dual  school  system  before  1954  creates  continuing  obligation  to
undertake affirmative  acts to desegregate school district);  Columbus Bd. of Educ.  v. Penick, 443 U.S.
449,  458  (1979)  (same).  These  issues,  of course,  lie  behind  Board  of Education  of Oklahoma  City
Public Schools  v.  Dowell,  111  S.  Ct.  630 (1991).

36.  E.g.,  Green  v.  County  School  Bd.,  391  U.S.  430,  440  (1968).
37.  See,  eg.,  Dayton  Bd.  of Educ.  v.  Brinkman  (Dayton I),  433  U.S.  406,  417,  420  (1977).
38.  See, eg.,  id. at 423  (Brennan,  J.,  concurring).

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 763 1991

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  79:751

uncertain epistemological  status.  One simply  cannot sort  out the connec-
tion between legal  segregation  in  1950  and educational  patterns  in  1990.
The status quo  ante-whatever it might have been--cannot  be conceptu-
alized.  To  try  to  resolve  issues  bearing  on  desegregation  remedies  in
terms of compensatory  principles  is  to  ask  unanswerable  questions.

The problem is  far more  general.  What would  our practices  be  in a
world  without  race  and  sex  discrimination?  How  would  one  treat  (for
example)  veterans'  preferences  in the absence  of sexism,  or  literacy  tests
for voting and  employment  in the absence  of racism?  In  all  these cases,
the  restoration  of a  status  quo  ante  is  a  conceptually  incoherent  task.
Moreover,  it is  not even  clear  whether  past  discrimination  presents  the
basic  reason  for  the  legal  responses  to  the  present  status  of  blacks.
Whether  such  discrimination  is  a  necessary  or  sufficient  condition  for
"remedial"  efforts  is  by  no  means  self-evident.3 9

Similar  problems  arise  in  cases  involving  affirmative  action.  The
Supreme  Court has  frequently indicated  that race-conscious  measures  are
permissible  only  as  a  "remedy"  for  identifiable  acts  of purposeful  dis-
crimination undertaken  within  the jurisdiction  of the governmental  insti-
in  affirmative  action. 4'  Here, 
too,  compensatory
tution  engaging 
principles  are  in  the  forefront,  allowing  affirmative  action  only  as  a
response  to tort-like  acts.  By  contrast,  affirmative  action grounded  in an
effort  to overcome  "societal  discrimination"  is  generally  impermissible."
In  so holding,  the Court  has  emphasized  that  the victims  of affirmative
action  are  either  employers  or,  much  more  frequently,  white  people  or
men  who  never  engaged  in  discriminatory  conduct.

The problem  of innocent  victims4 2  appears  to be a principal  impetus
behind  the requirement  of a showing  of past discrimination.  Under  cur-
rent  law, affirmative  action  can thus be  defended  most  easily  in tort-like
terms  as an  effort to  restore  a status  quo  ante  that has  been unsettled  by
identifiable  acts  producing  identifiable  harms  to  identifiable  actors.  The
problem  here,  as elsewhere,  is  that affirmative  action does  not fit  the tort
model.  Although the redress  of past discrimination  is an  important  ele-
ment  in  the  theory  and  practice  of  civil  rights  law,  there  is  no  well-
defined  status  quo  against  which  compensatory  principles  can  operate.

To put the point most generally:  It is true that  past acts  of discrimi-
nation  help  account for the socially  subordinate  status  of disadvantaged
groups, and when this is so,  some sort of remedial principle  should play a

39.  See  Sullivan, Sins of Discrimination, 100  HARV.  L. REv.  78,  83-84,  96  (1986)  (suggesting
that  the  Court could  have justified  "remedial"  affirmative  action  plans  by  reference  to  exclusively
forward-looking  goals,  such  as  improving  education  or promoting  diversity  in  the workplace).

40.  See, eg.,  City  of Richmond  v. J.A.  Croson  Co.,  488  U.S.  469,  509  (1989).
41.  See,  eg., id. at 499.
42.  By this term,  I mean  whites  or men  who may  benefit from but  are  not responsible for past

and  present  discriminatory  practices.

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 764 1991

1991]

THREE CIVIL  RIGHTS FALLACIES

role in civil  rights  theory.  But to try to decide  questions  about the scope
and  nature  of  antidiscrimination  policy  by  reference  to  compensatory
notions 
is  a  recipe  for  confusion  and  for  unproductive-because
unresolvable--disagreements.

III

FALLACY  #3:  COURTS  ARE  THE  APPROPRIATE  INSTITUTION  FOR
BRINGING  ABOUT  SOCIAL  CHANGE  IN  THE  AREA  OF  CIVIL RIGHTS

During  and  after the period  of the Warren  Court, it has  been  com-
monplace  to  suggest  that federal  courts  should  set  much  of civil  rights
policy  through the process  of constitutional  adjudication.4 3  The  courts'
insulation-from  an electoral  process that is often  said to have  produced
civil  rights  violations in  the first place-is  considered  a  comparative  vir-
tue, allowing  the judges to  implement antidiscrimination  principles  with-
out  being  affected  by  political  biases.  There  can  be  no  question  that
because of their insulation,  judges have  often been  in  an unusually  good
position  to  elaborate  and  implement  principles  of  antidiscrimination.
But  for several  reasons,  reliance  on  the judiciary  may  have  been  a mis-
take.  It may  have  diverted  attention  from  more  productive  alternatives
and at the same time disserved  the very  causes  at issue.  In any case,  such
reliance  seems  a poor  strategy  for  the future.  Three  considerations  are
relevant  here.

A.  Efficacy

Judicial  decisions  are  of  limited  efficacy  in  bringing  about  social
change.  Study  after  study has  confirmed  this basic  conclusion. 4  Brown
v.  Board of Education 15  is  usually  offered  as a counter-example,  but it is
in fact the most conspicuous confirmation  of the point.46  Ten years after
the  decision,  no  more  than  about  two  percent  of black  children  in  the
South  attended  desegregated  schools.4 7  It  was  not  until  1964,  after
Congress  and  the  executive  branch  became  involved,  that  widespread
desegregation  actually occurred.  The Court is  far more effective  at veto-
ing a decision  of another  government  entity  than it is  at  effecting  social
change on its own.  Of course, it is possible that the legislative and execu-
tive  actions  would  not  have  occurred  without  the  spur  of Brown,  but

43.  See,  eg.,  Fiss,  Foreword: The Forms of Justice, 93 HARV.  L. REv.  1 (1979).
44.  See  D.  HoRowrrz,  THE  COURTS  AND  SOCIAL  POLICY  56-62  (1977);  R.  MELNICK,
REGULATION  AND  THE  COURT:  THE  CASE  OF  THE  CLEAN  AIR  ACT  110-12  (1983);  G.
ROSENBERG,  THE  HOLLOW  HOPE:  CAN  COURTS  BRING  ABOUT  SOCIAL  CHANGE?  (forthcoming
Oct.  1991).

45.  347  U.S.  483  (1954).
46.  See  G. ROSENBERG,  supra note  44,  at 42-71.
47.  See  G.  STONE,  L. SEIDMAN,  C.  SUNSTEIN  & M.  TUSHNET,  CONSTITUTIONAL  LAW  474

(1986).

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 765 1991

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  79:751

even  this seems  uncertain.48

The  decision in Roe  v. Wade 4 9 may  be another  illustration,  though
the picture  here  is  more  complex.  It is  undoubtedly  true  that  the  deci-
sion  increased  women's  access  to  safe  abortions,  and  to  some  extent  it
may have  increased  the legitimacy  of abortion.  By  1973,  however,  state
legislatures  were moving firmly  to  expand  legal  access  to abortion,5 ยฐ  and
it  is  likely  that  a  broad  guarantee  of  access  would  have  been  available
even  without Roe.  However  surprising  the point  may  be,  Roe  did not
dramatically  increase  the actual  number  or rate of abortions. 1  Perhaps
more  fundamentally,  the  decision  may  well  have  created  the  Moral
Majority, helped defeat the equal rights amendment,  and undermined  the
women's  movement  by  spurring  opposition  and  demobilizing  potential
adherents.5 2  At the same time, Roe  may  have  taken national  policy  too
abruptly to  a point  toward  which  it  was  groping  more slowly, 5 3  and in
the process  may have prevented  state legislatures  from working  out long-
lasting  solutions  based  upon broad  public  consensus.

We  might in this regard  contrast Roe v.  Wade with the Civil  Rights
Act of 1964,  a  legislative enactment brought  about through  general  pub-
lic  support.  The  foundational  civil  rights  law in  the United  States  has  a
kind of legitimacy  and support that makes  it extremely  hard to  amend at

48.  See  G. ROSENBERG,  supra note 44,  at  107-56.
49.  410  U.S.  113  (1973).
50.  See  Morgan,  Roe  v.  Wade  and the Lesson  of the Pre-Roe Case Law,  77  MICH.  L.  REV.

1724,  1726  (1979).

51.  There  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  in  the  early  1960s,  there  were  between  1.0  and  1.5
million  abortions in  the United  States each  year.  That is,  at least  20%  and perhaps  as many as 30%
of all  pregnancies  ended  in  abortion.  See,  eg.,  L.  LADER,  ABORTION  2  (1966)  (referring  to  the
"recent"  estimate  of 1.5 million);  R.  SCHWARTZ,  SEPTIC ABORTION  7 (1968)  (in the late  1960s, over
20%  of pregnancies  terminated  in  illegal  abortions,  resulting  in  approximately  1.2 million  unlawful
abortions  per year);  J. VAN  DER TAK,  ABORTION,  FERTILITY,  AND  CHANGING  LEGISLATION:  AN
INTERNATIONAL  REVIEW  72-73  (1974)  (referring  to  "the  wide  acceptance  of a  round  figure  of  1
million induced  abortions  per year  (of which only an  estimated  8,000  were  legal),  corresponding  to
...  an abortion ratio of almost  30 per 100 live births"); Whittemore,  The Availability of Non.Hospital
Abortions, in  1 ABORTION  IN A CHANGING  WORLD  217 (R. Hall  ed.  1970)  ("the  oft-quoted figure of
one  million  criminal  abortions  in  the  United  States  is  a  fairly  reasonable  estimate");  see  also  H.
RODMAN,  B.  SARVIS,  & J. BONAR,  THE  ABORTION  QUESTION  23  (1987)  (estimate  of 1 million
illegal  abortions  per year prior to Roe); Fox, Abortion Related Deaths, in 98  AM.  J.  OBSTETRICS  &
GYNECOLOGY  645,  645-46  (1967)  (estimating that between  35,000  and  100,000 women annually  had
unlawful  abortions in  California  alone during this  period).  Police  reports  reveal  that in  1960, illegal
abortion  was  the third  largest  illegal  enterprise in  the United  States,  after  gambling  and  narcotics.
See E.  SCHUR,  CRIMES  WITHOUT VICTIMS,  DEVIANT  BEHAVIOR  AND  PUBLIC  POLICY  25  (1965).
But see N.  LEE, THE SEARCH  FOR AN  ABORTIONIST  5-15 (1969)  (describing  the difficulty of finding
accurate  data  on  the numbers  of illegal  abortions  because  they  are  carried  out  in  a  decentralized
way).

52.  See J. MANSBRIDGE,  WHY  WE LOST  THE ERA  122-28  (1986)  (documenting  some of these

propositions).

53.  See  Morgan,  supra note  50,  at  1726.

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 766 1991

1991]

THREE  CIVIL  RIGHTS FALLACIES

all  except  to  broaden  it.  At  least in  part  because  of its judicial  source,
Roe  has  no  such status.

We have seen  some evidence  for all  these  propositions in  the recent
past,  with  the  extraordinary  public  reaction  to  the  Supreme  Court's
Webster decision. 4  The  Court's partial retreat  from Roe  may  well have
galvanized  the  women's  movement  in  a  way  that  will  have  more
favorable  and  fundamental  long-term  consequences  for  sexual  equality
than  anything that could  have  come  from  the Court.  This is  not to  say
that Roe was necessarily wrong, either as a matter of constitutional  inter-
pretation  or as  a matter  of principle.  But its  effectiveness  has  been  lim-
ited, largely because of its judicial source.  The civil rights movement  has
been  similarly  spurred by  recent  Supreme  Court  decisions,  which  have
led in turn to  an aggressive  civil rights bill supported in large measure by
a Republican  President."5

More  generally,  it is  not  clear  that the United  States has  developed
significantly  different  antidiscrimination  principles  from  those  in  other
liberal  democracies  that  lack  judicial  review  (most  notably  France,
England,  and until recently,  Canada)  or that have  such review  but have
quite  different  constitutions  (most  notably,  Germany).  Of course, judi-
cial  review  has  in  some  settings  accomplished  considerable  good  and
even  introduced  important  changes  into  American  society.  But the evi-
dence  suggests that judges  are less  effective  than the elected  branches  of
the government  in  attempting  to  reform  systems  of discrimination.

B.  Democracy, Citizenship, Compromise, and Legitimacy

For  achieving  sensible  and  effective  reform,  political  channels  are
often far better than the courts.  The resort to politics can produce a kind
of citizen mobilization  that is  a public  and  private  good,  and  can incul-
cate  political  commitments,  broader  understanding,  feelings  of  citizen-
ship,  and  dedication  to  the  community.  All  these  may  in  turn  spur
deeper and wiser social  change in the area  of civil rights than reliance  on
the judiciary  would  provide.  Martin  Luther  King,  Jr.,  may  well  have
been  a  more  important  catalyst  for  constitutional  change  than  any  or

54.  Webster  v.  Reproductive Health  Servs.,  492  U.S.  490  (1989).
55.  The  Civil  Rights  Act  of  1990  was  introduced 

in  the  U.S.  Senate  and  House  of
Representatives  in  February  1990.  S.  2104,  101st Cong.,  2d Sess.,  136  CONG.  REC.  S1018-21  (daily
ed.  Feb. 7,  1990);  H.R. 4000,  101st Cong.,  2d Sess.,  136 CONG.  REc.  H364  (daily ed.  Feb. 7,  1990).
President  Bush did veto the Civil Rights Restoration Act, but his  disagreement actually focused only
on one part of the Act, not  exactly a trivial provision,  but one that should be seen  as a  mere piece in
an  extremely broad  and far-ranging measure.  President  Bush approved  of almost  all other aspects of
that measure.  See  President's Veto of S.  2104-Civil  Rights Act of 1990,  1990 U.S. CODE  CONG.  &
ADMIN.  NEWS  D36.  The  fight  over  the  Act  is  not  yet  over;  Congress  reintroduced  the Act  in
January  1991.  H.R.  1, 102d  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  137  CONG.  REC.  H53  (daily  ed. Jan.  3,  1991).

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 767 1991

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  79:751

even  all  of the Warren  Court's race  decisions.5 6

It is often thought that the very  fact that courts are unrepresentative
is  one  of their strengths;  they serve  as  an  available  alternative  to  demo-
cratic  channels.  But  reliance  on  the  courts  has  large  and  hidden  disad-
vantages.  It may  divert  energy  and  resources  from  political  processes,
and the substitution  effect  imposes large  costs on  these processes.  And if
questions  of  morality  -tend to  become  questions  of  constitutional  law,
their resolution  before  nine judges  can  harm  the practice  of citizenship.
As  noted,  some  of  this  effect  is  already  visible  in  the  abortion  contro-
versy.  The  same  may  also be  true for racial  discrimination,  though  the
evidence  is  more ambiguous  here.

This  is  not to  deny  that judicial  review  can  make  up  for  systemic
inequalities  in  majoritarian  processes  and  impose  the kind  of principled
deliberation  that comes  to  such processes  only with  difficulty.  But  reli-
ance on an aggressive  Court is, from  the standpoint  of civil rights  policy,
the furthest thing from  an unambiguous  good;  and  this is  so  even  if the
Court's  goals  are  sound.

C.  The Narrowing Focus of Adjudication

Despite innovative  theories and practices,5 7 adjudication  remains an
extremely  poor  system  for  achieving  social  reform.  Courts  are  rarely
expert in the area before them.  Moreover,  the focus  on the litigated case
hampers  judges'  efforts  to  understand  the  complex  systemic  effects  of
legal  intervention.  A decision  to  require  expenditures  on  school  busing
might,  for  example,  divert  resources  from  an  area  with  an  equal  or
greater  claim  to  the public  fisc.

More  fundamentally,  legal  thinking  and  legal  procedures  are  most
suited  to  ideas  growing  out  of  the  tradition  of  compensatory  justice,
which  is  poorly  adapted  to  the  achievement  of  serious  social  reform.
Adjudication  is ill-suited  to undertaking  the necessary  changes.  Many  of
the most  important problems  in  current  civil  rights  policy  are  systemic
and complex.  The  lack of adequate  schools, job  training,  or jobs  creates
a  cycle  of poverty,  vulnerability  to  drugs  and  to  crime,  teenage  preg-
nancy,  and  single-parent  households."  Courts  simply  lack  the tools  to
respond  to  these  problems.  Of  course,  they  might  make  things  better

56.  The  common  view  that  the  Court's  decisions  helped  to  mobilize  political  actors  and
protest,  or paved  the way  for  King,  has  surprisingly  little  empirical  support.  See  G. ROSENBERG,
supra note 44,  at  112-13.

57.  R.  COVER,  0. Fiss & J. RESNIK,  PROCEDURE  (1988),  can  be understood  as an  attempt to
revise the subject of civil procedure through a conception  that takes social reform  as a central  project
of the judiciary.  It  collects  a  wide  range  of theories  and  practices  directed  to that end.
58.  See  generally  W.  WILSON,  THE  TRULY  DISADVANTAGED  21-46  (1987) 

(analyzing
statistics  about  violent  crimes,  family  incomes,  employment,  and  out-of-wedlock  births  that
contribute  to  the problems  faced  by  inner-city  racial  minorities).

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 768 1991

1991]

THREE  CIVIL  RIGHTS FALLACIES

rather  than worse.  But the legislative  and executive  branches  must pro-
vide  the principal  initiative  for  the necessary  programs.

These  criticisms  of the judiciary  are  hardly  novel.  Though  voiced
most recently  by conservatives  during and after the period of the Warren
Court, critics voiced analogous  complaints  during  the New  Deal period,
when  it  would  have  seemed  extremely  peculiar  to  suggest  that  courts
should  shape  social  reform  for  the  disadvantaged.  Indeed,  the  rise  of
modem  regulatory  agencies  was  largely  a product  of  a belief  that  the
judiciary  lacked  the will,  the means,  and the democratic  pedigree  to cre-
ate social reform on  its own.5 9  With respect to  civil rights, we should  see
a  similar  constellation  of ideas in  the period  we  are now  entering.

IV
NEW  FOUNDATIONS

Thus  far,  the  discussion  has  been  largely  negative.  I  have  argued
that  three  of  the  major  claims  of  the  civil  rights  movement,  from  the
1950s  to  the present,  are  at best incomplete.  Frequently,  discrimination
is not a reflection of irrationality  or devaluation  in the ordinary  sense.  It
is  instead rational  economic  behavior  in light of the desires  of third par-
ties,  statistical discrimination,  or the effects  of past and existing practices
on  human  capital  and  existing  preferences.  Moreover,  compensatory
principles  are poorly  adapted  to the civil rights  setting, since they require
courts  and other public  officials to  answer impossible questions.  Finally,
reliance  on the judiciary  carries with it a host of problems.  Among  other
things,  the courts  are  ineffective  at achieving  large-scale  social  reform.

The three  problems are  closely  linked.  Judicial  institutions  are well
matched  to the achievement  of compensatory justice, and legal remedies
are  especially  suitable  if discrimination  is  a product  of individual  irra-
tionality  or prejudice.  An understanding  that discrimination  is  economi-
cally rational,  or not  readily captured in  compensatory  terms, would  call
for large  institutional and substantive  changes  in existing civil  rights law.
In particular,  it would  emphasize  the systemic  or  structural  character  of
race  and  sex  discrimination  and  the  need  for institutions  to  undertake
systemic  or structural  reform.  Our  current  understandings  of the prob-
lem  are  extremely  ill-adapted  to  this project.

I have not yet proposed  alternative understandings  of the problem  of
discrimination,  understandings  that might  lead  to  different  remedies  or
institutional  arrangements.  Indeed,  one  of  the  largest  gaps  in  present

59.  See  Sunstein,  Constitutionalism After the New Deal, 101  HARV.  L. REv. 421,  424-25  (1987)
(New Deal reformers  sought to avoid  the checks and balances  that limited the powers of each branch
of government);  id. at 437 (Progressives  saw judiciary as antidemocratic  and aligned with interests  of
powerful);  id.  at  443  (New  Deal  reformers  preferred  agencies  over  courts  in  part because  agencies
could  act  more  swiftly).

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 769 1991

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  79:751

civil rights  theory  consists  of the absence  of a full-fledged  explanation  of
just  how  to  characterize  a  claim  of  discrimination  and  why  we  should
eliminate it.  In  this highly  tentative  Section,  I will say  something about
these  inquiries.

Provisionally,  we  might  define  discrimination  to  include  any  deci-
sion  to  treat  an  otherwise  similarly  qualified  black  person,  woman,  or
handicapped  person  less  favorably  than  a  white,  able-bodied  male,
whether  the reason  for the decision  lies in  malice,  taste,  selective  empa-
thy  or indifference,  economic  self-interest,  or rational  stereotyping.  This
understanding  of discrimination  covers  not merely  covert unequal  treat-
ment  but  also  facially  neutral  requirements  that  would  not  have  been
adopted  if the group membership  of the two parties  had been reversed.60
It  does  not  cover  measures  merely  having  discriminatory  effects  unless
those  effects  are, in the sense  I have just indicated,  tied up with  racial  or
sexual  bias.

It follows  that one who claims  discrimination  does not  seek the pre-
vention  of certain  irrational  acts,  or of "prejudice,"  but  asks instead  for
the elimination,  in  places  large and  small,  of something  like  a  caste  sys-
tem.  Indeed,  a  large  mistake  of civil  rights  policy  has  been  to  treat  the
issue as one  of discrimination  at all, since the term  tends to connote irra-
tional  differentiation-an  unacceptable  practice  to  be  sure,  but  not  an
appropriate  description  of  the  problem  at  hand,  which  is  second-class
citizenship.  The  concept of second-class  citizenship,  or  caste, is  hard  to
define,  and I will have to  be somewhat  vague  about it.  I do  not mean  to
suggest  that the caste-like  features  of current  practices  are  the same-in
nature  or extent-as  those features  of genuine  caste  societies.  I  do mean
that the similarities  are  what  should  make  current practices  a  reason  for
collective  concern.

The  motivating  idea  behind  an  anti-caste  principle  is  Rawlsian  in
character:  Without very  good reason,  legal  and  social  structures  should
not turn differences  that are irrelevant  from the moral point  of view  into
social  disadvantages.6 1  They  certainly should not be permitted  to do so if
the disadvantage  is  systemic.  A systemic  disadvantage  is  one  that  oper-
ates  along  standard  and predictable  lines,  in  multiple important  spheres
of life,  and  that  applies  in  realms  like  education,  freedom  from  private
and  public  violence,  wealth,  political  representation,  and  political  influ-
ence,  all  of which  go to  basic  participation  as  a  citizen  in  a  democratic
society.62  Of course,  past  discrimination  is  a  morally  irrelevant  factor,

60.  See Strauss, supra note  3,  at 956-57  (suggesting  such  a  "reversing  the groups"  test as  the

standard  for  discriminatory  intent).

61.  See  J. RAWLS,  supra note  31,  at 59,  100-04.
62.  See  C.  MACKINNON,  FEMINISM  UNMODIFIED  30-31 

(discussing  systemic
disadvantages  suffered  by  women);  J.  RAWLs,  supra note  31,  at  102  (discussing  need  to  justify

(1987) 

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 770 1991

1991]

THREE  CIVIL  RIGHTS FALLACIES

but it  is one of a large  set of such factors that play  a role in the distribu-
tion  of social  benefits  and  burdens.

In the areas of race and sex  discrimination,  and of disability as  well,
the problem  is  precisely  this  sort of systemic  disadvantage.  When  com-
bined with social  practices,  difference  has the effect of systematically  sub-
ordinating  the  relevant  group  and  of doing  so  in  multiple  spheres  and
along  multiple  indices  of  social  welfare:  poverty,  education,  political
power,  employment,  susceptibility  to  violence  and  crime,  and  so  forth.
That is the caste system to which the legal system should  respond.  As we
have  seen,  among  the  many  problems  created  by  such  a  system  are
adverse  effects  on human  capital  and on  preference  formation,  and  gen-
eral  demoralization  of group  members.6 3

Differences  are  usually  invoked  as  the  justification  for  disadvan-
tage-for example,  as in the claim that blacks,  in important respects  and
as a group,  are different  from whites, or women are different  from men-
and  therefore  properly  receive  different  treatment.  But  different  treat-
ment need  not follow  from the fact  of difference.  For purposes of policy
and  law,  the question  is  not whether  there  is  a  difference-often  there
certainly  is-but whether the legal  and social  treatment of that difference
can be adequately justified.  By itself, the fact of difference  does  not sup-
ply an  adequate justification.

Differences  that  imply  inequality  are  the  result  of  legal  and  social
practices,  not  of  nature,  and  not  of  the  differences  themselves.  The
problems  faced  by  the  handicapped,  for  example,  are  a function  not of
handicap  alone  (a  most  ambiguous  idea)  but  instead  of the  interaction
between  physical  or  mental  capacities  on  the  one  hand  and  a  set  of
human obstacles  made  by  and for  the able-bodied  on the other.  (In the
pervasive  use of white and male norms, there  are analogies in the areas of
race and gender.)  It is those obstacles, rather than the capacities  taken as
brute  facts,  that create  a large  part  of what it means  to  be handicapped
(and unequal).  For  these  purposes,  it  is  not  decisive  whether  a present
disadvantage  can be tightly  connected  to  an intentionally  discriminatory
act  by  a  public  "tortfeasor,"  which  antidiscrimination  efforts  would
require.

A  few  disclaimers  are  necessary  here.  The  anti-caste  principle,  if
taken  seriously,  would  call  for  significant  restructuring  of social  prac-
tices.  For reasons  suggested  above, the principle  is better elaborated  and

institutions  that make  natural differences  have social  consequences).  An anti-caste  principle  is  not
"egalitarian."  Egalitarianism  calls  for equality  in the resources  of different  citizens;  this  principle  is
indeed  foreign  to  American  public  law.  But  the desire  to  eliminate  caste  systems  has  played  an
important  role  in American  constitutionalism  from  its  inception.  See  L.  HARTZ,  THE  LIBERAL
TRADITION  IN AMERICA  1-32  (1965).

63.  These points are stressed in Strauss, Racial Discrimination in Employment, 79 GEo.  L.J. -

(forthcoming  1991).

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 771 1991

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  79:751

implemented  by legislative and executive bodies,  with their superior  dem-
ocratic pedigree  and factfinding  capacities,  than by  constitutional  courts.
Moreover,  it is important to acknowledge that for good Rawlsian reasons
a  wide range  of differences  are  morally  arbitrary,  and in  a market  econ-
omy those differences  are quite frequently and for fully legitimate  reasons
translated  into  social  disadvantages.  Consider,  in  this  regard,  educa-
tional  background,  intelligence,  strength,  existing  supply  and  demand
curves for various products and services,  height, perhaps  even willingness
to  work hard.

An anti-caste principle that would attempt, through law,  to counter-
act all  these  factors would  be  difficult  indeed  to  sustain.  In  general,  the
recognition  of such factors is  inseparable  from  the operation  of a  market
economy,  and  a  market  economy  is  an  important  source  of  freedom,
prosperity, and  respect for different  conceptions  of the good.  The use of
such factors  is  at least sometimes  in the interest of the less  or  even  least
well off, and  in that case,  an anti-caste  principle  that would bar  their use
seems perverse.  Moreover,  an anti-caste principle that would override  all
morally irrelevant  factors  would  impose  extraordinary  costs  on  society,
both  in  its  implementation  and  administration  and  in  its  infliction  of
losses on  a wide  range  of people.  Those  costs  are  high  enough  to  make
such  a global  principle  immensely  unappealing.

The  principle  therefore  has  greatest  weight  in  discrete  contexts,
most notably  those  concerning  race,  sex,  and  disability,  where  gains  by
the  least  well  off  from  current  practice  are  hard  to  imagine,  where
second-class  citizenship  is  systemic  and  occurs  in  multiple  spheres  and
along easily identifiable  and sharply defined  lines,  where the consequence
of current practice  is to create  continuous developmental  harms  to mem-
bers  of  well-defined  groups,  where  there  will  be  no  global  threat  to  a
market  economy,  and where  the costs  of implementation  are not  terribly
high.

If an  anti-caste  principle  is  accepted,  the most  general  question  is
whether members  of the disadvantaged  group,  or people  who  might find
themselves  in  that category,  could be persuaded  that there  are good  rea-
sons  for the  practice  under  attack."  To  pose  that  question  is  to  place

64.  An idea of this sort is at work in the original position  set out in J. RAwLs,  supra note 31,  at
103;  see also  City  of Cleburne  v.  Cleburne  Living  Cent.,  473  U.S.  432,  455  (1985)  (Stevens,  J.,
concurring) ("I cannot believe that a rational  member of this  disadvantaged  class  could ever approve
of the discriminatory  application  of the city's ordinance  in this case.");  Okin,  Reason and Feeling in
Thinking About Justice, in  FEMINISM  AND  POLrrICAL  THEORY  15,  27-30  (C. Sunstein  ed.  1990)
(discussing  original position  as  requiring people  to  "think  from the point of view  of everyone").  An
excellent  example  of anti-caste  legislation  is the Violence Against  Women  Act, see  136 CONG.  REC.
S8263  (daily  ed. June  19,  1990),  which  contains  various  measures  designed  to  reduce  and  remedy
gender-related  violence.  Such  a measure  cannot easily  be understood  in  compensatory  terms;  and  it
could  not be  initiated  by  courts.

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 772 1991

1991]

THREE CIVIL  RIGHTS FALLACIES

into  doubt  unconscious  discrimination  as  well as  selective  empathy  and
indifference on the part of those who created the practice;  and the answer
will frequently  be negative.  Of course, there  will be  severe  difficulties  in
administering  a  system built  on a  question  of that  sort.  But  this is  the
best  inquiry in  this  context.

I do  not  suggest  that  a  principle  of this  sort  leads  to  a  particular
specification  of substantive  rights  or institutional  arrangements.  It needs
to  be  supplemented  with  a  range  of  other  considerations  in  order  to
become  a plausible  basis  for  civil  rights  policy.  It does,  however,  have
several  implications  by  itself.  It  suggests  that  compensation  for  past
wrongs is  not  the guiding  principle  for civil  rights  policy;  compensation
and  restoration  of the status  quo  are  not  the basic  issues  at all.  It sug-
gests that often,  discrimination  fueled  by factors  other  than prejudice or
irrationality  is also the target  of civil rights  policy, because  of the conse-
quences  of those forms  of discrimination  for the relevant  group.  It sug-
gests  that a system  with sufficient  opportunities  for education,  training,
or  employment,  without  race-  and  sex-related  violence,  and  without
incentives  for teenage  childbearing  or participation  in crime,  is  a princi-
pal  goal  of civil  rights  policy.  It suggests,  finally,  that  the  elaboration
and  implementation  of  the  relevant  policies  should  be  undertaken,  at
least in  the first instance,  by  legislative  and executive  bodies  and not by
the courts.  In all these  respects,  this principle represents  a renovation  of
all  that has  guided  civil  rights  policy over  the last generation.

CONCLUSION

I have suggested  that three  of the principal  claims that underlie civil
rights law  and policy  are in important respects  fallacies.  Discrimination
is  not  always  the  product  of  prejudice  or  irrationality.  Moreover,  to
understand the antidiscrimination  principle in  compensatory terms  leads
to  questions  that  are  unanswerable.  Finally,  reliance  on  constitutional
adjudication  is  a  large  mistake  for civil  rights  law.

The  three  fallacies  fit  well  together.  Each  of  them  fortifies  the
others.  The compensatory  principle  is  well  adapted  to  reliance  on judi-
cial institutions.  The notion that discrimination is  a product of prejudice
or  irrationality  also  helps  to  promote  reliance  on  the  courts,  enabling
them  to  build  antidiscrimination  principles  on  the  foundations  of  tort
law.  But  if discrimination  cannot  be well understood  in  these terms,  all
the fallacies  must yield.  They  provide  a poor  foundation  for civil rights
law  and  practice  in the  coming generation.

I have also  suggested,  though  more  tentatively,  that civil  rights  law
should  be informed  by  a principle that  forbids morally  irrelevant differ-
ences  from  being  turned,  without  very  good  reason,  into  a  systemic
the
source  of  social  or 

legal  disadvantages.  Thus  understood, 

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 773 1991

774 

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

antidiscrimination  principle becomes  an  anti-caste principle.  To be sure,
elaboration  of that principle  is  a large  task, one that  leaves  open a  wide
range of questions  concerning  both  substance and  institutional  arrange-
ments.  But if I am correct,  such a principle  provides  a better foundation
for civil  rights policy  than the three  fallacies that have burdened  the law
for so  long.

HeinOnline  -- 79 Cal. L. Rev. 774 1991

