 Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics On Property and Constitutionalism Cass R. Sunstein Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "On Property and Constitutionalism" (Coase-Sandor Institute for Law & Economics Working Paper No. 3, 1991). Cuss R. Sunstein Cass R Sunstein* I t is generally understood that the recent revolutions in Eastern Europe are producing a large-scale “transition.” It is important, however, to distinguish among the quite different features of the current changes. The new reform movements actually involve three distinctive transitions. The first is a transition from a command economy to markets. The second is a transition from a system of one-party domination to democracy. The third is a transition from a system in which government is unconstrained by laws laid down in advance to constitutionalism and the rule of law. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, The Law School and Department of Political Science, The University of Chicago; Co-Director, Center on Constitutionalism in Eastern Europe, The University of Chicago. I am grateful to Richard A. Epstein and Stephen Holmes for helpful comments on a previous draft. Different versions of some of this essay will appear in Constitutional Political Economy and in the Cardozo Law Review. lated. The right kind of constitution could play a crucial role in fueling economic development and democratic reform; indeed, it may be indispensable to them. The wrong kind of constitution-or no constitution at all-could be devastating to both of these. many of the fundamental issues now facing Eastern Europe. There is a serious current danger that the moment of constitutional opportunity will be irretrievably lost; and if it is, both prosperity and democratization will be at risk This essay comes in three parts. The first briefly discusses the relationships among property, democracy, and economic growth. My principal goal is to show that property should be seen as a political right, one that reduces dependence on the state and creates the kind of security that is indispensable to genuine citizenship in a democracy. Property rights are not in conflict with democracy; in a variety of ways they help provide the preconditions for self-governance. The creation of private property also serves a number of functions indispensable to economic development. We should begin by distinguishing between two sorts of constitutions. Westerners often think that Soviet-style constitutions are not constitutions at all. In fact, however, they embody a distinct conception of constitutionalism. Crucially, such constitutions do not distinguish between public and private spheres. They apply their prohibitions and permissions to everyone. The individual rights protected by Western constitutions are not, of course, limited to private property and economic liberties. They include other political and civil liberties and rights as well, and these are indispensable safeguards. My principal goal here, however, is to understand how constitutionalism might work simultaneously to promote the transition to economic markets and the transition to democracy, and for this reason it will be valuable to focus on the right to private property. In this section, I briefly outline some of the functions served by that right. The basic story should be familiar. I recount it here because it seems especially important to keep it in mind while exploring the recent wave of constitution-making in Eastern Europe. It is generally agreed that a system of private property helps to bring about economic prosperity. There are at least four central reasons.’ First, the institution of private property2 creates and takes advantage of the powerful human inclination to bring goods and services to oneself and to people one cares about.3  This claim does not depend on a proposition about human selfishness. The desire to acquire goods might be deeply altruistic, in the sense that people may want to give their goods to others, including the most vulnerable. l I draw  in this section  on J. Waldron,  The Right to Private  Property sloth and waste.4 These points, too, do not depend. on especially cynical accounts of human nature. It is necessary only to glance briefly at history, past and present, and to acknowledge that human beings will frequently attempt to accumulate resources. Social institutions appealing to this inclination will increase social productivity. Second, a system of private property performs a crucial coordinating function. It ensures that the multiple desires of hundreds, thousands, or millions of consumers will be reflected in market outcomes. In this way it protects against the perverse forms of scarcity produced by a command economy. Public officials cannot possibly know what and how much people will want in advance. Their decisions will thus create both too much and too little production. By contrast, a system of ownership rights signals people to devote their productive activity to places in which that activity is most valued. A command-and-control economy is far inferior in this regard. Every citizen of Eastern Europe has seen multiple illustrations. The point can be made more vivid by a glance at the problem of environmental deterioration. In recent years, it has been increasingly recognized that that problem-especially severe in Eastern Europe 4 This is a claim  about  the likely facts, not a necessary truth.  Powerful  social norms may operate as a surrogate  for private property,  helping  to overcome some of the problems  discussed  in text. Cf. Ullmann-Margalit,  The Emcrgence of Norms (1978). but of critical importance in the West as well-is in significant part7 a product of the collective action problem produced by the fact that the air and water are public goods, that is, collectively rather than privately owned.* The consequence is that the environmental costs of polluting activity are widely diffused among the public and not “internalized,” or taken into account, by polluters. Because they do not bear the direct cost, polluters lack an incentive to limit their polluting activity. This system creates a built-in tendency toward excessive pollution levels. B. Property and Democracy The connection between property and prosperity may be reasonably well understood; but the right to private property has not always been considered a precondition for democracy. On the contrary, private property has frequently been thought an obstacle to democracy, and for this reason highly objectionable, or perhaps at best an institution necessary for economic growth and therefore to be reluctantly accepted, despite its corrosive effects on the democratic process.10 There is indeed some tension between a system of property rights and a system of democracy. If property rights are secure, there is a firm limit on what the democratic process is entitled to do. In this sense the tension is a real and enduring one. Notably, markets impose conspicuous short-term cost+--unemployment  and inflation-and in the emerging Eastern European democracies, there will probably be. a continuous temptation to slow down the transition to markets or perhaps to reject the transition altogether. For this reason the simultaneous transition to democracy and to economic markets-without the protection of constitutionalism-will be exceptionally difficult. lo I do not deal here with the relationship  between  individual  development and property rights,  though  I believe that property  rights  do in fact promote that goal. For a good discussion, see J. Waldron,  supra note 1, ch. 10. pendence from government power. This view was often associated with exclusionary practices- a s , for example, in the notion that people without property should not be allowed to vote. One may deplore the exclusion without rejecting the proposition that a democratic state should attempt to give citizens a sense of independence from the state itself. In fact the republican tradition, read in light of modern understandings, argues not for an abolition of private property but instead for a system attempting to ensure that everyone has some. Even more fundamentally: The division between private and public spheres is hard to defend or even to understand if it is treated as a metaphysical one, or as a claim that public power is not behind the private sphere. But if we understand the division as a political one, to be justified in public terms, it becomes both intelligible and indispensable. The (legal) creation of a private sphere, undertaken by the state, is a key part of the process of creating civil society and market ordering. If these can be justified, the private sphere itself becomes unproblematic, at least in the abstract. Of course its particular l2 F. Hayek,  The Road to Serfdom (1948). Initially Hayek’s  discussion  of this point seems exceptionally  confusing.  He identifies  markets  and property on the one hand with the rule of law on the other; but the rule of law seems  to imply,  not necessarily markets  and property,  but instead  firm constraints on official  discretion and institutions  to enforce  those constraints. Such constraints  can be created with or without  property,  that is, a command  economy can set down  clear rules in advance. (Consider some of the American law of environmental  protection,  which relies on command-and-control  methods, but which  usually does not delegate open-ended  authority to bureaucrats.)  But the identification seems more plausible in light of the considerations  discussed in the text. content can always be criticized, and is frequently subject to democratic redefinition. There is a more particular sense in which private property helps to promote resistance to government. If government owns the presses, or the means of distribution, freedom of speech cannot easily l4 See  the classic discussion in L. Fuller, The Morality of Law (1964). l5 The demoralizing  effects of such regimes are well known to citizens of Communist  nations,  and indeed  to visitors-as well. Continuous  dependence  on government officials has a range of predictable  corrosive  effects on both character and spirit-a worthy subject for inquiry  by a modern Tocqueville. exist. Indeed, if government owns the paper itself, or allocates it in its discretion, there will be serious problems for the system of free expression. More generally, private ownership facilitates the kind of security on which diversity and pluralism depend. Political censorship may be altogether unnecessary if it is understood that current holdings are vulnerable to state control. In addition, government control of property-through constant readjustment of ownership rights-simply reintroduces the collective action problem originally solved by property rights. Public choice theory can be seen in part as a generalization of this simple insight. I7 For this reason the embrace of “context-smashing”  in R. Unger,  Politics able as well. Time and again it has been shown that economic growth does more than welfare and employment programs to benefit the disadvantaged. Of course growth does not do everything, and it must be supplemented. The second point, then, is that welfare and employment programs are a necessary part of any system of property rights. Such rights are best defended in self-consciously instrumental terms, because of the good things that they do. When they do not accomplish good, or enough good, they must be accompanied by other social strategies. I have said that the task of economic development cannot be rigidly separated from the task of constitution making. Without constitutional protection of property rights, there will be continuous pressure to adjust distributions of property on an ad hoc basis. When a group of people have acquired a good deal of money, it will be tempting to tax them heavily. When another group has verged on bankruptcy, there will be a temptation to subsidize them. After the fact, these steps may seem fair or even necessary; but if everyone knows that government might respond in this way, there will be a powerful deterrent to the creation of a market economy. No citizen- a n d no international or domestic investor-can be secure of his immunity from the state. of the problems, described in Part I, to which a system of property rights is supposed to respond. Above all, it will create individual vulnerability to government and at the same time produce both too little and too much use of existing resources. It will deter economic development and impair the movement toward democracy as well. I have claimed that a constitution can accomplish a great deal in easing the transition to economic markets and private property. In order for it to do so, constitutional protections must be judicially enforceable-that is, a court must be available to vindicate any rights that the constitution creates. Ordinary citizens must have a general right to raise constitutional objections before an independent tribunal authorized to provide redress. Without judicial review, constitutions tend to be worth little more than the paper on which they are written. They become simple words, or public relations documents, rather than instruments that confer genuine rights. While the efficacy of courts in social reform is disputable,20  there can be little doubt that judicially enforceable constitutions can have a significant effect both on real-world results and on legal and social culture in general. 21 To be sure, some nations in the West have prospered with little or nothing in the way of judicial enforcement of constitutions. But these nations were able to benefit from the background of civil society, market economies, and well-defined property rights. For them, constitutional protections were far less important. 2o See G Rosenberg, The Hollow Hope (1991) z Mucd  of the effect is deterrence  of harmful governmental  action  before the fact, rather than governmental  losses  in actual litigated cases. The fear of losing  in court has often proved a substantial  deterrent to government. ing to recognize, create, and protect them. But this point is a semantic one; the defense of the traditional rights need not depend on the false claim that they are negative. 1. Aspirations. The first such strategy is to use a constitution as a place for setting out very general social aspirations, or for imposing positive duties on government (such as the provision of a social welfare state including such guarantees as equitable remuneration, leisure time, social security, and occupational safety and health). There are three reasons why this would be a dangerous strategy, at least under current conditions. 22 These  draft Constitutions  are on file with the Center  on Constitutionalism  in Eastern  Europe,  University of Chicago Law School, and can be obtained  from that Center. forceable rights will in turn tend to destroy the negative rightsfreedom of speech, freedom of religion, and so forth-that might otherwise be genuine ones. If some rights are shown to be unenforceable, it is likely that other rights will be unenforceable as well. To say this is emphatically not to say that in the post-reform era, nations in Eastern Europe should eliminate social welfare protections and leave their citizens to the vicissitudes of the market. Such a route would be a recipe for disaster, since it would allow for mass suffering of the kind that is unacceptable in any nation. But these protections should be created at the level of ordinary legislation, and subject to democratic discussion, rather than placed in the foundational document. 23 See J Mill Considerations  on Representative  Government,  ed. C.V. Shields  (1881: Niw York: Liberal.  Arts Press, 1958). To say this is not of course  to say that all of those characteristics are always good ones. state. Moreover, countries in Eastern Europe are attempting to eliminate the effects of the notion that the state imposes “duties” on citizens, rather than giving them rights. It may be that in the West, more emphasis on duties would be a good idea. Perhaps the Western emphasis on “rights” has harmed social deliberation, especially in the United States, where duties should be taken more seriously.24 But this is the direction from which Eastern Europe ought to be emerging. tural shift, creating a belief in private property and a respect for markets, is indispensable. It is therefore surprising but true that the case for a strongly negative constitution, protecting market arrangements, is under current conditions powerful in Eastern Europe, even if it is ambiguous in the West. In the next few years, it will be critical to develop a set of potential provisions for inclusion as an “economic bill of rights” section of the proposed constitution. Indeed, this section could serve as one of the many possible new contributions of current constitution-makers to the general theory and practice of constitutionalism. and publicly available rather than secret; and it must operate in the world as it does on the books.25 A guarantee of the rule of law is both an economic and a democratic right. It creates a wall of protection around citizens, giving a guarantee of immunity and ensuring them that they may engage in productive activity without fear of the state. And by creating this wall of protection, the guarantee creates the kind of security and independence that are prerequisites for the role of a citizen in a democracy. 4. Protection of contracts. (a) In generai  Many constitutions protect contractual liberty from governmental invasion-as in, for example, a provision to the effect that government shall not pass any “Law impairing the Obligations of Contracts.” 2 7 Constitutional protection of contracts ensures citizens that when they engage in economic arrangements, they can do so free from the spectre of governmental interventions. Without this right, there will be a serious deterrent to productive activity. 27 Art. 1, section 9, section 10. 28 Sometimes  people think that the appropriate  remedy  for a harsh bargain is to disallow the bargain.  But it is not at all clear that this remedy helps the weaker  side. Usually  someone  in bad circumstances  will be presented  with a range of unfavorable  alternatives, and will choose the least unfavorable  of them. To disallow this option does nothing  to improve  the bad circumstances,  and simply forces the person  to choose the second-least  unfavorable  option. It is crucially important  for the emerging  democracies to understand this point. Efforts to close off market options are tempting when those options  seem few and produce harsh results; but the closing off is an utterly ineffectual  remedy. for interfering with free markets. There is for this reason a plausible argument that Eastern European countries should commit themselves, in advance, to a decision not to take this course, which is often appealing in the short-run but extremely destructive for the future. protecting occupational liberty. that can, ensure that doctors actually know something about medicine, or that lawyers are trained in the law. If this is so, it will be necessary to distinguish between legitimate and illegitimate interferences with free entry into occupations, rather than simply to say that the government has no role to play in this regard. This issue is probably best resolved through judicial interpretation, not in the text itself. idea that “we were not made for one another’s uses.“z9 6. Prohibition on government monopoZies (de jwe). If the goal is to create a market economy, the Constitution should say that government may not give itself a legal monopoly over any sector of the economy. A right of exclusive management of agriculture or telecommunications is a sure way of stifling competition and of impairing economic productivity. Indeed, such a right will reintroduce all of the problems discussed in Part I of this essay. The government should be banned from embarking on this course. facto monopolies are likely, and it is hard to see how a constitutional court can prevent them. Here we encounter one of the limits of constitutionalism: the narrow remedial power of the judiciary. of course there will be some hard interpretive questions here. To see whether there is discrimination, one will have to explore whether private and public enterprises are similarly situated. This will not always be an easy question to answer. ante harmful to the citizens of a nation. Despite this fact, there is constant pressure for these measures, from the usually narrow groups and interests that would benefit from them. Because tariffs and duties would create aggregate harms but short-term and narrow gains, it might be sensible to enact, in advance, a constitutional prohibition on them. The problem with this strategy is that it is at least reasonable to think that tariffs and duties are necessary under some conditions, and perhaps their availability is an important device for government to have while it is negotiating with other nations. I have not dealt with two problems of special importance to the emerging Eastern European democracies. The first is that the interpretation of constitutional provisions is of critical importance, and interpretation cannot be entirely constrained by those who write the Constitution. I have argued, for example, that a constitution should ensure that private property cannot be taken without just compensation. But a constitution cannot possibly spell out, in advance, what government action must be in order to qualify as a “taking.” Because of the limitations of language, that task must be left to judges dealing with particular cases and particular measures. The same point applies to all provisions now under consideration in Poland and elsewhere. Constitutions set out the broad outlines for decision, but in light of the limitations of words and human foresight, they cannot do much more than that. it will protect those rights once created; but the act of creation will not occur at the constitutional level. The point is simply a factual one, and it has received considerable empirical confirmation. The effect on preferences of the initial allocation of a commodity or an entitlement is commonly described as the “endowment effect.“31 The endowment effect has immense importance. It suggests that any initial allocation of an entitlement-and government cannot refuse to make an initial allocation-may well have effects on preferences. 31 It was first so-called  in Thaler, Toward a Positive Theory  of Consumer they said that they would be willing to pay an average of $247 to prevent the loss-but would demand no less than $1044 to accept it 35 In another study, participants required payments to accept degradation of visibility ranging from 5 to more than 16 times higher than their valuations based on their willingness to pay.36 According to yet another study, the compensation demanded for accepting a new risk of immediate death of .OOl% was one or two orders of magnitude higher than the amount of willingness to pay to eliminate an existing risk of the same size.37 A related survey showed similarly large status quo biases in willingness to pay for changes in risks? A powerful status quo bias appears to affect reactions to risks or losses. 35 J. Hammock  and G. Brown, Waterfowl and Wetlands:  Toward  Bioe reflect an effort to reduce cognitive dissonance: High valuation of what one owns, and low valuation or what one does not, is a means of reducing dissonance, and in some respects it is highly adaptive. Perhaps, too, the initial allocation has an important legitimating effect, suggesting that the entitlement “naturally” belongs where it has been placed, and putting a social burden on even voluntary changes. In some cases the divergence between willingness to pay and willingness to accept is probably a product of the change in social norms brought about by the change in the allocation of the entitlement.40 For present purposes, it is not necessary to explain the mechanism behind endowment effects. It is enough to say that the initial allocation has preference-shaping effects and that when this is so, there is no acontextual “preference” with which to do legal or political work. while holding preferences constant. But these sorts of explanations do not appear sufficient. it does so, the initial allocation will have important consequences for ultimate outcomes. The three transitions now taking place in Eastern Europe should be brought more closely together. Above all, the task of constitution-making can help facilitate the transitions to economic markets and to democratic self-government. To this end, I have outlined some possible constitutional provisions designed to protect the basic institutions of private property, free markets: and civil society. A similar analysis might be applied to provisions not directly concerned with the protection of markets-including rights to as sociational liberty; freedom from discrimination on the basis of sex, race, religion, and ethnicity; and rights of political and religious liberty. Without strong constitutional provisions on behalf of property rights, civil society; and markets, there will probably be a substantial temptation to intrude on all of these institutions, and, by so doing, to recreate the very problems that such institutions are supposed to solve. In Eastern Europe, the task of constitution-making is more difficult, and far more pressing, than it was in the West, in which a well-established backdrop of rights and institutions was already in place. The ironic conclusion is that the case for a firm negative constitution, and for creation and protection of property rights and free markets, is very strong in Eastern Europe; and this is so even if the corresponding case is, in Western countries, somewhat ambiguous. No constitution can make the initial allocations of property rights; this must be left to democratic processes. Moreover, no constitutional text can control the process of interpretation, and thus there is always a risk that written documents will be given a meaning other than that which would promote a nation’s welfare. But large-scale social change is always accompanied by risks, and the ubiquity of risk provides no reason for resignation or discouragement. A constitution offering firm protection to property rights could do a great deal to ease the transition to markets and democracy. 1. William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). Cass R; Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence The Law School The University of Chicago 1111  E. 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637