 Cass R. Sunsteint Our system of government is ineffective, inefficient, and undemocratic. Current institutions are the source of these problems. Without great difficulty, legal reforms could dramatically improve these institutions. * This essay is derived from a lecture Professor Sunstein delivered December 5, 1991, as part of the Donahue Lecture Series. The Donahue Lecture Series is a program instituted by the Suffolk University Law Review to commemorate the Honorable Frank J. Donahue, former faculty member, trustee, and treasurer of Suffolk University. The Lecture Series serves as a tribute to Judge Donahue's accomplishments in encouraging academic excellence at Suffolk University Law School. Each lecture in the series is designed to address contemporary legal issues and expose the Suffolk University community to outstanding authorities in various fields of law. some sections of this essay. President Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal, undertaken in the 1930s, represented a fundamental restructuring of the American legal system. Some people think that it amounted to a kind of constitutional amendment.' We need not go so far in order to recognize its foundational status in modem American government. Institutional changes followed from these ideas. Against the backdrop tional amendment). America). (discussing Roosevelt's reaction to invalidation of National Industrial Recovery Act and support for child labor, minimum wage, maximum hours, and collective bargaining measures). hours of work). How has our system of public law actually performed? Has it promoted economic prosperity and democratic governance? We now have considerable evidence on both scores. And while there have been some significant successes,"l much of the overall story is dismaying. The current system of public law has been extraordinarily inefficient. The annual net cost of regulation has been estimated at between $44 and $200 billion. 4 There is no question that we need not spend this amount for the benefits we actually receive. Nor are inefficiencies limited to the area of economic regulation. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has delayed the entry of beneficial foods and drugs into the market, significantly increasing risks to safety and health.' 9 The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) fuel economy standards appear to have produced uncertain gains in light of the fact that manufacturers were in any case moving to smaller and more efficient cars; but they did lead to significant losses in lives as a result of producing more dangerous, lighter vehicles.2 ° The United States spent no less than $632 billion for pollution control between 1972 and 1985.21 Some studies suggest that alternative strategies could have achieved the same gains at less than one-quarter of the cost. 22 So much for the facts. What is the cause of the current situation? A pervasive source of regulatory inefficiency in the United States is the use of rigid, highly bureaucratized "command and control" regulation, which dictates, at the national level, control strategies for hundreds, thousands, or millions of companies and individuals in an exceptionally diverse nation. Command and control regulation is a dominant part of American government in such areas as environmental protection and occupational safety and health. One of the many problems with BAT strategies is that they ignore the enormous differences among plants and industries and among geographical areas. In view of these differences, it is wildly inefficient to impose nationally uniform technological requirements. It does not seem sensible to impose the same technology on industries in diverse areas-regardless of whether they are polluted or clean, populated or empty, or expensive or cheap to clean up. (1983) (discussing harmful effects of FDA screening). In general, governmental specification of the means of achieving desired ends is a good way of producing inefficiency. Instead of permitting industry and consumers to choose the "means"-and thus to impose a form of market discipline on that question-we often select the means in advance. The governmentally-prescribed means is often the inefficient one. terest group pressures behind Clean Air Act). More generally, studies of the costs and benefits of regulatory programs show a crazy-quilt pattern, including both too much and too little regulation. Consider, for example, expenditures per life saved. 2 ' There is now considerable data on the amount of money spent to save lives in various government programs. Some programs pay for themselves in terms of health and related savings. The lives saved are purely a bonus, in the sense that they come for free. Other programs cost between $100,000 and $300,000 per life saved-surely an amount well worth spending. But still other programs cost $89 million per life saved, $92 million per life saved, even $132 million per life saved. To be sure, some disparities, even significant ones, might well be expected in a democracy.2 8 But it is difficult to believe that these differences reflect anything but interest-group power and irrationality of various sorts. In any case, they are highly inefficient. The New Deal aspired not only to greater efficiency but also to more democracy. The New Dealers hoped for a system in which citizens and representatives, operating through responsive but expert organs, would Democratic failures have often been documented.3 ° The BAT approach, for example, is severely deficient from the standpoint of a wellfunctioning political process. That approach ensures that citizens and representatives will be focussing their attention not on what levels of reduction are appropriate, but instead on the largely incidental and nearly impenetrable question of what technologies are now available.3' Because of its sheer complexity, this issue is not easily subject to democratic resolution. Moreover, the issue is not the relevant one for democratic politics, which is the appropriate degree and nature of environmental protection-an issue to which the BAT question is only indirectly related. In this respect, the BAT strategy is emblematic of a far more general alizing of regulatory policy). 31. See Ackerman & Stewart, Reforming Environmental Law: The Democratic Case for It would be most fortunate if the inefficiencies in current regulation could be remedied through reform strategies that simultaneously promoted democratic government. In this section, I argue that the same reforms that would increase efficiency would indeed promote democracy. I deal with three such reforms: disclosure and education; economic incentives; and decentralization. Many Americans are unaware of the risks that they face in day-to-day life. Often workers do not know about toxic substances in workplaces, or about the risks that they cause. Consumers of ordinary foods are unable to evaluate the dangers posed by fats, calcium, sugar, and salt. People in small communities do not know that toxic waste dumping has occurred; and if they know the facts, they do not know the risks. It would be reasonable to say that in cases of this sort, the interest in 33. See Rose-Ackerman, Progressive Law and Economics-And the New Administrative When information is lacking, there may well be a conventional case of market failure under economic criteria.3 5 To be sure, information-like other goods-is a scarce commodity. Perhaps the market has produced the optimal level of information. The optimal level is not complete information. If so, there is no market failure-even if there might be a problem under noneconomic criteria. But there are several reasons why the market for information may indeed fail. Information asymmetries may produce a "lemons" problem, in which 34. A qualification is necessary here. By offering more information than is efficient, the government may create inefficiency. By providing information, however, the government promotes a certain conception of liberty. sense the market often works as an effective check on dangerous products. Suppose that we wanted to increase the democratic character of contemporary government, by promoting citizen participation in, and control over, governmental processes. A good initial step would be for government to provide enough information so that people can make knowledgeable judgments. mation could help overcome some of the relevant biases. The national government has started a series of steps in the right direction. Mandatory messages about risks from cigarette smoking, first set out in 1965 and modified in 1969 and 1984, are the most familiar example.42 The FDA has long maintained a policy of requiring risk labels for pharmaceutical products. 43 The EPA has done the same for pesticides and asbestos." There are numerous other illustrations. Indeed, the effort to provide information counts as one of the most striking, if incipient, developments in modern regulatory law. Three recent initiatives are especially notable. the OSHA issued a Hazard Communication Standard (HCS), 45 applicable to the manufacturing sector. In 1986, the HCS was made generally applicable. Under the HCS, chemical producers and importers must evaluate the hazards of the chemicals they produce or import; develop technical hazard information for materials safety data sheets, and labels for hazardous substances; and, most important, transmit this information to users of the relevant substances. All employers must adopt a hazard communication program-including individual training-and inform workers of the relevant risks. The FDA has also adopted informational strategies. In its most ambitious set of proposals, the FDA seeks: (a) to compel nutritional labelling on nearly all processed foods, including information relating to cholesterol, saturated fat, calories from fat, and fiber; (b) to require compliance with government specified serving sizes; (c) to compel companies to conform to government definitions of standardized terms, including, "reduced," "fresh," "free," and "low;" and (d) to allow health claims only if These initiatives are simply a beginning. Broader and more ambitious programs, coordinating the general communication of social risks, are very much in order. It has been suggested that government might eventually develop a "national warnings system" containing a systematized terminology for warnings.4 9 Such a system could apply to all contexts and risks, and give a uniform sense of risk levels. The existence of a uniform language would make it possible to assess risks across a wide range of social spheres. By economic incentives, I mean financial penalties imposed on harmproducing behavior or benefits conferred on harm-reducing behavior. Such penalties should supplement and even displace command-and-control regulation. It is inefficient for government to prescribe the means for achieving social objectives. Ordinarily it would be far better, on economic grounds, for government to create incentives to engage in socially desirable conduct, and to permit the market to decide how companies respond to those incentives. An idea of this kind might be made part and parcel of a system of "green taxes." With such a system, we might levy taxes on people who impose externalities on others-users of dirty automobiles, farmers who employ pesticides, coal-fired power plants, gasoline that produces air pollution, products that contribute to destruction of the ozone layer or the greenhouse effect. Tax levies of various sorts are used by many nations already, though they have been slow in coming to the United States. 53 These levies have had, or are projected to have, excellent results. Thus a higher tax on leaded gasoline in Great Britain increased the market share of unleaded gas from four to thirty percent in less than a year.54 It is estimated that a doubling of pesticide prices would cut pesticide use in It is also estimated that a fee of $110 per ton on carbon would half." decrease carbon dioxide emissions by twenty percent by the year 2005.56 An important advantage of such strategies is that they would dramatically increase government revenues. This is an especially worthwhile goal in a period of large deficits. The suggested carbon tax would gener 51. Here I generalize from the helpful discussion in Ackerman & Stewart, supra note 31 (defending incentive systems). Economic incentives could be applied in other areas as well. Workers' compensation plans, for example, operate as a reasonably effective guarantee of workplace safety. According to a recent study, "If the safety incentives of workers' compensation were removed, fatality rates in the United States economy would increase by almost 30 percent. Over 1200 more workers would die from job injuries every year in the absence of the safety incentives provided by workers' compensation." 9 This contrasts with a mere two to four percent reduction in injuries from OSHA, an amount that links up well with the fact that annual workers' compensation premiums are more than 1000 times as large as total annual OSHA penalties.' The tax system could be used to punish employers who provide dangerous workplaces. Thus far we have seen that a shift to economic incentives would be efficient and effective. What consequences would such a shift have for democratic government? The answer is that it would have significant consequences, and that these would be extremely beneficial. 61 The current system puts public attention in the wrong places. Imagine, for example, that Congress and the citizenry-following the contemporary model-are asking the question whether ethanol, or some other gasoline substitute, should be required in new cars. It is perfectly predictable that in answering this question, well-organized groups with a significant stake in the outcome will bring their influence to bear. It is also predictable that ethanol producers may seek and actually obtain regulatory benefits, and for reasons bearing little or no relationship to environmental protection. discussion here. The movement toward economic incentives is preliminary but real. Thus far, it has occurred mostly in the environmental area. An important series of administrative initiatives have brought about "emissions trading," especially under the Clean Air Act.62 Under the EPA's policy, a firm that reduces its emissions below legal requirements may obtain "credits" that can be used against higher emissions elsewhere. 62. See Emissions Trading Policy Statement: General Principles for Creation, Banking, 64. See Hahn & Hester, Marketable Permits: Lessons for Theory and Practice, 16 ECOLOGY The most dramatic program of economic incentives can be found in the 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act. The Act now explicitly creates an emissions trading system for the control of acid deposition. In these amendments, Congress has made an explicit decision about aggregate emissions level for a pollutant.7' Whether the particular decision is correct may be disputed. But surely there are large democratic benefits from ensuring that public attention is focussed on that issue. 1. Efficiency Under current law, national standards are set both for the environment and for workplace safety and health. 76 But as we have seen, the costs and benefits of regulatory activity are widely variable across both time and space. Consider, for example, the issue of clean air. To require the same level of ambient air quality in Los Angeles and Wyoming makes little sense in light of the fact that the costs (and benefits) of achieving that level vary so dramatically. Uniform controls seem implausible if Wyoming has already attained a level of X, and if Los Angeles could not do so without suffering profound economic dislocations-including, for example, ceasing use of the automobile. Such controls would be grotesquely inefficient. protection above the national level. If our goal is increased democratization, it is indispensable to promote more decentralization. In the area of workplace safety, for example, democratic solutions cannot be achieved at the national level. The market mechanism of "exit"-permitting dissatisfied workers to leavemight well be accompanied by the political mechanism of "voice," by which workers participate in workplace governance.80 In order for that latter mechanism to operate, it is crucial that workplace conditions be decided at the local level. Opportunities for greater decentralization are thus part and parcel of the process of democratizing the employment market. it is also possible to strengthen state and local options, and precisely in the interest of democratization. We might, for example, permit dramatic variations with respect to air and water quality, accompanied by national "floors" designed to take account of interstate effects. Federal laws should be written to minimize preemption of different state solutions. Judge-made preemption doctrines should be designed to require a clear congressional statement before allowing such preemption. "voice" remedies). North Carolina has adopted a "pollution prevention program" designed to prevent pollution before it occurs, rather than to impose technology at the end of the pipe. These are simply a few of the many respects in which recent initiatives have begun to implement Justice Brandeis' aspiration that the states might serve as "laboratories" experimenting with different systems for attaining social goals. 4 Nor has the national government been inactive in this area. 5 Under EPCRKA, discussed above, information about the toxic chemical emissions must be provided to the states. The resulting information has been used as the foundation for a wide range of laws at the state level.86 Oregon now requires pollution reduction goals, as does Massachusetts. States have used the inventory as a basis for enforcement activity. Other national initiatives might similarly act as a spur for state and local decisions. There are some important qualifications to the arguments I have made thus far. Informational strategies, economic incentives, and decentralization have genuine limitations. In some cases, these approaches are inadequate. I outline some of the relevant considerations. There are two problems with informational strategies. First, the provision of information is expensive. Second, the provision of information is sometimes ineffectual or even counterproductive. remedy The second possibility is to impose a regulatory strategy rather than to require disclosure. By a regulatory strategy, I mean a mandatory outcome, such as a flat ban on the materials in question, or governmental specification of a particular outcome, as in a mandated maximum level of carcinogens in the workplace. Sometimes the regulatory strategy will be cheaper, because the price of disclosing information-changing packaging and so forth-is so high. This is likely to be the right response when most or all people would respond to the information in the same way. In that case, it is unnecessary to provide information, and better simply to dictate an outcome that, by hypothesis, is generally preferred. For an especially dangerous substance, one that reasonable people would not choose to encounter, a flat ban is appropriate. from The problem is aggravated by the fact that people tend to use heuristic devices that produce systemic errors. A particular problem here is the "availability heuristic," in accordance with which people tend to think an event is probable if they can readily bring to mind memories of its occurrence. Thus, for example, an airplane disaster will be thought relatively probable, whereas a death from diabetes will not be. There is a good deal of evidence that people overestimate risks from highly visible or sensational causes, but underestimate risks from less dramatic ones.92 There is evidence as well of another problem for informational strategies: people often believe themselves to be immune from risks that they acknowledge are significant and real with respect to others. 93 In one study, for example, ninety-seven percent of those surveyed ranked themselves as average or above average in their ability to avoid both bicycle and power mower accidents.94 Disclosure of information may be an unhelpful tool when people do not internalize the new data. Yet another problem is that disclosure requirements may have unanticipated adverse effects. For example, companies may respond to disclosure requirements by refusing to provide information at all (if this is an available option). The result will be the removal from the market of information that is useful overall. If industry responds to a requirement of evidentiary support for scientific claims with mere "puffing," consumers may have less information than they did to begin with. If advertisers must conduct extensive tests before they are permitted to make claims, they will be given a strong incentive to avoid making claims at all.98 Finally, information may be an inadequate strategy where greater safety is a public good.99 Imagine, for example, that the replacement of carcinogen X with safe product Y would benefit all workers simultaneously. Imagine, too, that each worker is bargaining separately with the employer. In that case, no individual employee would have a sufficient incentive to decrease his demand for wages and other benefits to obtain increased safety. Because the benefits of the new substance would be provided to everyone, no individual employee would "pay" enough to obtain them, preferring instead to take a free ride on the efforts of others. The result will be too little safety on conventional economic criteria. Here a regulatory response is appropriate. There are several possible problems with the use of economic incentives. The clearest cases arise when the appropriate response to a harmproducing activity is a flat ban. With an especially dangerous pollutant, an increased price is inadequate. The pollutant should be eliminated from the market, at least if its social benefits do not outweigh the relevant danger and less dangerous substitutes are available. But if a flat ban is not desirable, there should be a strong presumption in favor of economic incentives. 100. See Sunstein, Administrative Substance, supra note 2. Decentralization is not a preferred approach in at least three categories of cases. The first involves national moral commitments that cut across local boundaries. The most obvious candidates here are the prohibition on discrimination on the basis of race and sex. Here decentralized solutions are inadequate. The whole point of the national commitment is to ensure adherence to a principle that transcends state boundaries. The Civil War, establishing a prohibition on slavery and a requirement of racial equality, is the core example. In most of this essay, I have argued that economic and democratic goals can march hand-in-hand. Across a wide range, we can attempt precisely the same reforms to bring about both of these goals. For this reason, there is no need to choose between efficiency and democracy, at least for most of our efforts in the next generation. have been allocated so as to "maximize value," with reference to private willingness to pay. For believers in a democratic system, however, this criterion is distorted, and in two ways. First, a democratic system operates on the principle of one person, one vote. By contrast, a market allocates "votes" in accordance with how much people are willing to pay for things. Since willingness to pay is a function of ability to pay, rich people will be willing to pay far more than poor people. Indeed, the indigent can pay nothing at all. The principle of political equality, so central to democratic theory, is violated by the efficiency criterion. (discussing transformation of preferencing in politics). (discussing divergence between democratic outcomes and market choices).