University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

1991

On Property and Constitutionalism
Cass R. Sunstein

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "On Property and Constitutionalism" (Coase-Sandor Institute for Law & Economics Working Paper No. 3, 1991).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

CHICAGO

LAW  &  ECONOMICS   WORKING   PAPER  No.  3
(2D  SERIES)

ON PROPERTY AND CONSTITUTIONALISM

Cuss  R.  Sunstein

THE  LAW  SCHOOL

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO

ON PROPERTY AND CONSTITUTIONALISM

Cass  R  Sunstein*

I.  INTRODUCTION

I t  is  generally  understood  that  the  recent  revolutions  in  Eastern

Europe  are  producing  a  large-scale  “transition.”  It  is  important,
however,  to  distinguish  among  the  quite  different  features  of  the
current  changes.  The  new  reform  movements  actually  involve  three
distinctive  transitions.  The  first  is  a  transition  from  a  command
economy  to  markets.  The  second  is  a  transition  from  a  system  of
one-party  domination  to  democracy.  The  third  is  a  transition  from  a
system  in  which  government  is  unconstrained  by  laws  laid  down  in
advance to constitutionalism and the rule of law.

Although  important  work  is  occurring  on  all  these  fronts,  par-
ticipants  in  current  debates  generally  assume  that  the  three  transi-
tions  are  not  closely  connected.  At  the  present.  and  for  the  foresee-
able  future,  it  seem;  clear  that  the  transition  to  markets,  and  the  ac-
companying  efforts  to  promote  economic  development,  will  be
foremost  in  the  minds  of  the  reformers.  Democratization  appears
also  on  the  agenda,  but  it  is  taking  a  secondary  role.  In  the  mean-
time,  the  movement  for  constitutional  reform  generally  draws  little
public  attention,  and  indeed  has  been  dwarfed  by  other  matters.  In
many  circles,  the  drafting  of  the  Constitution  is  thought  to  involve
symbolic or even irrelevant matters having no real connection to the
hard pragmatic work of economic and political reform.

I  believe  that  the  separation  of  the  three  transitions,  and  the  de-
valuation  of  constitution-writing,  are  extremely  unfortunate  and
potentially  dangerous  mistakes.  In  fact  the  transitions  are  closely  re-

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  The  Law  School  and  De-
partment  of  Political  Science,  The  University  of  Chicago;  Co-Director,  Cen-
ter  on  Constitutionalism  in  Eastern  Europe,  The  University  of  Chicago.  I  am
grateful  to  Richard  A.  Epstein  and  Stephen  Holmes  for  helpful  comments  on  a
previous  draft.  Different  versions  of  some  of  this  essay  will  appear  in  Consti-
tutional  Political  Economy  and  in  the  Cardozo  Law  Review.

Copyright  0  1991  by  Cass  R.  Sunstein.

2

CHICAGO   WORKING   PAPER  IN  LAW  &  ECONOMICS

lated. The right kind of constitution could play a crucial role in fuel-
ing economic development and democratic reform; indeed, it may be
indispensable  to  them.  The  wrong  kind  of  constitution-or  no
constitution  at  all-could  be  devastating  to  both  of  these.

To  offer  only  one  example:  Firm  constitutional  Protection  of
property rights, combined with an independent judiciary is an excel-
lent  way  of  encouraging  international  investment  in  one’s  nation.
Such devices should spur domestic investment and initiative as well.
Without  such  constitutional  protection,  there  will  be  a  serious  ob-
stacle  to  the  necessary  economic  activity  from  international  and  do-
mestic enterprises. Anyone who engages in these activities will do so
with  knowledge  that  the  state  may  take  their  property  or  abrogate
their contracts. To say the very least, this will be an obstacle to eco-
nomic  development.

In  Eastern  Europe,  there  is  a  far  more  pressing  need  for  consti-
tutional  protection  of  economic  and  democratic  rights  than  there
was  in  the  United  States  or  the  West.  In  the  United  States,  for  ex-
ample,  the  process  of  constitution-making  was  much  simplified  by
virtue  of  the  fact  that  well  before  that  process  began,  private  prop-
erty,  the  common  law,  and  civil  society  were  firmly  in  place.  The
constitution-makers  could  build  on,  and  attempt  to  protect,  existing
achievements.  The  market  and  the  institutions  of  civil  society-pri-
vate  intermediate  associations  operating  between  the  individual  and
the  state,  including  religious  organizations,  charitable  trusts,  local
community  groups,  business  enterprises-antedated  the  Constitu-
tion.

The  task  of  constitution-making  in  Eastern  Europe  is  both
more critical and more daunting, precisely because of the absence of
well-established  institutions  protecting  market  ordering  and  civil
society.  The  emerging  constitutions  must  not  only  create  the  basic
governmental  structures  and  protect  the  conventional  catalog  of
liberal  rights,  but  also  concern  themselves  with  the  creation  of  safe-
guards  for  the  transition  to  (some  version  of)  market  ordering.  If
they  fail  to  do  so,  a  large  amount  of  the  important  work  will  occur
on  the  legislative  front,  where  there  may  be  special  barriers  to  suc-
cess.  A  particular  problem  is  that  democratic  politics  may  make  it
difficult  to  create  real  markets,  which  produce  such  transitional
problems  as  inflation  and  unemployment.  Even  more  fundamen-
tally,  the  process  of  constitution-making  could  become  irrelevant  to

PROPERTY   AND  CONSTITUTIONALISM

3

many  of  the  fundamental  issues  now  facing  Eastern  Europe.  There
is  a  serious  current  danger  that  the  moment  of  constitutional  oppor-
tunity  will  be  irretrievably  lost;  and  if  it  is,  both  prosperity  and  de-
mocratization will be at risk

This essay comes in three parts. The first briefly discusses the re-
lationships  among  property,  democracy,  and  economic  growth.  My
principal  goal  is  to  show  that  property  should  be  seen  as  a  political
right,  one  that  reduces  dependence  on  the  state  and  creates  the  kind
of  security  that  is  indispensable  to  genuine  citizenship  in  a  democ-
racy.  Property  rights  are  not  in  conflict  with  democracy;  in  a  variety
of  ways  they  help  provide  the  preconditions  for  self-governance.
The  creation  of  private  property  also  serves  a  number  of  functions
indispensable to economic development.

The  second  part  speculates  about  the  contents  of  a  constitution
that  is  self-consciously  designed,  as  Western  constitutions  have  not
entirely  been,  to  create  a  market  economy  and  to  promote  the  insti-
tutions  of  civil  society.  My  particular  goal  here  is  to  argue  that  con-
stitutionalism can play a crucial role in protecting both economic de-
velopment  and  democratic  self-government.  A  well-drafted  consti-
tution  can  guard  against  a  system  in  which  ownership  rights  are  ef-
fectively subject to continuous political revision; such a system rein-
troduces  all  of  the  problems,  both  economic  and  democratic,  intro-
duced  by  common  ownership  of  property.  Through  cataloguing
possible provisions, I hope to begin a process of helping to develop a
kind of “economic bill of rights” for constitution-making in  Eastern
Europe.  Such  a development might  ultimately  count  as  one  of  a
range  of  contributions  of  the  recent  events  to  the  theory  and  prac-
tice  of  constitutionalism,  and  to  the  long-overdue  integration  of
economics  and  constitutionalism.

The  third  part  deals  with  two  problems  that  cannot  be  solved
through  constitution-making.  The  first  problem  is  that  of  interpre-
tation.  The  meaning  of  any  text  is  a  function  of  interpretive  princi-
ples,  and  these  cannot  be  spelled  out  in  the  text  itself.  The  second
problem  is  the  task  of  initially  allocating  entitlements.  That  task
must  be  undertaken  through  ordinary  legislation,  and  it  will  have  a
range of surprising effects.

4

CHICAGO   WORKING  PAPER IN  LAW & ECONOMICS

I.  PROPERTY,   PROSPERITY,   DEMOCRACY

We  should  begin  by  distinguishing  between  two  sorts  of  consti-
tutions.  Westerners  often  think  that  Soviet-style  constitutions  are
not  constitutions  at  all.  In  fact,  however,  they  embody  a  distinct
conception  of  constitutionalism.  Crucially,  such  constitutions  do  not
distinguish  between  public  and  private  spheres.  They  apply  their
prohibitions and permissions to everyone.

Moreover,  such  constitutions  contain  duties  as  well  as  rights.
They do not merely grant privileges to citizens, but also impose obli-
gations  on  them.  Finally,  and  most  important  of  all,  the  central
provisions  of  Soviet-style  constitutions  set  out  very  general  social
aspirations  or  commitments.  Their  provisions  are  designed  to  state
those  aspirations,  not  to  create  concrete  entitlements  that  citizens
can  attempt  to  vindicate,  through  an  independent  judiciary,  against
government  officials.  These  aspirations  include  a  wide  range  of
“positive” rights.

Thus,  for  example,  the  Soviet  Constitution  includes  the  right  to
work  (Art.  4O),  the  right  to  rest  and  leisure  (Art.  41),  the  right  to
health  protection  (Art.  42),  and  the  right  to  maintenance  in  old  age,
sickness,  and  disability  (Art.  43).  It  imposes  on  citizens  the  duty  to
“preserve  and  protect  socialist  property”  and  to  “enhance  the  power
and  prestige”  of  the  Soviet  State  (Art.  62).  The  Polish  Constitution
includes  the  right  to  work  (Art.  68),  the  right  to  rest  and  leisure
(Art.  69),  and  the  right  to  health  protection  (Art.  70).  The  Roma-
nian  Constitution  includes  the  right  to  leisure  (Art.  19),  the  right  to
work,  including  equal  pay  for  equal  work  and  measures  for  the  pro-
tection  and  safety  of  workers  (Art.  18);  the  Bulgarian  Constitution
offers  the  right  to  a  holiday  (Art.  42),  the  right  to  work  (Art.  40),
the  right  to  labor  safety  (Art.  41),  the  right  to  social  security  (Art.
43), and the right to free medical care (Art.  47).

Along  each  of  these  dimensions,  Western  constitutions  are  quite
different.  The  provisions  of  such  constitutions  generally  apply  only
to  the  government,  and  not  to  private  actors.  They  do  not  impose
duties.  Most  important,  they  aim  to  create  solid  individual  rights,
ones that can be invoked by individual citizens, as of right, in an in-
dependent  tribunal  authorized  to  bar  governmental  action.  Western
constitutions generally do not include broad aspirations.

PROPERTY   AND  CONSTITUTIONALISM

5

The  individual  rights  protected  by  Western  constitutions  are
not,  of  course,  limited  to  private  property  and  economic  liberties.
They include other political and civil liberties and rights as well, and
these are indispensable safeguards. My principal goal here, however,
is  to  understand  how  constitutionalism  might  work  simultaneously
to  promote  the  transition  to  economic  markets  and  the  transition  to
democracy,  and  for  this  reason  it  will  be  valuable  to  focus  on  the
right to private property. In this section, I briefly outline some of the
functions  served  by  that  right.  The  basic  story  should  be  familiar.  I
recount  it  here  because  it  seems  especially  important  to  keep  it  in
mind  while  exploring  the  recent  wave  of  constitution-making  in
Eastern  Europe.

A. Private Property and Economic Prosperity

It  is  generally  agreed  that  a  system  of  private  property  helps  to
bring  about  economic  prosperity.  There  are  at  least  four  central  rea-
sons.’

First, the institution of private property2 creates and takes advan-
tage  of  the  powerful  human  inclination  to  bring  goods  and  services
to  oneself  and  to  people  one  cares  about.3   This  claim  does  not  de-
pend  on  a  proposition  about  human  selfishness.  The  desire  to  ac-
quire  goods  might  be  deeply  altruistic,  in  the  sense  that  people  may
want to give their goods to others, including the most vulnerable.

In a system of private property, the gains from the use and culti-
vation  of  ownership  rights  accrue  to  a  designated  owner.  A  system
without  private  property  stifles  incentives  and  thus  induces  both

l  I  draw   in  this  section   on  J.  Waldron,   The  Right  to  Private   Property

(1988). 

.

2  As  a  technical   matter,  a  system  of  private  property   should   not  be  identi-
fied with a  market economy.   The distinguishing   feature of  a market  economy  is
free  alienability   of  ownership   rights.   The  distinctive   feature   of  a  system  of  pri-
vate  property   is  that  individuals   are  entitled  to  decide  how  resources  will  be
used.  See   J.  Waldron,   supra  note  1,  at  60.  In  practice,  however,  these   closely
related   ideas  tend  to  go  hand-in-hand.

3  Aristotle  made   the  basic  point: “Men   pay  most  attention   to  what  is  their
own:  they  care  less  for  what  is  common;   or,  at  any  rate,  they  care  for  it  only  to
the  extent  to  which  each  is  individually  concerned.”   See  Aristotle,  Politics,
1261 (p. 44) (trans.  Barker).

6

CHICAGO   WORKING   PAPER  IN LAW  & ECONOMICS

sloth  and  waste.4  These  points,  too,  do  not  depend.  on  especially
cynical  accounts  of  human  nature.  It  is  necessary  only  to  glance
briefly  at  history,  past  and  present,  and  to  acknowledge  that  human
beings  will  frequently  attempt  to  accumulate  resources.  Social  insti-
tutions appealing to this inclination will increase social productivity.
Second,  a  system  of  private  property  performs  a  crucial  coordi-
nating  function.  It  ensures  that  the  multiple  desires  of  hundreds,
thousands, or millions of consumers will be reflected in market out-
comes.  In  this  way  it  protects  against  the  perverse  forms  of  scarcity
produced  by  a  command  economy.  Public  officials  cannot  possibly
know  what  and  how  much  people  will  want  in  advance.  Their  de-
cisions  will  thus  create  both  too  much  and  too  little  production.  By
contrast,  a  system  of  ownership  rights  signals  people  to  devote  their
productive activity to places in which that activity is most valued. A
command-and-control  economy  is  far  inferior  in  this  regard.  Every
citizen of Eastern Europe has seen multiple illustrations.

Third, the institution of private property solves, all at once, a se-
rious collective action problem faced by people in any system without
that  institution.5  When property is unowned, no one has a sufficient
incentive  to  use  it  to  its  full  advantage  or  to  protect  it  against
exploitation.  The  creation  of  private  property  overcomes  this  prob-
lem.  It  ensures  that  externalities  from  use  will  be  internalized  by
people who are producing either social harms or social benefits.6

The point can be made more vivid by a glance at the problem of
environmental  deterioration.  In  recent  years,  it  has  been  increasingly
recognized  that  that  problem-especially  severe  in  Eastern  Europe

4  This  is  a  claim   about   the  likely  facts,  not  a  necessary  truth.   Powerful   so-
cial  norms  may  operate  as  a  surrogate   for  private  property,   helping   to  overcome
some  of  the  problems   discussed   in  text.  Cf.  Ullmann-Margalit,   The  Emcr-
gence of Norms  (1978).

5  The  point   is  elaborated   in  Demsetz,   Toward   a  Theory  of  Property

Rights,   Am.  Econ.   Rev.:  Proceedings   and  Papers  57  (1967).

6  The  text  uses  a  pre-Coasian   understanding   of  both  harms   and  benefits,
see  Coase,  The  Problem   of  Social   Cost,   3  J.  Law  &  Econ.   1  (1960);   that  is,  it
assumes  that  we  can  know   without   much  reflection  what  sorts  of  things   are
“costs”of  what  sorts  of  activities.  As  Coase  would   have  it,  costs   should  be  seen
as  relational   entities   produced   by  acts  and  omissions   by  many  people  and  not
clearly  attributable   to  any  one  of  them.  An  understanding   that  something  is  a
cost  of  something  else  looks  like  a  descriptive  proposition,   but  it  must  a&ally
be  justified  on  moral  grounds.

PROPERTY   AND  CONSTITUTIONALISM

7

but  of  critical  importance  in  the  West  as  well-is  in  significant  part7
a product of the collective  action  problem  produced  by  the  fact  that
the  air  and  water  are  public  goods,  that  is,  collectively  rather  than
privately  owned.*  The  consequence  is  that  the  environmental  costs
of  polluting  activity  are  widely  diffused  among  the  public  and  not
“internalized,”  or  taken  into  account,  by  polluters.  Because  they  do
not  bear  the  direct  cost,  polluters  lack  an  incentive  to  limit  their
polluting activity. This system creates a built-in tendency toward ex-
cessive pollution levels.

A system without private property can be understood as a massive
version  of  this  unfortunate  state  of  affairs.  If  property  is  unowned,
everyone  has  an  incentive  to  exploit  it,  and  no  one  has  an  incentive
to use it to its full advantage. Activity levels will have no relationship
to their actual social costs and  benefits.9 Ownership rights overcome
the  difficulty.  They  operate  like  a  well-functioning  system  of  envi-
ronmental  law;  they  ensure  that  people  have  incentives  to  take  ac-
count  of  both  the  benefits  and  the  harms  of  what  they  do.  This  is
an exceedingly important task for a constitutional democracy.

Finally,  a  system  of  private  property  creates  the  kind  of  stability
and  protection  of  expectations  that  are  preconditions  for  investment
and  initiative,  from  both  international  and  domestic  sources.  A
company deciding whether to invest in a country will have a greater
incentive  to  do  so  if  it  knows  that  its  investment  will  be  protected,
and  that  government  confiscation  is  prohibited  by  the  government’s
basic  law.  A  citizen  who  is  seeking  to  begin  a  business  will  be  far
more  likely  to  do  so  if  he  can  operate  against  a  secure  and  stable
background, protected against the vicissitudes of government policy.
In  this  way,  too,  economic  development  can  be  facilitated  by  prop-
erty rights.

7  This   is  not,  of  course,  the  only  possible  understanding   of  the  environ-
mental  problem.   There   are  other,   noneconomic  reasons  to  think   that  the  level
of  pollution  is  too  high.  See   S.  Kelman,   What  Price  Incentives?   (1982).
* Hardin,  The Tragedy of the Commons, 162 Science  1243 (1968).
9  I  do  not  mean  to  endorse   here  the  economic   conception  of  costs  and
benefits,   which  is  based  on  private  willingness   to  pay  and  which  will  be  unac-
ceptable  for  many  purposes.  On  any  valuation,   however,  a  system  of  collective
ownership   threatens   to  create  the  dangers  mentioned  in  the  text.

8

CHICAGO   WORKING   PAPER  IN  LAW  & ECONOMICS

B.  Property  and  Democracy

The  connection  between  property  and  prosperity  may  be  reason-
ably well understood; but the right to private property has not always
been  considered  a  precondition  for  democracy.  On  the  contrary,  pri-
vate  property  has  frequently  been  thought  an  obstacle  to  democracy,
and  for  this  reason  highly  objectionable,  or  perhaps  at  best  an  insti-
tution necessary for economic growth and therefore to be reluctantly
accepted, despite its corrosive effects on the democratic process.10

There  is  indeed  some  tension  between  a  system  of  property
rights and a system of democracy. If property rights are secure, there
is  a  firm  limit  on  what  the  democratic  process  is  entitled  to  do.  In
this  sense  the  tension  is  a  real  and  enduring  one.  Notably,  markets
impose  conspicuous  short-term  cost+--unemployment   and  infla-
tion-and  in  the  emerging  Eastern  European  democracies,  there
will  probably  be.  a  continuous  temptation  to  slow  down  the  transi-
tion  to  markets  or  perhaps  to  reject  the  transition  altogether.  For
this  reason  the  simultaneous  transition  to  democracy  and  to  eco-
nomic  markets-without  the  protection  of  constitutionalism-will
be  exceptionally  difficult.

In  important  respects,  however,  it  is  quite  plausible  to  think  that
the  right  to  a  stable  system  of  property  rights-one  with  which  the
state will interfere only occasionally or in a limited way, with a pro-
vision for compensation - i s actually necessary. to democracy and not
opposed to it at all.

The  most  fundamental  point  about  the  relationship  between
property  and  democracy  is  that  a  right  to  own  private  property  has
an  important  and  salutary  effect  on  the  citizens’  relationship  with
the  state  and-equally  important- o n their  understanding  of  that
relationship. Because of this effect, it can be seen as a necessary pre-
condition for the status of citizenship. Personal security and personal
independence  from  the  government  are  guaranteed  in  a  system  in
which  rights  of  ownership  are  protected  through  public  institutions.
This  theme  has  played  a  large  role  in  republican  thought.  On
the  republican  view,  the  status  of  citizen  implies  a  measure  of  inde-

lo  I  do  not  deal  here  with  the  relationship   between   individual   development
and  property  rights,   though   I  believe  that  property   rights   do  in  fact  promote
that  goal.  For  a  good  discussion,  see  J.  Waldron,   supra  note  1,  ch.  10.

l1  And  long-term   ones  as  well.

PROPERTY   AND  CONSTITUTIONALISM

9

pendence  from  government  power.  This  view  was  often  associated
with  exclusionary  practices- a s , for  example,  in  the  notion  that
people  without  property  should  not  be  allowed  to  vote.  One  may
deplore  the  exclusion  without  rejecting  the  proposition  that  a
democratic  state  should  attempt  to  give  citizens  a  sense  of  indepen-
dence  from  the  state  itself.  In  fact  the  republican  tradition,  read  in
light  of  modern  understandings,  argues  not  for  an  abolition  of  pri-
vate  property  but  instead  for  a  system  attempting  to  ensure  that  ev-
eryone  has  some.

In  this  sense,  the  ownership  of  private  property  is  closely  associ-
ated  with  the  rule  of  law.12  Both  of  these  create  a  realm  of  private
autonomy  in  which  the  citizenry  can  operate  without  fear  of  public
intrusion.  That  realm  is  indispensable  to  the  public  sphere  itself.
Only  people  with  a  degree  of  security  from  the  state  are  able  to  par-
ticipate  without  fear,  and  with  independence,  in  democratic  delib-
erations.  In  this  sense,  a  sharp,  legally-produced  distinction  between
the  private  and  the  public  can  usefully  serve  the  public  sphere.  Con-
trary  to  a  conventional  understanding,  it  need  not  harm  it  at  all.13

Even  more  fundamentally:  The  division  between  private  and
public  spheres  is  hard  to  defend  or  even  to  understand  if  it  is  treated
as  a  metaphysical  one,  or  as  a  claim  that  public  power  is  not  behind
the  private  sphere.  But  if  we  understand  the  division  as  a  political
one,  to  be  justified  in  public  terms,  it  becomes  both  intelligible  and
indispensable.  The  (legal)  creation  of  a  private  sphere,  undertaken  by
the  state,  is  a  key  part  of  the  process  of  creating  civil  society  and
market  ordering.  If  these  can  be  justified,  the  private  sphere  itself  be-
comes  unproblematic,  at  least  in  the  abstract.  Of  course  its  particular

l2  F.  Hayek,   The  Road  to  Serfdom  (1948).  Initially  Hayek’s   discussion   of
this  point  seems  exceptionally   confusing.   He  identifies   markets   and  property
on  the  one  hand  with  the  rule  of  law  on  the  other;  but  the  rule  of  law  seems   to
imply,   not  necessarily  markets   and  property,   but  instead   firm  constraints  on
official   discretion  and  institutions   to  enforce   those  constraints.
Such  con-
straints   can  be  created  with  or  without   property,   that  is,  a  command   economy
can  set  down   clear  rules  in  advance.  (Consider  some  of  the  American  law  of
environmental   protection,   which  relies  on  command-and-control   methods,  but
which   usually  does  not  delegate  open-ended   authority  to  bureaucrats.)   But  the
identification  seems  more  plausible  in  light  of  the  considerations   discussed  in
the  text.

l3  Cf.  Holmes,  Gag  Rules  and  Democracy,  in  Constitutionalism   and

Democracy   (J.  Elster  &A.  Hylland  eds.  1988).

I O

CHICAGO   WORKING  PAPER IN LAW  & ECONOMICS

content  can  always  be  criticized,  and  is  frequently  subject  to  demo-
cratic redefinition.

The  creation  of  private  property  can  also  be  connected  with  the
traditional proscription on punishment by reference to vague laws or
punishment  without  laws  at  all.14  That  proscription  is  designed  to
provide the citizenry with a wall of personal security, creating zones
of  freedom  in  which  people  can  operate  without  fear.  A  system  of
private property performs closely related functions.

A  central  point  here  is  that  in  a  state  in  which  private  property
does  not  exist,  citizens  are  dependent  on  the  good  will  of  govern-
ment  officials,  almost  on  a  daily  basis.15  Whatever  they  have  is  a
privilege  and  not  a  right.  They  come  to  the  state  as  supplicants  or
beggars,  rather  than  as  rightholders.  Any  challenge  to  the  state  may
be  stifled  or  driven  underground  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  serious
challenges  could  result  in  the  withdrawal  of  the  goods  that  give
people  basic  security.  A  right  to  private  property,  free  from  govern-
ment interference, is in this sense a necessary basis for a democracy.

In  American  law,  the  unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine  op-
erates as a response to this concern in the context of funding, licens-
ing,  and  employment. 16  The  government  may  not  use  its  power  to
grant  (say)  welfare  benefits  as  a  way  to  pressure  the  exercise  of  free
speech  rights.  In  fact,  the  creation  of  property  rights  should  be seen
as  an  unconstitutional  conditions  doctrine  writ  very  large.  The  idea
is  that  government  may  not  use  its  power  over  property  to  pressure
rights  generates  a  strong
rights i
as  the  unconstitutional
barrier
conditions  doctrine  provides  a  degree  of  insulation  in  narrower  set-
tings.

n  general;  the  existence  of prop
against  this  form  of  pressure.

erty
just

There  is  a  more  particular  sense  in  which  private  property  helps
to  promote  resistance  to  government.  If  government  owns  the
presses, or the means of distribution, freedom of speech cannot easily

l4  See   the  classic  discussion  in  L.  Fuller,  The  Morality  of  Law  (1964).
l5  The  demoralizing   effects  of  such  regimes  are  well  known  to  citizens  of
Communist   nations,   and  indeed   to  visitors-as  well.  Continuous   dependence   on
government  officials  has  a  range  of  predictable   corrosive   effects  on  both  charac-
ter  and  spirit-a  worthy  subject  for  inquiry   by  a  modern  Tocqueville.

l6  See  generally  Sullivan,   Unconstitutional   Conditions,   102  Harv.  L.
Rev.  1413  (1989);  Epstein,   Unconstitutional   Conditions,  State  Power,  and  the
Limits  of  Content,  102  Harv.  L.  Rev.  4  (1988).

PROPERTY   AND  CONSTITUTIONALISM

I I

exist.  Indeed,  if  government  owns  the  paper  itself,  or  allocates  it  in
its  discretion,  there  will  be  serious  problems  for  the  system  of  free
expression.  More  generally,  private  ownership  facilitates  the  kind  of
security  on  which  diversity  and  pluralism  depend.  Political  censor-
ship  may  be  altogether  unnecessary  if  it  is  understood  that  current
holdings are vulnerable to state control.

The  final  point  is  that  one  of  the  best  ways  to  destroy  a  demo-
cratic  system  is  to  ensure  that  the  distribution  of  wealth  and  re-
sources is unstable and constantly up for new evaluation by the polit-
ical process. A high degree of stability is necessary in order to allow
people  to  plan  their  affairs,  to  reduce  the  effects  of  factional  or  in-
terest-group  power  in  government,  to  promote  investment,  and  to
prevent  the  political  process  from  breaking  down  by  attempting  to
resolve  enormous,  emotionally  laden  issues  about  who  is  entitled  to
what.  Stability  and  security-a  sense  of  context-are  important  in-
dividual and collective goods. A system in which property rights are
open to continuous readjustment will produce serious harm.17

In  addition,  government  control  of  property-through  constant
readjustment  of  ownership  rights-simply  reintroduces  the  collective
action  problem  originally  solved  by  property  rights.  Public  choice
theory can be seen in part as a generalization of this simple insight.

Like  the  right  to  freedom  of  religious  conscience,18   moreover,
the  right  to  property  helps  create  a  flourishing  civil  society,  an  in-
termediate  level  between  the  government  and  the  individual.  The
development of a civil society can in turn be understood as a mech-
anism  both  for  creating  economic  prosperity  and  for  promoting
democratic  self-governance.  A  constitutional  system  that  respects
private property should be regarded, not as an effort to oppose liberal
rights  to  collective  self-government,  but  instead  as  a  way  to  fortify
democratic  processes.

I  have  not  dealt  with  the  question  of  redistribution.  In  the
West,  enthusiasm  for  property  rights  is  often  thought  to  entail  a  re-
luctance’ to allow redistribution, or (worse) complete indifference to
the  poor.  The  proper  response  is  twofold;  First,  property  rights  help
create  wealth, and greater wealth will often benefit the most vulner-

I7  For  this  reason  the  embrace  of  “context-smashing”   in  R.  Unger,   Politics

(1985), seems’  most puzzling.

l8  Cf.  Holmes,   supra  note  13.

12

CHICAGO  WORKING  PAPER IN LAW & ECONOMICS

able  as  well.  Time  and  again  it  has  been  shown  that  economic
growth  does  more  than  welfare  and  employment  programs  to  ben-
efit  the  disadvantaged.  Of  course  growth  does  not  do  everything,
and  it  must  be  supplemented.  The  second  point,  then,  is  that  wel-
fare  and  employment  programs  are  a  necessary  part  of  any  system  of
property  rights.  Such  rights  are  best  defended  in  self-consciously
instrumental  terms,  because  of  the  good  things  that  they  do.  When
they do not accomplish good, or enough good, they must be accom-
panied  by  other  social  strategies.

Properly  understood,  the  defense  of  property  rights  is  a  defense
of  programs  of  redistribution  as  well.  These  programs  are  not  de-
signed  to  produce  economic  equality-a  truly  disastrous  goal-but
instead  to  bring  about  genuine  equality  of  opportunity  and,  equally
important,  freedom,  for  all  people  in  society,  from  desperate  condi-
tions,  or  from  circumstances  that  impede  human  functioning.19

II.  PROPERTY   AND  CONSTITUTION-MAKING

I  have  said  that  the  task  of  economic  development  cannot  be
rigidly  separated  from  the  task  of  constitution  making.  Without
constitutional  protection  of  property  rights,  there  will  be  continuous
pressure to adjust distributions of property on an ad hoc basis. When
a  group  of  people  have  acquired  a  good  deal  of  money,  it  will  be
tempting  to  tax  them  heavily.  When  another  group  has  verged  on
bankruptcy,  there  will  be  a  temptation  to  subsidize  them.  After  the
fact,  these  steps  may  seem  fair  or  even  necessary;  but  if  everyone
knows  that  government  might  respond  in  this  way,  there  will  be  a
powerful  deterrent  to  the  creation  of  a  market  economy.  No  citi-
zen- a n d no  international  or  domestic  investor-can  be  secure  of
his  immunity  from  the  state.

A pervasive risk is that governmental control over property rights
will  undo  the  decision,  made  in  the  basic  system  creating  such
rights, to solve a collective action problem faced-by public ownership.
If  property  rights  are  insecure-if  they  are  subject  to  continuous
governmental  examination- t h e system will approach equivalence to
one  in  which  there  are  no  such  rights  at  all.  This  will  introduce  all

l9  See  Nussbaum,   Aristotelian   Social  Democracy,   in  Liberalism   and  the
Good  (R.  Douglass,   G.  Mara,   &  H.  Richardson,   eds.,  1990);  A.  Sen,  Com-
modities   and  Capabilities   (1985).

PROPERTY   AND  CONSTITUTIONALISM

13

of  the  problems,  described  in  Part  I,  to  which  a  system  of  property
rights is supposed to respond. Above all, it will create individual vul-
nerability  to  government  and  at  the  same  time  produce  both  too  lit-
tle and too much use of existing resources. It will deter economic de-
velopment and impair the movement toward democracy as well.

A.  In General

I  have  claimed  that  a  constitution  can  accomplish  a  great  deal  in
easing  the  transition  to  economic  markets  and  private  property.  In
order  for  it  to  do  so,  constitutional  protections  must  be  judicially
enforceable-that  is,  a  court  must  be  available  to  vindicate  any  rights
that  the  constitution  creates.  Ordinary  citizens  must  have  a  general
right  to  raise  constitutional  objections  before  an  independent  tri-
bunal authorized to provide redress. Without judicial review, consti-
tutions  tend  to  be  worth  little  more  than  the  paper  on  which  they
are  written.  They  become  simple  words,  or  public  relations  docu-
ments,  rather  than  instruments  that  confer  genuine  rights.  While
the  efficacy  of  courts  in  social  reform  is  disputable,20   there  can  be
little  doubt  that  judicially  enforceable  constitutions  can  have  a  sig-
nificant  effect  both  on  real-world  results  and  on  legal  and  social
culture  in  general. 21 To  be  sure,  some  nations  in  the  West  have
prospered  with  little  or  nothing  in  the  way  of  judicial  enforcement
of  constitutions.  But  these  nations  were  able  to  benefit  from  the
background  of  civil  society,  market  economies,  and  well-defined
property  rights.  For  them,  constitutional  protections  were  far  less
important.

AFor  Eastern  Europe  in  general,  the  drafting  of  the  constitution
appears  to  pose  two  especially  distinctive  challenges.  The  first  is  to
begin  the  process  of  creating  a  legal  culture  with  firm  judicial  pro-
tection  of  individual  rights.  By  individual  rights,  I  mean,  first  and
foremost,  traditional  “negative”  rights  against  government,  promi-
nent  among  them  private  property  and  freedom  of  contract.  It  is  of
course  misleading  to  think  of  these  as  genuinely  negative  rights.
They  depend  for  their  existence  on  governmental  institutions  will-

2o  See  G  Rosenberg,  The  Hollow  Hope  (1991)
z  Mucd   of  the  effect  is  deterrence   of  harmful  governmental   action   before
the  fact,  rather  than  governmental   losses   in  actual  litigated  cases.  The  fear  of
losing   in  court  has  often  proved  a  substantial   deterrent  to  government.

I4

CHICAGO WOR.KING PAPER IN LAW & ECONOMICS

ing  to  recognize,  create,  and  protect  them.  But  this  point  is  a  se-
mantic  one;  the  defense  of  the  traditional  rights  need  not  depend  on
the false claim that they are negative.

The  second  challenge  is  to  facilitate  the  creation  of  a  market
economy  and  of  a  civil society-that  is,  a  realm  of  private  action
containing  institutions  (churches,  markets,  corporations,  labor
unions,  women’s  organizations,  and  so  forth)  that  are  independent
of  the  state  and  constrained  minimally  by  it.  Through  meeting  these
challenges,  a  constitution  could  simultaneously  promote  democratic
goals and help bring about economic prosperity.

To  carry  out  this  task,  constitution-makers  should  avoid  three
strategies that contain serious risks. All of these strategies are charac-
teristic  features  of  communist  constitutionalism.  Unfortunately,  all
of  them  appear  to  be  influencing  current  debates  in  the  post-com-
munist  era.  The  draft  Constitutions  tend  to  replicate  the  errors  of
the  communist  constitutions  themselves.22

1. Aspirations. The first such strategy is to use a constitution as a
place  for  setting  out  very  general  social  aspirations,  or  for  imposing
positive duties on government (such as the provision of a social wel-
fare  state  including  such  guarantees  as  equitable  remuneration,
leisure  time,  social  security,  and  occupational  safety  and  health).
There  are  three  reasons  why  this  would  be  a  dangerous  strategy,  at
least under current conditions.

First,  to  state  aspirations  and  impose  positive  duties-prominent
of  course  in  the  Soviet  Constitution-runs  the  risk  of  turning  a
constitution  into  something  other  than  a  legal  document  with  real-
world  consequences.  It  is  important  to  remember  that  if  it  is  to  cre-
ate rights realistically enforceable in the world, a constitution should
not  list  all  things  to  which  a  country  aspires.  It  should  limit  itself,
for  the  most  part,  to  rights  that  it  is  genuinely  able  to  enforce.  A
constitution  that  creates  positive  rights  is  not  likely  to  be  subject  to
judicial enforcement, because these rights are vaguely defined, simul-
taneously  involve  the  interests  of  numerous  people,  and  depend  for
their  existence  on  active  management  of  government  institutions-
something  for  which  judges  are  ill-suited.  The  existence  of  unen-

22  These   draft  Constitutions   are  on  file  with  the  Center   on  Constitu-
tionalism   in  Eastern   Europe,   University  of  Chicago  Law  School,  and  can  be
obtained   from  that  Center.

PROPERTY   AND   CONSTITUTIONALISM

15

forceable  rights  will  in  turn  tend  to  destroy  the  negative  rights-
freedom  of  speech,  freedom  of  religion,  and  so  forth-that  might
otherwise  be  genuine  ones.  If  some  rights  are  shown  to  be  unen-
forceable, it is likely that other rights will be unenforceable as well.

The  second  problem  with  positive  rights  is  that  they  will  work
against  the  general  current  efforts  to  diminish  the  sense  of  entitle-
ment  to  state  protection,  and  to  encourage  individual  initiative  and
self-reliance.  Both  markets  and  democracy  tend  to  develop  these
highly salutary characteristics. Sometimes liberal constitutionalism is
praised  because  it  responds  accurately  to  “human  nature,”  and  does
not  try  to  tinker  with  it.  There  is  undoubtedly  something  to  this
idea;  efforts  fundamentally  to  revise  human  character  are  usually
doomed  to  failure.  But  liberal  constitutionalism  might  be  defended
precisely  on  the  ground  that  it  has  healthy  effects  on  human  charac-
ter.  Markets  and  democracy  tend  to  create  certain  types,  with  many
valuable characteris tics.23

To say this is emphatically not to say that in the post-reform era,
nations  in  Eastern  Europe  should  eliminate  social  welfare  protec-
tions and leave their citizens to the vicissitudes of the market. Such a
route  would  be  a  recipe  for  disaster,  since  it  would  allow  for  mass
suffering  of  the  kind  that  is  unacceptable  in  any  nation.  But  these
protections should be created at the level of ordinary legislation, and
subject  to  democratic  discussion,  rather  than  placed  in  the  founda-
tional  document.

The  third  problem  with  positive  rights  is  that  they  establish
government  interference  with  markets  as  a  constitutional  duty.  The
current  effort  is  to  limit  such  interference,  and  to  establish  the  pre-
conditions  for  private  markets,  free  trade,  and  free  contract.  To  im-
pose a constitutional duty of interference is to move in precisely the
wrong  direction.

2.  Duties.  Another  strategy,  posing  similar  risks,  is  to  use  the
constitution  as  a  place  for  creating  “duties”  as  well  as  rights.  Such
duties  are  not  likely  to  be  enforceable  through  courts.  Their  state-
ment  in  a  constitution  tends  to  weaken  the  understanding  that  the
document  creates  protected  rights,  with  real  meaning,  against  the

23  See  J  Mill  Considerations   on  Representative   Government,   ed.  C.V.
Shields   (1881:  Niw  York:  Liberal.   Arts  Press,  1958).  To  say  this  is  not  of
course   to  say  that  all  of  those  characteristics  are  always  good  ones.

16

CHICAGO WORKING  PAPER IN LAW & ECONOMICS

state.  Moreover,  countries  in  Eastern  Europe  are  attempting  to
eliminate the effects of the notion that the state imposes “duties” on
citizens,  rather  than  giving  them  rights.  It  may  be  that  in  the  West,
more emphasis on duties would be a good idea. Perhaps the Western
emphasis on “rights” has harmed social deliberation, especially in the
United  States,  where  duties  should  be  taken  more  seriously.24  But
this  is  the  direction  from  which  Eastern  Europe  ought  to  be
emerging.

3.  No  distinction  between   public  and  private  spheres. Yet another
dangerous  strategy  is  to  make  constitutional  provisions  binding
against private people and private organizations as well as against the
state. In almost all Western systems, the constitution applies only to
the  government,  not  to  the  people  in  general.  This  is  extremely  im-
portant,  because  it  recognizes  and  helps  create  a  private  sphere--a
civil society that operates independently of the state. It also frees up
private  organizations-employers, religious  organizations,  unions,
and  so  forth-to  act  as  they  choose.  If  the  people  want  to  apply  par-
ticular constitutional provisions to particular private organizations, of
course  they  can  do  so,  through  ordinary  legislation.  But  it  is  a  mis-
take  to  apply  such  provisions  through  the  constitution  itself.  Above
all,  this  strategy  works  to  erase  the  distinction  between  the  private
and  public  spheres,  in  a  way  that  would  tend  to  defeat  current  aspi-
rations  in  Eastern  Europe.  As  noted,  that  distinction  should  be  en-
thusiastically embraced on substantive political grounds.

Ironically,  these  dangers  are  more  serious  for  the  East  than  for
the  West.  In  the  United  States,  for  example,  the  institutions  of  pri-
vate property and civil society are firmly in place, and social injustice
frequently occurs precisely because of the absence of positive protec-
tions and of safeguards against the power of private institutions. The
case  for  a  firm  right  to  some  forms  of  social  assistance  is  at  least  a
plausible one in America. Such a right would not seriously jeopardize
existing  legal  and  social  institutions;  it  could  not  possibly  threaten
the general belief in markets, solid property rights, and civil society.

In  systems  that  are  seeking  for  the  first  time  to  establish  free
markets  and  civil  society,  and  that  already  have  a  strong  public
commitment  to  a  social  welfare  state,  the  relevant  considerations
point  in  precisely  the  opposite  direction.  A  dramatic  legal  and  cul-

24  See  M.  Glendon,  Rights  Talk  (1991).

PROPERTY   AND   CONSTITUTIONALISM

I7

tural shift, creating a belief in private property and a respect for mar-
kets, is indispensable. It is therefore surprising but true that the case
for  a  strongly  negative  constitution,  protecting  market  arrange-
ments,  is  under  current  conditions  powerful  in  Eastern  Europe,
even if it is ambiguous in the West.

We  might  draw  a  more  general  conclusion  from  this  discussion.
It  is  often  said  that  constitutions,  as  a  form  of  higher  law,  must  be
compatible with the culture and mores of those whom they regulate.
In  one  sense,  however,  the  opposite  is  true.  Constitutional  provi-
sions should be designed to work against precisely those aspects of a
country’s  culture  and  tradition  that  are  likely  to  produce  harm
through  that  country’s  ordinary  political  processes.  There  is  a  large
difference between the risks of harm faced by a nation committed by
culture  and  history  to  free  markets,  and  the-corresponding  risks  in  a
nation  committed  by  culture  and  history  to  social  security  and  gen-
eral  state  protection.  Constitutions  should  work  against  the  particu-
lar  nation’s  most  threatening  tendencies.  This  point  explains  why
extremely  powerful  safeguards  against  sex  discrimination  and  ethnic
and  religious  oppression  are  necessary  in  Eastern  Europe  (a  point
that would, however, take me well beyond the scope of this essay). It
is above all for this reason that constitutions designed for one nation
are ill-adapted for others.

B.  Particdar   Provisions

In the next few years, it will be critical to develop a set of poten-
tial provisions for inclusion as an “economic bill of rights” section of
the  proposed  constitution.  Indeed,  this  section  could  serve  as  one  of
the  many  possible  new  contributions  of  current  constitution-makers
to the general theory and practice of constitutionalism.

I  provide  in  this  section  a  preliminary  outline  of  constitutional
provisions  that  might  be  adopted  in  the  interest  of  creating  a  well-
functioning  system  of  property  rights  and  economic  markets.  The
outline  amounts  to  little  more  a  list;  it  is  intended  only  to  provide a
starting point for discussion.

1.  The  rule  of  Zaw.  In  order  to  comply  with  the  rule  of  law,  a
government  must  ensure  that  action  may  not  be  taken  against  citi-
zens unless it has laid down, in advance, a pertinent law. The rule  of
law requires that any such restriction must be clear rather than vague

I8

CHICAGO  WORKING  PAPER IN LAW & ECONOMICS

and  publicly  available  rather  than  secret;  and  it  must  operate  in  the
world as it does on the books.25

A guarantee of the rule of law is both an economic and a demo-
cratic  right.  It  creates  a  wall  of  protection  around  citizens,  giving  a
guarantee  of  immunity  and  ensuring  them  that  they  may  engage  in
productive  activity  without  fear  of  the  state.  And  by  creating  this
wall  of  protection,  the  guarantee  creates  the  kind  of  security  and  in-
dependence  that  are  prerequisites  for  the  role  of  a  citizen  in  a
democracy.

2.  Protection   of  property  against  takings  without  compensation.
Many  constitutions  contain  protection  of  this  kind.  The  American
Constitution  embodies  this  idea  in  the  fifth  amendment,  which
says, “nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just
compensation.“2  6 A provision of this general sort is indispensable on
both  economic  and  democratic  grounds.  Without  such  a  provision,
there is not, in fact or in law, a system of private property.

3. Protection of property  against takings without due process. This
is  a  procedural  rather  than  substantive  protection  of  property.  It
means  that  citizens  will  be  provided  with  a  hearing  before  govern-
ment  may  interfere  with  their  holdings.  A  provision  of  this  sort  ac-
complishes two functions.

First,  it  promotes  accurate  factfinding.  A  hearing  before  an  in-
dependent  tribunal  ensures  that  property  will  not  be  taken  capri-
ciously,  or  on  the  basis  of  whim,  or  for  discriminatory  or  irrelevant
reasons.  In  the  hearing,  it  is  necessary  to  show  the  facts  that  would
justify  a  deprivation  of  property  as  a  matter  of  law.  Second,  the
hearing  right  carries  out  an  important  dignitary  and  participatory
function.  To  say  that  people  cannot  be  deprived  of  property  without
a  hearing  is  to  say  that  before  it  acts  against  them,  the  government
must  listen  to  what  they  have  to  say.  This  constraint  improves  gov-
ernmental  legitimacy  as  well.  There  is  considerable  evidence  that
people  feel  more  secure  and  trustful  if  government  affords  them  an
opportunity  to  be  heard  before  it  undertakes  action  harmful  to  their
interests.

25  See  L.  Fuller,  The  Morality  of  Law  (1964).
26  U.S.  Const.  Amend  V.

,

I9

PROPERTY   AND  CONSTITUTIONALISM

4. Protection of contracts.
(a)  In  generai   Many  constitutions  protect  contractual  liberty
from  governmental  invasion-as  in,  for  example,  a  provision  to  the
effect  that  government  shall  not  pass  any  “Law  impairing  the  Obli-
gations  of  Contracts.” 2  7  Constitutional  protection  of  contracts
ensures  citizens  that  when  they  engage  in  economic  arrangements,
they  can  do  so  free  from  the  spectre  of  governmental  interventions.
Without  this  right,  there  will  be  a  serious  deterrent  to  productive
activity.

For  those  countries  that  choose  this  route,  there  are  two  central
questions.  The  first  is  whether  the  protection  applies  prospectively,
or  only  retroactively.  One  might  think  that  the  state  should  be  free
to  create  the  background  against  which  people  enter  into  agree-
ments,  and  that  therefore  there  should  be  no  limit  on  the  state’s
power  to  set  out,  in  advance,  limits  on  the  terms  on  which  people
may  contract.  This  is  the  approach  taken  in  American  law,  which
allows  the  government  to  affect  contractual  ordering  however  it
wishes, so long as it does so in advance.

The  second  and  related  question  is  the  extent  of  the  “police
power,”  pursuant  to  which  limits  on  contractual  freedom  will  be
permitted. It is obvious that the state can forbid contracts for murder
or  assault.  It  will  probably  be  agreed  that  the  state  may  forbid  con-
tracts  to  work  for  less  than  a  certain  monthly  wage,  or  for  more
than  a  certain  number  of  hours  per  week.  But  does  this  mean  that  a
state  can  impair  a  contract  retroactively  simply  because  it  believes
that  the  outcome  is  unfair  to  one  side?28  If  so,  freedom  of  contract
becomes a dead letter.

(b)  Ban  on  wage  andprice  controls.  Limits  on  wages  and  prices-
in  the  form  of  floors  or  ceilings-are  of  course  a  standard  method

27 Art. 1, section  9, section 10.
28  Sometimes   people  think  that  the  appropriate   remedy   for  a  harsh  bargain
is  to  disallow  the  bargain.   But  it  is  not  at  all  clear  that  this  remedy  helps  the
weaker   side.  Usually   someone   in  bad  circumstances   will  be  presented   with  a
range  of  unfavorable   alternatives,  and  will  choose  the  least  unfavorable   of  them.
To  disallow  this  option  does  nothing   to  improve   the  bad  circumstances,   and
simply  forces  the  person   to  choose  the  second-least   unfavorable   option.  It  is
crucially  important   for  the  emerging   democracies  to  understand  this  point.  Ef-
forts  to close  off market  options  are  tempting  when  those options   seem  few  and
produce  harsh  results;  but  the  closing  off  is  an  utterly  ineffectual   remedy.

20

CHICAGO  WORKING  PAPER IN LAW & ECONOMICS

for  interfering  with  free  markets.  There  is  for  this  reason  a  plausible
argument  that  Eastern  European  countries  should  commit  them-
selves, in advance, to a decision not to take this course, which is of-
ten  appealing  in  the  short-run  but  extremely  destructive  for  the  fu-
ture.

A  particular  problem  here  is  that  well-organized  private  groups
will  frequently  seek  assistance,  in  the  form  of  regulatory  laws  en-
abling  them  to  function  as  a  cartel.  This  strategy  might  at  first
glance  have  a  public  interest  justification,  but  it  can  ultimately  be
disastrous. A system that creates minimum prices for (say) milk may
help some milk producers, but it will also create scarcity in an impor-
tant  commodity  and  also  increase  prices  for  consumers,  many  of
them likely to be poor. Maximum prices can in turn produce scarcity,
often  of  important  commodities.

A  system  in  which  government  generally  sets  minimum  and
maximum  prices  will  eventually  produce  many  of  the  economic  and
democratic  problems  that  Eastern  European  nations  are  attempting
to  solve.  The  United  States  has  witnessed  this  very  problem  with
regulation  of  energy  prices;  such  regulation  helped  produce  the  en-
ergy crisis of the 1970s.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  also  plausible  to  think  that  controls  on
wages  and  prices  will  sometimes  be  desirable  during  and  after  the
transition  to  a  market  economy.  Even  in  such  an  economy,  legal
controls on wages and prices sometimes have at least plausible justifi-
cations.  The  category  is  not  limited  to  the  minimum  wage;  it  in-
cludes  price  supports  of  various  kinds  as  well.  A  ban  on  wage  and
price controls may be excessively strong medicine for the problem at
hand.

5.  Occupational  Ziberty.   There  are  several  possible  provisions  for

protecting occupational liberty.

(a)  Protection  offlee  entry  into  occupations,  trades,   and  business.   A
provision  of  this  sort  can  be  found  in  the  German  Constitution.
This  is  a  salutary  protection  against  governmental  restrictions  on  an
important  form  of  liberty,  one  that  is  part  and  parcel  of  free  labor
markets.

It  does,  however,  contain  an  ambiguity,  similar  to  that  arising
under  the  protection  of  freedom  of  contract.  It  seems  clear  that
government  can  impose  certain  limits  requiring
jobs  be  per-
formed  by  people  who  are  trained  to  do  them.  It
for  example,

that
can,

PROPERTY   AND  CONSTITUTIONALISM

21

ensure  that  doctors  actually  know  something  about  medicine,  or
that lawyers are trained in the law. If this is so, it will be necessary to
distinguish  between  legitimate  and  illegitimate  interferences  with
free  entry  into  occupations, rather  than  simply  to  say  that  the
government has no role to play in this regard. This issue is probably
best resolved through judicial interpretation, not in the text itself.

(b)  The  right  to  choose  one’s  occupation.  A  provision  of  this
general  sort  can  be  found  in  the  German  Constitution.  It  overlaps  a
good  deal  with  protection  of  free  entry  into  trades,  and  has  similar
virtues.  It  also  raises  a  similar  interpretive  difficulty,  involving  the
legitimacy of provisions designed to ensure that people are genuinely
qualified for jobs.

(c) A prohibition  on forced labor. This provision seems indispens-
able  to  the  emerging  Eastern  European  democracies.  It  nicely  com-
plements  the  right  to  choose  one’s  occupation,  by  saying  that  gov-
ernment  cannot  require  people  to  engage  in  work  that  it  prefers
them  to  undertake.  It  also  tends  to  guarantee  free  labor  markets.
Such a provision also carries forward, in a particularly crisp way, the
  traditional  liberal  prohibition  on  slavery,  embodied  in  the  general

idea that “we were not made for one another’s uses.“z9

6. Prohibition on government monopoZies (de jwe). If the goal is to
create  a  market  economy,  the  Constitution  should  say  that  govern-
ment  may  not  give  itself  a  legal  monopoly  over  any  sector  of  the
economy.  A  right  of  exclusive  management  of  agriculture  or
telecommunications  is  a  sure  way  of  stifling  competition  and  of  im-
pairing  economic  productivity.  Indeed,  such  a  right  will  reintroduce
all of the problems discussed in Part I of this essay. The government
should be banned from embarking on this course.

Under  certain  narrow  conditions,  an  exception  might  be  permit-
ted-as,  for  example,  where  government  cannot  efficiently  perform
a  certain  function  unless  it  creates  a  monopoly,  and  where  competi-
tion  is  impossible.  This  is  an  extremely  rare  circumstance,  however,
and a strong burden should be imposed on government to show that
it is present in any particular case.

It  would  probably  be  a  mistake  to  create  a  constitutional  prohi-
bition  on  government  monopolies  that  exist  in  fact  but  that  are  not
created  through  law.  In  the  transition  from  communism,  some  de

29  J.  Locke,  Two  Treatises   on  Government  311  (Laslett   ed.  1960).

22

CHICAGO  WORKING  PAPER IN LAW & ECONOMICS

facto monopolies are likely, and it is hard to see how a constitutional
court  can  prevent  them.  Here  we  encounter  one  of  the  limits  of
constitutionalism: the narrow remedial power of the judiciary.

7.  Nondiscrimination   against  private  enterarises.   It  probably  fol-
lows  from  what  has  been  said  thus  far  that  government  should  be
constrained from imposing special disabilities on private enterprises,
that  is,  from  taxing,  regulating,  or  otherwise  discouraging  private
entities  from  operating  on  equal  terms  with  official  organs.  Gov-
ernment might well seek to create such disabilities as a way of insu-
lating  itself  from  competition  or  of  protecting  its  own  instrumen-
talities. If it does so, it will create severe harms to civil society and to
economic  markets.  A  prohibition  could  accomplish  considerable
good

of course there will be some hard interpretive questions here. To
see  whether  there  is  discrimination,  one  will  have  to  explore
whether  private  and  public  enterprises  are  similarly  situated.  This
will not always be an easy question to answer.

8.  The  right  to  travel  within  the  nation  and  to  andporn  the  na-
tion.  Protection  of  the  right  to  travel  serves  both  economic  and
democratic  functions.  Especially  in  a  system  with  some  degree  of
jurisdictional  decentralization,  the  right  to  travel  is  a  safeguard
against oppressive regulation. If citizens can leave, there is a powerful
deterrent to such regulation; people are able to “vote with their feet.”
It  is  fully  plausible  to  think  that  in  the  United  States,  the  right  to
travel  has-been  one  of  the  greatest  safeguards  against  legislation
harmful  to  economic  development.  The  right  to-travel  internally
creates  a  built-in  check  on  tyranny,  at  least  in  a  federal  system.  The
right to leave one’s nation serves the same function. In this sense the
right is simultaneously an economic and a political one.

9.  Tbefiscal  constittition.   It  might  be  appropriate  to  introduce  a
series  of  provisions  amounting  to  a  “fiscal  constitution,”  that  is,  a
document  designed  to  regulate  institutions  dealing  with  the  rela-
tionship  between  government  and  the  economy.  Of  course  such
provisions  would  overlap  with  those  discussed  above.  I  offer  a  few
examples  here.  I  do  not  discuss  monetary  arrangements  and  institu-
tions,  because  they  would  call  for  lengthy  discussion;  but  certainly
provisions bearing on that issue warrant consideration.

(a)  Ban  on  tarz@   and  duties.  It  has  probably  been  established,
through  both  theory  and  practice,  that  tariffs  and  duties  are  on  bal-

PROPERTY   AND   CONSTITUTIONALISM

23

ante  harmful  to  the  citizens  of  a  nation.  Despite  this  fact,  there  is
constant pressure for these measures, from the usually narrow groups
and  interests  that  would  benefit  from  them.  Because  tariffs  and  du-
ties  would  create  aggregate  harms  but  short-term  and  narrow  gains,
it might be sensible to enact, in advance, a constitutional prohibition
on  them.  The  problem  with  this  strategy  is  that  it  is  at  least  reason-
able  to  think  that  tariffs  and  duties  are  necessary  under  some  condi-
tions,  and  perhaps  their  availability  is  an  important  device  for  gov-
ernment  to  have  while  it  is  negotiating  with  other  nations.

(b)  Balanced  budget.  In  the  United  States,  there  has  recently
been  some  interest  in  a  constitutional  amendment  that  would  re-
quire  “balanced  budgets. ”  The  case  for  such  an  amendment  is  not
obscure.  For  legislators  or  governments  with  short-term  electoral
and  domestic problems, it may well make sense to spend more than
one receives. The dangers of such a course are felt by future genera-
tions.  A  constitutional  provision  might  be  directed  against  this  form
of myopia.

On  reflection,  however,  it  would  probably  be  a  mistake  to  in-
clude  such  a  provision  in  a  Constitution.  A  decision  not  to  balance
the budget might be the right one in any particular year. The conse-
quences  of  unbalanced  budgets  are  sharply  disputed  among
economists.  It  is  hardly  clear  that  they  are  seriously  harmful.  More-
over, a provision to this effect would not readily be subject to judicial
enforcement.

(c)  Restrictions  on  the  taxing  power.  A  fiscal  constitution  might
also  impose  restrictions  on  the  power  of  taxation.  Most  plausible
here  would  be  a  ban  on  retroactive  taxation.  If  government  may  tax
resources accumulated in a period in which they could not be taxed,
it  should  not,  consistent  with  the  rule  of  law,  be  permitted  to  in-
troduce a tax that will be imposed retroactively. There are also ques-
tions  here  about  possible  restrictions  on  progressivity.

(d) Ban on controls on export  or import of currency. It might well
make  sense  to  accompany  a  right  to  travel  with  a  prohibition  on  le-
gal  controls  on  the  export  or  import  of  currency.  Such  a  prohibition
could serve similar functions in guarding against protectionism.

24

CHICAGO  WORKING  PAPER IN LAW & ECONOMICS

III.  PROBLEMS

I  have  not  dealt  with  two  problems  of  special  importance  to  the
emerging  Eastern  European  democracies.  The  first  is  that  the  in-
terpretation of constitutional provisions is of critical importance, and
interpretation  cannot  be  entirely  constrained  by  those  who  write  the
Constitution.  I  have  argued,  for  example,  that  a  constitution  should
ensure  that  private  property  cannot  be  taken  without  just  compen-
sation. But a constitution cannot possibly spell out, in advance, what
government action must be in order to qualify as a “taking.” Because
of  the  limitations  of  language,  that  task  must  be  left  to  judges  deal-
ing  with  particular  cases  and  particular  measures.  The  same  point
applies  to  all  provisions  now  under  consideration  in  Poland  and
elsewhere.  Constitutions  set  out  the  broad  outlines  for  decision,  but
in  light  of  the  limitations  of  words  and  human  foresight,  they  can-
not  do  much  more  than  that.

More  fundamentally,  the  meaning  of  any  text  is  a  function  of
interpretive  principles.  To  say  that  the  original  understanding  is
binding, or that there should be an interpretive presumption in favor
of  property  rights,  or  that  courts  should  minimally  intrude  into
political processes, or that a commitment to constitutional equality is
a  commitment  to  the  elimination  of  castes-all  these  are  fully
understandable  claims,  but  their  contents  are  not  “in”  any  text,  and
they  must  be  justified  in  substantive  terms.  Frequently,  debates  over
interpretive  principles  purport  to  be  semantic;  actually  they  involve
the  selection,  on  political  and  moral  grounds,  of  norms  with  which
to  give  meaning  to  constitutional  texts.  No  document  can  avoid  the
grant  of  discretion  to  interpreters  in  choosing  among  various  possi-
ble norms.

The second problem is that a system of private property has to be
created  rather  than  merely  recognized.  In  light  of  the  current  expe-
rience  of  Eastern  Europe,  the  notion  of  “laissez-faire,”  as  a  descrip-
tion  of  markets,  stands  exposed  as  the  conspicuous  fiction  that  it  is.
Markets  depend  for  their  existence  not  on  passivity,  but  on  active
governmental  choices.  Most  of  those  choices  cannot  be  made  in  a
Constitution.  The  movement  for  privatization-for  the  creation  of
property  rights- i s exceptionally  important,  and  it  must  accompany
the  writing  and  implementation  of  constitutional  rights.  The
Constitution  will  work  against  the  backdrop  of  property  rights,  and

PROPERTY   AND  CONSTITUTIONALISM

25

it  will  protect  those  rights  once  created;  but  the  act  of  creation  will
not occur at the constitutional level.

In Eastern Europe, the problem is especially formidable. It is sad
but  true  that  existing  ownership  rights  often  have  their  source  in
arbitrariness  or  in  injustice.  Who  owns  what  is  a  function  of  past
acts, public and private, many of which are irrelevant or unacceptable
from  the  moral  point  of  view.  In  the  West,  this  fact  can  be  conve-
niently ignored, because the role of fate, injustice, force, or the state
in  initial  allocations  is  not  really  visible.  And  in  important  respects
this  is  all  to  the  good;  a  constant  focus  on  the  origins  of  property
rights  might make it hard to proceed, day to day, with existing allo-
cations.  In  Eastern  Europe,  by  contrast,  any  allocation  will  be  very
visible indeed. It will occur all at once or in various steps, but in any
case  people  will  see  that  some  people  are  getting  property  through
government  decree,  and  others  are  not.  The  task  of  allocation  is  for
this reason much more difficult.

Sometimes  it  is  thought  that  the  allocation  of  initial  entitle-
ments  “does  not  matter,”  in  the  sense  that  at  least  in  the  absence  of
transactions  costs,  people  will  bargain  their  way  toward  the  same
outcome  regardless  of  that  allocation.  This  basic  idea  is  the  funda-
mental  claim  behind  the  Coase  theorem.30  Although  the  Coase
theorem  has  been  highly  influential  in  American  law,  and  has  con-
tributed  to  many  major  advances  in  our  understanding,  the  proposi-
tion  is  sometimes  false.  Its  falsehood  relates  in  important  ways  to
current  reform  efforts  in  Eastern  Europe.

The  central  point  here  is  that  whether  people  have  a  preference
for  a  commodity,  a  right,  or  anything  else  is  in  part  of  function  of
whether  the  government  has  allocated  it  to  them  in  the  first  in-
stance. There is simply no way to avoid the task of initially allocating
an  entitlement,  and  the  decision  to  grant  an  entitlement  to  one
person  frequently  makes  that  person  value  that  entitlement  more
than  he  would  if  the  right  had  been  allocated  to  someone  else.  (It
also  makes  other  people  value  it  less  than  they  otherwise  would.)
The  initial  allocation  serves  to  influence,  to  legitimate,  and  to  rein-
force  social  understandings  about  presumptive  rights  of  ownership.
That  allocation  has  an  important  causal  connection  to  individual
perceptions about the good or right in question.

3o  See   Coase,  supra  note  6.

26

CHICAGO  WORKING PAPER IN LAW & ECONOMICS

The point is simply a factual one, and it has received considerable
empirical  confirmation.  The  effect  on  preferences  of  the  initial  allo-
cation  of  a  commodity  or  an  entitlement  is  commonly  described  as
the  “endowment  effect.“31 The  endowment  effect  has  immense
importance. It  suggests  that  any  initial  allocation  of  an  entitle-
ment-and  government  cannot  refuse  to  make  an  initial  alloca-
tion-may  well  have  effects  on  preferences.

Economists  and  psychologists  have  found  this  effect  in  many
places,  including  both  real  exchange  experiments  and  surveys.  For
example,  a  recent  study  showed  that  people  who  were  allocated  cer-
tain  consumption  objects-pens,  coffee  mugs,  and  binoculars-
placed a much higher valuation on those objects than did those who
were  required  to  purchase them. 32 No such effects were observed for
money  tokens  in  otherwise  identical  experiments.  In  a  similar  study,
some participants were given a mug and others a chocolate bar; both
were  told  that  they  could  exchange  one  for  the  other.  Participants  in
a  third  group,  not  given  a  prior  entitlement,  were  told  that  they
could select one or the other; 56% of these selected the candy bar. By
contrast,  89%  of  those  initially  given  the  mug  refused  to  trade  it  for
the  candy  bar,  and  only  10%  of  those  initially  given  the  candy  were
willing  to  trade  it  for  the mug. 33  The  different  evaluations  could  not
be  explained  by  reference  to  anything  other  than  the  initial
endowment.

Studies based on survey research have made similar findings. One
such  study  found  differences  between  payment  and  compensation
valuations  of  trees  in  a  park  of  about  five  to  one.34  When  hunters
were  questioned  about  the  potential  destruction  of  a  duck  habitat,

31  It  was  first  so-called   in  Thaler,  Toward  a  Positive  Theory   of  Consumer

Choice,  1 J. Econ. Behavior  and Org. 39 (1980).

32  Kahneman,  Knetch,  and  Thaler,  Experimental   Tests   of  the  Endowment
Effect and the Coase Theorem,  98 J. Pol. Econ.  1325 (1990). See  also Knetch,
The  Endowment   Effect  and  Evidence   of  Nonreversible   Indifference   Curves,  79
Am.  Econ.   Rev.  ,1277  (1989);  Knetch  and  Sinden,   Willingness  to  Pay  and
Compensation   Demanded:   Experimental   Evidence   of  an  Unexpected   Disparity
in Measures  of Value,  99 Q J. Econ.  507 (1984).

33  Knetch,   supra  note  32.
34  Brookshire   and  Coursey,   Measuring  the  Value  of  a  Public   Good:  An
Empirical   Comparison   of  Elictation   Procedures,   77  Am.  Econ.  Rev.  554
(1987).

PROPERTY   AND   CONSTITUTIONALISM

27

they  said  that  they  would  be  willing  to  pay  an  average  of  $247  to
prevent  the  loss-but  would  demand  no  less  than  $1044  to  accept
it  35  In  another  study,  participants  required  payments  to  accept
degradation  of  visibility  ranging  from  5  to  more  than  16  times
higher  than  their  valuations  based  on  their  willingness  to  pay.36
According  to  yet  another  study,  the  compensation  demanded  for  ac-
cepting  a  new  risk  of  immediate  death  of .OOl% was  one  or  two  or-
ders  of  magnitude  higher  than  the  amount  of  willingness  to  pay  to
eliminate an existing risk of the same  size.37 A related survey showed
similarly large status quo biases in willingness to pay for changes in
risks?  A  powerful  status  quo  bias  appears  to  affect  reactions  to  risks
or  losses.

In  many  settings,  then,  it  has  been  shown  that  people  place  a
higher  value  on  rights  or  goods  that  they  currently  hold  than  they
place  on  the  same  goods  when  in  the  hands  of  others.  There  are
multiple  possible  explanations  for  endowment  effects.  In  many
cases,  endowment  effects  reflect  a  genuine  preference-shaping  con-
sequence  from  the  initial  assignment.39  Endowment  effects  may

35  J.  Hammock   and  G.  Brown,  Waterfowl  and  Wetlands:   Toward   Bioe-

conomic   Analysis   (1974).

36  Rowe,  d’Arge,   and  Brookshire,   An  Experiment  on  the  Economic  Value

of Visibility, 7 J. E nv. EC.  and Management  1 (1980).

37  Thaler  supra  note  31,  at  44.
38  Thus’people   were  willing   to  pay  $3.78  on  average   to  decrease  the  risk
from  an  insecticide,   but  77%  refused  to  buy  the  product  at  any  price,  however
reduced,  if  the  risk  level  would   increase  by  an  equivalent   amount.  Viscusi,   Ma-
gat,  and  Huber,   An  Investigation  of  the  Rationality  of  Consumer   Valuations
of  Multiple Health  Risks,  ‘18  RAND  Journal   of Economics  465 (1987).

39  Such  effects  may  also  come  from  experience;  people  who  use  a  product  or
have  an  entitlement  may  learn  to  appreciate  its  value.  They  may  be  a  product  of
strategic  considerations;  someone  may  be  unwilling  to  give  up  a  right  because
the  concession  would  reveal  weakness  in  bargaining.  Sometimes  they  might  be
produced  by  the  wealth  effect  of  the  initial  allocation  of  the  entitlement.  Differ-
ent  allocations  produce  differences  in  wealth-someone  with  more  entitlements
is  to  that  extent  richer-and  perhaps  some  allocations  have  wealth  effects  suffi-
ciently  large  to  affect  the  point  to  which  people  will  bargain.

Such  effects  might  also  derive  from  anticipated  after-the-fact  regret.  People
who  trade  one  good  for  another  may  think  that  in  the  event  of  disappointment,
they  will  be  left  not  only  with  a  good  of  uncertain  value,  but  also  with  a  feeling
of  responsibility  for  that  very  fact.  Notably,  some  of  these  explanations  do  not
depend  on  real  preference  change  at  all.  They  account  for  endowment  effects

28

CHICAGO  WORKING PAPER IN LAW & ECONOMICS

reflect  an  effort  to  reduce  cognitive  dissonance:  High  valuation  of
what  one  owns,  and  low  valuation  or  what  one  does  not,  is  a  means
of  reducing  dissonance,  and  in  some  respects  it  is  highly  adaptive.
Perhaps,  too,  the  initial  allocation  has  an  important  legitimating
effect,  suggesting  that  the  entitlement  “naturally”  belongs  where  it
has  been  placed,  and  putting  a  social  burden  on  even  voluntary
changes.  In  some  cases  the  divergence  between  willingness  to  pay
and  willingness  to  accept  is  probably  a  product  of  the  change  in  so-
cial  norms  brought  about  by  the  change  in  the  allocation  of  the
entitlement.40

For  present  purposes,  it  is  not  necessary  to  explain  the  mecha-
nism  behind  endowment  effects.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  the  initial
allocation  has  preference-shaping  effects  and  that  when  this  is  so,
there is no acontextual “preference” with which to do legal or politi-
cal work.

If  all  this  is  correct,  large  consequences  follow.  In  Eastern  Eu-
rope,  property  rights  have often yet to be allocated. A series of deci-
s i o n s -not  feasibly  placed  in  the  Constitution-must  be  made  to
establish  who  owns  what.  The  distinguishing  feature  of  a  system  of
freedom  of  contract  is  that  rights  of  ownership  are  alienable.  But
such  a  system  can  operate  with  quite  different  initial  allocations  of
rights.  Should  workers  have  a  presumptive  right  to  be  fired  only  for
cause,  a  right  that  employers  can  “buy”  through  contract?  Or  should
employers have a presumptive right to fire employees at will, a right
that  employees  can  purchase  in  an  agreement?  Does  the  right  to
own  a  plant  include  the  right  to  pollute,  subject  to  an  agreement  to
cease,  obtained  by  neighbors?  Or  do  the  neighbors  own  that  right
initially,  with  a  provision  for  purchase  from  the  plant  owner?  A
regime of freedom of contract is consistent with all of these systems.
The key point is that the initial allocation will affect the valuation of
the  rights  by  both  current  owners  and  would-be  purchasers.  And  if

while  holding  preferences  constant.  But  these  sorts  of  explanations  do  not  ap-
pear  sufficient.

4o  The  endowment  effect  should  probably  not  be  seen  as  a  case  of  individ-
ual  irrationality,  as  has  been  found  in  certain  reactions  to  low-probability
events  or  in  certain  kinds  of  preference-reversals.  It  is  by  no  means  clear  that
status  quo  bias  of  this  kind  is  irrational.

PROPERTY   AND  CONSTITUTIONALISM

29

it does so, the initial allocation will have important consequences for
ultimate  outcomes.

For  transition  in  Eastern  Europe,  it  is  important  also  to  under-
stand  that  much  of  governmental  behavior-the  acts  of  government
and  of  those  who  seek  to  influence  it-might  well  be  a  product  of
endowment  effects.  The  point  has  a  range  of  positive  implications;
indeed,  it  helps  to  explain  a  wide  range  of  political  outcomes  and
political behavior. Political participants should be able to exploit en-
dowment  effects  by  attempting  to  describe  the  status  quo  in  a  way
that  takes  advantage  of  the  phenomenon  of  status  quo  bias.  So  too,
political  actors  are  frequently  successful  when  they  are  able  to  iden-
tify  and  control  the  perception  of  the  status  quo.  One  example-
prominent  in  Eastern  Europe  before  and  after  communism-is
provided  by  constant  political  efforts  to  lower  expectations  by  de-
scribing  the  status  quo,  or  the  expected  status  quo,  as  systematically
worse  than  in  fact  it  is-so  that  the  citizenry  will  rarely  perceive  de-
viations as losses but instead only as gains. The phenomenon occurs
during elections, during wars, and during debate over the economy.

With  respect  to  current  dilemmas  in  Eastern  Europe,  the  exis-
tence  of  endowment  effects  shows  the  importance  of  initial  enti-
tlements  in  creating  preferences  and  beliefs:  Probably  the  most  that
can  be  said  is  that  the  initial  allocation  should  be  undertaken  demo-
cratically  and  with  a  firm  awareness  of  the  (perhaps  surprising)
consequences. But  the  Constitution  cannot  plausibly  make  that
allocation.  It  can  only  protect  property  rights  once  they  have  been
created.  Like  the  problem  of  interpretation,  the  problem  of  al-
locating  initial  entitlements  points  to  important  limits  in  constitu-
tionalism.

CONCLUSION

The  three  transitions  now  taking  place  in  Eastern  Europe
should  be  brought  more  closely  together.  Above  all,  the  task  of
constitution-making  can  help  facilitate  the  transitions  to  economic
markets  and  to  democratic  self-government.  To  this  end,  I  have
outlined  some  possible  constitutional  provisions  designed  to  protect
the basic institutions of private property, free markets: and civil soci-
ety.  A  similar  analysis  might  be  applied  to  provisions  not  directly
concerned  with  the  protection  of  markets-including  rights  to  as-

30

CHICAGO WORKING  ,PAPER  IN LAW & ECONOMICS

sociational  liberty;  freedom  from  discrimination  on  the  basis  of  sex,
race,  religion,  and  ethnicity;  and  rights  of  political  and  religious
liberty.

The  most  general  point  is  that  with  strong  constitutional  pro-
tection  of  private  property  and  economic  markets,  nations  in  East-
ern  Europe  can  take  an  important  step  on  the  way  to  both  eco-
nomic  growth  and  democratic  self-government.  The  connection
between  private  property  and  prosperity  is  well  understood;  the  ex-
perience  of  Eastern  Europe  confirms  a  less  obvious  point,  involving
the  contributions  of  such  rights  to  the  security  indispensable  to  citi-
zenship.  In  this  light  such  rights  can  be  defended  not  on  the  ground
that  they  conform  to  “human  nature,”  but  on  the  contrary  as  part  of
a  system  having  salutary  rather  than  destructive  effects  on  human
character.  Both  markets  and  democracy  are  most  plausibly  defended
in these terms.

To  say  this  is  hardly  to  challenge  programs  that  redistribute  re-
sources,  training,  or  opportunities  to  the  poor,  or  that  otherwise
protect  the  vulnerable.  The  instrumental  arguments  that  justify  pri-
vate  property  call  for  efforts  to  ensure  that  everyone  can  have  some
of  it.  These  arguments  powerfully  support  government  programs
supplementing  market  arrangements.41

Without  strong  constitutional  provisions  on  behalf  of  property
rights, civil society; and markets, there will probably be a substantial
temptation  to  intrude  on  all  of  these  institutions,  and,  by  so  doing,
to  recreate  the  very  problems  that  such  institutions  are  supposed  to
solve.  In  Eastern  Europe,  the  task  of  constitution-making  is  more
difficult,  and  far  more  pressing,  than  it  was  in  the  West,  in  which  a
well-established  backdrop  of  rights  and  institutions  was  already  in
place.  The  ironic  conclusion  is  that  the  case  for  a  firm  negative
constitution,  and  for  creation  and  protection  of  property  rights  and
free  markets,  is  very  strong  in  Eastern  Europe;  and  this  is  so  even  if
the  corresponding  case  is,  in  Western  countries,  somewhat  ambigu-
ous.

41  To  say  this  is  not,  however,  to  say  that  such  programs   should   be  guar-
anteed   constitutionally.  Nor  is  it  to  deny  that  diffkult  instrumental   judgments
must  be made about  the efficacy of different programs,  some  of which undoubt-
edly  undermine   their  own  goals  by  creating   dependency.

PROPERTY AND CONSTITUTIONALISM

31

No  constitution  can  make  the  initial  allocations  of  property
rights;  this  must  be  left  to  democratic  processes.  Moreover,  no  con-
stitutional  text  can  control  the  process  of  interpretation,  and  thus
there  is  always  a  risk  that  written  documents  will  be  given  a  mean-
ing  other  than  that  which  would  promote  a  nation’s  welfare.  But
large-scale  social  change  is  always  accompanied  by  risks,  and  the
ubiquity  of  risk  provides  no  reason  for  resignation  or  discourage-
ment.  A  constitution  offering  firm  protection  to  property  rights
could  do  a  great  deal  to  ease  the  transition  to  markets  and  democ-
racy.

CHICAGO WORKING PAPERS IN LAW AND ECONOMICS
(SECOND  SERIES)

1. William  M. Landes, Copyright  Protection  of Letters, Diaries and
Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach  (July 1991).

2.  Richard  A.  Epstein,   The  Path  to  The  TJ.  Hooper:  The  Theory

and History of Custom  in the Law of Tort (August 1991).

3.  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  On  Property  and  Constitutionalism   (Septem-

ber 1991).

Different versions of some of this essay will appear in Constitutional
Political  Economy  and  in  the  Cardozo  Law  Review.  Readers  with
comments should address them to:

Cass  R;  Sunstein
Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence
The  Law  School
The University of Chicago
1111   E.  60th  Street
Chicago,  IL  60637

