University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1991 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Constitutionalism and Secession 
Constitutionalism and Secession 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Constitutionalism and Secession," 58 University of Chicago Law Review 633 (1991). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Constitutionalism  and  Secession

Cass R.  Sunsteint

The  Soviet  Constitution  guarantees  a  right  to  secede.'  The
American  Constitution  does  not.  Although  some  secessionists  in
the American  South,  invoking  state sovereignty,  claimed to  find  an
implicit  right  to  secede  in  the  founding  document,  it  was  more
common  to  invoke  an  extratextual  and  nonjusticiable  "right  to  se-
cede"  said  to  be enshrined  in the  Declaration  of Independence.'  In
any  case, no  serious  scholar  or  politician  now  argues  that  a right to
secede  exists  under  American  constitutional  law.3  It  is  generally
agreed  that such  a  right would  undermine  the  Madisonian  spirit  of
the  original  document,  one  that  encourages  the  development  of
constitutional  provisions  that  prevent  the  defeat  of  the  basic
enterprise.4

Eastern  European  countries  are  now  deciding  about  the  con-
tents of proposed  constitutions. They  are often  doing  so  in the  con-
text  of  profound  cultural  and  ethnic  divisions,  both  often  defined
at least roughly in territorial  terms.  These  divisions  have propelled

t  Karl N. Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence  and  Co-Director,  Center  for  the Study
of Constitutionalism  in  Eastern  Europe,  The University  of Chicago  Law  School  and Depart-
ment of Political  Science.  I am  grateful  to  Akhil  Amar,  Marcella  David,  Jon  Elster, Larry
Kramer, Bernard  Manin, and  Michael  McConnell  for  helpful  comments,  and to  Sean  Dona-
hue  and  Simon  Steel  for  research  assistance.  This  paper was  originally  prepared  for  a  con-
ference  sponsored  by the Liberty  Fund, Inc.,  at the  University of Arizona  in December  1990,
and  I am  most grateful  to the  participants  in  that  conference  for  valuable  assistance.

' Constitution  (Fundamental  Law)  of the  Union of  Soviet Socialist  Republics,  Art 72:
"Each  Union  Republic  shall  retain the  right freely  to  secede  from  the USSR."  The  transla-
tion  is reprinted  in  John  N.  Hazard,  The  Union of Soviet Socialist Rei3ublics 31,  in  Albert
P.  Blaustein  arid  Gisbert  H.  Flanz,  eds,  18  Constitutions of  the  Countries of the  World
(Oceana,  1990).

1  Dwight  L.  Dumond,  The Secession Movement,  1860-1861  120-21  (Macmillan,  1931).
3  As  a  formal  matter  of  constitutional  interpretation,  the  issue  has  been  settled  since
Texas v  White, 74  US  700,  724-26  (1869)  (holding secession of Texas  from the Union  uncon-
stitutional  because  the states' acceptance  of the federal  Constitution represented  a  waiver  of
the  right  to  secede).  See  also  Akhil  Reed  Amar,  Some  New  World  Lessons  for  the  Old
World,  58  U  Chi L  Rev  483,  501-02  &  n  68,  (1991)  (discussing  secession).

4  Lincoln  set out the  basic Madisonian  view:  "Perpetuity  is implied,  if not expressed,  in
the  fundamental  law  of all  national  governments.... 
[N]o  government  proper  ever  had  a
provision  in  its organic  law for  its  own  termination."  First Inaugural  Address  (Mar 4,  1861),
reprinted  in  T.  Harry  Williams,  ed,  Selected  Writings and Speeches of Abraham Lincoln
117  (Hendricks,  1943)  ("Lincoln Writings").

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  633 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

claims  for  local  self-determination  that  could  readily  be  trans-
formed  into  attempts  to  guarantee  a  right  to  secede  or  even  into
secession  itself. In  Eastern  Europe  in  particular,  debates  over  the
right  to  secede  have  already  played  an  extraordinarily  important
role  in  discussions  of  new  institutional  arrangements.  Various  po-
litical  actors  have  vigorously  asserted  a right to  secede  in  Yugosla-
via, the  Soviet Union, and the Czech  and  Slovak Republics.5  Active
secession  movements  have  played  a  central  role  in  current  efforts
to  establish  democratic  governance.  Such  movements  have  led  to
claims  for  a  constitutional  right  to  secede,  paralleling  the  Soviet
right  but to  be  respected  in  practice.  A  draft  of the  Slovak  consti-
tution,  for  example,  creates  a  right  to  secede.6

It is likely that these claims  will be asserted  all the  more vigor-
ously  in  the  future. The  claims  for  secession,  or  for  a  right  to  se-
cede,  raise exceptionally  large  questions  about  the theory and prac-
tice  of  constitutionalism.  It  is  therefore  an  especially  important
time to  explore  the  relationship  between  secession  claims  and  con-
stitutionalism  in  general.

My  principal  claim  in  this  essay  is  that  whether  or  not  seces-
sion  might be justified  as  a matter of  politics or  morality,  constitu-
tions  ought not  to  include  a right  to  secede.  To  place  such  a  right
in  a founding  document would  increase  the  risks  of  ethnic  and  fac-
tional  struggle;  reduce  the  prospects  for  compromise  and  delibera-
tion  in government;  raise  dramatically  the  stakes  of day-to-day  po-
litical 
illegitimate
considerations  into  those  decisions;  create  dangers  of  blackmail,
strategic  behavior,  and  exploitation;  and,  most  generally,  endanger
the  prospects  for  long-term  self-governance.8  Constitutionalism,

irrelevant 

introduce 

decisions; 

and 

5  See,  for  example,  Celestine  Bohlen,  East  Europe's Past Imperils  3  Nations, NY
Times A16  (Dec  16,  1990)  ("East Europe's Past"). The  Croatian  Parliament  has  adopted  a
constitution  that would  give  it  a  right to  secede  from  Yugoslavia  upon  a  two-thirds  vote  of
the local  legislature  and a  simple majority vote  in  a  plebiscite.  See  Croatia Takes  the Right
to  Secede,  NY Times  A9  (Dec  22,  1990).  In  October  1990,  Slovenia  passed  a  constitutional
amendment  creating  a  right  to  secede.

There  are  active  secession  movements  elsewhere-in  Canada  and  India,  for  exam-
ple-and  while  I  do  not  explore  them  here,  this  article  bears  on  the  issue  of  secession
generally.

See Draft  Constitution  of the  Slovak  Republic, Arts  2,  7  (on file  with  U  Chi L  Rev)..
It would follow  that courts  should  not find such a right to be implicit  in constitutions.

8 Lincoln  made  many  of these  arguments:
Plainly, the  central  idea  of secession  is  the  essence  of anarchy. A  majority  held  in  re-
straint by  constitutional checks  and  limitations,  and  always  changing  easily with  delib-
erate  changes  of popular  opinions  and  sentiments,  is  the  only true  sovereign  of a  free
people.  Whoever rejects  it does, of necessiy, fly  to anarchy or to despotism.  Unanimity
is  impossible;  the  rule  of  a  minority,  as  a  permanent  arrangement,  is  wholly  in-

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  634 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

embodying  as  it  does  a  set  of  precommitment  strategies,  is  fre-
quently  directed  against  risks  of  precisely  this  sort.  Political  or
moral  claims  for secession  are  frequently  powerful,  but they  do not
justify  constitutional  recognition  of  a  secession  right.

The  principal  argument  for  recognition  of  a right  to  secede  is
that  it  would  operate  as  a  powerful  deterrent  to  oppressive  and
discriminatory  practices,  and  also  serve  as  an  effective  remedy for
these  practices.  Usually,  however,  these  goals  can  be  promoted
through  other,  more  direct  means.  If they  cannot  be,  a  negotiated
agreement  embodying  secession  or  a  right  of  revolution-also  not
recognized  in  founding  texts-is  a  preferable  safeguard.  The  op-
portunity for  a negotiated  agreement  or  a right of revolution  would
provide  a  remedy  against  most of the relevant  abuses  without  rais-
ing  the  continuous  risks  to  self-government  that  would  be  created
by  a  constitutional  right  to  secede.

In the  process  of making  this  argument,  I  hope  also  to  disen-
tangle  the  various  possible  grounds  for  a  moral  claim  to  secession
and  to indicate  which  of those  grounds  have force  in different  con-
texts.  Some  of the  discussion  will provide  support  for the view  that
secession  is often  justified  as  a matter  of political  morality. In such
cases  I argue  against  national  efforts  to  stop  secession  through  mil-
itary  or  other  action.

In Part I, I discuss  constitutions  as  precommitment  strategies,
designed  to  foreclose  debate  over  certain  fundamental  questions.
These  strategies  should  often  be  seen  as  enabling  rather  than  con-
straining,  that  is,  as  devices  not  only  for  limiting  government,  but
also  for  facilitating  the  difficult  process  of  self-government.  This
argument  has  powerful  roots  in  the  American  constitutional  tradi-
tion  and  applies  with  particular  force  in  the  context  of  secession.
The  argument  also  has  general  implications  for  the  theory  of what
does  and  does  not belong  in  constitutions. This theory remains  in a
surprisingly  primitive  state,  and  I  will  venture  some  preliminary
remarks  on  the  subject.

In  Part II,  I  discuss  reasons  why  a subunit  of  a nation  might
want  to secede,  and  provide  a  brief assessment  of those  reasons  as
a  matter  of political  morality.  My  conclusion  is  that those  reasons
often  create  a  strong  moral  claim  for  secession.  Even  when  this  is
so,  however,  the  creation  of  a  right to  secede  in  a  founding  docu-

admissable;  so  that,  rejecting  the  majority  principle,  anarchy  or  despotism  in  some
form  is  all  that is  left.

First  Inaugural Address  (Mar  4,  1861),  in  Williams,  ed, Lincoln Writings 117,  120  (cited  in
note  4).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  635 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

ment  is  usually  unjustified.  Part  III  discusses  qualified  rights  to
secession,  arguing that  even  though  these  are  superior  to  a  general
right  of  exit  for  subunits,  they  are  inferior  to  an  across-the-board
waiver  of  that  right  by  all  subunits  in  a  nation.9

I.  CONSTITUTIONS  AS  PRECOMMITMENT  STRATEGIES

A. 

In  General:  Notes  on  Constitutionalism

It  is  often  said  that  constitutionalism  is  in  considerable  ten-
sion with  democracy. Thomas  Jefferson  was emphatic  on the point,
arguing  that  constitutions  should  be  amended  by  each  generation
in  order  to  ensure  that the  dead  past  would  not  constrain  the  liv-
ing  present. 10  Many  contemporary  observers  echo  the  Jeffersonian
position,  claiming  that  constitutional  constraints  often  amount  to
unjustified,  antidemocratic  limits  on  the  power  of  the  present  and
future.1  Responding  to  Jefferson,  James  Madison  argued  that  a
constitution  subject  to  frequent  amendment  would  promote  fac-
tionalism  and  provide  no 
republican  self-
government. 2

firm  basis 

for 

Madison  envisioned  firm  and lasting  constitutional  constraints
as  a precondition  for  democratic  processes,  rather  than  a check  on
them. This  vision  captures  a central  goal of American  constitution-
alism:  to  ensure  the  conditions  for  the  peaceful,  long-term  opera-
tion  of  democracy  in  the  face  of  often-persistent  social  differences
and  plurality along  religious,  ethnic,  cultural,  and  other  lines. This
goal  is  highly  relevant  to  constitutional  developments  in  Eastern
Europe,  where  religious  and  ethnic  hostilities  are  especially  in-
tense.  Madison  saw  differences  and  diversity  as  strengths  rather
than  weaknesses,  if  channeled  through  constitutional  structures
that  would  promote  deliberation  and  lead  groups  to  check,  rather
than  exploit,  other  groups.  It  may  be  possible  for  Eastern  Euro-

9  My  argument  builds  largely  on  the  theory  and  practice  of constitutionalism  in  the
United  States  and, to  a  lesser  extent,  on  more  general  western  political  and  constitutional
theory.  By  so concentrating,  of course,  I do not mean to suggest  that American  and  western
traditions  and  approaches  provide  the  only basis  for  evaluating  the  constitutional  implica-
tions of a right to secede.  In view  of the  underlying issues,  however,  it  would be surprising if
other  traditions  and  approaches  did  not reach  similar  conclusions.

10 Thomas  Jefferson,  Letter  to Samuel  Kercheval  (July 12,  1816),  reprinted  in  Merrill

D.  Peterson,  ed,  The Portable Thomas Jefferson 558-61  (Viking,  1975).

'1  For  an  extreme  example,  see  Roberto  Mangabeira  Unger,  Politics: A  Work  in  Con-

structive Social Theory 454-57  (Cambridge,  1987).

12  James  Madison,  Letter  to  Thomas  Jefferson  (Feb  14,  1790),  reprinted  in  Marvin
Meyers,  ed,  The Mind of the Founder: Sources of the Political Thought of James Madison
230-31  (Bobbs-Merrill,  1973).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  636 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

pean  countries  to  replicate  this  approach,  although  they  face  far
more  profound  differences  of language,  ethnicity,  history, and  reli-
gion  than  those  that  confronted  the  Framers  of  our  Constitution.
To approach  the  question  of secession,  it  will be  useful  to pro-
vide  a  brief  outline  of  some  of the  reasons  for  entrenching  institu-
tional  arrangements  and  substantive  rights.' 3  On  such  questions,
constitutional  theory  remains  in  a  surprisingly  primitive  state.1 4  I
begin by examining  what  sorts of  considerations  might lead  people
forming  a new  government  to  place  basic  rights  and  arrangements
beyond the  reach  of  ordinary  politics. The  crucial  idea  here  is that
for  various  reasons,  people  in a newly formed  nation  might attempt
to  do  so  as  part of  a  precommitment  strategy.

Some rights  are entrenched  because  of a belief that they  are in
some  sense  pre-  or  extra-political,  that  is,  because  individuals
ought  to  be  allowed  to  exercise  them  regardless  of what  majorities
might  think.  Some  of  these  rights  are  entrenched  for  reasons  en-
tirely  independent  of  democracy.  Here  constitutionalism  is  indeed
a self-conscious  check on  self-government,  attempting  to immunize
a private  sphere  from public  power.  Plausible  examples  include  the
rights  to  private  property, 15  freedom  from  self-incrimination,  bod-
ily  integrity,  protection  against  torture  or  cruel  punishment,  and
privacy.

But  many  of  the  rights  that  are  constitutionally  entrenched
actually  derive  from  the  principle  of  democracy  itself.  Their  pro-
tection  from  majoritarian  processes  follows  from  and  creates  no
tension  with  the  goal  of  self-determination  through  politics.  The
precommitment  strategy  permits  the  people  to  protect  democratic
processes  against  their  own  potential  excesses  or  misjudgments.
The  right to  freedom  of  speech  and  the  right to  vote  are  familiar
illustrations.  Constitutional  protection  of  these  rights  is  not  at
odds  with the  commitment  to  self-government  but instead a logical
part  of  it.' 6

'a By using  the word  "entrenching"  here  and  elsewhere,  I refer  to simple constitutional-

ization,  not  to a  decision  to immunize  a  constitutional provision  from  amendment.  I assume
throughout  that constitutional  provisions  are  much  more  difficult  to  change  than  ordinary
statutes,  but  nonethelsss  amendable  if there  is  a  consensus  that they  should  be.

"'  For  a  valuable  collection  of  essays  on  this  topic,  see Jon  Elster  and  Rune  Slagstad,

eds,  Constitutionalism and Democracy (Cambridge,  1988).

"  The  right  to  property  is  an  ambiguous  case;  it  is  a  democratic  right  as  well  as  a
private  one. Private  property  provides  for security  and independence  from  government,  and
these  are  preconditions  for  citizenship-a  theme  that  played  a  large  role  in  republican
thought. See J.G.A.  Pocock,  ed,  The Political Works of James Harrington 53-63,  67-68,  144-
52  (Cambridge,  1977).

16  For an  extended  elaboration  of this  theme, see  John  Hart Ely,  Democracy and Dis-

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  637 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law  Review

[58:633

Institutional  arrangements  can  also  be understood  as  an effort
to  protect  a private  sphere  from  majoritarianism.  Often this  effort
stems  from  a  fear  of  democratic  processes.  A  decision  to  divide
government  among  the  legislative,  executive,  and judicial  branches
might  be  regarded  as  an  effort  to  check  and  limit  government  by
requiring  a consensus  among  all three before the  state can  interfere
with the  private sphere. 17  Private  liberty flourishes because  govern-
ment  is  partially  disabled.  So  too,  a  federal  system  might  ensure
that the  nation and its  subunits  will check  each  other, generating  a
friction  that  enables  private  liberty  to  flourish.' 8

if  structural  provisions 

Structural  provisions  of  this  sort  limit  the  political  power  of
present  majorities  (or  minorities),  and  in  this  sense  raise  difficul-
ties for those who believe  that the only or  principal purpose  of con-
stitutionalism  is  to  provide  a  framework  for, democratic  govern-
ance.  But 
seen  as
precommitment  strategies,  some  of them can be  enabling as  well as
constraining. 9  We  can  understand  both  individual  rights  and
structural  provisions  in  this  way.  Like  the  rules  of  grammar,  such
provisions  set out the rules  by which  political discussion  will  occur,
and  in that sense  free  up  the  participants  to  conduct  their  discus-
sions  more  easily.

are  generally 

The  system  of  separation  of  powers,  for  example,  does  not
merely  constrain  government,  but also  helps  to  energize  it, and  to
make  it more  effective,  by  creating  a healthy  division  of labor. This
was a prominent  argument  during  the  framing period  in America.2 °
A  system in which  the  executive  does  not bear  the  burden  of adju-
dication  may  well  strengthen  the  executive  by  removing  from  it  a
task  that  frequently  produces  public  opprobrium.  Indeed,  the  en-
tire  framework  might  enable  rather  than  constrain  democracy,  not
only by  creating  an energetic  executive 2 '  but, more  fundamentally,

trust (Harvard,  1980).

(New  Am  Library,  1961).

17  See  Federalist  51  (Madison),  in  Clinton  Rossiter,  ed,  The  Federalist Papers 320-25

"8 See id  at 323  (federalism  and  the  separation of powers  create a  "double  security"  for
individual  rights  because  "[t]he  different  governments  will  control  each  other,  at  the same
time  that each  will  be  controlled  by  itself.").

19  I  borrow  here  from  Stephen  Holmes,  Precommitment, and the  paradox of  democ-
racy, in  Elster  and Slagstad,  eds,  Constitutionalism and Democracy 195  (cited in  note  14),
and  Stephen  Holmes,  Gag rules  or the politics of omission, in  id  at 19.

"  See  Arthur S.  Miller,  An Inquiry into the Relevance of the Intentions of the Found-
ing Fathers, with Special Emphasis upon the Doctrine of Separation of Powers, 27  Ark  L
Rev  583,  588-89  (1973)  (efficiency  was  a  principal  rationale  for  the  separation  of powers,  in
the  view  of  influential  Framers  such  as  John  Adams,  Thomas  Jefferson,  John  Jay,  and
James  Wilson).

21  See Federalist  70  (Hamilton),  in  Rossiter, ed,  The Federalist Papers 423-31  (cited  in

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  638 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

by  allowing  the  sovereign  people  to  pursue  a strategy,  against their
government,  of divide  and  conquer.  So long  as it  is  understood that
no  branch  of government  is  actually  "the  people,"  a system  of sep-
aration  of  powers  can  allow the  citizenry  to  monitor  and  constrain
their  inevitably  imperfect  agents.  In  general,  the  entrenchment  of
established  institutional  arrangements  enables  rather  than  merely
constrains  present  and  future  generations  by  creating  a  settled
framework  under  which  people  may  make  decisions.

Thus  far  I  have  suggested  that  constitutions  might  create
rights  and  institutions  that  follow  from  some  independent  theory
of  what  individuals  are  owed,  that  are  a  natural  corollary  of  the
commitment  to  democracy,  or  that  help  to  facilitate  the  demo-
cratic  process  by  establishing  the  basic  structures  under  which  po-
litical  arrangements  can  take  place.  Constitutional  provisions  may
be  facilitative  in  quite  another  sense:  a  decision  to  take  certain  is-
sues  off the  ordinary  political  agenda  may  be  indispensable  to  the
political  process.2 2

For  example,  the  initial  decision  to  create  a  system  of  private
property  places  severe  constraints  on the  scope  of  any political  de-
liberations  on  that  fundamental  issue,  and  often  serves  to  keep  is-
sues  of  private  property  off  the  political  agenda  completely.  In-
deed,  Madison  understood  the  protection  of  rights  of  property
largely  as  a  mechanism  for  limiting  factional  conflict  in  govern-
ment,  not  as  a  means  of  protecting  "rights"  and  much  less  as  a
means  of  ensuring  against  redistribution.2"  The  removal  of  the  is-
sue  from  politics  serves,  perhaps  ironically,  to  ensure  that  politics
may  continue.

So  too,  a  nation  might  protect  questions  of  religion  against
resolution  by  democratic  processes,  not  only  because  there  is  a
right to  freedom  of  religious  conscience,  but also  because  the  dem-
ocratic  process  works  best  if  the  fundamental  and  potentially  ex-
plosive  question  of religion  does  not intrude  into  day-to-day  deci-
sions.  More  narrowly  and  no  doubt  more  controversially,  the
decision  to  constitutionalize  the  right to  abortion  might be justified
because  it  minimizes  the  chances  that  this intractable  and  polariz-

note  17)  (describing  need  for  a  vigorous,  unitary  executive).

22 See  Holmes,  Gag rules, in  Elster  and  Slagstad,  eds,  Constitutionalism and Democ-

racy (cited  in  note  14).

'3 See  Meyers,  ed,  The  Mind  of  the Founder 502-09  (cited  in  note  12).  In  fact,  the
failure  of the Framers  to eliminate  slavery  in  the  original  Constitution  was  attributable  to
ideas  of this  sort. The  example  reveals  that  the  decision  to  take  an  issue  off  the  political
agenda  is also  a  decision  to resolve  that issue  one way  rather  than  another. Such  a  decision
may  well  be  objectionable  on  democratic  or  other  grounds.

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  639 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

ing  question  will  intrude  into  and  thus  disable  the  political
process.

Yet  another  set  of  facilitative  constitutional  precommitment
strategies  includes  provisions  that  are  designed  to  solve  collective
action problems  or prisoners'  dilemmas,  that is,  situations  in which
the  pursuit  of  rational  self-interest  by  each  individual  actor  pro-
duces  outcomes  that  are  destructive  to  all  actors  considered  to-
gether,  and  that could  be avoided  if all  actors  agreed  in advance  to
coercion,  assuring  cooperation.2 4  People  who are  creating  their  gov-
ernment  might voluntarily  waive  a right whose  existence  would re-
materialize,  and  create  serious  risks, without  the waiver.  A decision
to  relinquish  an  otherwise  available  right  advances  the  interests  of
all  or  most  who  are  involved.2 5

This  idea  has  played  a  large  role  in  the  American  constitu-
tional  experience.  The  leading  example  is  the  Full  Faith  and
Credit  Clause,26  which  requires  each  state  to  enforce  judgments
rendered  in  other  states.  Every  state  might  have  an  incentive  to
refuse  to  enforce  the  judgments  of  other  states;  if  Massachusetts
chooses  not to  honor  the  judgment  of  a  New'York  court  against  a
Massachusetts  citizen,  then  Massachusetts  receives  a  short-term
gain  because  the resources  its  citizen  needs  to  satisfy any judgment
remain  within  the  borders  of  Massachusetts.  But  all  states  would
be  better  off  if  the  law  bound  each  of  them  to  respect  the  judg-
ments  of  others.  The  Full  Faith  and  Credit  Clause  ensures  pre-
cisely  this  outcome,  effectively  solving  a  conventional  prisoners'
dilemma.

Another  illustration  is  the  Commerce  Clause.  The  Supreme
Court  has  consistently  interpreted  the  clause  as  disabling  the
states  from  regulating  interstate  commerce."'  In  the  period  be-
tween  the  Articles  of  Confederation  and  the  Constitution,  battles
among  the  states  produced  mutually  destructive  tariffs  and  other
protectionist  measures.  The  adoption  of  each  of  these  measures
may  well  have  furthered  the  interest  of  each  state  considered  in
isolation.2 9  Collectively,  this  system  proved  disastrous.3 0

24 See  generally  Jon  Elster,  The  Cement of Society (Cambridge,  1989);  Edna Ullmann-

Margalit,  The Emergence of Norms  (Oxford,  1977).

25 Compare  Jean  Hampton,  Hobbes  and  the  Social  Contract Tradition (Cambridge,

1986).

26 US  Const,  Art IV,  § 1,  cl 1.
27  US  Const,  Art I,  §  8,  cl 3  .
28  See,  for  example,  Gibbons v  Ogden,  22  US  1  (1824).
29  Though  protectionism  can  be  self-destructive  as  well,  the  mere  perception  of self-

interest is  sufficient  for  purposes  of  this argument.

30  For  a  standard  treatment, see  John Fiske,  The Critical Period of American History,
1783-89 144-45  (Houghton  Mifflin,  1916)  ("[T]he different  states, with  their  different  tariff

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  640 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

Especially  in  light  of  the  strong  emotional  attachments  that
fuel perceptions  of state  self-interest,  a system  in  which  each  state
can  choose  whether  to  initiate  protectionist  measures  might  well
lead  many states to  do so.  But  an agreement  by  all states  to refrain
from  protectionism,  and thus  to waive  their  antecedent  right  under
the  Articles  of  Confederation,  should  further  the  collective  inter-
est.  The  constitutional  decision  to  remove  control  of  interstate
commerce  from  state  authority  solves  the  problem.3 '  In  this  case,
as with the Full  Faith  and  Credit  Clause,  a relinquishment  of what
appears  to  be  state  sovereignty  very  likely  furthers  the  interest  of
all  states  concerned.

This  example  illustrates  both  the  importance  of  precommit-
ment strategies  in  resolving  prisoners'  dilemmas,  and  the  potential
value  of judicial  review  in  a healthy  constitutional  system. The  Su-
preme  Court's  conclusion  that  the  Commerce  Clause  contains  an
implicit  limitation  on  state  power  over  interstate  commerce-a
"negative"  federal  power-was  controversial  at  first  and  still raises
thorny  problems  for  the  Court  from  time  to time. 2  The  Commerce
Clause  on  its  face  provides  the  federal  government  with  only  the
positive power  to  regulate, and  locates  this power  in the  legislature,
not the  courts.  But the  negative  commerce  power  follows naturally
from  the  structural  logic  of  the  Constitution.  Its  enforcement  by
the judiciary  has been  an important  means  of remaining  faithful  to
that  logic.3 3

Finally,  constitutional  precommitment  strategies  might  serve
to  overcome  myopia  or  weakness  of  will  on  the  part  of  the  collec-
tivity,  or to  ensure  that representatives  follow  the  considered judg-
ments  of the  people.  Protection  of freedom  of  speech,  or  from  un-

and  tonnage  acts,  began  to  make  commercial  war  upon  one  another.").  For  a  revisionist
view,  see  Edmund  W.  Kitch,  Regulation and the  American  Common Market, in  A.  Dan
Tarlock,  ed,  Regulation, Federalism, and Interstate Commerce 9-19  (Oelgeschlager,  Gunn
& Hain, 1981)  (states under  Articles  of Confederation  actually  cooperated  to promote  free-
dom  of  trade).

31 There  is  a  close  parallel  here  in  the  recent experience  of the  European  Community
with  regard  to the  1992  economic  union.  See,  for  example,  Wayne Sandholtz  and  John Zys-
man,  1992: Recasting the European Bargain, 42  World  Pol  95  (1989).

"  See, for  example,  Hunt v  Washington State Apple Advertising Commission, 432  US
333  (1977)  (North  Carolina  statute  requiring  only federal  grades  on  all  closed  containers  of
apples shipped  into state  violated  Commerce  Clause because  it  burdened  interstate  sales  of
Washington  apples  and  discriminated  against  such  sales).

11  In  the United  States, judicial  review  is  itself a product  of reasoning  based  on consti-
tutional  structure  rather  than  text.  See Marbury v  Madison, 5 US  137  (1803).  It  would  be
far  simpler,  however,  to make  that power  explicit.

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  641 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

reasonable  searches  and  seizures,  might  represent  an  effort  by  the
people  themselves  to  provide  safeguards  against  the  impulsive  be-
havior  of  majorities.  Here  the  goal  is  to  ensure  that  the  delibera-
tive  sense  of  the  community  will  prevail  over  momentary  pas-
sions.34   Similarly,  a  constitution  might 
firm
acknowledgement  that  the  desires  of  the  government,  even  in  a
well-functioning  republic,  do  not  always  match  those  of  the  peo-
ple.3 5  Constitutional  limits, introduced  by  something  like  the  peo-
ple  themselves,  therefore  respond  to  the  agency  problem  created
by  a system  in which  government  officials  inevitably  have  interests
of their  own.  This  problem  arises  in all  systems  of government,  in-
cluding  democracies.  In  countries  emerging  from  communist  rule,
without  established  principles  of  democratic  representation,  it  is
likely  to  pose  a special  danger,  against  which  constitutional  provi-
sions  should  guard.

represent  a 

In  all  of  these  cases,  the decision  to  take  certain  questions  off
the  political  agenda  might  be  understood  as  a  means  not  of  dis-
abling  but  of  protecting  politics,  by  reducing  the  power  of  highly
controversial  questions  to  create  factionalism,  instability,  impul-
siveness,  chaos,  stalemate,  collective  action problems,  myopia,  stra-
tegic  behavior,  or  hostilities  so  serious  and  fundamental  as  to  en-
danger  the governmental  process  itself. In this respect, the  decision
to  use  constitutionalism  to  remove  certain  issues  from  politics  is
often  profoundly  democratic.

We  can also  see  many constitutional  provisions  as  mechanisms
for  ensuring  discussion  and  deliberation  oriented  toward  agree-
ment  about  the  general  good  rather  than  factionalism  and  self-in-
terested bargaining.  The  states'  relinquishment  of their preexisting
sovereign  right  to  control  the  entry  and  exit  of  goods  is  the  most
prominent  example.  But  the  institutions  of  representation  and
checks  and  balances  have  frequently  been  designed  to  promote
general  discussion  and  compromise,  to  diminish  the  influence  of
particular  segments  of  society,  and  to  produce  the  incentives  for
and  possibility  of  agreement.  These  principles  largely  guided  the
development  of the United  States  Constitution.  They bear  directly

31  This  theme  runs  throughout.  The  Federalist.  See,  for  example,  Federalist  10
(Madison),  in  Rossiter,  ed,  The Federalist Papers 77-84  (cited  in  note  17)  (representative
rovernment,  spread  over  a  large  and diverse  electorate,  can  prevent factional  passions  from
lominating  public  affairs);  Federalist 78  (Hamilton),  in  id  at 464-69  (independent, life-ten-
ired judiciary  with  authority  to  proclaim  unconstitutional  acts  void  is  an  important  check
)n  majority  power).

35  See Federalist 78  (Hamilton),  in  id  at 464, 467  (judicial review  of the  constitutional-
,ty of laws  maintains primacy  of "intention  of the people"  over  "intention  of their agents").

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  642 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

on  the  attempts  of  Eastern  European  countries  to  meld  constitu-
tionalism  with  democracy  in  the  midst  of  extraordinary  diversity
and  pluralism.3 6

B.  Secession

1.  Eastern  Europe:  Some  background.

Secession  has  become  an  extremely prominent  issue in  Eastern
Europe.  As  of  this  writing,  the  situation  is  highly  fluid,  indeed
changing  almost  daily.  Anything  said  here  about  the  situation  will
likely  be  significantly  out of date  by the  time  of publication.  But a
brief  review  of  the  current  situation  will  serve  as  a  useful  prelude
to  the  discussion.

The  future  of Yugoslavia,  which  has  six  republics,  remains  in
severe  doubt  in  light  of  strong  pressures  for  independence  in  Slo-
venia  and  Croatia.  Polls  have  shown more  than  80  percent  support
for  independence  in  the  Slovenian  Republic.3 7  The  Slovenian  Par-
liament  voted  in  February  1991  to  "invalidate"  all  federal  laws,
with  Slovenian  President  Milan  Kucan  claiming  that  the  vote
means  that Yugoslavia  "has  ceased  to  exist." 8  If Slovenia  secedes,
Croatia  will  probably  do  so  as  well. 39  The  Croatian  Parliament  has
given  itself veto  power  over national  laws.40  The  new Serbian  Pres-
ident,  Slobodan  Milosevic,  is  a  firm  Serbian  nationalist  who  has
awakened  fears  of  oppression  among  non-Serbs. 41  He  has  claimed
that  "every  Serb  must  live  in  a Serbian  state. '42  Milosevic  has  re-
fused  to  recognize  the  supremacy  of the  eight-member  Yugoslavian
Presidency.43   The  Yugoslavian  government  has  nonetheless
claimed  that it  may use  military force  to  ensure  against secession."
Secessionist  pressures  may  be  moving  Yugoslavia  toward  civil

6  See  Federalist  51  (Madison),  in  id  at 320,  324-25  ("multiplicity  of interests,  and...
multiplicity of sects"  can  promote  democratic  government  through  a  system  of checks  and
balances).

17 Celestine  Bohlen,  Serbian Voting Today Could Signal a  Major Turn in  Yugoslavia's

Future, NY  Times  A22  (Dec 9,  1990)  ("Serbian Voting").

" Blaine  Harden,  Slovenia  'Invalidates' Yugoslav  Laws;  Republic's Parliament De-

clares Disassociation from Federation, NY  Times  A18 (Feb 20,  1991).

3'  Andrew  Borowiec,  Belgrade System  on  Verge  of Falling, Wash  Times  A8 (Dec  13,

1990).

40  Chuck  Sudetic,  Another  Yugoslav  State Breaks Ties,  NY Times  A3  (Feb 21,  1991).
41 Id.
42 Boro Dropulic,  Is  There A  Yugoslavia?, NY  Times  A22  (Mar  22,  1991).
43 Blaine  Harden,  Yugoslav  President Resigns Amid  Crisis; Jovic Warns of  Political

'Disintegration', NY Times  A15  (Mar  15,  1991).

4  Bohlen,  Serbian Voting  (cited  in  note  37).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  643 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

war. 5  Widespread  ethnic  violence  and  ultimate  disintegration
seem  possible,"  despite  recent  signs  of  greater  moderation.4 7

The  federal  structure  of  the  Czech  and  Slovak  Federative  Re-
public  is  also  under  considerable  pressure.  The  current  solution  is
a  new  provisional,  nonconstitutional  arrangement  that  dramati-
cally  limits  the  authority  of the  national  government,  placing  it  in
the  two  republics.4  Under  the  new  arrangement,  the  national  gov-
ernment  has power  over  defense,  foreign  policy,  and monetary  pol-
icy,  with  most  other  powers  placed  elsewhere.49

It  appears that  only a small  percentage  of the  Slovakians  favor
secession.5 0  In  December  1990,  however,  President  Vaclav  Havel
sought  dramatic  new  powers  to  respond  to  the  claim  by leaders  in
Slovakia  that  their  laws  had  primacy  over  those  of  the  national
parliament. 5'  Vladimir  Meciar,  until recently the  Prime Minister  of
the  Slovak  Republic,  had  on  occasion  argued  for  Slovakian  legal
primacy. 52  According  to  Havel,  the  consequence  of  such  primacy
would be that  "our  constitution  will be  broken and  our  state would
inevitably  fall  into  legal  chaos."5  Indeed,  Havel  argued,  a  system
of  Slovenian  legal  primacy  would  "destabilize  all  of  Europe.15 4

The  Soviet  Union,  of  course,  is  in  the  most jeopardy  of  all.
Here  some  believe  that  civil  war  is  a  realistic  threat.  In  all,  four-
teen  of the  fifteen  Soviet  republics  have  asserted  their  sovereignty
in  one  form  or  another.  Citizens  of  the  Baltic  states  and  several
other  Soviet  republics  overwhelmingly  support  independence. 55

15  See,  for  example,  David  Lawday,  Croatia braces itself for  the expected  civil  war,

U.S.  News  & World  Rep  38  (Apr  1,  1991).

'  Chuck Sudetic,  Rebel  Serbs Complicate Rift on  Yugoslav  Unity, NY Times  A2  (Apr
2,  1991);  Jim  Fish,  Yugoslavs'  Talks  End in  Apparent Impasse, NY  Times  A22  (Mar  29,
1991);  Dropulic,  Is  There A  Yugoslavia?  (cited in  note  42).

17  David  Binder,  Yugoslavia Edges  Away  From  the  Brink,  NY  Times  A3  (Mar  21,

1991).

48 Bohlen,  East  Europe's Past (cited  in  note  5);  Michael  Z.  Wise,  Czechs,  Slovaks
Reach Agreement  on  Federal, Regional Power-Sharing Plan, Wash  Post  A24  (Nov  14,
1990).  The  draft  constitutions  take  quite  different  approaches  (on file  with  U  Chi  L  Rev).
49  Wise,  Czechs, Slovaks Reach Agreement  on Federal, Regional Power-Sharing Plan

1o  Bohlen,  East Europe's Past (cited in  note 5)  (noting that recent poll showed  16  per-

(cited  in  note  48).

cent support for  secession).

(London)  11  (Dec  11,  1990).

Times  §  1  at  13  (Mar  17,  1991).

"'  Peter  Greer,  Havel  Seeks  Extra Powers  to  Preserve  Single  State,  The  Times

52 John  Tagliabue,  Slovakia's Separatist Premier Facing Political Counterattack, NY

'3 Greer,  Havel Seeks  Extra Powers (cited in  note  51).
"  Simon  Pellar,  Czechs Fear for Federation as Slovaks  Press for Sovereignty, Reuters

Library Report  (Dec  7, 1990).

65  Bohlen,  East Europe's Past (cited  in  note  5).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  644 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

The  most  highly  publicized  secession  movements  have  occurred  in
the  Baltic  states,  and  secessionist pressures  have  placed  the  future
of  the  Soviet  Union  in  serious  doubt.  Article  72-guaranteeing  a
right of secession-has  been an  important  part of the debate.  Until
recently,  however,  it  provided  no  firm  basis  for  secession,  in  part
because  of  the  absence  of  a  legal  mechanism  for  its  enforcement.5 6
Unilateral  secession  movements  were  said  to  violate  Articles  73
and  74,  which  provide  for  the  supremacy  of  Soviet law  and  for  So-
viet  sovereignty. 57  In  April  1990,  however,  legislation  was  enacted
to provide  for  secession  through  a two-thirds  majority in  a referen-
dum  and  a  five-year  transition  period .5

The  most  vigorous  secession  movements  have  taken  place  in
Lithuania,  Estonia,  and  Latvia.  The  Soviet  Union  incorporated
these states by force  in 1940,  after they  had  enjoyed  two  decades  of
independence.  All  three  have  seen  vigorous  secession  movements.
The  Estonian  Congress  has  asked  the  United  Nations  and  the  So-
viet  Parliament  to  restore  "the  free  and  independent  republic  of
Estonia."5 9  There  was  78  percent  support  for  independence  among
Estonians."  The  Lithuanian  Parliament  unanimously  approved  a
formal  declaration  of  independence."  Over  90  percent  of  Lithua-
nian  citizens  support independence.2  The  Soviet  Union  responded
with  a  damaging  economic  blockade, 3  and  also  with  military
force. 64  Soviet  troops  captured  the  main  publishing  center  in
Vilnius  and  also  assaulted  broadcasting  stations,  killing  and

50  Victor  Danilenko,  Vilnius: Its  Own  Worst Enemy,  NY  Times A25  (Apr  17,  1991).

57  Id.

1990).

11 Id;  Michael  Dobbs,  Latvians, Estonians Vote  to Support Independence; Non-Bind-
ing Ballots Conducted to Show  Support for Secession From the Soviet  Union, NY Times
A8  (Mar  4,  1991).

"'  Esther  B.  Fein,  Estonian Congress Calls for a  Republic, NY  Times  A10 (Mar  12,

*' Dobbs,  Latvians, Estonians Vote  to Support Independence (cited  in  note  58).
*" Bill  Keller,  Parliament in  Lithuania, 124-0,  Declares Nation  Independent, NY

Times Al  (Mar  12,  1990).

12  Peter  Maass,  Vote  Buoys  Lithuanians But  Goal Is  Still Elusive; Nationalists Seek
Forceful Foreign Support, Wash  Post  All  (Feb  10,  1991);  Francis  X.  Clines,  Lithuania
Votes Overwhelmingly For Independence From Moscow,  NY Times §  1  at 1  (Feb  10,  1991);
Michael  Dobbs, Baltic Crackdown Leaves  Gorbachev With Room  to  Maneuver, Wash  Post
A14  (Feb 10,  1991).

13  Bill  Keller,  Lithuania Agrees  to  100-Day Delay  on Independence, NY  Times  Al

(June  30,  1990).

"  Bill Keller,  The  Crushing of Lithuania's Independence Drive: A  Precise Script Is

Detected, NY  Times A8 (Jan  16,  1991).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  645 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

wounding  unarmed  civilians  in  the  process6 5  Non-binding  plebi-
scites  in  Latvia  showed  77  percent  support  for  independence.6

An  important  opposition  movement  in the  Ukraine  has  asked
for  complete  independence  from  Moscow  and  the  creation  of  an
independent  Ukrainian  state.6 7  The  actual  government  of  the
Ukraine  has  not  gone  so  far,  but it  did proclaim  itself  a  sovereign
state,  one  whose  laws  took  precedence  over  those  issuing  from
Moscow  and  extended  to  the  control  of troops  on  Ukrainian  terri-
tory.68  Without  issuing  a  formal  statement  of  independence,  the
Parliament  of the  Ukraine  invoked  the  "supremacy,  independence,
fullness  and  indivisibility  of  the  republic's  power  on  its  territory
and  its  independence  and  equality  in  external  relations. 6 9

Arguments  for  eventual  secession  have  been  made  in  Soviet
Georgia  as  well.70  In  March  1991,  the  citizens  of  Georgia  voted
overwhelmingly  (with  95  percent  in  favor)  for  independence,7 1  and
in  April,  the  Parliament  unanimously  declared  independence.7 2
The  Soviet  Parliament  responded  with  a  recommendation  that
Gorbachev  impose  a  state  of  emergency, 73  and  troops  have  been
dispatched  to  stop  internal  fighting. 74  The  Chuvash  Autonomous
Republic  has  claimed  sovereignty  over  its  own  natural  resources;
the  Mari Autonomous  Republic  has declared  sovereignty;  and  Rus-
sia itself has  considered  the  possibility  of secession.75  Buryatia  has
proclaimed  that  its  laws  take  precedence  over  those  of  the  Soviet
Union.  Moldavia  has  sought  greater  autonomy.7 6  Byelorussia  has
declared  its  sovereignty  as  well.7 7

65 Id.
6 Dobbs,  Latvians, Estonians Vote  to  Support Independence (cited  in  note  58).
67  Michael  Dobbs,  Group  Calls for  Ukrainian Independence, Wash Post Al  (Oct  29,

1990).

08 Francis X.  Clines,  Ukrainians Declare Republic Sovereign Inside Soviet System,  NY

Times  Al  (July  17,  1990).

69 Id.
70  Georgian Nationalist Wins,  NY  Times  A16  (Nov  15,  1990).
71  Send  Army to  Georgia, Gorbachev is Advised,  NY Times  A3  (Apr 2,  1991);  Michael
Dobbs, Soviet  Georgians Vote  For Independence By  Margin of 9 to  1,  NY  Times A14  (Apr
1,  1991);  Elizabeth  Shogren,  Soviet  Georgians Probably Will  Vote  Today  to  Secede,  LA
Times  A5 (Mar  31,  1991).

72  Soviet Georgia OKs  autonomy; Moscow  sends forces, Chicago  Tribune  §  1  at  5  (Apr

73 Send Army  to  Georgia (cited  in note  71);  Dobbs,  Soviet  Georgians Vote  For Inde-

2,  1991).

pendence  (cited in  note  71).

74 Soviet  Georgia OKs autonomy  (cited in  note  72).
" Francis X.  Clines, In  Soviet Union, Dizzying Disunion, NY  Times  A6  (Oct 26,  1990)

("Dizzying Disunion").

76  Id.
7  Francis  X.  Clines,  Byelorussia Joins Sovereignty  Move,  NY  Times  A4  (July  28,

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  646 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

Movements  for  secession  in the  Soviet Union  promise to  bring
about  substantial  changes  in  existing  institutional  arrangements.
President  Gorbachev  attempted  to  respond  with  a  union  plan 78
and  an  ambiguously  worded  referendum  question. 79  Even  if all  15
Soviet  republics ultimately  remain part  of a federal union,  it  seems
certain  that secessionist  pressures  will diminish  the  central govern-
ment's power  over its  subunits  in major and  potentially  destructive
ways.80  In  any  case,  these  pressures  have  diverted  energy  and  at-
tention  from the  effort  to  bring  about  democratic  self-government
and  economic  prosperity  in  the  wake  of  the  downfall  of  the  previ-
ous  system.  This  seems  clear  even  if the  grounds  for  secession  are
in  some  or  many  cases  substantial-a  question  I take  up  below.8 '

2.  Precommitment  and  secession.

For  the  moment  I  will  not speak  to  the  issue  of  whether  and
when  secession  is desirable  or just. Instead  I want to  ask  whether a
Constitution  ought to  recognize  a right to  secede.  I will  understand
a constitutional  right to  secede  as  encompassing  (a) an  explicit  tex-
tual  provision  guaranteeing  such  a  right  or  (b)  an  implicit  under-
standing  that  the  constitution  creates  that  right,  accompanied  in
either  case  by  (c)  a willingness  to enforce  that right by  a court with
the  power  of judicial  review-that  is,  a  court  capable  of  granting
and  enforcing  a  subunit's  request  to  secede  despite  the  objections
of  the  central  government.  As  the  Soviet  experience  has  shown  in
the  context  of  individual  rights  as  well  as  the  context  of secession,
constitutional  guarantees  on  paper  often  mean  nothing  without  in-
stitutions  available  to  vindicate  them.82

1990).

10,  1991).

71  Serge Schmemann,  Moscow Publishes New Plan of  Union, NY  Times §  1 at  1 (Mar

7  The  referendum  asked:  "Do you  consider  it necessary to preserve the  Union  of Soviet
Socialist  Republics  as  a  renewed  federation  of  equal  Soviet  republics,  in  which  the  rights
and  freedoms  of  people  of  any  nationality  will  be  fully  guaranteed?"  Michael  Dobbs,
Gorbachev Appeals  to Preserve  Union; President Launches  Campaign For Referendum,
Hits Separatists, Wash  Post Al  (Feb  7,  1991).

8o See  the discussion  of the union plan  in  Schmemann,  Moscow Publishes New  Plan of

Union (cited in  note  78).
81 See  Part  II.
82  The  Soviet  Constitution  guarantees  a  panoply  of individual  rights  that  makes  our
Bill of Rights  pale  by comparison,  though neither  the  courts  nor  other  branches  of govern-
ment have  traditionally  respected  or enforced  most  of these rights.  Article  39,  for example,
guarantees  full  "social,  economic,  political  and  personal  rights";  Article  40  guarantees  the
right to work;  Article  41  recognizes  a right  to rest  and leisure;  Article  49  guarantees  a  right
to petition for redress of grievances;  and Article  50  guarantees freedom  of speech,  press, and
assembly.  See  generally  Chapter  7  of  the  Soviet  Constitution,  reprinted  in  Hazard,  The

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  647 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

At  first  *glance,  the  argument  for  a  right  to  secede  seems
straightforward.  If  a  subunit  no  longer  wants  to  exist  within  the
nation,  why  should  it  have  to  do  so?  This  initial  challenge  draws
strength  from  a number  of  arguments,  spelled  out below,  including
the  need  for  local  self-determination,  the  history  of unjust acquisi-
tion in Eastern Europe  and  elsewhere,  the claims  of ethnic  and  cul-
tural  integrity,  and  the  threat  of  abridgement  of  basic  rights  and
liberties.

The  issue  of  secession  is,  however,  an  unusually  good  candi-
date  for  an  analysis  that  stresses  the use  of constitutionalism  as  a
precommitment  strategy.  Indeed,  the  problem  of  secession  closely
parallels  the  problems  solved  by the  Full  Faith  and  Credit  Clause
and  the  Commerce  Clause,  and  in  some  respects  follows  naturally
from those  examples.  The  initial  point  is that  constitutional  recog-
nition  of  a right  to  secede  might well  have  a range  of  harmful  con-
sequences  for  democratic  politics.  In  the  face  of  such  a  right,  a
threat to  secede  could  under  certain  conditions  be  plausible  at any
given  time,  allowing  the  exit of the subunit from  the  nation  to be  a
relevant  factor  in  every  important  decision.  It  is  not  difficult  to
imagine  circumstances  in which  it  will  be  in a  subunit's  interest to
issue  that  threat.  Rather  than  working  to  achieve  compromise,  or
to  solve  common  problems,  subunits  holding  a  right  to  secede
might well  succumb  to the  temptation  of self-dealing,  and hold  out
for whatever  they  can get.83  It  is  quite  possible  that some such  self-
dealing  has  already  occurred  in  Eastern  Europe. 4

A  right to  secede  will  encourage  strategic  behavior,  that  is,  ef-
forts  to  seek  benefits  or  diminish  burdens  by making  threats  that
are  strategically  useful  and  based  on  power  over  matters  techni-
cally  unrelated  to  the  particular  question  at  issue.  Subunits  with
economic  power  might  well  be  able  to  extract  large  gains  in  every

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 27-30, in  Blaustein  and  Flanz,  eds,  18  Constitutions of
the  World  (cited  in  note  1).

8  This  was  Lincoln's  view:

If the  minority  will  not  acquiesce,  the  majority  must, or  the government  must  cease.

If a  minority  in  such  case  will  secede  rather  than  acquiesce,  they  make  a  precedent
which  in  turn  will  divide  and ruin  them;  for  a  minority  of their  own  will  secede  from
them  whenever  a  majority  refuses  to  be controlled  by  such  minority.

First Inaugural  Address  (Mar  4,  1861),  in  Williams,  ed,  Lincoln  Writings 114,  120  (cited  in
note  4).

84  See,  for  example,  Clines,  Ukrainians Declare Republic Sovereign  (cited  in  note  68)
("(T]he declarations  of sovereignty  thus  far  are  laying  out  a  kind  of negotiating  agenda  for
Mr. Gorbachev's  promised  attempt  to redefine  the  union  more  favorably  for  the  republics

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  648 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

decision  involving  the  geographic  distribution  of  benefits  and  bur-
dens.  A  constitutional  system  that  recognizes  and  is  prepared  to
respect  the  right  to  secede  will  find  its  very  existence  at  issue  in
every  case  in  which  a  subunit's  interests  are  seriously  at  stake.  In
practice,  that threat  could  operate  as  a prohibition  on  any national
decision  adverse  to  the  subunit's  interests.

A  temporarily  disaffected  subunit  could,  in  short,  raise  the
stakes  in  ordinary  political  and  economic  decisions  simply  by
threatening  to  leave.  The  threat  would  be  especially  credible  and
therefore  disruptive  if  the  subunit  can  or  might  prefer  to  exist  on
its  own.  The  recognition  of  a  right  of  exit  on  the  part  of  the
subunit  could  thus  prevent  fair  dealing  on  the  nation's  part,  by
allowing  the  subunit  to  veto  policies  that  are  justified  on  balance.
It  might  also  lead  to  undue  caution.  The  threat  to  secede
might  deter  the  government  from  taking  action  that  offends  a
subunit but is on  balance justified.  Consider,  for  example,  the issue
of  taxation.  A  tobacco-growing  subunit  equipped  with  the  right  to
secede  might  be  able to  veto  a decision  to raise  taxes  on  (say) ciga-
rettes  even  if  that  decision  would  further  the  nation's  long-term
interest.  Similar  considerations  apply  to  the  decision  to  enter  into
war,  to  enact  environmental  regulation,  or  to  increase  or  decrease
aid to  agriculture.  A  secession  right cannot  plausibly  be justified on
the  ground  that  it 
is  a  necessary  check  on  national  policies
designed  to  ensure  that  those  policies  are  in  the  general  interest;
the  fact  that  a  state  wants  to  secede  is  neither  a  necessary  nor  a
sufficient  reason  to  believe  that  the  general  interest  is  being
violated.

Family  law  supplies  a  helpful  analogy.  In  a  marriage,  the  un-
derstanding  that the  unit is not  divisible  because  of current  dissat-
isfaction,  but  only  in  extraordinary  circumstances,  can  serve  to
promote compromise,  to  encourage  people  to live  together,  to lower
the  stakes  during  disagreements,  and  to  prevent  any  particular
person  from  achieving  an  excessively  strong  bargaining  position.  A
decision  to  stigmatize  divorce  or  to  make  it  available  only  under
certain  conditions-as  virtually  every  state  in  the  United  States
has  done-may  lead  to  happier  as  well  as  more  stable  marriages,
by  providing  an  incentive  for  spouses  to  adapt  their  behavior  and
even  their  desires  to  promote  long-term  harmony.8 5  I  intend  to

85  See,  for  example,  Jon  Elster,  Sour  Grapes (Cambridge,  1983)  (discussing  adaptive
preferences).  Family  law  also  supplies  a  ready  counter-argument:  restrictions  on  divorce
may  increase  the power  of the  stronger party by  denying  exit to  the weaker.  It  may  also,  by
adapting  desires,  produce  one of  the most  pernicious  forms  of inequality,  in  which  the  dis-

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  649 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

make  no  sweeping  comment  here  on  the  structure  of divorce  law;  I
argue  only  that  in  the  secession  context  there  are  strong  reasons
for  making  exit  difficult.

Recognition  of  a, right  to  secede  would  also  ensure  that  any
subunit whose resources  are  at the moment indispensable,  and that
might  be  able  to  exist  on its  own,  is in  an extraordinary  position  to
obtain  benefits  or to  diminish  burdens  on  matters  formally  unre-
lated  to  its  comparative  advantage.  Moreover,  the  shared  knowl-
edge  that  the  nation  is  terminable  at  the  option  of  any  subunit
would  promote  instability.

In  these  circumstances,  we  might  understand  a  waiver  of  the
right  to  secede  as  a  solution  to  a  collective  action- problem  or  a
prisoners'  dilemma.  For  each  subunit, acting  individually,  recogni-
tion  of the  right might  increase its  authority  to  obtain  a large share
of  the  collective  assets  during  any  general  allocation.  But  if  the
right to  secede  exists,  each  subunit will  be  vulnerable  to  threats  of
secession  by  the  others.  If  the  considerations  marshalled  thus  far
are  persuasive,  all  or  most subunits  are  quite  plausibly  better  off if
each  of  them  waives  its  right  to  secede.  More  generally,  the  diffi-
culty  or  impossibility  of  exit  from the  nation  will  encourage  coop-
eration  for  the  long  term,  providing  an  incentive  to  adapt conduct
and  even  preferences  to  that  goal.

Of course,  the  existence  of a  right to  secede  will  have  few  such
consequences  if a threat to  secede  is  not credible. Under  some  con-
ditions,  however,  the  threat  will  be  a  real  one.  Some  subunits
might  well  find  it  in their  economic  interest  to  exist  on  their  own.
If  independence  is  economically  preferable,  the  threat  of secession
will  be  fully  plausible.  Other  subunits  will  suffer  some  economic
loss  if they  secede,  but still  find  independence  worthwhile  because
of  gains  in  terms -of cultural  or  geographical  autonomy  or  capacity
for  self-governance.  Here  a  threat  of  secession  might  be  credible
even  if the  seceding  subunit  would  be  an  economic  loser.

In the  context  of secession,  the  practical political  problem  goes
especially  deep.  The  right to  secede  is  different  from  other  poten-
tial vetoes  on  national  legislative  action  precisely  because  it  raises
fundamental  and  often  emotional  issues  having  to  do  with  the
claims  of  ethnicity,  territory,  and  history  to  separation  and  self-
determination.  These  issues  have  a  peculiar  tendency  to  inflame
both  subunits  and  those  who  want them  to  remain  part of  the  na-
tion.  They  tend  to  raise  the  emotional  stakes  in  such  a  way  as  to

advantaged  accept  their  fate  because  there  is  no  alternative.  There  are  undoubtedly  paral-
lels  here  as well  in  the  secession  setting.

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  650 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

make  the  ordinary  work  of politics-not  to mention  day-to-day  in-
teractions  in  other  spheres-extremely  hard  to  undertake. s6

In Eastern  Europe,  divisions  of this  kind  promise  to be  among
the  most  important  questions  for  constitutional  resolution  in  the
next  generation."'  Those  divisions  threaten  not  only  to  split  na-
tions  into  subunits-which  may  or  may  not  be  good-but  also  to
paralyze  national  and  local  governments  and  to  deflect  them from
dealing  with  the  enormous  current  social  and  economic  problems.
Deliberation  is  often  an  inadequate  check,  and  it  comes  at  a  high
price.  A  waiver  of  the  right to  secede  protects  against  inflamed  or
impulsive  behavior."'  On  some  occasions,  the  emotional  stakes
should  be  raised  in  precisely  this  way.  But  constitutional  recogni-
tion  of  a  right  to  secede  accomplishes  the  relevant  goals  at  great
risk to  the  fundamental  task  of  creating  healthy,  long-term  consti-
tutional  structures.

The  large  destabilizing  effects  of  a  right  to  secede  may  also
disrupt  expectations  whose  existence  is  indispensable  both  to  eco-
nomic  prosperity  and  democratic  self-determination.  After  seces-
sion,  it  will  be  extremely  hard  to  disentangle  the  contributions  of
the  subunit  and  the  nation  in  order  to  decide  who  should  be  pay-
ing  whom  for  what.  The  sheer  volume  of  the  costs  of  allocation
provide  at  least  a  consideration  against  recognition  of  a  right  to
secede.  Much  more  fundamentally,  a  nation  whose  subunits  may
secede  will  be  far less  likely  to  engage  in long-term  planning.  Inter-
dependence  will  be  both  threatening  and  risky,  and  thus  will  be
discouraged.

86  It  might  be  responded  that the  presence  of a  secession  right  may  actually  tend  to
enable  rather  than  disable  politics;  a  subunit might  be more  inclined  to accept  impositions
by the  central government  as  long as it  is assured  that when  the impositions  become  cumu-
latively intolerable  it  can  leave.  In  a  well-functioning  democracy,  however,  there is  no prob-
lem  with  subunit  "acceptance"  of national  decrees.  Because  the  decrees  are  unlikely  to be
punitive,  and  because  the  subunit will  participate  in  forming  them, acceptance  by  subunits
is  generally  forthcoming.  A  secession  right is  therefore  unnecessary  to  promote  acceptable
legislation.

87  See  Bohlen,  East Europe's Past (cited  in  note  5);  Gorbachev Explains Proposed

Union Pact to  Party, NY  Times  All  (Dec  11,  1990).

8  These considerations  point out  the asymmetry between  two seemingly  parallel  rights,
that of  emigration  and  that  of secession.  The  right  to  emigrate  is  an  important  check  on
tyranny-as,  plausibly,  is the  right to secede.  But the  right to  emigrate  does  not create  the
twin  and  related  risks  of  strategic  behavior  and  inflamed  ethnic  or  cultural  conflict.  The
right  to  secede,  unlike  the  right to  emigrate,  is  exercised  by  subunits  rather  than  individu-
als,  aggregates  a  number  of  citizens  at  once,  and  thus  solves  a  collective  action  problem
faced  by  individual  people  who seek to emigrate.  This  solution to  the collective  action  prob-
lem  poses  the  difficulties  of strategic  behavior  and  inflamed  conflict.

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  651 1991

The  Universityof Chicago Law  Review

[58:633

For  Eastern  European  countries,  it  is  imperative  to  develop
institutions  that  can  ensure  confidence  in  the  long-term  health  of
the  newly democratized  governmental  systems. Without  such  insti-
tutions,  the  emerging  market  economies  will  fail. 9 A  waiver  of the
right  to  secede  should  be  seen  as  part  of  a  set  of  strategies
designed  to  bring  about stable  institutional  arrangements.  In  this
light it  should be  unsurprising  to  observe  proposed  institutional  re-
forms  designed  to  foster  stability  in  the  face  of  separatist  appeals,
such  as  the  Czechoslovakian  plan  to  allocate  much  more  power  to
the  republics  and  the  "union  treaty"  proposal  in  the  Soviet
Union.90

There  is  an  analogy  here  in the  history  of the  American  Con-
stitution.  The  Framers  deemed  it  necessary  to  protect  contractual
agreements  against  state  impairment  not  to  help  creditors  as  a
class,  but  to  ensure  that  commercial  interactions  would  occur  in
the first  place."  A  system  in which  states  can  impair  contracts  will
discourage  their  formation  in  the  first  instance,  and  thus  have
harmful long-term  effects  on  the  economy  as  a whole.  So  too, legal
protection of national  unity should  have an  important coordinating
effect,  creating  expectations  of long-term  interaction  indispensable
to  national  self-government.

Thus far  I have  argued  that  a waiver  of the  right to  secede  is a
sensible  precommitment  strategy,  one  that  is  likely  to  remove  a
serious  threat to  democratic  processes.  There  are  at least  two  pos-
sible  responses to  this line  of argument. The  first is  that if the  exis-
tence  of the nation  confers  mutual  benefits-an  assumed precondi-
tion  for  its  continuation-then  subunits  will  rarely  threaten  to
secede  even  if  constitutionally  authorized  to  do  so,  and  the  threat
will  rarely be credible  even  if made. The  costs  of secession  will usu-
ally  be  at  least  as  large  for  the  subunit  as  for  the  nation.  On  this
view,  recognition  of  a  right  to  secede  would  never  or  rarely  have
the  adverse  effects  claimed  for  it.  A  well-functioning  nation  simply
will  not  face  serious  secession  threats;  subunits  will  invoke  the
right  only  in  the  most  extraordinary  circumstances.  Indeed,  in
those  circumstances  the  right is  a necessary  corrective  to the  status
quo.

11  For a discussion  of the  economic  difficulties  facing  these  countries, see  Steven  Green-
house,  East Europe Finds Pain on Journey to Capitalism, NY Times  Al  (Nov  10,  1990).
"  See,  for  example,  Wise,  Czechs,  Slovaks  Reach Agreement  on  Federal, Regional
Power-Sharing Plan (cited in  note  48);'Gorbachev Explains Proposed Union Pact (cited  in
note  87).

91  US  Const,  Art I,  § 10,  cl  1 (barring  the  states from  passing  "any...  Law  impairing
the  Obligation  of Contracts").  See  also Federalist 44  (Madison),  in Rossiter,  ed,  The Feder-
alist Papers 280,  282-83  (cited  in  note  17).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  652 1991

1991)

Constitutionalism and Secession

This  rejoinder  may  be  correct.  Under  certain  circumstances,
recognition  of  a  right to  secede  would  probably  make  little  differ-
ence.  But  the  rejoinder  seems  too  optimistic.  Sometimes  secession
may  well  further  the  economic  interest  of  the  subunit,  or  the
threat  might  be  credible  because  an  economic  loss  would  be
counteracted  by gains  in terms  of symbolism  or  subunit  autonomy.
Moreover,  national  politics  affecting  multiple  subunits  are  subject
to  unpredictable  and  often  highly  emotional  factors.  Technocratic
rationality  does  not characterize  deliberations  in  which the  specter
of secession  is  involved.  The  mere  possibility  of secession  may pre-
vent  calm  negotiation.2

There  can  be  no  assurance  that  secession  will  not  be
threatened  simply  because  things  are  generally  going  well  and
there  is  mutual  interdependence.  Inflamed  subunit  sentiments
have  been  a  characteristic  feature  of  recent  developments  in  con-
stitution-making,  in  Eastern  Europe  and  elsewhere.9 3  And  in East-
ern  Europe  in  particular,  social,  economic,  and  environmental
problems-many  demanding  strong  action  from  the  central  gov-
ernment-have  been  quite  severe,  further  fueling  ethnic  and  re-
gional  conflicts.  In  these  circumstances  a  right  to  secede  would  be
especially  dangerous.

The  second  response  would  generalize  the  first,  claiming  that
the  case  against  a  constitutional  right  to  secession  is  simply  too
speculative.  All  of  the  harmful  effects  are  possible,  but there  is  no
good  reason to  think that they  will occur.  Perhaps  a right to  secede
is  a necessary  inducement  to persuade  subunits to  enter  the  nation
at  all.  Perhaps  subunits  will  rarely  invoke  the  right  to  secede,  be-
cause  social  and  political  norms  will  deter  them  from  doing  so.
Perhaps  the  costs  of secession  to  all  subunits  will  be  so  high as  to
make  the  threat implausible.  The greater  the degree  of interdepen-
dence  and  cohesion,  of  course,  the  higher  the  costs  of  secession.
Perhaps  strategic  behavior  will  be  collectively  punished,  so  that  it
will  occur  rarely  if  at  all.  Perhaps  the  right  to  secede  will  be  in-

Is  For an example  from  the American  experience,  see  David M.  Potter, The Impending
Crisis, 1848-1861 209-11  (Harper  & Row,  1976)  (describing the  breakdown  of reasoned  de-
liberation  that occurred when  Senator  Charles  Sumner,  the  prominent Massachusetts  aboli-
tionist,  was  beaten  with  a  cane  by  South  Carolina  Representative  Preston  Brooks  after
Sumner  ridiculed  the "loose  expectoration"  in  the  speech  of Brooks's  relative,  Senator  An-
drew  Butler, a  supporter  of slavery).

"'  See Bohlen,  East Europe's Past (cited in  note 5);  Clines,  Dizzying Disunion (cited in
note  75) Jonathan  Kaufman,  Tunnel at the End of the Light for E.  Europe, Boston  Globe  1
(Oct 21,  1990);  Chuck  Sudetic,  Ethnic Rivalries Push Yugoslavia  to  Edge, NY  Times  A14
(Oct  14,  1990)  ("Ethnic Rivalries"); Simon  Jenkins,  Nationalism's Dark  Cloud over  the
Democratic Battlefield of Europe, The  Sunday  Times  (London)  C3  (Jan  7,  1990).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  653 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

voked  only  in- cases  in  which  it  is  an  important  safeguard.

These  suggestions  are  plausible.  Under  certain  conditions,  the
right  to  secession  would  have  few  deleterious  effects,  and  it  may
prevent  serious  harms.  This  is  especially  so  in  cases  involving  a
weak  or  loose  confederation  without  substantial  interdependen-
cies-the  very  concept  now  gaining  popularity  in  Yugoslavia,
Czechoslovakia,  and  the  Soviet  Union.  In  such  cases,  the  risks
posed  by strategic  behavior  and  inflamed  ethnic  and other  passions
will  be  less  severe.  For  the  European  Community,  for  example,  a
right to  secede  may  therefore  be  more  sensible,  and  indeed  it  will
provide  a  greater  incentive  to join  in  the  first  instance.

For  those  deciding  on the  contents  of  a constitution,  the  ques-
tions  are  which  scenarios  are  most  likely  and  which  provide  the
worst  case.  The  most that  one  can  do  here  is to  point  to  the  often
large  emotional  attachments  to  subunits,  the  possibility  of  finan-
cial  gains  from  strategic  behavior,  the  familiar  frailties  of  human
nature,  the  rational  and  irrational  factors  that  can  make  subunits
press  secession  claims,  and  the  potentially  debilitating  effects  of
such  claims  on  subunit  and  national  processes  of self-government.
In view  of these  considerations,  it  seems  highly likely  that rec-
ognition  of  a  constitutional  right  to  secede  would  create  serious
difficulties.  In  Eastern  Europe,  where  strong  nationalist  passions
persist  and  threaten  to  infect  daily  politics if given  an  explicit  con-
stitutional home,  a right  to secede  would be  especially  damaging  to
the  prospects  for  democratic  government.  All this  suggests  a strong
presumption  against  a  constitutional  right  to  secede.

II.  REASONS  FOR  SECESSION

Even  if  a  constitutional  right  to  secede  would  create  risks  for
democratic  politics,  the  case  against  such  a  right  has  hardly  been
completed.  It  might well  be  that the  countervailing  considerations,
justifying  a right  to  secede,  outweigh  any  such  adverse  effects.

To  explore  this  question,  it  will  be  useful  to  examine  why  a
subunit  of  a  country  might  want  to  secede.  The  reasons  fall  into
five  basic  categories.  All  of  them  have  played  a  prominent  role  in
discussions  of  this  subject  in  Eastern  Europe.  Thus,  for  example,
infringement  of  civil  liberties  has  played  a  role  in  Yugoslavia,
where  the  fear  of  Serbian  oppression  partly  motivates  Slovenian
and  Croatian  secessionism,  and  in  the  Ukraine,  where  Soviet  sup-
pression  of  the  Ukrainian  Church  has  played  a  similar  role.  Eco-
nomic  self-interest  has  been  a  motivating  factor  in  the  wealthier

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  654 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

republics  of  Yugoslavia  and  also  in  the  Soviet  Union.9 4  Economic
exploitation  has  been  relevant  in  the  Ukraine.9 5  The  injustice  of
the original  acquisition  is  of special  importance  in  Lithuania, Esto-
nia, and Latvia.  Claims of cultural and  ethnic  integrity have  played
a  role  in  the  Soviet  Union,  Yugoslavia,  and  the  Czech  and  Slovak
Federative  Republic."

Many  of these  arguments  provide  plausible  grounds  for  seces-
sion  as  a  matter  of  political  morality.97  I  evaluate  them  briefly
here,  with  special  attention  to  their  relationship  to  a  claimed  con-
stitutional  right  to  secede.

A.  Abridgement  of  Civil  Rights  or  Civil  Liberties

A  subunit  might  want  to  secede  because  its  people  are  being
oppressed,  according  to  (let us  assume)  traditional  liberal  under-
In  the  Soviet  Union,  for  example,  the
standings  of  oppression. 

'" See  Clines,  Byelorussia Joins Sovereignty Move  (cited  in  note  77).
"5  See  Clines,  Ukrainians Declare Republic Sovereign  (cited in  note  68).
"  See  Ukrainians Rally Against Moscow, NY Times A10  (Oct 1,  1990);  Sudetic,  Ethnic

Rivalries (cited  in  note  93);  Pellar,  Czechs Fear for Federation (cited in  note  54).

17  For  an  especially  helpful  discussion,  overlapping  with  the  argument here,  see  Allen
Buchanan,  Toward  a  Theory  of Secession,  101  Ethics  322  (1991).  The  credibility  of  the
moral  case  makes it  especially  troublesome  to suggest  that  military force  should  be  used  to
stop  secession-a  difficult  problem  that I  cannot discuss  in  detail  here.  Sometimes  military
force  will be  justified  because  the  ground  for  secession  is itself weak  or involves  oppression,
as  in  the  case  of  the  American  Civil  War.  Sometimes  such  force  will  deter  other  secession
movements,  and  this  will  justify  force  when  the  secession  movements  are  not,  all  things
considered,  legitimate  ones.  But  the  consequences  of the  use  of military  force  are  generally
unpredictable  and  often  worse  than  first  anticipated.  In  this  light  the  question  whether  a
nation  should  be  kept together  through  official  violence  cannot  be  sensibly  answered  in  the
abstract.  At  any  rate,  one  need  not and  should  not  extrapolate  from  the  American  experi-
ence  the  proposition  that civil  war  is  always  preferable  to secession.

11  By  traditional  liberal  understandings,  I mean  to include  rights  to freedom  of speech,
freedom  of religion,  freedom  from  unreasonable  searches  and seizures,  private  property,  and
the rule  of law. See  Stephen  Holmes,  Benjamin Constant and the Making of Modern Liber-
alism  131-38  (Yale,  1984).  I  do  not discuss  here  the  more  particular  view  that secession  is
necessary  to prevent  (what some  consider to be)  abuses  of government  in the  form  of redis-
tribution  of resources,  social  and  economic  regulation,  and  taxation methods  that are  char-
acteristic  of western  industrialized  democracies.  This  view,  associated  with  the  ideas  about
the  state  set  out  in  different  forms  in  Robert  Nozick,  Anarchy, State, and Utopia (Basic,
1974),  and  Richard A.  Epstein,  Takings  (Harvard,  1985),  might  on  certain  assumptions  ar-
gue  powerfully  in  favor  of a secession  right as a means  of disabling  government. If one wants
to  disable  government  in  this  broad  way,  a  secession  right  might  be  more  easily  justi-
fied-though  even  here  alternative  mechanisms  might be  preferable,  and  the cure  might be
worse  than  the  disease.

Note  also  that a  right  to  secede  might  be  sought,  not  to  disable  modern  government,
but  to  establish  a  territorial  right  vindicated  by  history,  or  to  ensure  self-government  by
ethnic  or other  groups.  See  also  Part II.B.  (arguing that  economic  self-interest  of a subunit
is  not  a  sufficient  reason  for  a  right  to  secede).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  655 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law  Review

[58:633

history  of  widespread  abridgement  of  free  speech,  of political  lib-
erty as  a whole,  and  of basic  guarantees  of individual  independence
an  security might  well have  supported  a claim  to  secede,  certainly
before  the increasing  freedom  encouraged  by the  Gorbachev  regime
in  the  late  1980s.

Governmental  oppression  of  this  sort  might  be  limited  to  a
subunit,  or  it  might  be  part  of  a  general  pattern  of  governmental
abuse.  For  example,  the government  may  have limited  the right  to
freedom  of speech  in only  one  part of the  nation. Alternatively, the
oppression  might  be  quite  general,  and  the  subunit might  want  to
secede  because  it  sees  itself as  subject,  like  other  subunits,  to  an
intolerable  regime.

In  this latter  case,  something  other than  the  fact of oppression
must  also  be  at work  in  order  to justify  secession  as  distinct from,
say,  civil  disobedience  or  revolution.  If the  oppression  is  general,
some  independent  factor-like  cultural  homogeneity  or  a  claim  to
territorial  integrity  based  on  history-is  necessary  to  unite  one  of
the  many  subunits  that  are,  by  hypothesis,  being  oppressed.  For
this reason,  I focus  here  on  the  case  of a subunit that is singled  out
for  injustice,  in  the  form  of  abridgement  of  civil  liberties  or  civil
rights.

When  oppression  is  pervasive,  and  not  otherwise  remediable,
secession  is  a justified  response;  it  is  fully  plausible  to  say  that  a
subunit is  entitled  to  leave  a nation  that  is oppressing  it. Standing
alone,  however,  injustice  or  oppression  does not provide  a powerful
case  for  creating  a constitutional  right to secede.  If the  central  gov-
ernment  suspends  civil  rights  and  civil  liberties,  the  preferable  re-
sponse  is to  restore  rights  and liberties  through  the  pressure  of  do-
mestic  or  international  law. A  selective  abridgement  of the right  of
free  speech  is far  more naturally  countered  by a restoration  of that
right than by permitting  exit from  the nation.  Abridgement  of civil
rights  or  civil liberties  appears  to  provide  no  good  argument  for  a
constitutional  right  to  secede,  but  instead  furnishes  reasons  for  a
constitutional  order  that  makes  abridgement  unlikely.

If restoration  is  for  some  reason  impossible,  of  course,  seces-
sion  might  be  necessary.  In  Eastern  European  nations  without  a
recent  history  of  protection  of  civil  rights  and  civil  liberties,  such
novel  institutions  as  checks  and  balances  and  judicial  review  may
take  a  long  time  to  develop,  and  provide  weak  safeguards,  espe-
cially  at first.9 9  In  such  cases  a  constitutional  right  to  secede  could

99  In  America,  judicial  review-itself  an  extratextual  practice-did  not  take  root  until
fourteen  years  after  the  enactment  of the  written  Constitution.  Marbury v  Madison, 5  US
137  (1803).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  656 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

be  understood  as  an  indirect,  second-best  means  of  reducing  the
risk  of  oppression.  The  oppression  is  not  by  itself  a  sufficient
ground  for  secession,  but the  secession  right  is  necessary  to  fore-
stall  it, buttressing  the  other  constitutional  safeguards.  A  possible
preliminary  conclusion,  then,  is that the  risk that a  central  govern-
ment  will  abridge  the  liberties  of  members  of  a  subunit,  or  a  his-
tory of  such  abridgement,  combined with  the  infeasibility  of elimi-
nating  the  oppression,  can  justify  both  secession  as  a  matter  of
political  morality  and the  creation  of  a  right  to  secede.

The  implications  for  constitutional  practice  are  twofold.  The
first  and  most  obvious  is  that  constitutional  systems  should  con-
tain  powerful  safeguards  against  the  abridgement  of  civil  rights
and civil  liberties.  The  most important  such  safeguards  are  checks
and  balances,  federalism,  a  specification  of  protected  rights,  and
judicial  review.  If the  constitution  establishes  these safeguards  and
the  central  government  observes  them,  this  ground  for  secession
will  disappear  altogether.  This  is  admittedly  a  large  task  in  East-
ern  Europe,  but it  is  far  more  likely than  a secession  right  to  pro-
duce  sound  long-term  results.

The  second  and  more  complex  implication  is  that  a  constitu-
tional  right to  secede  may be necessary  to deter  the  abridgement  of
civil  rights  and  civil  liberties.  This  argument  has  foundations  in
the  work  of  Thomas  Jefferson,  who  favored  both  small  political
units  and  occasional  therapeutic  rebellions-views  that led  him  to
endorse  a  right  to  secede.  Thus  Jefferson  wrote  in  1816,  "If  any
State  in  the  Union  will  declare  that  it  prefers  separation  ... 
to  a
continuance  in  union  . . . I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  'let  us
separate.'  "100

We  can  find  a  parallel  to  this  argument  in  the  continuing  de-
bates  over federalism  and  rights  of interstate  mobility.  Any  society
that constitutes  its government  through  a federal  system-one  that
embodies  a  decision  to  allow  for  movement  among  states  and  to
limit the scope  of national  law-necessarily  creates  a  built-in  safe-
guard  against  political  or  economic  oppression.  A  government  that
oppresses  its  citizenry  will soon  find itself without  citizens  at all. In
Eastern  Europe,  for  example,  the  existence  of  national  controls
that  could  not  be  escaped  through  rights  of  exit  served  as  an  ex-
tremely  powerful  check  against  change.  The  denial  of  the  right  to
travel  was  therefore  the  denial  of a  crucial  political  right, one  that

'oo Thomas  Jefferson,  Letter  to  W.  Crawford  (June  20,  1816),  quoted  in  Lee  C.

Buchheit,  Secession: The Legitimacy of Self-Determination 109  (Yale,  1978).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  657 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

belongs  on  the  same  plane  as  voting.10'  The  recent  history  of  Ger-
many powerfully  illustrates  this  proposition.

In  a  healthy  federal  system,  states  will  often  compete  to  at-
tract  citizens  by  offering  better  services.  The  result  should  be  a
beneficial  "race"  to  provide  a  mix  of  laws  and  regulations  that
maximize  liberty  and  security.  Indeed,  the fact  of interstate  mobil-
ity  in  the  United  States  is  probably  a  far  more  powerful  check
against  many forms  of  state  tyranny  than  the  existence  of judicial
review.  Of  course,  there  is  a  dark  side  to  this  process.  The  "race"
can be  harmful  as well  as  beneficial.  Consider  cases  in which  states
compete  for  revenue-providing  industry  by  eliminating  environ-
mental  or  occupational  regulation  that  would  in  fact  be  optimal;
here  the  competition  is  destructive,  and  the  national  government
accordingly must  be  authorized  to impose  uniform  regulation  on its
subunits.  But there  can  be no  doubt that the  right  of exit  operates
as  a  powerful  check  on  tyranny  of  various  sorts.  It  might  follow
that  a right  to  secede  could be justified as  a similar  and  quite valu-
able  mechanism  for  ensuring  against  oppression  by  the  national
government.  The  fact  that  the  method  is  indirect  does  not  mean
that  it  is  not  extremely  effective.

In  some  contexts,  a right  to  secede.might  well  be  justified  on
this  ground.  Especially  when  it  seems  clear  that  other  institutions
cannot  protect  civil  rights  and  civil  liberties,  a  secession  right
might  be justifiable.  But  in  general,  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  ar-
gument  overcomes  the  considerations  against  a constitutional  right
traced  in  Part  I.  I  have  noted  that  there  are  far  more  direct  and
less dangerous  means  of protecting  against the  abridgement  of civil
rights  and  civil  liberties.  A  good  constitution  will  contain  those
means.  Rights  of  interstate  mobility  and  a  federal  structure  will
operate  as  additional  safeguards.

At  least  most  of  the  time,  a  constitutional  right  to  secede
would  create severe  risks  without  at the  same  time  conferring  ben-
efits  that  cannot  be  largely  or  entirely  achieved  through  other
strategies.  In  Eastern  Europe  in  particular,  secession  movements
have  arisen  at a time  when  the  abridgement  of civil rights  and  lib-
erties  has  been  dramatically  decreased,  a  point  that  suggests  that

'0  See,  for  example,  Shapiro v Thompson, 394 US 618  (1969)  (holding unconstitutional

a state  statutory  provision  denying welfare to residents  who have  not resided in  the jurisdic-
tion  for  at  least  one  year  on  grounds  that  personal  liberty  includes  freedom  to  travel
throughout  country  without  unreasonable  burdens  or  restrictions);  Kramer v  Union Free
School District, 395  US  621  (1969)  (invalidating state statute  limiting right to  vote  in school
district  elections  to those  who  own  or lease  taxable  real  property  in  the  district  or who  are
parents  of children  enrolled  in  the  schools).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  658 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

the  secession  right  is  usually  not  founded  on  this  form  of  oppres-
sion  at all.  Secession  was  not  a  feasible  option  in  Eastern  Europe
as  long  as  central  governments  consistently  denied  civil  rights  and
liberties.  For  this  reason,  an  attempted  justification  of  a  secession
right  based  on  those  grounds  seems  unpersuasive.

B.  Economic  Self-interest

A  subunit might  want to secede  because  economic  self-interest
suggests  it  ought  to proceed  on  its  own.  The  subunit may be  subsi-
dizing  other  people  of  the  nation  in  various  ways;  for  example,  it
may  have valuable  natural  resources  that are  being used  by  outsid-
ers  at  costs  lower  than  the  subunit  would  like  to  charge,  or  its
members  may  be  especially  productive.  Members  of  the  subunit
might  come to  believe  that they will  be financially  better  off if they
create  their  own  country.

In  Eastern  Europe,  this  sort  of  argument  appears  to  have
played  at  least  some  role  in  recent  discussions.  In Yugoslavia,  the
comparatively  rich  and  developed  northern  republics  of  Slovenia
and  Croatia  have  sought  to  secede.  Many  Slovaks  appear  to  fear
that the Czechs  will take a disproportionate  share  of the  benefits  of
western  investment,  and  that  the  government  of  President  Havel
will  not  protect  Slovakian  economic  interests.

Whether  or  not  economic  self-interest  justifies  secession  as  a
matter of  political  morality  is  a complex  question.  The  answer  will
turn,  at  least  in  part,  on  whether  there  is  a  justification  for  the
economic  harms  faced  by  the  subunit.  This  judgment  will  depend
in  turn  on  theories  about  what  the  state  may  do.  For  example,
some  appealing  to  the  rule  of the  state  attempt to  justify redistri-
bution  from  rich  subunits  to  poor  ones.  If  such  redistribution  is
indeed justified,  then the fact  that the  economic  self-interest of the
rich  subunit has  been jeopardized  is  not a  good basis  for  secession.
Regardless  of  one's  view  of  the  propriety  of  redistribution,
however,  the fact that  secession  might further  a subunit's economic
self-interest  provides insufficient  reason  to  create  a right  to  secede.
At  any  given  time  a  subunit  may  be  contributing  more  than  what
seems  its fair  share, and  perhaps  some subunits will  be  doing so  for
very  long  periods.  But  unless  there  is  some  kind  of  injustice,  the
mere  fact  that secession  is  in  a subunit's  self-interest  does  not jus-
tify  creation  of  that  right.  Self-interest  is  usually  a  controversial
grounds  for  political  action  at  the  individual  level,  unless  trans-
lated  into  terms  that  invoke  reasons  other  than  self-interest  alone;
it  is  all  the  more  difficult  to  support secession  of  subunits  on  this
ground.

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  659 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

This is  especially  so  in light  of the fact that to  allow  self-inter-
est  to  be  a justification  would  produce  a range  of  risks,  canvassed
above,  to  the  successful  operation  of  the  polity.  Economic  self-in-
terest is  an  especially  weak  basis  for  creating  a constitutional  right
to  secede  in  light  of  the  multiple  deleterious  effects  that  such  a
right would have  for the process  of national  self-government,  which
may well  be  in the  long-term  interest of all  subunits of the country.
A  precommitment  strategy  is  therefore  appropriate.

C.  Economic  Exploitation

A  more  serious  argument  for  a  right  to  secession  would  stress
economic  exploitation.  By  this  term  I  mean  not  that  a  subunit  is
simply  losing,  but that  it  can  claim,  with  reasons,  that  the  central
government  is  treating  it  unfairly.  We  might  hypothesize  that  the
nation  is  systematically  depleting  the  subunit's  resources  for  the
general  good,  thus  reducing  the  subunit's  wealth  far  below  what  it
would  be  if  the  subunit  stood  alone;  or  the  nation  might  be  un-
fairly  discriminating  against  the  subunit in  the distribution  of gen-
eral  benefits  and  burdens.  A  claim  for  secession  might  well  be
based  on  this  sort  of  behavior  from  the  nation's  center.  Indeed,  a
right to  secede-as  in the  case  of abridgement  of civil  liberties  and
civil  rights-might  be  justified  as  a  means  of  deterring  economic
exploitation  of subunits.  In Yugoslavia,  this  idea has played  an im-
portant  role.  Slovenia  and  Croatia  are  economically  advantaged,
and  they fear  that they  will have  to  submit  to  a Serbian-controlled
national  government,  which  they  will  have  to  subsidize.

In  some  cases,  economic  exploitation  might  indeed  justify  se-
cession  as  a matter  of  political  morality.  But does  the  prospect  of
exploitation  argue  for  a  constitutional  right  to  secede?  There  are
several  possible  answers  here.  The  first  is  that  it  is  hard  to  define
the  baseline  against  which  to  measure  a  claim  of  exploitation;  the
term  itself  is  a  placeholder  for  ideas  that  must  be  substantively
defended.  No  subunit  has  an  antecedent  right to  a stream  of wel-
fare  identical  to  what  it  would  have  received  if it  had  not  been  a
member  of  the  nation.  Moreover,  it  is  extraordinarily  difficult  to
calculate  benefits and  burdens,  especially  over long periods  of time.
In many cases  the 'question  of exploitation  will be  hard  to assess  in
light  of the  many links  by which  subunits  in  a nation  become  eco-
nomically  interdependent.

Suppose  that  in  some  cases  we  might  agree  that  a  subunit  is
being  exploited  by  the  nation.  In  such  cases,  a  good  constitution
will  provide  both  structural  and  rights-based  provisions  designed
to  prevent  discrimination  against  certain  subunits,  and  these  pro-

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  660 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

the  nation  may  unite  against 

visions  will  make  a  right  to  secede  unnecessary.  The  subunit
should,  for  example,  be  granted  full  representation  in  the  legisla-
ture;  this  is  a  built-in,  if  partial,  corrective.  (It  is  only  partial  be-
the
cause  other  parts  of 
subunit-hardly  an  unfamiliar  phenomenon.)  The  United  States
Constitution  achieves  this  goal  in  part  through  the  establishment
of  a  bicameral  legislature  in  which  all  states,  regardless  of  size,
have  equal  representation  in  one  house.  This  requirement  is,  in
fact,  the  only  element  of the  Constitution  specifically  protected  by
the  document  itself against  amendment  without  the  consent  of the
affected  state.102  The  constitution  could  also  ban  discriminatory
taxation,  or  require  unanimous  consent to  certain  measures  raising
a risk  of  exploitation.

These  strategies  pose  dangers  as  well.  Perhaps  discriminatory
taxation  is  justified  as  a  redistributive  strategy  or  as  a  means  of
taking  account  of  differences  in  initial  endowments.  Perhaps  dis-
criminatory  taxation  is  a  reasonable  response  to  the  nature  of  the
object  of the  tax.  Suppose,  for  example,  that a nation  decides,  out
of  concern  for  the  environment  and  the  public  health,  to  limit
through  taxation the  growing  of  tobacco  or the  mining  of high-sul-
fur  coal.  Those  regions  that  produce  the  relevant  commodities  will
bear  the  brunt of the  tax, but this disparate  impact does  not neces-
sarily  make  the  tax  bad  or  secession  justifiable.  Moreover,  a una-
nimity  or  supermajority  requirement  may  forestall  desirable  na-
tional  action.  In  this  sense  such  a  requirement  poses  some  of  the
risks  of  a  secession  right.  But  the  basic  point  is  that  a  right  to
secede  is  a  second-best  and  highly  indirect  remedy,  one  that  cre-
ates  a range  of problems  independent  of economic  exploitation  and
whose  purposes  might  be  accomplished  through  other  means.

D.  History  and  Territory:  The 
Acquisition

Injustice  of 

the  Original

Secession  might  be  sought  by  a  subunit  that  claims  that  its
membership  in  the  nation  originally  resulted  from  unjustified  ag-
gression,  and  that  sees  itself  as  having  territorial  integrity  as  a
matter  of  history  and  international  law,  properly  construed.  Often
some  understanding  of  this  kind  plays  a  role  in  secession  claims.
Suppose  Subunit  A  existed  as  an  independent  entity  at  an  earlier
period.  The larger  unit absorbed  Subunit A through  war  or  aggres-

162 US  Const,  Art V.

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  661 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

sion.  The  subunit  now  seeks  to  separate  from  the  nation  as  a way
of  undoing  an  historical  wrong.

In  Eastern  Europe,  of  course,  ideas  of  this  sort  have  surfaced
prominently  and  provided  an  important  impetus  for  secession
movements,  especially  in  the  Baltic  states.  Formerly  independent
Lithuania was  forcibly  incorporated  into  the  Soviet  Union  in  1940
as  a  result  of  the  Nazi-Soviet  Pact,  and  the  incorporation  was
clearly  unlawful.  Latvia  and  Estonia  claim,  plausibly, that they  too
were  forcibly  and  illegally  incorporated  as  a  result  of  the  same
agreement.  For  these  states,  the  Soviets  are  an  occupying  power,
and  their  inclusion  in  the  union  resulted  from  duress  in  the  form
of  a threatened  Soviet  attack.

Arguments  of  this  kind  may  well  provide  a  sufficient  moral
reason  for  secession.  Certainly  if  little  time  has  passed  since  the
original  aggression,  a right to  secede  seems  self-evident;  it  corrects
the  original  injustice.  But  for  three  reasons,  it  is  doubtful  whether
the  existence  of  historic  abuses  is  a  sufficient  reason  to  create  a
constitutional  right to  secede.

The  first is  that  a well-functioning  system of international  law
is  the  best,  most  direct  way  to  prevent  and  to  respond  to  aggres-
sion.1 -3  A  right  to  secede  is  too  general,  applying  in  cases  when
there  has  not  been  aggression  at  all.  At  most the  phenomenon  of
aggression  justifies  a  moral  right  to  secede  in  some  narrowly  de-
fined  class  of  cases  in  which  membership  in  the  nation  was  origi-
nally  involuntary.  Something  like  that  right  already  exists  as  a
matter  of  international  law. 10 4  A  generalized  constitutional  right  to
secession  is  unnecessary  to  recognize  a  right  to  exit  from  a  union
created  by force.

The  second  problem  is  a  practical  one.  A  nation  that  takes
other  countries  by  force,  and  incorporates  them,  is  unlikely  to  re-

103  The Iraqi  annexation of Kuwait is a  recent example,  though  here it  was  necessary to

resort  to force  to  bring  about  compliance  with  principles  of international  law.

104 This  is  the  ambiguous  and  controversial  right  of self-determination.  See  Buchheit,

Secession: The Legitimacy of Self-Determination at 8-20  (cited in  note  100).  The  principle
of self-determination,  recognized  in the  United Nations  Charter and  in numerous  U.N.  Dec-
larations,  came  to have  great importance  in the era of decolonization,  though the  contours  of
the  right-particularly  with  respect  to  armed  intervention  by  third  parties  intent  on  fur-
thering  the  right-remain  unclear.  See  also  United  Nations  Declaration  on  Principles  of
International  Law  Concerning  Friendly  Relations and  Co-operation  Among  States  in Accor-
dance  with  the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations,  which  proclaims  "The  principle  of  equal
rights  and  self-determination  of peoples"  ("[A]ll peoples  have  the right freely  to determine,
without  external  interference,  their  political  status  . .
. and  every  State  has  the  duty  to
respect this  right in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of the  Charter.")  UN  Res  2625  (Oct 24,
1970),  in  Dusan  J.  Djonovich,  ed,  13  United Nations Resolutions, Series I  (General Assem-
bly  Resolutions) 337,  339  (Oceana,  1976).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  662 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

spect  any  right  to  secede  that  it  has  formally  recognized.  The  So-
viet  Union  is  at least  a partial  example." 5  In  the  event of  incorpo-
ration  by force,  a right  to secede  is especially  prone  to becoming  an
ineffectual  "parchment  barrier."' 0 6

The  third problem  is  that  the drigins  of  many, perhaps  most,
nations  often  involve  aggression  and  abuse  at  some  point  in  the
past, and  it  is not  easy to  decide  which  such  abuses  provide  a suffi-
cient  basis  for  a  right  to  secede.  The  category  of  cases  in  which
secession  can  plausibly be  justified  on such  grounds  is  simply enor-
mous,  and  if  secession  is  generally  to  be  permitted,  the  result
would  be  an  intolerable  disruption  of  established  arrangements.
This  consideration  suggests  that  while  the  injustice  of the  original
acquisition  will  often  provide  a  good  basis  for  a  secession  right,  a
system  that would  allow  secession  in  all  such  circumstances  would
be  hard  to  defend. 0 7

In  cases  of  subunits  absorbed  through  aggression,  then,  the
preferable  remedy  is  a  system  of  international  law,  including  an
internationally  recognized  right  to  restore  original  borders  when
sufficiently  little  time  has  passed  and  when  exercise  of  that  right
would  not  unduly  disrupt  existing  arrangements. 10 8  Sometimes  a
right  to  secede  is  in  fact  justified  on  this  ground  as  a  matter  of
political  morality,  and  this  factor  argues  in  favor  of some  secession
movements  now  occurring in Eastern  Europe, especially  in the  Bal-
tic  states. But a domestic  constitutional  provision  guaranteeing  the
right  to  secede  is  both  too  small  and  too  large  a  way  to  deal  with
this  problem.

105 See,  for  example,  Keller,  Lithuania Agrees  to  Delay  (cited  in  note  63);  Celestine

Bohlen,  Gorbachev Bars Independence Bids  of 2  Baltic Lands, NY  Times  Al  (May  15,
1990);  Bill Keller,  Moscow  Lays  Out Terms for Baltics, NY  Times A18 (June  13,  1990).

''  This  term  originated  with  Madison.  See  Federalist  48  (Madison),  in  Rossiter,  ed,

The Federalist Papers 308,  338  (cited  in  note  17).

107 For purposes of law and morality, it  is both necessary  and difficult  to make  temporal

and other  distinctions.  Subunits  initially  absorbed  by  aggression  or  other  unjust  means
often  become  well-integrated  into a  union  over  time and come  to enjoy  many  benefits  from
membership  in  the  union.  (Hawaii  is  an  example.)  At  least  when  a  good  deal  of  time  has
passed,  it  is  hardly  clear  that  injustices  of  several  generations  past  by  themselves  justify
secession.

10 The phrasing  here is  deliberately  vague. A detailed  discussion  of when  subunits once

annexed  through aggression  have  a  good  moral justification  for  secession  would take me  far
beyond  the current  discussion.  For  a  valuable  discussion  of the  crucial territorial  dimension
to  secession  claims,  see  Lea  Brilmayer,  Secession  and  Self-Determination: A  Territorial
Interpretation, 16  Yale  J  Intl L  177  (1991).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  663 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law  Review

[58:633

E.  Cultural  Integrity  and  Self-determination

Often  a  claimed  right  to  secede  is  built  on  an  understanding
that  the  subunit  has  a  cultural  integrity  that  entitles  it  to  self-de-
termination.  The  subunit perceives  itself as both  homogeneous  and
-substantially different  in  terms  of  basic  norms  and  commitments.
The  very  fact that  it  is  governed  by  a broader  entity  appears  to be
a  form  of  tyranny,  or  an  unjustifiable  absorption  by  foreigners.
Rule  by  outsiders  eviscerates  the  subunit's  distinct  identity.

Ideas  of this  sort  have  frequently  fueled  secession  movements
in  Eastern  Europe  and  elsewhere.  Slovakia,  for  example,  is  more
agricultural  and  devoutly  Roman  Catholic  than  is  the  Czech  Re-
public,  and  the  cultural  difference  certainly  plays  a role  in  the  se-
cession  movement.  Often  a  claim  to  cultural  integrity  is  accompa-
nied  by  a  perception  that  the  subunit  had  territorial  integrity  in
the  past,  and  was  the  object  of unjustifiable  aggression.  As  a prac-
tical  matter,  the  two  arguments  tend  to  go  hand  in  hand.

'Whether  a  claim  to  cultural  integrity  justifies  secession  as  a
matter  of  political  morality  is  a  complex  matter.  Certainly  ethnic
homogeneity  can  make  rule  by  outsiders  impossible  or  oppressive.
Just  as  certainly,  productive  interactions  among  heterogeneous
groups  can  make  for  an  especially  successful  democracy.  History
offers  examples  of  both  phenomena.  It  is  therefore  impossible  to
say,  in  the  abstract,  whether  secession  can  be  justified  on  this
ground.  Much  will  depend  on  how  culturally  homogenous  groups
are  treated  by  the  larger  nation,  the  nature  of  the  differences  be-
tween  the subunit  and the  nation, and  the forms their  hornogeneity
takes.  For  example,  a  cultural  group  that  oppresses  others  in  its
region  can  hardly  make  a powerful  mbral  claim  for  a  right to  self-
governance  if  the  larger  nation  prizes  civil liberties. 10 9

Here,  as  before,  any  legitimate  claims  that  underlie  a right  to
secession  might  be  accommodated  by narrower  and  less  dangerous
strategies-in  particular,  federalism  and  representation  mecha-
nisms.  A  system  of  federalism  often  guards  against  precisely  the
problem  of rule  by remote  leaders having  insufficient  identification
with  or knowledge  of subunits.  In  the  Amdrican  experience,  feder-
alism  was  designed  to  ensure  local  self-determination  while  at  the
same  time  providing  and  thus  benefiting  from  governance  at  the
national  level.  Federal  systems  can  allow  a large  degree  of govern-

109  The  attempt  at  secession  by  the  American  South  is  an  example.  In  such  a  case,

secession  would  be unjustified  even  as a  matter  of political  morality.  A desire  to oppress  all
or  part  of the  citizenry  is  not  a  good  basis  for  secession.  The  American  Civil  War  was  of
course  fought  partly  over  these  grounds.

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  664 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

ance  by subunits  claiming  cultural  and  territorial  integrity.  Indeed,
the  national  constitution  may  restrict  the  central  government  to
certain  enumerated  powers,  including provision  of national  defense
or  regulation  of interstate  commerce,1 0°  or  it  may  expressly  reserve
certain  powers  of  internal  self-governance  to  the  subunits.  It  may
well  be  that  through  these  routes,  federal  systems  can  accommo-
date  many  of  the  concerns  that  underlie  claims  to  secession  based
on  cultural  integrity.

Systems  of representation  might  also  supply  a  corrective  here.
Seats  in the national  legislature  might be  set aside  for  subunit rep-
resentatives,  to  ensure  that the  views  of subunits  are  expressed  on
an  ongoing  basis  during the  deliberative  process.  Such  seats  might
provide  a  form  of  proportional  or  even  super-proportional  repre-
sentation.  Perhaps  a  minority  veto  should  be  ensured  on  certain
issues.

In  some  circumstances,  however,  these  solutions  will be  inade-
quate.  Sometimes  nationhood  demands  interference  with local  self-
determination,  as  in  regulation  of  intrastate  commerce  having  in-
terstate  effects.  Sometimes  the  claim  for  self-determination 
is
largely  an  emotional  one,  coming  from  a  group  affronted  by  the
very  fact  of  national  incorporation  and  national  rule.  Sometimes
nationhood  involves  an  inevitable  surrender  of  components  of sov-
ereignty  claimed  by  subunits.  If full  self-determination  is  the  goal,
the  only  remedy  will  be  secession,  enabling  the  subunit  to  escape
entirely  from  the  legal  authority  of the  nation.

It  may be  that this argument  is  sufficient, as  a matter  of politi-
cal  morality,  to  justify  secession  in  some  contexts.  It  is  surely
strengthened  if  the  argument  from  cultural  integrity  is  accompa-
nied  by  a  claim  to  territorial  integrity  in the  past. But it  is  doubt-
ful that, standing  alone,  the  argument  from cultural  integrity justi-
fies  a  constitutional  right  to  secede.  In  such  cases,  we  are  often
dealing,  by  hypothesis,  with  subunits  that  voluntarily  agreed  to
enter  the  nation  at some  earlier  time."'  In  such  cases,  the  claim  of
cultural  integrity  will  frequently  be  inadequate,  because  sufficient
commonalities  with  the  nation  will  likely  exist, justifying  the  origi-
nal  agreement.  Whether  or  not  this  is  so,  recognition  of  a  right  to
secede,  based  on  grounds  of  cultural  integrity,  will  probably  pose

110 This is,  of course,  the strategy  followed  by  the  United  States  Constitution.  See  US

Const,  Art I.

"I  If the argument  emphasizes  the  injustice  of the  original  entry, as  in  the  case  of the
Baltic  states,  then it is  not simply based  on  cultural  integrity  and  should  be  analyzed  as  in
Part  II.D.

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  665 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

dangers  to  national  self-determination  that  are  not  counterbal-
anced  by  the  advantages  to  the  various  subunits  themselves.
Whether  or  not  the  interest  in  cultural  integrity  provides  a  good
moral  justification  for  secession,  it  does  not  support  a  decision  to
place  a right  to  secede  in  a  founding  document.

Indeed,  cultural  integrity  is  a particularly  weak reason  to  con-
stitutionalize  the  right  to  secede  insofar  as  it is  precisely  the  cul-
tural  integrity  of  subunits  that  most  dramatically 
threatens
processes  'of  national  self-determination.  In  the  most  extreme
cases,  revolution  or  a  negotiated  settlement  may  be justified.  But
constitutional  recognition  of  a  right  to  secede  would  be  a  cure
worse  than  the  disease.

The  right to  revolt differs  in interesting  ways from  the  right to
secede.  It would  be  plausible  to  constitutionalize  the  former  right
as,  in a sense, the  United  States  Constitution has  done  through the
right of  amendment," 2  which  in  theory  could  be used  by Congress
and  the  states  to  rewrite  the  founding  document  in  fundamental
ways. But since  the  point of a revolution  is to  reject the  established
order,  it  is  unclear  why  constitutionalization  of  any  such  right
would  be  a useful  step at  all.  If the  argument  above  is  persuasive,
however,  it  is  even  less  plausible  to  constitutionalize  the  right  to
secede.  The  latter  right is  usually  defined  in  the  discrete  terms  of
some  subunit-geographical,  ethnic,  or  religious,  or some  combina-
tion of these-and these  features  of the  relevant right  pose the  dis-
tinctive  risks  of  strategic  bargaining  or  an  inflamed  polity.  A  right
of revolution  does not  create  these  risks  in  an even  vaguely  similar
fashion.

Nor  does  a negotiated  settlement  pose  the  difficulties  involved
in a right to secede.  The  whole  point of such  a right  is that there is
no need  for the  approval  of others  in order  for  the right to  be exer-
cised. A  negotiated  settlement  can be brought  about without  a con-
stitutionalized  secession  right.113

III.  A  QUALIFIED  RIGHT  TO  SECEDE?

A  possible  response  to  the  discussion  thus  far  would  be  that
the  right-to  secede  should indeed  be constitutionalized,  but hedged
with  qualifications  and  limitations  that  minimize  the risk of strate-
gic  behavior.  At  least  four  possibilities  seem  plausible.  One  strat-

112  US Const,  Art  V.
113  Such  a  settlement  might  of  course  be  blocked  with  a  constitutional  prohibition
against  secession,  even  of the voluntary  kind. But it is  unclear  how such  a prohibition  could
be  beneficial.

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  666 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

egy  would  allow  secession  if  and  only  if  a  large  majority  of  the
subunit  sought  it.  Another  would  allow  secession  only  under  cer-
tain enumerated  circumstances,  as, for  example,  in  cases  of suspen-
sion  of  civil  liberties  or  economic  exploitation.  Yet  another  would
create  a  requirement  of  prolonged  deliberation  before  secession
would  be lawful.  Such  a system  might  involve,  for  example,  multi-
ple  popular  votes,  with  substantial  waiting  periods  between
votes.1 14  A  fourth  approach  would  create  a  right  to  secede,  either
absolute  or  qualified,  but  make  it  nonjusticiable.  Each  of  these
possibilities  raises  difficult  and  general  questions  about  constitu-
tionalism.  I deal  with  them  only  briefly  here.

All  of  these  routes  have  large  advantages  over  an  unqualified
right  to  secede,  but it  is  doubtful  whether  the  advantages  justify
constitutionalization  of even  a qualified  right to  secede.  A  require-
ment  of  a  supermajority  would  certainly  limit  the  occasions  for,
and  seriousness  of,  secession  threats.  But  in  cases  in  which  the
subunit  can  be  energized-for  reasons  of  economic  self-interest  or
ethnic  and  territorial  self-identification-the  protection  would  be
inadequate.  It  is  true  that  a  subunit  may  want  to  secede  for  good
reasons,  but  as  discussed  above,  there  are  better  and  less  disrup-
tive  means  of  ensuring  that  the  good  motivations  that  sometimes
underlie  secession  movements  can  be  addressed.  These  involve,
above  all,  federalism,  checks  and  balances,  entrenchment  of  civil
rights  and  civil  liberties,  and  judicial  review.  If  these  protections
are  inadequate,  it  is highly  doubtful  that a qualified  right to secede
will  do  the  job.

There  is  something  to  be said  in  favor  of  a secession  provision
that  would  be  limited  to  specified  causes.  Such  a  provision  might
be  treated  as  ancillary  to  the  nondiscrimination  principles  and  ba-
sic  protections  of  liberties.  It  would  furnish  a  powerful  and  self-
enforcing  mechanism  against  violations  of  the  relevant  rights.  But
to  accomplish  these  purposes,  the  right  to  secede  is  probably  too
blunt  and  dangerous  an  instrument.  One  might  hope  that  the  di-
rect  provisions  discussed  above  will  be  sufficient.  More  fundamen-
tally, the  recognition  on  paper  of  a right to  secede  is  unlikely to  be
a useful  supplement if they are  not. A state that violates  its textual

114 The State  of New  York has  created  such a process  for dealing  with  the secessionist
demands  of Staten  Island, a subunit of the City of New York that may  prefer to become  an
independent municipality.  Staten Island  residents  must first  approve secession  in  two  refer-
enda, with a period for hearings  between the two  votes; the state legislature would then have
to pass  legislation  approving  the  secession. See  City of New  York  v State of New  York,  557
NYS2d  914,  158  AD2d  169  (1990)  (rejecting  equal protection  challenge  to  this  scheme).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  667 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[58:633

commitments  to  civil  rights  and  liberties  will  probably  not respect
its  textual  commitment  to  secession.

A  right  to  secede  after  an  extended  period  of  deliberation
would  probably  be  the  best  of  the  various  alternatives.  Through
this  route  it  would  be  possible  to  reduce  some  of  the  risks  of  an
inflamed  polity.  Indeed,  the  very  difficulty  of  obtaining  secession
would  deter  efforts  to seek  that remedy unless  it  seemed  necessary,
and  would  diminish  the  possibility  that  any  threat  of  secession
could  disrupt  democratic  and  deliberative  processes.  For  this  rea-
son it  could  not be  said, a priori, that such  a system would necessa-
rily  be  undesirable.  But  in  Eastern  European  nations  with  a  his-
tory  of  ethnic  and  religious  tensions,  even  a  secession  right
modified  in  this  way  would  pose  significant  risks  to  self-govern-
ance.  A  prolonged  deliberative  period  over  the  question  of  contin-
ued  ties  to  the  nation  could  create  all  of  the  threats  emphasized
above.  Probably  the  best  result  is  not  to  create  the  right  at  all.

A  final  possibility  would  be  to  create  a  right  to  secede  but to
make  it  nonjusticiable-that  is,  to  make  the  right  one  that  courts
will  not  recognize  or  enforce.  India's  Constitution  follows  this
strategy  mainly  with respect  to  certain  "positive"  rights,  including
the  right to  subsistence. 115  Such  rights  are  recognized  in the  sense
that  the  constitution  makes  them  binding  on  the  legislature,  but
the  courts  are  unable  to  protect  them.  The  argument  for  en-
trenched  but nonenforceable  rights  is  that  their  entrenchment  es-
tablishes  norms  that  government  is morally  and  politically  obliged
to  respect,  but  whose  judicial  enforcement  would  create,  in  espe-
cially  severe  forms,  the  various  difficulties  produced  when  judges
lacking  policymaking  competence  or  a  good  electoral  pedigree  are
responsible  for the  vindication  of constitutional  rights. 116 The right
to  subsistence  is  a  plausible  candidate  for  this  strategy  because  of

"'  Part IV  of the  Indian  Constitution  includes "Directive  Principles  of  State  Policy,"
which  are  nonjusticiable.  See  Art  37:  "The  provisions  contained  in  this  Part  shall  not  be
enforceable  by  any court,  but the principles  therein  laid down  are nevertheless  fundamental
in  the governance  of the  country and it shall be the  duty of the State  to apply  these princi-
ples  in  making laws."  These  provisions include  minimalization  of inequalities  in income  and
elimination  of inequalities  in  status,  facilities,  and  opportunities  (Art 38,  cl  2);  "equal  pay
for  equal  work for both  men and women"  (Art 39(d)); free  and  compulsory  elementary  edu-
cation  (Art 45);  the securing  of a "living  wage"  for  all workers  (Art 43).  The right to subsis-
tence  is most directly  stated  in Art 39,  which  provides:  "The State shall,  in particular, direct
its policy towards  securing:  (a) that the  citizens,  men and  women  equally, have  the right to
an  adequate  means  of livelihood.  . . ." Constitution  of India  (1949),  reprinted in  Albert  P.
Blaustein,  et al,  India 62-64, in  Blaustein  and  Flanz,  eds,  7 Constitutions of the  Countries
of the  World  (cited in  note  1).

11  See Lawrence  Gene  Sager,  Fair Measure: The Legal Status of Underenforced Con-

stitutional Norms, 91  Harv  L  Rev  1212  (1978).

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  668 1991

1991]

Constitutionalism and Secession

the  vagueness  of  the  right  and,  more  fundamentally,  the  obvious
problems  in  its  judicial  definition  and  implementation.  Perhaps
the  right  to  secede  should  be  placed  in  this  category.

The  principal  difficulty  with  this  claim  is  that  nonjusticiable
rights  are  usually those  whose  elaboration  would  strain  judicial  ca-
pacities.  Here  there  is  no  such  problem.  To  make  the  right  to  se-
cession  nonjusticiable  would  reflect  not  a  problem  of  definition  or
implementation,  but instead  ambivalence  about  the  right  itself. As
distinguished  from  the right  to  subsistence,  there  is  nothing  vague
about  the  right  to  secede.  Moreover,  as  the  recent  experiences  of
constitutionalism  in  Eastern  Europe  and  China  reveal,  judicially
unenforceable  constitutional  rights  are  frequently  not rights  at all.
By  itself this  consideration  makes  it  important  to  ensure  that con-
stitutional  rights  are  generally  enforceable,  lest  the specification  of
unenforceable  rights  lead,  in a system  unaccustomed  to  such  rights
at all,  to  a  process  in  which  constitutional  rights  are  generally  not
subject  to  real-world  vindication.

If the  case  for  a  right  to  secede  is  persuasive,  then  the  right
should  be  both  entrenched  in the text  and judicially  enforceable.  If
the  case  is  weak,  then  an  unenforceable  right  is  no  better  than  no
right at all. In  any case,  the  right to  secede  does  not have  the  char-
acteristics  that  sometimes  justify  entrenched  but  unenforceable
rights.

CONCLUSION

Claims  for  recognition  of  a constitutional  right  to  secede  raise
large  questions  about  the  nature  of  constitutional  protections  in
the emerging  Eastern European  democracies.  I have suggested  that
constitutional  protections  should  often  be  understood  as  an  effort
to  facilitate  rather  than  merely  to  frustrate  democratic  processes.
Such  efforts  take  many  forms:  the  protection  of  rights  central  to
self-government;  the  creation  of  fixed  and  stable  arrangements  by
which  people  might  order  their  affairs;  the  removal  of  especially
charged  or  intractable  questions  from  the  public  agenda;  the  crea-
tion  of  incentives  for  compromise,  deliberation,  and  agreement;
and  the  solution  of  problems  posed  by  collective  action  problems,
myopia,  impulsiveness,  and  prisoners'  dilemmas.  Ideas  of  this  sort
provide  a helpful  if partial foundation  for  considering  possible  pro-
visions  in  new  constitutions.  In  any  case,  they  suggest  that  a  right
to  secede  does  not  belong  in  a  founding  document.

In some  cases,  a right to secede  will be  fully justified  as a mat-
ter  of  political  morality.  Nothing  I  have  said  argues  against  the
view  that  subunits  sometimes  have  good  reasons  for  seceding.  On

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  669 1991

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

the  contrary,  I have  attempted  to  catalog  the  reasons  for  secession
and  in  the  process  to  show  that  those  reasons  are  often  powerful.
But  the  existence  of  occasionally  powerful  moral  claims  supplies
insufficient  reason  for  constitutional  recognition  of  the  right to  se-
cede.  A nation that recognizes  this right,  and  is prepared  to respect
it,-may  well  find  that  it  has  thereby  endangered  ordinary  demo-
cratic  processes.  A  decision  to  allow  a right  of exit  from  the  nation
will  divert  attention  from  matters  at  hand,  allow  minority  vetoes
on  important  issues,  encourage  strategic  and  myopic behavior,  and
generally  compromise  the  system  of self-government.  For this  rea-
son, a waiver  of the right to  secede  should  be  seen  as a natural part
of  constitutionalism,  which  frequently  amounts  to  a  precommit-
ment strategy  directed  against problems  of precisely  this sort. Peo-
ple  deciding  on  constitutional  provisions  often  choose,  in  advance,
to  waive  seemingly  important  rights  when  the  waiver  would  serve
the  general  interest.

To  say  this  is  not,  I  emphasize,  to  deny  that  there  are  good
reasons  why  a  subunit might  want  to  secede.  In Eastern  Europe,  it
is  plausible  to  say  that  such  reasons  exist  in several  places.  I have
suggested  that  even when  this is  so,  there  are generally  -more direct
means  of  accomplishing  the  desired  goals,  such  as  local  self-deter-
mination  through  federalism,  firm  protection  of  civil  rights  and
civil  liberties,  and  institutional  and  substantive  guarantees  against
economic  exploitation.  It  may  be  that the  more direct means  are in
some  circumstances  inadequate.  In  such  cases,  however,  the  proper
remedy  is to  reach  a  negotiated  solution,  to  exercise  the  unwritten
right  to  revolt,  or  to  apply  the  pressure  of  domestic  and  interna-
tional  law,  rather  than  to  create  a  constitutional  right  to  secede.

HeinOnline  -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev.  670 1991

