 Cass R. Sunsteint From the early 1950s until the present day, three propositions have permeated the arguments of lawyers and others interested in advancing the cause of civil rights. t Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago School of Law and Department of Political Science. B.A. 1975, Harvard University; J.D. 1978, Harvard University. Mary Becker, Anne-Marie Burley, Jon Elster, and Abner Greene provided helpful comments on an earlier draft. For financial support, I am grateful to the James H. Douglas, Jr., Fund for the Study of Law and Government, the Pritzker Family Faculty Fund, and the Jerome F. Kutak Faculty Fund. In the last generation, it has frequently been suggested that discriminatory behavior is a product of irrational bigotry or hostility. In this account, people treat blacks differently from whites, or women differently from men,1 because of a form of prejudice. The term "prejudice" is, of course, not self-defining. As conventionally used, the term includes not simply hatred, but also a wide variety of negative judgments about a class of people defined by race or gender. 1. My focus here is on discrimination against blacks, women, and (to a lesser extent) the handicapped. Of course, other groups are and should be protected by antidiscrimination laws, but at least some of these groups raise distinctive considerations that I cannot discuss here. The theory of civil rights law has often identified "discrimination" with prejudice, and defined an act as discriminatory when it is caused by prejudice. To understand the importance of identifying discrimination with prejudice, it is necessary to understand "discrimination," which is also, of course, a contested concept. For present purposes, I will understand discrimination to include a decision to treat a black person or a woman differently from a white person or a man, regardless of the motivation. This idea has some truth to it; in some situations, discrimination is costly. But sometimes discrimination is caused by employer practices that stem directly from economic self-interest rather than from the employer's prejudice or irrationality.' Indeed, discrimination may be fueled by considerations unrelated to the animus of the employer or discriminator. It may, instead, reflect (1) the desires of third parties; (2) statistically accurate generalizations; or (3) the consequences of an unequal status quo for investments in human capital and for preference formation. To disregard these points is to produce understandings and (1990), suggests that there may be prejudice in the selection of the criteria used to make judgmentsthat is, the decisionmakers might not have selected the same criteria to make the contested decision had the shoe been on the other foot. This might well count as another form of prejudice, and if so, the category is broader than what I have described here. It is difficult, however, to incorporate this notion of prejudice into antidiscrimination law (as Strauss emphasizes), and Strauss' efforts go well beyond conventional understandings of "prejudice" and "discrimination." The clearest illustration of discrimination not driven by economic irrationality occurs when third parties are in a position to impose financial punishments on nondiscriminatory employers. 7 Suppose, for example, that purchasers or fellow employees refuse to buy from or to work for a company that does not discriminate. Even if employers would themselves choose not to discriminate or have no particular view about whether or not to discriminate, third parties can pressure employers to discriminate. In all these cases, an employer who introduces norms of equality into the work force will be punished, not rewarded. For the employer faced with consumers or employees who prefer discrimination, a decision to engage in discrimination is in an important respect neutral. He is simply maximizing his profits by respecting consumer demand. Indeed, an employer who refuses to discriminate will be engaging in what is, from his point of view, a form of affirmative action. If he must become a nondiscriminator, it will be to promote the long-range goal of race and sex equality. 9 All this suggests that discrimination can be a product not of prejudice, but of responses to market pressures from third parties. Of course, prejudice is in some sense at work-by customers or fellow employeesbut the discriminator is not himself acting from prejudice or irrationality. B. Statistical or Economically Rational Discrimination Sometimes discriminatory behavior is a result of generalizations or stereotypes that, although over-broad and perhaps invidious, provide an economically rational basis for employment decisions. 1 Stereotypes and generalizations are, of course, a common ingredient in day-to-day decisions. There are informational costs in making distinctions within categories, and sometimes people prefer to avoid the often far more costly examination of the merits of the particular employee. whether the choice of classification criteria reflects discriminatory intent). in ways that are consistent with their prejudice." Id. at 174. nondiscrimination and affirmative action."). Suppose that there has been widespread discrimination for any number of reasons: employers have a taste for discrimination; third parties impose pressure on employers to discriminate; employers use statistical generalizations that are rational. Once the discrimination becomes established, members of disadvantaged groups will suffer from harmful effects on investment in human capital and on preference formation. t9 The productivity of participants in the labor market is endogenous to, or partly a product of, discrimination in that market. It is a mistake to take productivity within any social group as static or unaffected by employer decisions. Such decisions will have important dynamic effects on how blacks and whites, or women and men, choose to invest in human capital. Decisions about education, child care, training, drug use, employment programs, and tradeoffs between work and leisure will be affected by existing patterns of discrimination. In a market having such discrimination, members of disadvantaged groups will invest relatively less in education and training programs. Indeed, lower investments on their part are perfectly rational. As market actors, women should invest less than men in training to be (for example) pilots, economists, politicians, lawyers, or law professors if these professions discriminate against women and thus reward their investment less than that of men. 19. Arrow, supra note 6, at 88; Lundberg & Startz, Private Discrimination and Social texts, and that the hostile reception given to disadvantaged groups perpetuates their exclusion from certain sectors of the economy. In that case, inequality will be the result of discrimination that is itself the product not only of past irrational hostility or prejudice, but also of a far more complex system of interactions with economically rational employment decisions. An additional problem is that private preferences, of both discriminators and their victims, tend to adapt to the status quo, and to do so in such a way as to make significant change hard to achieve. The reduction of cognitive dissonance is a powerful motivating force: people attempt to bring their beliefs and perceptions in line with existing practice.2 1 The victims of inequality tend to reduce dissonance by adapting their preferences to the available opportunities. Consider the story of the fox who concludes that he does not want unavailable grapes because he considers them sour: he considers them sour because they are unavailable.2 2 Or people may adapt their aspirations to the persistent and often irrationally held belief that the world is in fact just.23 The beneficiaries of the status quo tend to do the same, concluding that the victims deserve their fate, that they are responsible for it, or that the current situation is part of an intractable, given, or natural order.24 There is extremely powerful evidence in the psychological literature to support these claims. 25 For example, people who behave cruelly change their attitudes toward the objects of their cruelty and thus devalue them. Observers of cruelty and violence tend to do the same. the victim has clear cognitive and The phenomenon of blaming groups have prospered as a result of such investments, notwithstanding discriminatory tastes on the part of employers, customers, and fellow employees. (describing "sour grapes" response as a way to reduce cognitive dissonance). The arguments I have offered thus far build on standard economic accounts of discrimination. It is notable that none of the various effects reflects an uncontroversial market failure in the conventional sense. The incorporation of racist or sexist preferences is efficient, if the efficiency criterion is based on private willingness to pay; 28 the same applies with profit-maximizing reactions to the desires of third parties and with statistical discrimination. In all these cases, governmental interference will probably produce an efficiency loss, at least in the short term.2 9 The most likely exception is the effect of discrimination on human capital and preference formation. 0 In that case, it is possible that discrimination will produce a serious externality in the form of harmful effects on prospective labor market entrants, with a corresponding efficiency loss. If discrimination discourages members of disadvantaged groups from investing in human capital, it will produce large social losses by decreasing potentially large sources of productivity. Ideas of this sort may provide the basis for a fully plausible efficiency justification for antidiscrimination law. Much of the rhetoric of the civil rights movements is built on principles of compensatory justice. According to these principles, those who have caused harm to a person or group must repair the harm. For example, slavery and segregation have played a large role in producing secondclass citizenship for blacks in America. A principal purpose of civil rights law is to undo the historical wrong, thus returning to the status quo ante. To be sure, the approach of the courts-and especially of the Supreme Court-has been based on a narrow conception of compensation. A broader compensatory principle would promote far more legal victories for members of disadvantaged groups.34 In this more expansive view, the redress of harms other than those created by the particular practice in question would be the goal of the equality principle. The notion of compensation would remain, but it would require public and private employers to ensure that the distribution of benefits and burdens Principles of compensatory justice play a prominent, indeed central role here. They define the very nature of the inquiry. Some Justices, for example, emphasize the difficulty of finding a good causal connection between post-1970 or 1980 practices and pre-1954 discrimination.37 For them, the weak causal connection means that the law should not make people restructure present practices. By contrast, other Justices emphasize the legacy of past discrimination and what they see as its undeniable causal connection to present patterns of segregation. 38 Both sides appear, however, to miss the fact that issues of causation, and the compensatory principles that underlie them, have little coherence in this context. An inquiry into the amount of racial integration that would have occurred in a world unaffected by racial segregation is likely to be empirically unanchored, indeed, chimerical. Social scientists, let alone judges, are simply not equipped to answer that question-not because they lack appropriate tools, but because the question itself is of Similar problems arise in cases involving affirmative action. The Supreme Court has frequently indicated that race-conscious measures are permissible only as a "remedy" for identifiable acts of purposeful discrimination undertaken within the jurisdiction of the governmental instiin affirmative action. 4' Here, too, compensatory tution engaging principles are in the forefront, allowing affirmative action only as a response to tort-like acts. By contrast, affirmative action grounded in an effort to overcome "societal discrimination" is generally impermissible." In so holding, the Court has emphasized that the victims of affirmative action are either employers or, much more frequently, white people or men who never engaged in discriminatory conduct. 39. See Sullivan, Sins of Discrimination, 100 HARV. L. REv. 78, 83-84, 96 (1986) (suggesting that the Court could have justified "remedial" affirmative action plans by reference to exclusively forward-looking goals, such as improving education or promoting diversity in the workplace). and present discriminatory practices. During and after the period of the Warren Court, it has been commonplace to suggest that federal courts should set much of civil rights policy through the process of constitutional adjudication.4 3 The courts' insulation-from an electoral process that is often said to have produced civil rights violations in the first place-is considered a comparative virtue, allowing the judges to implement antidiscrimination principles without being affected by political biases. There can be no question that because of their insulation, judges have often been in an unusually good position to elaborate and implement principles of antidiscrimination. But for several reasons, reliance on the judiciary may have been a mistake. It may have diverted attention from more productive alternatives and at the same time disserved the very causes at issue. In any case, such reliance seems a poor strategy for the future. Three considerations are relevant here. Judicial decisions are of limited efficacy in bringing about social change. Study after study has confirmed this basic conclusion. 4 Brown v. Board of Education 15 is usually offered as a counter-example, but it is in fact the most conspicuous confirmation of the point.46 Ten years after the decision, no more than about two percent of black children in the South attended desegregated schools.4 7 It was not until 1964, after Congress and the executive branch became involved, that widespread desegregation actually occurred. The Court is far more effective at vetoing a decision of another government entity than it is at effecting social change on its own. Of course, it is possible that the legislative and executive actions would not have occurred without the spur of Brown, but The decision in Roe v. Wade 4 9 may be another illustration, though the picture here is more complex. It is undoubtedly true that the decision increased women's access to safe abortions, and to some extent it may have increased the legitimacy of abortion. By 1973, however, state legislatures were moving firmly to expand legal access to abortion,5 ° and it is likely that a broad guarantee of access would have been available even without Roe. However surprising the point may be, Roe did not dramatically increase the actual number or rate of abortions. 1 Perhaps more fundamentally, the decision may well have created the Moral Majority, helped defeat the equal rights amendment, and undermined the women's movement by spurring opposition and demobilizing potential adherents.5 2 At the same time, Roe may have taken national policy too abruptly to a point toward which it was groping more slowly, 5 3 and in the process may have prevented state legislatures from working out longlasting solutions based upon broad public consensus. propositions). More generally, it is not clear that the United States has developed significantly different antidiscrimination principles from those in other liberal democracies that lack judicial review (most notably France, England, and until recently, Canada) or that have such review but have quite different constitutions (most notably, Germany). Of course, judicial review has in some settings accomplished considerable good and even introduced important changes into American society. But the evidence suggests that judges are less effective than the elected branches of the government in attempting to reform systems of discrimination. For achieving sensible and effective reform, political channels are often far better than the courts. The resort to politics can produce a kind of citizen mobilization that is a public and private good, and can inculcate political commitments, broader understanding, feelings of citizenship, and dedication to the community. All these may in turn spur deeper and wiser social change in the area of civil rights than reliance on the judiciary would provide. Martin Luther King, Jr., may well have been a more important catalyst for constitutional change than any or It is often thought that the very fact that courts are unrepresentative is one of their strengths; they serve as an available alternative to democratic channels. But reliance on the courts has large and hidden disadvantages. It may divert energy and resources from political processes, and the substitution effect imposes large costs on these processes. And if questions of morality -tend to become questions of constitutional law, their resolution before nine judges can harm the practice of citizenship. As noted, some of this effect is already visible in the abortion controversy. The same may also be true for racial discrimination, though the evidence is more ambiguous here. Despite innovative theories and practices,5 7 adjudication remains an extremely poor system for achieving social reform. Courts are rarely expert in the area before them. Moreover, the focus on the litigated case hampers judges' efforts to understand the complex systemic effects of legal intervention. A decision to require expenditures on school busing might, for example, divert resources from an area with an equal or greater claim to the public fisc. 56. The common view that the Court's decisions helped to mobilize political actors and protest, or paved the way for King, has surprisingly little empirical support. See G. ROSENBERG, supra note 44, at 112-13. (analyzing statistics about violent crimes, family incomes, employment, and out-of-wedlock births that contribute to the problems faced by inner-city racial minorities). Thus far, the discussion has been largely negative. I have argued that three of the major claims of the civil rights movement, from the 1950s to the present, are at best incomplete. Frequently, discrimination is not a reflection of irrationality or devaluation in the ordinary sense. It is instead rational economic behavior in light of the desires of third parties, statistical discrimination, or the effects of past and existing practices on human capital and existing preferences. Moreover, compensatory principles are poorly adapted to the civil rights setting, since they require courts and other public officials to answer impossible questions. Finally, reliance on the judiciary carries with it a host of problems. Among other things, the courts are ineffective at achieving large-scale social reform. 59. See Sunstein, Constitutionalism After the New Deal, 101 HARV. L. REv. 421, 424-25 (1987) (New Deal reformers sought to avoid the checks and balances that limited the powers of each branch of government); id. at 437 (Progressives saw judiciary as antidemocratic and aligned with interests of powerful); id. at 443 (New Deal reformers preferred agencies over courts in part because agencies could act more swiftly). standard for discriminatory intent). (discussing systemic disadvantages suffered by women); J. RAWLs, supra note 31, at 102 (discussing need to justify but it is one of a large set of such factors that play a role in the distribution of social benefits and burdens. Differences are usually invoked as the justification for disadvantage-for example, as in the claim that blacks, in important respects and as a group, are different from whites, or women are different from menand therefore properly receive different treatment. But different treatment need not follow from the fact of difference. For purposes of policy and law, the question is not whether there is a difference-often there certainly is-but whether the legal and social treatment of that difference can be adequately justified. By itself, the fact of difference does not supply an adequate justification. institutions that make natural differences have social consequences). An anti-caste principle is not "egalitarian." Egalitarianism calls for equality in the resources of different citizens; this principle is indeed foreign to American public law. But the desire to eliminate caste systems has played an important role in American constitutionalism from its inception. See L. HARTZ, THE LIBERAL TRADITION IN AMERICA 1-32 (1965). 64. An idea of this sort is at work in the original position set out in J. RAwLs, supra note 31, at 103; see also City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Cent., 473 U.S. 432, 455 (1985) (Stevens, J., concurring) ("I cannot believe that a rational member of this disadvantaged class could ever approve of the discriminatory application of the city's ordinance in this case."); Okin, Reason and Feeling in Thinking About Justice, in FEMINISM AND POLrrICAL THEORY 15, 27-30 (C. Sunstein ed. 1990) (discussing original position as requiring people to "think from the point of view of everyone"). An excellent example of anti-caste legislation is the Violence Against Women Act, see 136 CONG. REC. S8263 (daily ed. June 19, 1990), which contains various measures designed to reduce and remedy gender-related violence. Such a measure cannot easily be understood in compensatory terms; and it could not be initiated by courts. I have suggested that three of the principal claims that underlie civil rights law and policy are in important respects fallacies. Discrimination is not always the product of prejudice or irrationality. Moreover, to understand the antidiscrimination principle in compensatory terms leads to questions that are unanswerable. Finally, reliance on constitutional adjudication is a large mistake for civil rights law. legal disadvantages. Thus understood, antidiscrimination principle becomes an anti-caste principle. To be sure, elaboration of that principle is a large task, one that leaves open a wide range of questions concerning both substance and institutional arrangements. But if I am correct, such a principle provides a better foundation for civil rights policy than the three fallacies that have burdened the law for so long.