University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1992 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Something Old, Something New Feature 
Something Old, Something New Feature 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Something Old, Something New Feature," 1 East European Constitutional Review 18 
(1992). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

EAST  EUROPEAN  CONSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW

Rights, aspirations and  state action in Eastern  European  constitutions.

SOMETHING  OLD,  SOMETHING  NEW

By  Cass R. Sunstein

The theory of what belongs in a constitution remains in a
surprisingly primitive  state.  Indeed, the theory has been
in  transition  in  the  last  hundred, fifty,  or  even  twenty-
five years.  With respect to the matter of rights, scholars
have  suggested  that  there  have  been  three  distinct  gen-
erations of understandings.  The "first generation"  rights
involve the conventional civil and political liberties, most
prominently  the  right  to  own  property,  to  freedom  of
contract,  to  freedom  of speech,  and  to  freedom  of reli-
gion.  The "second generation"-still  quite controversial-
includes rights to positive state protection of human well-
being,  including  the  right  to  social  security,  to  decent
housing, to leisure, and to food.  The "third generation" of
rights  involves  the  environment,  peace,  and  economic
development.  The act of constitution-making  in Eastern
Europe-against  the  backdrop of the  demise of Commu-
nism-affords a distinctive  opportunity for self-conscious
reflection  about the proper place of different conceptions
of rights in a constitution.  What emerges should  provide
important,  and  quite  general,  lessons  about  the  theory
and practice of constitutionalism.

Constitutionalism, East and West

In  approaching  the current  drafts,  it  is  useful  to  distin-
guish between  two conceptions  of constitutionalism,  be-
tween which  the current  reform efforts  are  now poised.
Most of the  old-regime  Eastern  European  constitutions
were similar  to or modelled  on the  Stalinist constitution
of the Soviet Union.  Westerners  often think that Soviet-
style  constitutions  are  not  constitutions  at  all. 
In  fact,
however, they embody a distinctive conception of consti-

tutionalism,  with  three  especially  interesting  features.
First, and  crucially, such  constitutions do not distinguish
between  public  and  private  spheres.  They apply  their
prohibitions and permissions to everyone, not only to the
government.  No civil society is immunized from consti-
tutional  constraint.  The "state action" doctrine of course
plays  an  important  role  in  American  constitutionalism,
immunizing the  behavior of private persons  (and corpo-
rations) from constitutional  constraints.  The  Soviet con-
stitution contains no  such doctrine,  and  the same  is true
for the post-1946 constitutions of Poland, East Germany,
Romania,  Bulgaria,  Albania,  and  Czechoslovakia.  The
refusal  to incorporate  a state action doctrine in these con-
stitutions is a predictable consequence  of the attack on the
public-private distinction and the traditional Communist
reluctance to foster a civil society independent of the state.
Second,  such  constitutions  contain  duties  as well  as
rights.  They  do  not merely  grant privileges  to  citizens,
but also  impose obligations  on them.  The Soviet consti-
tution, for  example, created  a duty for citizens  "to  make
thrifty  use  of the  people's  wealth"  (Article  61),  "to  pre-
serve and protect socialist property" (Article 61), to "work
conscientiously"  (Article 60), and "to concern themselves
with the upbringing of children" (Article  65).

Finally, and  most  important,  the  central  provisions
of  Soviet-style  constitutions  set  out  very  general  social
aspirations  or  commitments.  Their  provisions  are  de-
signed  to  state  those  aspirations-not  to create  concrete
entitlements  that  citizens  can  attempt  to  vindicate,
through an independentjudiciary and as a matter of ordi-
nary  law, against  government  officials.  In  fact,  nojudi-
cial  enforcement  of constitutional  rights  is  authorized.

HeinOnline  -- 1 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 18 1992

SPRING  1992

The absence  ofjudicial  enforcement  helps  in turn  to  ac-
count for  the existence  of broad  aspirations.  The  exist-
ence  of judicial  enforcement  disciplines  and  limits  the
category  of protected  rights, restricting it to  matters over
which court superintendence  is most plausible.

In  Soviet-style  constitutions,  the enumerated  aspira-
tions  include  a  wide range  of "positive" rights.  I put  the
term  "positive"  in  quotation  marks  because  some  of the
so-called  negative  rights  in Western  democracies  have a
positive  dimension.  The  rights  to  private  property  and
freedom  of contract,  for  example,  require  state  institu-
tions  to  be  available  to  provide  positive  protection  on
their behalf. In this way the distinction  between  negative
and positive rights-as traditionally understood in Ameri-
can law-is no distinction  at all.  It is nonetheless perfectly
possible  to understand  the difference  between  the rights
protected  in  different  legal  systems.  Thus, for  example,
the  Soviet  constitution  includes  the  right to  work  (Art.
40),  the  right  to  rest  and  leisure  (Art. 41),  the  right  to
health protection (Art. 42), and the right to maintenance
in  old  age,  sickness,  and disability  (Art. 43).  The Polish
constitution includes the right to work (Art. 68), the right
to rest and leisure (Art. 69), and the right to health protec-
tion (Art. 70).  The Bulgarian constitution  offers the right
to  a  holiday  (Art. 42),  the  right  to  work  (Art. 40),  the
right to  labor safety (Art. 41), the  right to social  security
(Art. 43), and the right to free  medical  care (Art. 47).

Along  each  of  these  dimensions,  Western  con-
stitutions are of course  quite different.  Their  provisions
generally  apply only  to  the  government, and  not  to  pri-
vate actors  (with prominent exceptions  such  as our Thir-
teenth  Amendment).  The distinction  is  conventionally
justified  as a means  of protecting  and  fostering a  private
realm, or civil society, by insulating it from constitutional
constraints.  Of course  a  legislature  may  impose  such
constraints, and this is far from uncommon  in the United
States.  For  example,  the  proscription  on  race  and  sex
discrimination  is generally  applied  to  nongovernmental
entities. But it is important, both practically and symboli-
cally, that the proscription  is remitted  to democratic  pro-
cesses, and is not constitutionally mandated.

Western  constitutions  also fail  to  impose  duties;  in-
stead they create rights.  In one sense, of course, the oppo-
sition between rights and duties is unhelpful.  To create a
right  is  to  impose  a  duty.  If one  person  has  a  right  to
property, other people  have a duty not to trespass.  If you

have a  right to be  free  from racial  discrimination, others
are under a duty not to act on the basis of the color of your
skin.  Because  legal  rights  create  legal  duties,  and  vice
versa,  the apparent failure of Western  constitutionalism
to create  duties must  be  understood  through  the  lens of
the  state  action  doctrine.  The  rights  created  by  such
constitutions  generally  do  not  run  against  private  per-
sons.  It is therefore  the state, and not private persons, that
is under  constitutionally  enforceable  duties.  Soviet-style
constitutions are distinctive  in their willingness expressly
to impose duties on private persons.

Most important, Western constitutions aim to create
solid individual  rights, ones that can  be invoked  by indi-
vidual citizens, whenever they see  fit, in an independent
tribunal  authorized  to  bar  governmental  action.  West-
ern  constitutions  generally  do  not  include  broad  aspi-
rations, and they usually avoid "positive" rights of the sort
that  is  characteristic  of  Soviet-style  documents. 
In
America,  it has  sometimes  been  urged  that broad  consti-
tutional  provisions  be  interpreted  to  create  such  rights,
most notably  the  right to subsistence.  These arguments
have  had  no success  in  the  courts.  Whether  or  not the
courts  should  have  taken  arguments  of this  sort  more
seriously,  the  current  outcomes  are  consistent  with  the
general  tendency to reject  positive rights of this kind.

The Lasting  Legacy  of Communism?  Or a Third
Way?

With this background, we are in a position to make some
general comments about the rights recognized  in the draft
constitutions and  the  new constitutions  of Bulgaria  and
Hungary. There are many surprising developments here.
One of the most remarkable features  of these  documents
is  that  in  many  respects,  they  are  much  closer  to  their
Soviet-style  predecessors  than  to  Western  constitutions.
Like Soviet-style  constitutions, they do not make distinc-
tions between the  public and private spheres.  In general,
the text of all of the drafts  suggest that they apply equally
.to  public  and  private  actors.  The  constitutions  do  not
attempt to foster or even  anticipate a  civil  society, except
insofar  as  they  make  occasional  references  to  religious
institutions or labor unions.

To be sure, it is unclear to what extent some constitu-
tional rights can be raised against the private sphere.  The
right  to  protection  of property  against  takings  without

HeinOnline  -- 1 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 19 1992

compensation,  for  example,  seems  to  run  only  against
official  organs.  The same  is almost  certainly true  of the
right to free education  and to social  security.  But there is
no  general  understanding,  in  any  of these  documents,
that the constitution  applies only to the  government.  In
this respect,  the drafts are a  surprisingly conspicuous out-
growth of their predecessors.

Equally remarkably,  every  one of the draft constitu-
tions contains a rich array of welfare entitlements.  In this
regard,  the draft  constitutions  generally go  well  beyond
their Communist  predecessors.  The  Albanian  constitu-
tion  is typical.  It includes the right  to work, the right  to
remuneration  in  cases  of work  stoppage,  the right  to  a
paid  holiday,  the  right  to  recreation,  the  right  to  social
security,  guaranteed  free  medical  service,  and  paid  ma-
ternity leave.  The Polish draft is quite similar. The Czech
draft includes the right to work, the right to safe  working
conditions,  the  right to  recreation  after  work  and  to  a
paid holiday, and  the right to social  security.  It also pro-
vides  rights  to  education  and  training  for  the  disabled.
The Czechoslovak draft includes  in addition to these the
right to a sound and worthy environment-a right found
in the  new Hungarian constitution and in the Slovak and
Romanian  drafts  as  well.  The  Bulgarian  constitution
contains many such rights, with especially vigorous com-
mitments to the environment.  The Lithuanian draft pro-
tects  the  right  to  an adequate  living  standard  and  to  ad-
equate and safe working conditions, as well as the general
right to "adequate payment."  Many of the drafts contain
duties.

At the  same  time, the  draft  constitutions  contain  a
large set of rights that are quite foreign to the Communist
documents.  Most  notably,  every  one  of the  drafts,  in-
cluding the Hungarian constitution, includes the right to
private  ownership of property.  There are differences  in
formulations.  The Albanian  draft, for example,  guaran-
tees private ownership,  but also  states that the "land and
underground  resources,  the mines, forests,  waters, natu-
ral  resources  of energy,  means  of communication  of na-
tional importance, means of railway transportation,  tele-
communications,  radio  and TV  stations, and cinematog-
raphy  are  the property  of the state"  (Art. 12).  It is espe-
cially  notable  to  see  a  constitutional  principle  of public
ownership of the  means of communication-a  principle
that appears  in  no other  document, and  that  is likely  to
provide a  large obstacle  to freedom  of expression.  Even

EAST  EUROPEAN  CONSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW

the  Albanian draft, however, makes it clear  that the law
will recognize  and guarantee  private  ownership  of prop-
erty (Art. 15).

We might think of private  property and freedom  of
contract as the foundational  liberties of a system built on
the principle of free markets.  Surprisingly, however,  not
one  of the  documents  contains  a  general  protection  of
freedom of contract.  Contractual liberty is conspicuously
absent  from  the  drafts-conspicuous  in  view  of the  ap-
parent shift to  a market economy.  All of the documents
do protect the right to  choose ajob, and building  on this
idea, some of them guarantee somewhat broader rights of
contractual liberty in connection with employment. Thus
the Czechoslovak draft also protects against forced labor,
and singles out for protection the (especially  ambiguous)
right  to  enterprise  and  other  economic  initiatives;  this
latter provision  finds  a  close  parallel  in  the  Hungarian
constitution.

There may be an eventual  conflict between  broadly
guaranteed  rights  of freedom  of choice  in  employment
on the  one  hand  and  constitutionally-compelled  regula-
tion of the labor market on the other. Free choice in labor
markets  is often said to  entail constraints on governmen-
tal controls on those markets.  The tension will predictably
arise  in  Eastern  Europe.  The  existence  of potentially
conflicting  provisions  in  the draft constitutions  attests to
the current ambivalence about unconstrained  markets, at
least with respect to employment.

Writing Constitutions Against  the Past

The  draft  constitutions  also  contain  an  extraordinary
panoply  of other  rights.  For  present  purposes  I will  be
very brief. What we might call "participatory rights" are
generally  included-including  the  freedom  to  speak,  to
vote,  to join and  leave  associations,  and  to  strike.  The
Albanian constitution, for example,  grants a general right
to elect and to be elected to all citizens over the  age of 18.
There  are  broadly  defined  rights  against  the  police.  In
their  range  and  detail,  these go  well beyond  the  Ameri-
can  constitution,  and  give  a  remarkable  picture  of the
abuses  against  which  the post-Communist  nations have
thought it most  necessary  to guard.  In  view of the wide-
spread denial of political  rights under Communism, and
the  frequent  brutality  of the  police  during  that  period,
these provisions  are of particular interest.

HeinOnline  -- 1 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 20 1992

SPRING  1992

Moreover,  discrimination  on  the basis  of ethnicity,
religion, and sex is peculiarly likely to arise in the wake of
Communism.  Antidiscrimination provisions of some sort
appear  in all the  documents, and the particular  wording
of the relevant  provisions of course  bear on this threat.  It
is conspicuous  in  this regard  that the Bulgarian  constitu-
tion contemplates  compulsory  instruction in  the Bulgar-
ian  language,  specifically  prohibits  any  organization  or
alliance along ethnic lines or attempting to foster ethnicity,
and  refuses  to put ethnic  minorities on a  plane of equal-
ity.  Several of the drafts expressly  forbid sex  discrimina-
tion, but many do not. Protections against discrimination
on  the  basis  of religion  and  ethnicity  take  a  variety  of
different forms.  They also  set out a range of protections
in the criminaljustice system.  Several of them bar capital
punishment.  Many of the protected  rights are subject to
quite open-ended  abrogation where the public interest so

requires; the Bulgarian, Lithuanian, and Romanian docu-
ments are  especially notable here.

For  Western  observers,  however,  the  most  remark-
able  feature  of  the  current  drafts  is  their  broadly
aspirational  nature,  protecting  positive  rights  of many
kinds,  and  their  apparent  application  of  constitutional
rights  and  duties  to  nongovernmental  action.  On  the
optimistic  view,  this  strategy  may  represent  a  healthy
effort to synthesize  the best of two very different  concep-
tions of constitutionalism.  Pessimists, on the other hand,
would  argue  that an  approach  of this  sort will  seriously
endanger  the  transition  to  civil  society  and  a  market
economy-and  perhaps  threaten  constitutionalism itself.

Drafts andfinal versions of Central and Eastern European consti-
tutions may be obtainedfrom the Centerfor the Study ofConstitu-
tionalism in Eastern Europe.

Some  preliminary notes on  the intransigence of ethnic politics.

STRONG  CAUSES,  WEAK  CURES

By Claus Offe

Large  parts of the Western  public  in general  and  liberal
intellectuals  in  particular  are dismayed  by  the outbursts
of nationalist politics and ethnic strife that have emerged
in the post-Communist societies.  At the risk of increasing
their dismay, I would argue  (a) that the "ethnification" of
the politics of transition is the outcome of powerful causal
forces that cannot easily be wished away, and (b) that it is
exceedingly  difficult  to  design  institutional  or  constitu-
tional  arrangements  that  would  conform  to  universalist
standards  and  pave the way for  the peaceful  coexistence
of ethnic  groups  within East European  states.  In  short,
the  ills  of ethnic  politics  have  strong  causes  and  weak
cures.

The "ethnification"  of politics involves  several inter-
related  strategies.  First, territorial  boundaries  are drawn
in  a  way  that  maximizes  ethnic  homogeneity.  Second,
policies  are pursued  which differentiate  the status rights
of citizens  according to ethnic affiliation.  Third, policies
are proposed, advocated and resisted, and political  parties

and  other  associations  formed,  in  the  name of fostering
the well-being of one ethnic community  while excluding
those  who  don't belong.  In all  three  of these  strategies,
ethnicity  plays the role of the dominant cleavage  and the
source of symbolic representations.

Given  the  situation  in  which  individual  and  collec-
tive  actors  find  themselves  in  post-Communist  Eastern
Europe, ethnification appears rational to them.  Thus, it is
no longer enough to convince the political leaders of these
societies  that ethnification  is  inconsistent  with Western
standards  of  universalism  and  political  modernization,
standards  to  which  they  themselves  supposedly  aspire.
What is called for is not moral exhortations but a change
in  the  parameters  of action  of these  leaders  that  would
make  it  both  preferable  and  affordable  for  them  to  re-
frain from pursuing strategies of ethnification.

It  is  well  known  that  the  ethnification  of politics,
apart  from  the  emotional  gratifications  it  may  have  to
offer, involves a  number of serious dangers.  First, ethni-

HeinOnline  -- 1 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 21 1992

