 Cass R. Sunstein * t All rights reserved. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard. - Ed. I am grateful to Akhil Amar, David Currie, Elena Kagan, Stephen Gilles, Michael McConnell, Richard Posner, and Peter Strauss for helpful comments, and to Gabriel Gore and Richard Madris for valuable research assistance. In 1983, Judge Antonin Scalia, of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, published a dramatic and provocative essay on the law of standing. The thesis can be found in the title: The Doctrine of Standing As An Essential Element of the Separation of Powers. I Only recently named a judge, and having taught administrative and constitutional law for many years, Judge Scalia called for a significant shift in the law of standing. into In 1992, Justice Antonin Scalia wrote the dramatic opinion for the Supreme Court in Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 5 which significantly 1. Antonin Scalia, The Doctrine of Standing as an Essential Element of the Separation of Standing After Lujan shifts the law of standing. The opinion hinges on a distinction between two kinds of cases. "When... the plaintiff is himself an object of the action (or forgone action) at issue ... there is ordinarily little question" that he has standing. 6 "When, however, ... a plaintiff's asserted injury arises from the government's allegedly unlawful regulation (or lack of regulation) of someone else, much more is needed."' 7 In the latter case, there is the risk of serious interference with executive power, in the form of a "transfer from the President to the courts" of "the Chief Executive's most important constitutional duty, to 'take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed.' "8' Through Justice Scalia's opinion, the Court held that Article III required invalidation of an explicit congressional grant of standing to "citizens." 9 The Court had not answered this question before.10 Lujan may well be one of the most important standing cases since World War II. Read for all it is worth, the decision invalidates the large number of statutes in which Congress has attempted to use the "citizen-suit" device as a mechanism for controlling unlawfully inadequate enforcement of the law.' Indeed, the decision ranks among the most important in history in terms of the sheer number of federal statutes that it apparently has invalidated.12 The citizen suit has become a staple of federal environmental law in particular: nearly every major environmental statute provides for citizen standing.13 The place of the citizen in environmental and regulatory law has now been drawn into sharp question. Standing After Lujan fact" will both allow standing where it should be denied and deny standing where it should be granted. question of substantive law, answerable by reference to the statutory and constitutional provision whose protection is invoked." 111 S. CL at 1704 (citing Fletcher, supra, at 229). case. I end the Part with two brief detours: a discussion of the role of the citizen suit in regulatory law and a general assessment of Justice Scalia's conception of Article III, as set out in his 1983 Suffolk Law Review article. The overlap between the 1992 Lujan opinion and the 1983 article is sharp and clear. The overlap makes the article a matter of considerable current interest. The law of standing has had many remarkable twists and turns. For convenience, we might think of American law as evolving through five different eras of standing doctrine. We are now in the midst of the fifth; its contours remain indistinct. But one of its principal features is an insistence that Article III requires injury in fact, causation, and requirements unknown to our law until the 1970s. In redressability this Part, I outline the development of standing doctrine. 17 It makes sense to begin with the text of Article III, which extends "Judicial Power" to certain specified "Cases" and "Controversies." 18 In the original understanding, "cases" included both civil and criminal disputes, whereas "controversies" were limited to civil disputes. 19 Article III contains no explicit constitutional requirement of "standing" or "personal stake." Nor does it ever refer to "injury in fact." It does require a case or controversy, and very plausibly there is no such thing Standing After Lujan without a cause of action. 20 If we are to impose additional standing requirements, we must do so on the basis not of text but of history, both before and at the time of the framing and through judicial practice over time.2 1 An overview of opinions addressing the issue of standing will help illustrate the basic picture. In the history of the Supreme Court, standing has been discussed in terms of Article III on 117 occasions. 22 Of those 117 occasions, 55, or nearly half, of the discussions occurred that is, in the past seven years. Of those 117, 71, or over after 1985 that is, in just two thirds, of the discussions occurred after 1980 over a decade. Of those 117, 109, or nearly all, of the discussions occurred since 1965. The first reference to "standing" as an Article III limitation can be found in Stark v. Wickard,2 3 decided in 1944. The next reference does not appear until eight years later, in Adler v. Board of Education.24 Not until the Data Processing case in 197025 did a large number of cases emerge on the issue of standing. The explosion of judicial interest in standing as a distinct body of constitutional law is an extraordinarily recent phenomenon. 26 What of "injury in fact"? No court referred to this phrase before Barlow v. Collins 27 in 1970. After that year, the phrase appears in about ten cases during each succeeding five-year interval, until a leap to ten references in the brief period from 1990 to 1992.28 Thus the injury-in-fact test played no role in administrative and constitutional law until the past quarter century. Implicit in these ideas was a particular conception of Article III and a particular understanding of the relationship between Article III and standing. If neither Congress nor the common law had conferred a right to sue, no case or controversy existed. Whatever harm had occurred was not legally cognizable at all; this was a case of damnum Standing After Lujan absque injuria. Courts had no power to hear the plaintiff's claim. There was therefore a sharp distinction between an injury on the one hand (a "harm") and a legal injury on the other. To this extent, the Article III requirement of a case or controversy did indeed constrain the category of persons who could bring suit. But the constraint had everything to do with whether the legislature or some other source of law had created a cause of action. It had nothing to do with "injury in fact." There is no evidence of constitutional limits on the power to grant standing. In both England and America, actions by strangers, or by citizens in general, were fully permissible and indeed familiar. There is no basis for the view that the English and early American conception of adjudication forbade suits by strangers or citizens. The practice in England is revealing, for it helps cast light on what the founding generation may have understood by "case or controversy." Before and at the time of the framing, the English practice was to allow strangers to have standing in the many cases involving the ancient prerogative writs. Of these writs, two of the most important were certiorari and prohibition. "The English tradition of locus standi in prohibition and certiorari is that 'a stranger' has standing, but relief in suits by strangers is discretionary." '3 2 The governing idea behind the writ of prohibition was that a usurpation of jurisdiction encroached on the royal prerogative. It followed that anyone could bring the writ.33 A key case was Articuloi Cler, reported by Coke in a passage that would have been familiar to the Americans of the late eighteenth century.3 4 The central passage says: "And the kings courts that may award prohibitions, being informed either by the parties themselves, or by any stranger, that any court temporall or eclesiasticall doth hold plea of that (whereof they have not jurisdiction) may lawfully prohibit the same ... ,,a3 No English court appears to have rejected the view that prohibition was available at the behest of strangers.3 6 The writ of certiorari was similarly available to citizens, and not just those with a concrete or personal interest. A case in 1724 indi cated that "one who comes merely as a stranger" was entitled to discretionary judicial relief.37 Suits by strangers were also permitted under a statute allowing an information of quo warranto.38 An English case expressly so held in the auspicious year of 1789.39 There were other English precedents for the citizen suit. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, mandamus was available in England, even at the behest of strangers. 40 Thus Berger writes: From such cases a colonial lawyer might well have concluded that mandamus was capable of issuance at the suit of a stranger who sought to assert the public interest, especially because the analogy of mandamus to prohibition was early drawn, and because Coke, who had unequivocally stated the availability of prohibition to strangers, also made a massive assertion of mandamus jurisdiction. 4 1 The mandamus action is closely related to the modem citizen suit. The purpose of the mandamus action is to require the executive branch to do what the law requires it to do. This is the same idea that underlies the citizen suit, most conspicuously in the environmental area. The English history is sufficient to show that if we are thinking in historical terms, "the argument for a constitutional bar to strangers as complainants against unconstitutional action" is "without foundation."44 The modem injury-in-fact test, developed in the twentieth century, attempted to draw on the Westminster practice.45 But Standing After Lujan enough has been said to show that this is a historical blunder. There is relatively little explicit material on the Framers' conception of "case or controversy." 46 Certainly there is no direct evidence that injury in fact or concrete interest was intended to be a constitutional prerequisite under Article III. There is no reason to think that the Framers sought to limit Congress' power to create "cases" or "controversies" by conferring causes of action.4 7 To understand what the Americans understood, it is useful to consult the early American practice, looking at the state and federal levels. Other cases in the first century of the republic suggested the same view. 5 1 Thus Louis Jaffe summarized his historical survey with the is consonant with what was, generally speaking, the business of the Colonial courts and the courts of Westminster when the Constitution was framed. right to a commission is something which the laws of the United States cannot enforce: In pursuing this inquiry, the first question which presents itself, is, whether this can be arranged with that class of cases which come under the description of damnun absque injuria a loss without an injury. suggestion that "the public action an action brought by a private person primarily to vindicate the public interest in the enforcement of public obligations has long been a feature of our English and American law."'52 At the national level, there is no clear American tradition of reliance on the prerogative writs. According to the Supreme Court's interpretation of the All Writs Act, 53 Congress did not choose explicitly to create general mandamus, prohibition, or certiorari jurisdiction, though there were particular statutory and common law cases involving the writs, and it seems clear that their limited use was a matter of legislative discretion rather than constitutional command. 54 There are, however, revealing early precedents for the citizen suit at the national level. The writ of prohibition to restrain an allegedly unconstitutional tax was treated as a constitutional case in a relatively early decision of the Marshall Court, 55 and in 1875 the Supreme Court allowed a petition for mandamus at the behest of what it treated as citizens. In Union Pacific Railroad v. Hall,56 merchants brought suit to require a federally chartered railroad to create a certain railroad line. They invoked a general mandamus statute "to compel the Union Pacific Railroad Company to operate its road as required by law."'57 The Court said that the merchants were attempting to enforce "a duty to the public generally" and that they "had no interest other than such as belonged to others."' 58 Nonetheless, the Supreme Court allowed the action to go forward. Congress supplied two precedents formers' action 52. Louis L. Jaffe, Standing to Secure Judicial Review: Private Actions, 75 HARV. L. REV. 255, 302 (1961). After the founding period, the American law took on a predictably complex and somewhat exotic form, with rules of its own. See FRANK GOODNOW, THE PRINCIPLES OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW OF THE UNITED STATES 418-41 (1905). For the modem rules, see 2 CHESrER J. ANTEAU, THE PRACTICE OF EXTRAORDINARY REMEDIES (1987), discussing prohibition, quo warranto, and certiorari. Although many modem American courts generally require a personal stake of some kind, this requirement is far from universal. See, e.g., id. at 622-24 (describing citizen and taxpayer standing in Georgia, Hawaii, and New Jersey). Standing After Lujan against the view that Article III bars "stranger" or "citizen" actions once these have been congressionally authorized. The qui tam action was accompanied by the informers' action. Through this action, people can bring suit to enforce public duties; successful plaintiffs keep a share of the resulting damages or fines. In the states, this action had become familiar in the early stages of American history. Notably, the informers' action was available against both private defendants and public officials. 65 Early Congresses created at least two informers' actions to assist in the enforcement of federal law. The first of these operated not only against private violators but against executive officials as well. 66 "Suits by those without personal injury who were acting as representatives of others were not viewed as raising constitutional problems under article III.1167 For present purposes, what is especially revealing is that there is no evidence that anyone at the time of the framing believed that a qui tam action or informers' action produced a constitutional doubt. No one thought to suggest that the "case or controversy" requirement placed serious constraints on what was, in essence, a citizen suit. This fact provides extremely powerful evidence that Article III did not impose constraints on Congress' power to grant standing to strangers. More generally, if the stranger suit was thought constitutionally problematic, in all probability some constitutional concern would have been voiced about the qui tam action or the informers' action. The absence of any concern about these actions makes it exceedingly unlikely that the case or controversy requirement was believed to place Standing After Lujan any constraints on Congress' ability to grant causes of action to strangers. 70 The Constitution may require courts to impose greater constraints on standing when the executive is the defendant.71 But if an "injury in fact" is required by Article III, it should not matter a great deal whether the defendant is public or private. Hence the qui tam and informers' actions do seem to be powerful evidence against the claim that an injury in fact is an Article III requirement. The discussion thus far has shown that early English and American practices give no support to the view that the Constitution limits Congress' power to create standing. The relevant practices suggest not that everyone has standing, nor that Article III allows standing for all injuries, but instead something far simpler and less exotic: people have standing if the law has granted them a right to bring suit. There is no authority to the contrary before the twentieth century, and, indeed, I think that there is no such authority before World War 11.72 A general picture emerges from the words of the great administrative law teacher Frank Goodnow, writing in 1905. Goodnow's extensive treatise has no discussion of standing, then a foreign concept; but it does deal with the prerogative writs in America. Describing what had come to be the American practice, Goodnow wrote: The purpose of the writs is twofold. In the first place, they are issued mainly with the intention of protecting private rights; in the second place, some of them may be made use of also for the purpose of the maintenance of the law regardless of the fact whether in the particular case a private right is attacked or not Thus in the case of the certiorari it has been held that this writ may not be made use of simply for the maintenance of the law, that no one may apply for it unless he has some particular interest in its issue which is greater than that possessed by the ordinary citizen. The courts, however, have held with regard to the quo warranto that it may be issued on the demand of any citizen of responsibility; and the better rule would seem to be that in matters of public concern any citizen or taxpayer may apply for the mandamus.73 In this light, is it even possible to argue that the case or controversy requirement forbids the citizen action? Perhaps the English cases are not decisive, since the case-or-controversy requirement was 70. The notion of "stranger" is in fact problematic in this context, for the cause of action makes the litigant the holder of a kind of property right. See infra notes 130-32 and accompanying text. not present in English law. That requirement might even be seen as a check on certain suits cognizable in England. Nor is the American practice completely unambiguous. The prerogative writs were not generally available at the behest of strangers in the federal courts. As noted, the qui tam action operated against private persons, and money would always change hands. It might therefore remain possible to argue that Article III indeed requires a "personal stake" or an "injury in fact" because, in the United States, federal courts were not traditionally given jurisdiction in pure citizen suits. seems most adventurous as a matter of history. Standing After Lujan ings.78 In Article III, the general principle is that a case cannot exist unless some source of law creates a cause of action. It is hard to understand why this principle should be abandoned in the context of a citizen suit.79 B. The Initial Appearance of "Standing" The Progressive and New Deal Periods The second stage of standing law occurred in the early parts of this century. It was here that "standing" began to make a modest initial emergence as a discrete body of doctrine. To understand this development, a little background is in order. In the key cases, they repudiated constitutional attacks on legislative and administrative action by invoking justiciability doctrines.8 2 Prominent among these doctrines was the requirement of what we now think of as standing.8 3 The crucial cases involved efforts by citizens at large to invoke the Constitution to invalidate democratic outcomes.8 4 In such cases, the Court held that there was no personal stake for the invocation of judicial power. or standing The development of standing limitations in the early part of the twentieth century was indeed a novelty, in the sense that no separate body of standing law existed before this period. Notably, the relevant opinions did not even refer to the word standing. But we might well see the Brandeis-Frankfurter innovations as broadly compatible with preexisting law. For the most part, their opinions can be read to hold that no one has a right to sue unless some law has conferred a right to do so. In the cases in which the cause of action was denied, no such right had been conferred. This was the key point in the relevant opinions. 87 Standing After Lujan As noted above, the requirement of a cause of action is indeed a command both of Article III and of tradition."" The relevant denials of standing were therefore properly based on the plaintiffs' inability to find a law that entitled them to sue. Thus the Supreme Court could write as late as 1939 that, to have standing, a plaintiff must have a "legal right one of property, one arising out of contract, one protected against tortious invasion, or one founded on a statute which confers a privilege."8 9 C. The Administrative Procedure Act The third period in the development of standing consists of the enactment and interpretation of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) in 1946.90 The relevant provision of the APA was an effort to codify the developing body of judge-made standing law: "A person suffering legal wrong because of agency action, or adversely affected or aggrieved by agency action within the meaning of a relevant statute, is entitled to judicial review thereof." 91 This apparently cryptic phrase was actually designed to recognize standing in three straightforward categories of cases. All three categories had become well-established under previous law.92 First, people could obtain standing by showing that they suffered a "legal wrong" because a common law interest was at stake. An invasion of a common law interest would certainly qualify as a legal wrong. Courts presumed that anyone who could show such an invasion would be entitled to bring suit. This idea had constitutional foundations, to the extent that a foreclosure of standing to people with common law interests might raise problems under the Due Process Clause or Article III. 93 Second, plaintiffs could show that they suffered a legal wrong within the meaning of APA by demonstrating that their statutory in terests were at stake. For example, if the interest of a litigant in competition on equal terms was a relevant factor under the governing if the agency was required to take that factor into account statute the litigant would have standing to bring suit to vindicate its inter est. Congress need not have expressly conferred standing on the plaintiff; under the APA, the mere existence of an interest protected by statute was sufficient. 94 The APA's framers paid little attention to the question how far this approach would extend standing to beneficiaries and competitors, though it seems clear that standing was not merely contemplated for objects. 95 The third category did not involve legal wrong at all. People could a statute bring suit if they could show that "a relevant statute" other than the APA granted them standing by providing that people "adversely affected or aggrieved" were entitled to bring suit. In this way, the APA recognized that Congress had allowed people to have causes of action, and hence standing, even if their interests were not entitled to consideration by the relevant agency. Such people could act as "private attorneys general." This had already occurred under the Federal Communications Act.9 6 The APA thus provided for congressional authorization of actions by people lacking legal injuries. I will not discuss here the question how to interpret statutes that are ambiguous on the existence of a private cause of action. For present purposes, the key point is that the APA did not require an explicit grant, but instead inferred a cause of action (standing) from the existence of an interest that the agency was entitled to consider. (discussing the APA and beneficiary standing). Standing After Lujan The fourth stage of standing law spanned from the early 1960s un til about 1975. It included several dramatic new departures. including beneficiaries of regulatory programs The shift in this fourth period began when courts interpreted the "legal wrong" test to allow many people affected by government decisions to bring suit to challenge government action. For example, courts concluded that displaced urban residents, listeners of radio stations, and users of the environment could proceed against the government to redress an agency's legally insufficient regulatory protection. 97 To understand these developments, a little background is again in order. The theory that the [FCC] can always effectively represent the listener interests in a renewal proceeding without the aid and participation of legitimate listener representatives fulfilling the role of private attorneys general is one of those assumptions we collectively try to work with so long as they are reasonably adequate. When it becomes clear, as it does to us now, that it is no longer a valid assumption which stands up under the realities of actual experience, neither we nor the Commission can continue to rely on it. The gradual expansion and evolution of concepts of standing in administrative law attests that experience rather than logic or fixed rules has been accepted as the guide. [T.he problem of whether the administrator's refusal to take action is reviewable still remains. . In some instances review may be unavailing because the determination of whether or not action should be taken in the circumstances may have been committed to the exclusive judgment of the administrator as to the public interest and convenience. But ifthe denial is based on an erroneous interpretation of law, judicial review is available to remove at least that barrier. Michigan Law Review political pressure from regulated industries.99 The result was agency "capture." Through this process, statutory enactments could be defeated during implementation, principally as a result of the continuous exercise of power by well-organized private groups, or "factions." Collective action problems faced by the often-diffuse members of the beneficiary class made it hard for them to exert the same kind of continuous influence on government. Just as unorganized interests would be at a systemic disadvantage in economic ordering, so they would face serious problems in the political process. Government failure would therefore mimic market failure. These modest expansions in standing were entirely compatible with the language and framework of the APA. They built on the "legal wrong" idea to grant standing to many individuals and groups intended to be benefited by statutory enactments. It was fully reasonable to think that the beneficiaries of regulation suffered a legal injury when government failed to protect their legal interests. But a huge Standing After Lujan and far less justified conceptual break occurred in Justice William 0. Douglas' opinion for the Court in Association of Data Processing Organizations v. Camp, 0 2 which provides the basic underpinnings for the modem law of standing. In Data Processing, the Court essentially jettisoned the entire framework of the APA, even as it purported to interpret that very statute. unintended in Data Processing, but perhaps presaging a partial return to the legal interest test. Thus the first Supreme Court case denying standing on zone-of-interest grounds came in 1991. See Air Courier Conference of Am. v. American Postal Workers Union, 111 S. Ct. 913 (1991). If the analysis in this essay is right, this development should be enthusiastically welcomed as a return to the correct understanding of the APA and Article III. Kenneth Culp Davis, purporting to interpret the Administrative Procedure Act. 0 9 Davis relied on the APA's "adversely affected or aggrieved" language in support of this conclusion. In his view, someone is "adversely affected" if he suffers an injury "in fact." 110 For reasons set forth above, this was a misreading of the APA; the language and history of that statute suggested no such renovation of standing law."' The words "adversely affected or aggrieved" are not freestanding, but are followed by "within the meaning of a relevant statute." This juxtaposition shows that Congress was thinking of other laws that created private attorneys general.1 1 2 But Davis' misreading received an authoritative endorsement in Data Processing. The Court's opinion was opaque on the connection between injury in fact and Article III. The test seemed to stem from the APA, but the opinion can be read to suggest that Article III is also highly relevant. 113 2. Conceptual Confusion, the New Deal, and the Metaphysics of "Injury" Data Processing was poorly written, because it left obscure the relationship between standing and Article III, and more fundamentally because it did not explain the legal source of its novel, indeed unprecedented approach to standing. In its basic orientation, however, Data Processing reflected the emerging and highly tenable view, reflected in more plausible interpretations of the APA, that saw regulatory beneficiaries as suffering "legal injuries."' 1 14 The case thus bears some resemblance to the lower court opinions on that point, opinions that could claim to rest on the basic APA framework.11 5 a. Beneficiaries as objects, objects as beneficiaries. I have suggested that the emerging principles of standing could be associated with a particular belief about what caused administrative failure. The grant of beneficiary standing stemmed in part from understandings about the diffuse and disorganized character of the class of regulatory beneficiaries. If the beneficiaries had no greater influence than the ob Standing After Lujan jects, and often even less, it seemed odd to say that the objects would be the only ones entitled to seek judicial review. should receive no less protection than the interests traditionally protected by the common law. deployed by unelected judges as the vehicle for the definition of a system of public law sharply opposed to modem regulatory institutions. We can go even further. After the New Deal, the very distinction between regulatory beneficiaries and regulatory objects seemed based on a conceptual mistake. That distinction treated the common law as the normal and natural state of affairs; it saw a deviation from the common law as an intrusion on some "object," and as a protection of some "beneficiary." Indeed, the definition of the "object" and the "beneficiary" was parasitic on common law. But this was a way for courts to load the dice. Indeed, this understanding was no longer consistent with the practices and values of modem government. In classifying some harms as injuries in fact and other harms as Standing After Lujan purely ideological, 121 courts must inevitably rely on some standard that is normatively laden and independent of facts. If the point seems obscure, it is only because there are reasonably well-established conventions on what counts as an injury, and these conventions tend to disguise the normative judgments and make them seem purely factual. But in every case, the person who brings a lawsuit believes that she has indeed suffered an injury in fact. 59 (discussing congressional power to grant standing). purchase a home or apartment but who pose as renters or purchasers in order to collect information about unlawfully discriminatory racial steering. Without any statute, testers could not possibly have standing. It would not matter if they perceived an "injury in fact" when they were given false, discriminatorily motivated information about the housing market. But Congress declared it unlawful "[to represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available" and created a cause of action to enforce this right. 12 6 The Havens Realty Court held that, in view of this statute, Congress had conferred a sort of legal interest on testers and provided that it could be legally redressed. The injury to the "statutorily created right to truthful housing information" was sufficient for constitutional purposes. 127 It cannot be right to say that the plaintiff in Havens Realty suffered no injury in fact before Congress had acted, and that the civil rights statute somehow conjured up an injury ("in fact"!). Instead the relevant statute created a legally cognizable harm where none had existed before. Despite the Havens Realty Court's bow in the direction of injury in fact, 128 the case shows that the real question is what harms that people perceive as such ought to be judicially cognizable. The outcome in the case had nothing to do with "injury in fact." It had everything to do with the set of legal rights that Congress had conferred. 129 In these circumstances, whether there is a so-called nonjusticiable ideological interest, or instead a legally cognizable "actual injury," is a product of legal conventions and nothing else. To people who are part of the legal culture, some harms obviously count as such, but only because those claims are so familiar. Their familiarity often stems from the fact that they were protected at common law. To the same people, some harms are not perceived as such, but only because they 126. 42 U.S.C. §§ 3604(d), 3612(a) (1988). 127. 455 U.S. at 374. 128. See 455 U.S. at 374. 129. Consider also the closely related case of Trafficante v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 409 U.S. 205 (1972). There, two tenants of a large apartment complex in California complained about their landlord's racially discriminatory practices. They contended that these practices deprived them of "important benefits from interracial association." 409 U.S. at 210. The Court allowed standing under a statute explicitly granting the right to sue. In a concurring opinion, Justice White rightly said that, without the statute, he "would have great difficulty in concluding" that there was a case or controversy. 409 U.S. at 212. Without the statute, we would say that the plaintiffs had a merely ideological injury; perhaps we would not be able to see the harm they suffered as an injury at all. After the enactment of the statute, however, a unanimous Court concluded that standing could be found. Is it even plausible to think that there was no "injury in fact" before the statute, and thus that the California plaintiffs came to experience an injury ("in fact"l) the day that Congress passed a law in the District of Columbia? Standing After Lujan are unfamiliar. Their unfamiliarity often stems from the fact that they are foreign to the common law. When Congress creates a cause of action enabling people to complain against racial discrimination, consumer fraud, or destruction of environmental assets, it is really giving people a kind of property right in a certain state of affairs. 13 1 Invasion of that property right is the relevant injury. If some of these things seem to be "property" only ambiguously, we might recall a lesson from law school's first year: property is simply a bundle of sticks, and property rights can exist in a wide variety of tangible and intangible matters. Nothing in the Constitution forbids Congress from creating property interests of these various kinds or from allowing people to vindicate those interests in court. 1 that denial of right to bring suit can constitute a deprivation of property). he bears no responsibility for the use to which I have put them here. Michigan Law Review The resistance to this general approach stems from the deep familiarity of the common law catalogue of legal rights; people, or more importantly judges pondering "injury in fact," tend to think of property in terms of that particular catalogue. But the notion that the common law exhausts Congress' power, and that the Constitution forbids it from intruding on that catalogue or creating new legal rights, is (I repeat) simply a modem form of substantive due process. Indeed, the parallel with substantive due process is very precise. In the early twentieth century, the common law catalogue was similarly thought to be part of the state of nature, or of "how things are," and thus to operate as a barrier to legislative efforts to redefine property interests. 133 The examples suggest that there are innumerable "injuries in fact" produced by public and private action. Many of those injuries might well produce lawsuits. But an injury can become judicially cognizable if and only if it has received legal status from some source of law. To this extent, the Data Processing Court's attempted shift from law to fact was doomed to fail from the beginning. The same should be true of the law of standing. In the long run, the injury-in-fact test will, I believe, be seen as the contemporary analogue of the discredited notion of "vested rights" in the law of conflicts. So much for conceptual matters. A final development is relevant to the period under discussion. Spurred by judicial developments and ward a new emphasis on the definition and implementation of public values. See id. at 23-27. If what I am suggesting is right, however, abandoning the touchstone of property is not so easy. Standing depends on some legal interest, however much we might try to redirect the inquiry, and if it depends on legal interest, it depends on something like property. Standing After Lujan suspicion of agency "capture," Congress created a wide range of citizens' suits. 13 6 These suits would be available against (a) private defendants operating in violation of statute and (b) administrators failing to enforce the law as Congress required. Congress was especially enthusiastic about such suits in the environmental area, addressing the fear that statutory commitments would be threatened by bureaucratic failure. With a number of devices, including the citizen suit, Congress hoped to overcome administrative laxity and unenthusiasm, and also to counteract the relatively weak political influence of beneficiaries. 137 Congress did not, however, devote much attention to the constitutionality of citizen standing, and the issue was to remain open for many years. The fifth stage of standing law is the contemporary one. I begin to some apparent motivating with description and then turn assumptions. This period is defined principally by a series of cases establishing that the plaintiff does not suffer injury in fact unless he can show that (a) the injury is attributable to the conduct of the defendant and (b) the injury is likely to be redressed by a decree on his behalf. A less obvious but equally important development is the Court's tacit insistence that the requisite injury in fact be defined in common law-like terms. A still less obvious development is the renewed use of Article II in standing cases; indeed, it may not be unfair to say that Article II concerns are coming to dominate the interpretation of Article III. As I will suggest, the Lujan opinion is motivated by many of the concerns expressed in Justice Scalia's dissenting opinion in Morrison v. Olson, 138 the independent counsel case. Notably, most of the key cases have involved attempts by some plaintiff to require the executive branch to fulfill its statutory responsibilities by enforcing the law more vigorously. The initial step was Linda R.S. v. Richard D., 139 in which a mother of an illegitimate child brought suit against the local prosecutor, contending that his failure to initiate child support proceedings against the child's father caused her harm. The Court denied standing on the ground that it was unclear whether a decree in the plaintiff's favor would remedy that harm. The father might simply go to jail, leaving the mother no better off than before. According to the Court, this possibility rendered purely "speculative" whether prosecutorial proceedings would yield the desired outcome.140 The Linda R.S. decision was followed by Simon v. Eastern Kentucky Welfare Rights Organization. 14 1 There, the Court denied standing to indigent people protesting a change in tax policy which reduced the obligation of hospitals to provide medical services to the indigent. The plaintiffs claimed that they had sought and been denied medical treatment as a result of this ruling. According to the Court, the plaintiffs could not show that the changed policy actually affected their own situation. "It is purely speculative whether the denials of service... fairly can be traced to petitioners' 'encouragement' or instead result from decisions made by the hospitals without regard to the tax implications." 142 The third key case was Allen v. Wright. 14 3 In that case, the Court said that parents of black children attending public schools that were undergoing desegregation lacked standing to challenge the grant of tax deductions to segregated private schools. The pivotal point was that the plaintiffs could not show that a decree in their favor would actually affect their children. Denial of the tax deduction would not necessarily benefit the plaintiffs. Any causal relationship between the deduction and the progress of any particular desegregation plan was, again, fatally "speculative."' 144 An especially important section of the Allen opinion referred to Article II and to the separation of powers. The Court explained that, if the plaintiffs were to have standing, judges would become "virtually Standing After Lujan continuing monitors of the wisdom and soundness of Executive action."'14 The Court also suggested that standing here would risk judicial usurpation of the President's power to "take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed."' 146 Standing should thus be unavailable "in a case brought, not to enforce specific legal obligations whose violation works a direct harm, but to seek a restructuring of the apparatus established by the Executive Branch to fulfill its legal duties."' 14 7 These suggestions - with Article II concerns prominently appearing in an Article III setting have proved extremely important. The cases in this fifth period of standing law reveal a more general trend in administrative law, a trend of which Lujan is very much a part. The fourth stage had witnessed a fundamental assault on the distinction between regulated objects and regulatory beneficiaries. In the past fifteen years, however, the Supreme Court has unmistakably if usually implicitly insisted on that very distinction. A key-case, highly representative of current tendencies, is Heckler 1 There the Court held that agency inaction, unlike v. Chaney.15 agency action, would be presumed immune from judicial review. In so holding, the Court apparently drew a distinction between regulated objects and regulatory beneficiaries. Indeed, the Court defended its conclusion in part by suggesting that, when an agency fails to act, it "does not exercise its coercive power.., and thus does not infringe upon areas that courts are often called upon to protect." 15 2 Apparently, only the interests of the objects generally are protected. The Chaney Court also referred to the Take Care Clause of Article II, suggesting that this provided a further reason for judicial reluctance to supervise administrative inaction. In this way, Heckler v. Chaney is of a piece with Allen v. Wright and Lujan. In many other cases, the Court has rejected challenges to administrative decisions by regulatory beneficiaries. As noted, most of the key standing cases involved efforts by regulatory beneficiaries to require enforcement of regulatory statutes. Before Lujan, the law thus stood poised for an explicit judicial distinction between suits by objects and suits by beneficiaries. What underlies the current trend? There are several possibilities, and all of them have probably contributed to a growing enthusiasm for the apparently discredited distinction between regulatory beneficiaries and regulated objects. The possibilities should be seen as a modem theoretical rejoinder to the 1960s and 1970s fear of agency capture by regulated objects. found modest ronmental regulation was a taking). Standing After Lujan bious benefits. 157 This view has influenced the executive branch, and it has appeared to play a role in the courts as well.' 58 Many people think that administrators are systematically inclined toward overenforcement of regulatory statutes, or toward "capture" by regulatory beneficiaries.1 59 Quite apart from issues of substance, some urge that judicial compulsion of regulatory action is unconstitutional on Article II grounds or at least constitutionally troublesome. 160 Others think that courts cannot possibly play a fruitful role in assuring adequate implementation of regulatory statutes. 16' Some or all of these ideas undoubtedly help explain what has become an unmistakable trend in favor of greater judicial insistence on the distinction between suits by regulating beneficiaries and suits by regulated objects.1 62 In this Part, I turn to Lujan. 163 I first discuss what the Court said and then evaluate its reasoning. Two detours will be necessary: first, to address Justice Scalia's conception of standing; and second, to deal with the role of the citizen suit in environmental and regulatory policy. I conclude with a brief suggestion about how Lujan should have been written. The Lujan case arose under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (ESA). 64 The ESA is an aggressive set of protections for endangered species.165 Its key provision says that "Each Federal agency shall, in consultation with and with the assistance of the Secretary [of the Interior], insure that any action authorized, funded, or carried out by such agency... is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered species .... "166 For many years it has been uncertain whether the obligations of the ESA apply to actions of the U.S. government that are taken in foreign countries. In 1978, the relevant authorities agreed that the ESA did indeed apply outside the United States. 167 But in 1983, the Interior Department initiated a change in its position. An important new regulation, ultimately issued in 1986, announced that the ESA would apply only to actions within the United States or on the high seas. 168 The regulation had a number of important consequences. American agencies funding foreign projects were no longer required to consult with the Secretary of the Interior if their projects would jeopardize the existence of endangered species. The ESA would provide no obstacle to the expenditure of American taxpayer dollars to projects that would threaten to eliminate endangered species outside U.S. borders. The Court's opinion, devoted entirely to the issue of standing, is quite straightforward. It falls into four parts: a general statement about standing; a discussion of injury in fact; an assessment of redressability; and a treatment of the citizen suit. final regulation). Standing After Lujan showing that it is likely that the injury will be redressed by a decision favorable to the plaintiff.170 This opening statement breaks little new ground. But the Court added that the standing issue will often be affected by "whether the plaintiff is himself an object of the action (or forgone action) at issue." 17 1 If the plaintiff is an object, the three requirements will ordinarily be met. But when an "injury arises from the government's allegedly unlawful regulation (or lack of regulation) of someone else, much more is needed." 172 In such cases, there is the problem that "causation and redressability ordinarily hinge on the response of the regulated (or regulable) third party to the government action or inacand perhaps on the response of others as well." 173 The Court tion suggested that in such cases standing "is ordinarily 'substantially more difficult' to establish." 174 The Court had implicitly drawn this distinction in Allen v. Wright, 175 but Lujan was the first case explicitly to mark out the categories. Michigan Law Review ing on injury in fact. Standing After Lujan tangibly benefits him than it does the public at large." 183 To support this contention, the Court cited cases from the 1920s and 1930s rejecting suits by citizens complaining about government action on constitutional grounds. It also pointed to a number of post-1970 cases appearing to suggest that Article III in fact required a particularized injury. 184 The Court acknowledged that in none of these cases had Congress explicitly granted citizens a right to bring suit. But in the Court's view, this difference did not matter. The Court emphasized that "[v]indicating the public interest (including the public interest in government observance of the Constitution and laws) is the function of Congress and the Chief Executive."1' Is In particular, the Court said that if Congress could turn "the undifferentiated public interest in executive officers' compliance with the law into an 'individual right' vindicable in the courts," 18 6 it would be transferring "from the President to the courts the Chief Executive's most important constitutional duty," that is, "to 'take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed.' "187 Thus, the Court's decision rested on the fear that, if Congress could grant standing here, it would turn the judges into overseers, and usurpers, of the President himself. Here Article II helped give context to Article III. case Congress refused to "identify the injury it seeks to vindicate and relate the injury to the class of persons entitled to bring suit.1' ' 92 In any case, Article III does not permit Congress to allow courts "to vindicate the public's nonconcrete interest in the proper administration of the laws. While it does not matter how many persons have been injured by the challenged action, the party bringing suit must show that the action injures him in a concrete and personal way. ' 193 Each conclusion in the principal opinion is of considerable interest. The Court's conclusion on the matter of injury raises three different issues. The first is whether the plaintiffs did indeed show an injury, assuming the Court's definition of what the injury was. The second is whether the plaintiffs could have been permitted to recharacterize their injury in a different way. The third has to do with the general problems in the very notion of injury in fact. 192. 112 S. Ct. at 2147 (Kennedy, J., concurring). 193. 112 S. Ct. at 2147 (Kennedy, J., concurring). There were two other separate opinions. Justice Stevens concurred in the judgment. 112 S. Ct. at 2147. He concluded that plaintiffs had standing because some of them had visited a critical habitat of an endangered species, shown a professional interest in preserving the species and its habitats, and intended to revisit them in the future. They did not need to show that the return visit was imminent. They would suffer the relevant injury, sufficient for Article III purposes, as soon as the species was destroyed. Justice Stevens also contested the matter of redressability. He would have presumed that, if the Court required funding agencies to consult with the Secretary, the agencies would abide by the Court's interpretation, and that consultation would yield tangible results. Justice Stevens concurred only because he concluded that, on the merits, the ESA did not apply overseas. Standing After Lujan certainty that they would be affected by the government decisions at issue in the case. implications: [E]ven if Bakke had been unable to prove that he would have been admitted in the absence of the special program, it would not follow that he lacked standing.... The trial court found such an injury, apart from failure to be admitted, in the University's decision not to permit Bakke to compete for all 100 places in the class, simply because of his race. 19 6 What happened here was that the Bakke Court found injury, causation, and redressability by the simple doctrinal device of recharacterizing the injury. In Bakke, the Court described the injury as involving not admission to medical school but the opportunity to compete on equal terms. The Court has not explicitly used this technique in any other case, 197 but it might easily have done so. In Simon v. Eastern Kentucky Welfare Rights Organization [EKWROJ, for example, the Michigan Law Review Court might have said that the injury consisted not of a refusal of admission to a hospital, but instead of a decision not to permit the plaintiffs to have an opportunity to be admitted on the terms specified by law, simply because of unlawful incentives created by the IRS.198 In this way, Bakke and EKWRO were structurally similar. Likewise, in Allen v. Wright, 199 the Court might have recharacterized the injury as an opportunity not to have the desegregation process distorted by the incentives created through the grant of unlawful tax deductions to private schools. note 15, at 77-81. The Court did not require ordinary redressability because there was a clear invasion of a statutory right and a clear congressional grant of standing. See id. Standing After Lujan the ESA as protecting the right to have the opportunity to see endangered species unaffected by adverse action by government agencies? Surely Congress has the constitutional power to create such a right. But courts may wish to avoid this interpretation in the absence of an especially clear congressional statement. The recharacterization of injuries to include less particularized, "opportunity" harms does expand the category of people entitled to bring suit. At some point the recharacterization will mean that all, or almost all, citizens are harmed in the same way. Prudential considerations might well counsel against this step.2°° This point suggests that, when Congress has not spoken clearly, courts should not allow injuries to be characterized in such broad terms that the plaintiff is not particularly affected. But in Lujan, there was no such problem. The plaintiffs had a fully plausible professional and educational interest in the species at issue. If the plaintiffs had tried to characterize their injury as the diminished opportunity to promote their interests, they should have been permitted to do so. There is little law on this issue, but perhaps inventive plaintiffs will be permitted to make efforts in this direction in the future. standing may undercut rights of those most directly affected). 201. See supra notes 120-29 and accompanying text. I suggest that this is very much what happened in the ESA itself. By creating citizen standing, Congress in essence created the relevant property interest and allowed citizens to vindicate it. To this extent, Congress did indeed create the requisite injury in fact, and the Court should have recognized it as such. If a problem remains, perhaps it lies in Congress' failure to be explicit on the point. This may ultimately be the meaning of Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion, and if so it remains possible for Congress to solve the problem through more careful drafting. I discuss these points in Part 111.202 2. Redressability On the question of redressability, there was no majority for the Court. Three justices saw no problem with redressability; two Justices refused to speak to the issue; four Justices found a constitutional defect. Because no majority spoke, the Lujan case has little precedential value on this question. In cases of this kind, the relevant harm consists of a grant of funds Standing After Lujan that makes certain harms more likely as a result of the contribution of American tax dollars the loss of a species or the incidence of discrimination. The examples illustrate what Congress frequently attempts to do in the areas of funding requirements, environmental protection, and risk regulation in general: it attempts to change incentives in a way that should produce aggregate changes without necessarily affecting outcomes in particular cases. The reduction of sulfur dioxide emission levels in California will reduce the risk that people will suffer from respiratory disease. But it will usually be speculative in any particular case whether the mandated reduction will make any difference to a particular human life. by the failure to consult, then a decree ordering consultation would have redressed the harm. Of course, survival of the endangered species is not a necessary consequence of the requirement to consult. Perhaps the agencies would refuse to consult; perhaps removal of funding would not affect any species. But none of this is relevant. For purposes of redressability, a requirement of consultation must merely affect incentives in the statutorily required way. As noted, the Court did not explain this conclusion; I try to do so below.20 6 But if plaintiffs need not meet the normal standards for redressability for procedural violations, it follows that plaintiffs in Lujan itself need not have met the normal standards for redressability. Indeed, under this reasoning, redressability need not be shown in a wide range of cases in which a plaintiff contends that the executive branch has failed to comply with a procedural requirement imposed by law.20 7 A contrary conclusion would produce surprising results. It would mean that Article III imposed a constitutional obstacle to most ordinary administrative law cases. In the usual case, a litigant contends that an agency has failed to follow some procedural requirement - by holding inadequate hearings, failing to give notice, meeting with private people, or attending to a statutorily irrelevant factor. In all such cases, it might well be said, under the apparent standard in Lujan, that the redressability requirement has not been met. In such cases, it is Standing After Lujan entirely "speculative" whether a decree in the defendant's favor will remedy the alleged injury. Lujan cannot be understood to say that these conventional cases have all of a sudden become nonjusticiable. I will attempt to sort out these very complex issues below.20 8 For the moment, we should think of redressability as a crude device for determining whether Congress intended to confer a cause of action.20 9 When Congress has not spoken, the absence of redressability - understanding the injury in relatively concrete, personalized terms - may argue for the conclusion that the national legislature has not conferred standing on the plaintiff. This idea may be part of the prudential notion that standing will not be recognized for "generalized grievances."' 2 10 Certainly courts should not recognize standing when the injury, however characterized, will not be redressed by a decree in the plaintiff's favor. As an independent Article III requirement, however, the notion of redressability makes little sense in the cases under discussion. By far the most important and novel holding in Lujan was that Congress cannot grant standing to citizens. The largest conclusion, also set out in Justice Scalia's 1983 Suffolk Law Review article, is that Article III requires a concrete, particularized, actual, or imminent injury in fact that also satisfies the causation and redressability requirements. This conclusion rested on the Court's own precedents, on the Take Care Clause, and on a particular understanding of Article 111.211 I take these in order. eral expenditures; in Ex parte Levitt,2 14 the Court dismissed an action challenging Justice Hugo Black's appointment to the Supreme Court. None of these cases involved a congressional grant of standing. All involved constitutional claims. Following the discussion in Part I, I suggest that all of these cases are best understood as attempts to persuade the Court to create private rights of action under constitutional provisions, as in the 1971 case of Bivins v. Six Unknown Named Agents. 2 15 In Bivins, the Court concluded that the Fourth Amendment implicitly creates a private right of action that is, it implicitly authorizes people to bring suit for damages to vindicate their Fourth Amendment rights. 21 6 But not every constitutional provision creates a private right of action. It seems especially implausible to say that constitutional provisions create such rights when the relevant duty runs to the public as a whole rather than to affected individuals. Under traditional standards, a law that creates a duty to the general public does not give rise to privately enforceable rights.2 17 Fairchild, Mellon, and Ex parte Levitt should be seen as suits attempting to create private rights of action under constitutional provisions that did not contemplate such actions. This understanding accords with the language of the opinions, which indeed suggests that the relevant constitutional provisions do not create private rights. Hence the words in Fairchild: "Plaintiff has [asserted] only the right, possessed by every citizen, to require that the Government be administered according to law and that the public moneys not be wasted. Obviously this general right does not entitle a private citizen to institute in the federal courts a suit .... ,,21 8 In thinking about these precedents, we may go a bit further. A well-established view holds that courts should be reluctant to invoke constitutional provisions as a check on democratic processes. 2 19 Except when absolutely necessary, constitutional adjudication should be Standing After Lujan avoided. Many of the justiciability doctrines mootness, political questions emplify the relevant "passive virtues. Ideas of this sort were close to the heart of the jurisprudence of Justices Brandeis and Frankfurter, who were, as we have seen, the central figures behind the rise of standing limitations. However controversial these ideas may be to some,2 2 1 they are fully intelligible. But there is a huge difference between cases reflecting judicial reluctance to invoke the Constitution to challenge legislative outcomes and cases in which Congress, the national lawmaker, has explicitly created standing so as to ensure bureaucratic conformity with democratic will. On the basis of all these considerations, it seems clear that the result in Lujan has no firm support in the precedents. The issue of citizen standing had never been decided. Scalia's Lujan opinion with his insistence elsewhere on a "unitary executive," one that is free from interference by others. 225 We may speculate that, on Justice Scalia's view, the notion of a "unitary executive" equally forbids citizen suits that allow judicial intrusions on the "Take Care" power and statutory initiatives that remove executive power from the President in favor of independent counsels. But what is the precise relationship between standing limitations and the President's power to take care that the laws be faithfully executed? From its text and history, it seems clear that the Take Care Clause confers both a duty and a power 226 and that it does indeed impose limits on what courts can do to the bureaucracy. The Take Care Clause confers a power insofar as it grants to the President, and no one else, the authority to oversee the execution of federal law.227 The provision therefore carries implications for the perennial question of the President's power over the administration. It also suggests that oversight of bureaucratic implementation falls to the President, not to Congress or the courts. for present purposes. Standing After Lujan ceeded to win on the merits, no problem would arise under the Take Care Clause. A judicial decision for the plaintiffs would signal that the President had violated his constitutional command to respect and enforce the ESA as enacted. These questions do not establish that there are no limits on standing. But they do raise doubts about the relevance of the Take Care Clause. In fact they suggest that the clause, however relevant it may be to many issues on administrative law, is irrelevant to the question of standing. cute the law230 is unacceptable under Article II. Indeed, many of the recent standing cases might be thought to be Article II cases masquerading under the guise of Article III; we may even say that the Article II tail is wagging the Article III dog. But the conflation of Article II and Article III concerns has led to serious confusion. If a plaintiff with a plane ticket can sue under the ESA without offense to Article II, then it makes no sense to say that Article II is violated if a plaintiff lacking such a ticket initiates a proceeding. Beneficiary standing poses no Article II issue. The two articles raise quite different concerns; they should be analyzed separately. little to do with the Take Care Clause. Instead, it must rest on the understanding that Article III places a substantive limitation on what sorts of harms can count as legally cognizable injuries. Standing After Lujan courts in a democracy, an argument that stems from political theory. But because that argument is obviously influencing the development of standing principles in the Supreme Court and elsewhere, it is worthwhile to address the argument here. In his 1983 essay, Justice Scalia argued that "courts need to accord greater weight than they have in recent times to the traditional requirement that the plaintiff's alleged injury be a particularized one, which sets him apart from the citizenry at large. '235 Scalia acknowledged that this was "not a linguistically inevitable conclusion." 2 36 The text of Article III does not suggest that a personal injury is necessary. But in his key statement, discussed above, Scalia defended the limitation on grounds of tradition.2 37 Scalia explicitly claimed that "there is a limit upon even the power of Congress to convert generalized benefits into legal rights and that is the limitation imposed by the so-called 'core' requirement of standing. ' 238 A central concern is what Scalia describes the recent rise of the courts as "equal partners" with the legislative and executive branches. In his view, this unfortunate development is related to the law of standing. Thus Scalia suggests that "[tihe sine qua non for emergence of the courts as an equal partner with the executive and legislative branches in the formulation of public policy was the assurance of prompt access to the courts by those interested in conducting the debate. ' 239 Unlimited standing gave people this prompt access, thus impairing the system of separation of powers in two ways: first, by providing more occasions for judicial review of executive action; second, by changing the timing of that review. It is through this lens that Scalia offers the distinction with which I began this article. In the first class of cases, "an individual who is the very object of a law's requirement or prohibition seeks to challenge it"; here, standing is simple. In the second class, "the plaintiff is complaining of an agency's unlawful failure to impose a requirement or prohibition upon someone else"; here the harm is "a majoritarian one." 24 1 The central point in the analysis is that [u]less the plaintiff can show some respect in which he is harmed more than the rest of us ... he has not established any basis for concern that the majority is suppressing or ignoring the rights of a minority that wants protection, and thus has not established the prerequisite for judicial intervention. 242 Thus, the "doctrine of standing... is an essential means of restricting the courts to their assigned role of protecting minority rather than majority interests. ' 243 Scalia urged that judges had been assigned this role by the Constitution, and also that the other role the protection of majority interests - would be poorly executed by judges. lected from a highly educated elite. This situation is just perfect for a body that is supposed to protect the individual against the people; it is just terrible (unless you are a monarchist) for a group that is supposed to decide what is good for the people. Where the courts, in the supposed interest of all the people, do enforce upon the executive branch adherence to legislative policies that the political process itself would not enforce, they are likely (despite the best of intentions) to be enforcing the political prejudices of their own class.244 Scalia was alert to the concern that, without broad standing for beneficiaries, legislative enactments would be unlawfully underenforced within the bureaucracy. Indeed, he noted that statutes might get "lost or misdirected" in the executive branch; furthermore, he admitted that this was indeed the consequence of his proposal. 245 But this is "a good thing. ' 246 and this is the article's striking conclusion Executive nonimplementation of statutes is part of a well-functioning democratic process, keeping law current with existing views. "Yesterday's herald is today's bore." 24 7 This is a provocative and arresting argument, made in short compass. But it faces several difficulties. One problem is that the argu Standing After Lujan ment is strikingly ahistorical. The article does not address the question whether the Framers actually had this conception of Article III. As we have seen, there is no evidence that they did. There is considerable evidence to the contrary. There is a further problem. In a case of beneficiary or citizen standing, courts are not enforcing "executive branch adherence to legislative policies that the political process itself would not enforce. '249 Instead, they are requiring the executive branch to adhere to the law, that is, to outcomes that the political process has endorsed. In Lujan, for example, the plaintiffs would have won only if they could have shown an unambiguous legislative judgment in their favor.250 Standing would produce "legislative policies that the political process itself would not enforce" 25 1 only if courts systematically misinterpreted statutes. But this seems to be an unsupportable assumption. gressional enactments, even if motivated by the President himself, is inconsistent with the system of separation of powers. 252. See R. Shep Melnick, Administrative Law and Bureaucratic Reality, 44 ADMIN. L. REV. Standing After Lujan distinction between the objects and beneficiaries of regulation. The second is that it turns on an inadequate conception of the workings of American democracy. 254. See supra note 99. 255. See supra note 100 and accompanying text. 256. See generally the analysis in Burton A. Weisbrod, Conceptual Perspective on the Public Interest: An Economic Analysis, in PUBLIC INTEREST LAW 4 (Burton A. Weisbrod et al. eds., 1978). receives distinguished support from a significant body of empirical and analytic literature.2 57 Even if judges do not agree with that judgment, they sh6uld not foreclose the cause of action in the name of the Constitution. To make a full evaluation of Lujan, a good empirical picture of the citizen suit would be valuable. What effect does the citizen suit have on the real world? Is it a valuable instrument of environmental and regulatory policy? How many citizen suits have merit? Does the citizen suit produce greater compliance with the law or better regulatory policy? In how many cases does the citizen suit facilitate standing, or simplify standing issues, compared to a requirement of injury in fact? The answers to such questions may not help with the constitutional issue. But they will aid in an assessment of whether the demise of citizen suits is an important event for administrative law. 257. See, eg., Richard B. Stewart, The Reformation of American Administrative Law, 88 Standing After Lujan Clean Water Act, apparently because some of the statutory provisions speak quite plainly and mandate unambiguous action. 262 Post-Lujan, most environmental suits will be able to go forward under the injury-in-fact requirements. An environmental organization will typically be able to find a member who has the requisite injury.263 But the need to show an injury will complicate such suits, and some occasions will arise when no plaintiff can be found. Moreover, regulatory cases will arise in which the insistence on an actual injury, as understood in Lujan, will bar the action altogether. I discuss this possibility in Part III. In its current form, the citizen suit should be seen as part and parcel of a largely unsuccessful system of command-and-control regulation. Under this system, Congress entrusts agencies with the job of issuing a massive number of highly centralized, rigid, and often draconian regulatory requirements. It should be no surprise that agencies are often unable to undertake their legally required tasks, especially in view of the fact that they infrequently receive the necessary resources. The citizen suit is part of a complex system in which Congress delegates difficult or even impossible tasks, appropriates inadequate resources, imposes firm and sometimes unrealistic deadlines, 265 and enlists courts and citizens in order to produce compliance. 266 The system may well find explanation in terms of the self-interest of elected representatives. 267 Credit-claiming for apparently aggressive regula of Persons With Standing to Seek Judicial Review ofAgency Rulemaking, 39 ADMIN. L. REV. 139 (1987); Fadil, supra note 258; David S. Mann, Comment, Polluter-Financed Environmentally Beneficial Expenditures: Effective Use or Improper Abuse of Citizen Suits Under the Clean Water Act, 21 ENVTL. L. 175 (1991); James L. Thompson, Citizen Suits and Civil Penalties Under the Clean Water Act, 85 MICH. L. REV. 1656 (1987). tion can coexist with a range of real-world loopholes, helping industry to escape from government controls. But the public is often the loser. In these circumstances, the citizen suit is probably best understood as a band-aid superimposed on a system that can meet with only mixed success. Instead of band-aids, modem regulation requires fundamental reform. Congress should replace the command-and-control system with more flexible, incentive-oriented measures. 268 Instead of a continuing emphasis on judicial review, modem bureaucracy needs large-scale shifts introduced and implemented by legislators and administrators themselves. 269 We should not, however, forget that bandaids can do some good. The citizen suit may serve as an effective if partial alternative to massive regulatory overhaul. In any case, the complex policy issues do not bear on the interpretation of Article III. From what has been said thus far, we can offer some brief general words about the law of standing and Lujan itself. With respect to standing in general, the key question is whether Congress (or some other relevant source of law) has created a cause of action. Without a cause of action, there is no standing; there is no case or controversy; and courts are without authority to hear the case under Article III. EcON. & ORGANIZATION 59 (1992) (discussing the symbiotic relationship between legislators and environmental groups). Standing After Lujan standing issue through the wrong lens. An injury in fact is not required by Article III, and it is not sufficient for standing.27 1 Both history and principle show that people with "injuries in fact" may or may not have standing. The question is whether Congress has conferred a right to bring suit. Lujan settled some important questions. But it left many issues open, and it raised at least as many new ones. The future looks particularly murky in light of Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion, which refused to join the plurality on redressability, questioned any focus on the common law as the exclusive source of injury, and suggested relatively broad congressional power on the issues of injury and causation. 273 In this Part, I outline the settled and unsettled issues. I also suggest how some of the current puzzles should be resolved. The most important conclusions involve possible congressional responses to LuJan. I suggest that the simplest and most effective response would be the creation of a bounty for successful citizen plaintiffs. Such a bounty to confer a property interest on citizens). would build directly on the qui tam and informers' actions, and it should not raise a constitutional problem in the aftermath of Lujan. A more complex response would be for Congress expressly to create a property interest in the various regulatory "goods" that it wants to authorize citizens to protect. It might, for example, say that citizens generally have a beneficial interest in certain endangered species that are at risk from acts of the U.S. government. This somewhat adventurous strategy would have the advantages of building on common law notions of interest and injury and of forcing focused congressional attention on the precise nature of the rights at stake. It would also respond to some of the concerns in Justice Kennedy's concurrence. Despite its relative novelty, an approach of this sort should also be constitutional. The Lujan opinion does not reject a number of cases in which courts have given standing to environmental plaintiffs. On the contrary, it expressly endorses many such cases, even when the plaintiff is complaining that the executive has taken inadequate action to enforce the law. To this extent, the invalidation of the citizen suit allows a good deal of room for private litigants to initiate proceedings against the executive branch. The case therefore introduces some uncertainty into the law, but it probably does not work any fundamental shift in the environmental area. The Court thus makes clear that, if an environmental plaintiff can show that its members use the particular environmental resource that is at risk, standing is available. It follows, for example, that a citizen in New York could, post-Lujan, complain about the failure to enforce clean air or clean water requirements in New York. The Court suggests as much by invoking the Japan Whaling case274 to show that an environmental organization could complain of excessive whale harvesting when the "whale watching and studying of their members w[ould] be adversely affected by continued whale harvesting. ' 275 The Court also says that a citizens' council has standing to bring suit to challenge environmentally harmful construction in the area where its members live.276 Standing After Lujan It also remains clear that some procedural injuries can produce standing under Article III. The Court writes: This is not a case where plaintiffs are seeking to enforce a procedural requirement the disregard of which could impair a separate concrete interest of theirs (ag., the procedural requirement for a hearing prior to denial of their license application, or the procedural requirement for an environmental impact statement before a federal facility is constructed next door to them).2 7 7 A citizen can thus complain about a failure to prepare an environmental impact statement (EIS) even though it is "speculative" whether the statement will cause the project to be abandoned.278 Standing remains available in all cases under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)279 whenever plaintiffs can show that the project, if completed, would adversely affect their interests. A concrete injury of this kind is sufficient even if ordinary redressability cannot be shown. "The person who has been accorded a procedural right to protect his concrete interests can assert that right without meeting all the normal standards for redressability and immediacy. 2 80 It is clear that the Court believes this; but, as noted above, it is not clear why the Court does so. If Article III requires redressability, most NEPA suits indeed seem unconstitutional. In the typical NEPA action, there is no assurance that completion of an adequate EIS would have any consequence at all for the plaintiffs. One might well think, as the government urged in Lujan, that NEPA suits frequently violate Article III. "Congress has the power to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a case or controversy where none existed before. ' 281 More deeply, however, I think that the Court's conclusion on this point exemplifies several of the problems associated with the whole notion of redressability. A procedural right is created, not because it necessarily yields particular outcomes, but because it structures incentives and creates pressures that Congress has deemed important to effective regulation. The same is true for the sorts of interests at stake in the ESA and in many other environmental statutes. Congress is attempting not to dictate outcomes but to create procedural guarantees that will produce certain regulatory incentives. Redressability in the conventional sense is irrelevant. Thus far I have explained the types of suits Lujan has left untouched. But it is equally clear that Lujan forecloses "pure" citizen suits. In these suits, a stranger with an ideological or law-enforcement interest initiates a proceeding against the government, seeking to require an agency to undertake action of the sort required by law. Many environmental statutes now allow such actions, and plaintiffs have brought many suits of this kind. Under Lujan, these suits are unacceptable. Congress must at a minimum "identify the injury it seeks to vindicate and relate the injury to the class of persons entitled to bring suit. '2 82 If Congress has simply given standing to citizens, 283 this requirement has not been met. The plaintiff must point to a concrete injury, not merely to a congressional grant of standing. The discussion thus far has focused to a large extent on changes in the law of injury in fact. Lujan extends this change, placing a renewed emphasis on the notion that the harm must be imminent and nonspeculative. This requirement will likely carry more weight than it has in the past. Before Lujan, requiring people to obtain a plane ticket or to make firm plans to visit the habitat of endangered species might Standing After Lujan well have been unnecessarily formalistic. Now such actions are apparently required. But this is not a fundamental revision of previous law. The celebrated SCRAP case284 is probably a relic. But on that point, the handwriting had been on the wall a long time, and, if the analysis thus far is correct, there is no reason to mourn for SCRAP, in which Congress had not conferred a right to bring suit. The same would be true in the standard broadcasting case, in which listeners or viewers in a defined area, or of defined programming, challenge an FCC decision that bears on their programming choices. 288 If the FCC refuses to license a classical music station, there is a concrete injury, and it is sufficiently particularized under Lujan. The intention to listen to a station is not as conjectural as the travel intention at issue in Lujan. Because only four justices concluded that the redressability requirement had not been met in Lujan, the case probably offers no real lessons on that issue. After Lujan, the law of redressability thus remains as it was before: Extremely fuzzy and highly manipulable. It is manipulable, first, because there is no clear metric by which to decide whether it is "speculative" to say that a decree will remedy the plaintiff's injury. It is manipulable, second, because, as we have seen, whether an injury is redressable depends on how it is defined. If the injury in the Bakke case was defined as the right to attend law school, the redressability requirement was violated. If the injury in a standard environmental case is defined as the right not to suffer concrete personal health damage as a result of environmental harm, many environ Standing After Lujan mental plaintiffs will be unable to show redressability. If, however, the injury is defined as freedom from a certain risk of health damage, there is no problem of redressability. This indeed appears to be the way courts conventionally treat the issue. The status of the citizen suit is somewhat obscure after Lujan. At dissenting). a minimum, we know that Congress cannot grant standing to people who have no personal stake in the outcome of an agency action. But Justice Kennedy, joined by Justice Souter, said that Congress "has the power to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a case or controversy where none existed before. '2 95 This is a potentially crucial phrase. What does it mean? At a minimum, it means that Congress can create rights foreign to the common law. These include the right to be free from discrimination,2 96 the right to occupational safety,2 97 indeed, the vast panoply of statutory rights going beyond common law understandings. It must also mean that Congress has the power to find causation, perhaps deploying its factfinding power, where courts would not do so. 298 Justice Kennedy thus suggests that Congress can find causation and redressability even where courts would disagree. Perhaps courts will review such findings under a deferential standard. 295. Lujan, 112 S. Ct. at 2146-47 (Kennedy, J., concurring). 296. See Havens Realty Corp. v. Coleman, 455 U.S. 363, 373 (1982); Trafticante v. Metropolian Life Ins. Co., 409 U.S. 205, 212 (1972) (White, J., concurring). As noted above, the Havens Court found an injury to a "statutorily created right to truthful housing information," which it held sufficient for standing. 455 U.S. at 374. Effectively, Congress had created a kind of property interest in such information. The Lujan Court does not explain why Congress may not do the same for endangered species, or for the rainforest, or for clean air in an area in which one does not live. See supra text accompanying note 202; cf United States Parole Commn. v. Geraghty, 445 U.S. 388, 404 (1980) (noting that a class action does not become moot after the named plaintiff's substantive claim has expired as the representative retains a "personal stake" in obtaining class certification). Standing After Lujan "power to define injuries." Can Congress say that opportunity-type injuries are legally cognizable? Might Congress follow the Bakke strategy and conclude that standing exists in many cases involving increases in risks or attempts to alter incentives? Lujan provides no authoritative answer. But Justice Kennedy's concurrence suggests that Congress does possess power to define these events as injuries for purposes of standing. Justice Kennedy emphasized that standing need not be based solely on common law-like injuries; his concern was that, in creating the citizen suit, Congress had not even identified the injury it was attempting to redress. Congress can meet this concern by identifying injuries, building on the common law framework to recognize regulatory harms. The decreased probabilistic, probability of injury, the grant of opportunities, and the provision of appropriate incentives are key goals of the regulatory state. It should not be dificult for Congress to connect these goals to the injuries it seeks to prevent. Nothing in Article III forbids this course, even after Lujan. F. Private Defendants Many citizen-suit provisions in the environmental laws give the citizen the option of initiating proceedings against the private defendant allegedly operating in violation of federal law. Formally, Lujan did not address this strategy because the case involved a governmental defendant. Does Lujan affect suits against private persons? The answer is unclear. We have seen that a large part of the Court's opinion relies on the fear that, without a particularized injury, courts will be displacing executive power under the Take Care Clause. This concern is entirely inapplicable when the executive is not even a party. 3°° On the other hand, if Article III does indeed require a personal stake, the identity of the defendant should not matter. A case in which a citizen initiates proceedings against a private defendant would indeed test the claim that the Take Care Clause is a major impetus behind the Lujan decision. 300. A qualification is necessary here. When private people sue other private people to enforce federal statutory law, there is a lurking issue about private interference with the exercise of prosecutorial discretion, and hence with the President's "Take Care" power. But this issue surely does not have constitutional status. Parallel public and private remedies are most familiar to American law; they do not violate the Constitution. stake. After Lujan, the citizen-suit provisions are probably unconstitutional even when the defendant is a private citizen or corporation. Perhaps Congress can respond to Lujan by granting cash bounties to citizen plaintiffs. Indeed, this possibility might produce some of the most important and difficult post-Lujan issues. If Congress wants to reinstate the citizen suit after Lujan, a cash bounty would be the simplest strategy. Indeed, an exceedingly short amendment to existing law, giving a bounty to all successful citizen plaintiffs, should be sufficient. For reasons that follow, the bounty should create an interest and hence standing. In this way, a system of bounties would fully overcome the post-Lujan doubts about the citizen suit. A bounty system would also be more straightforward than the principal alternative strategy now available to Congress, involving restructured property rights. 30 1 A bounty system would have the important advantage of building on the clear historical precedents of qui tam and informers' actions, precedents that are firmly established in American law.302 To the extent that the citizen suit is a helpful device,303 Congress should be encouraged to take this step. At least where administrative inaction is both harmful and predictable, and where it cannot be prevented through more fundamental regulatory reform, 304 a bounty system would make a great deal of sense. Indeed, the creation of a system of citizen bounties could well be a major step in administrative law. In the first case, Congress might allow citizens to proceed against polluters or others without requiring a conventional injury in fact, but with provision for a financial bounty to victorious citizen litigants. Does the bounty create the requisite personal interest or concrete stake? In this context, Lujan is probably inapplicable by its own rationale. There is no risk that courts will usurp executive functions under the Take Care Clause. The executive is not a defendant. Not only is the executive not involved, but the plaintiff has a concrete interest in the form of the bounty. Standing seems perfectly appropriate. In fact, the Standing After Lujan Lujan Court seemed to invite this conclusion: "Nor, finally, is [this] the unusual case in which Congress has created a concrete private interest in the outcome of a suit against a private party for the government's benefit, by providing a cash bounty for the victorious plaintiff. ' 30 5 The qui tam action and the informers' action 30 6 seem to be decisive precedents in favor of this conclusion. In both of these actions, a bounty was provided, and it would be most adventurous to say that these arrangements violated Article III. In the second case, Congress might give a cash bounty to litigants who have prevailed against the government. It might, for example, award $500 to plaintiffs in cases involving environmental harms. It might even amend all current citizen-suit provisions in order to provide a cash bounty. A simple statute could accomplish this goal. Would this entail a different outcome from that in Lujan? The answer is unclear. On the one hand, the executive remains a defendant, and the Lujan objection from the Take Care Clause remains. On the other hand, the existence of a cash bounty gives the plaintiff the equivalent of a personal stake in the outcome, just like a case in which she has a right to obtain damages from a common law tortfeasor. This personal stake is probably sufficient to create standing. Here the informers' action is a direct precedent. the various citizen-suit provisions constitutional in cases in which Lujan draws them into severe doubt. I have criticized the injury-in-fact test on the ground that it undermines Congress' power to create property rights where they had not existed before. In Lujan, the plaintiffs might well have asserted that the conferral of a cause of action amounted to the creation of a form of property. Justice Kennedy had an answer to this claim: "Congress has the power to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a case or controversy where none existed before. '30 7 But here Congress has refused to "identify the injury it seeks to vindicate and relate the injury to the class of persons entitled to bring suit. ' 30 8 Apparently, plaintiffs had no property right under the ESA, because Congress failed explicitly to define the relevant injury when it provided for citizen suits. Suppose, then, that Congress attempts to create a citizen suit in the following way. It announces, first, that all Americans have a kind of property right in some environmental asset. The asset might be clean air anywhere in the country, or pristine areas, or the continued existence of endangered species in the United States or abroad. If this seems odd, we might note that Congress could surely create property rights in unowned land within the United States; to the extent that such rights do not interfere with the claims of a competing sovereign, Congress can create them with respect to unowned land outside our territorial borders. 309 And surely Congress' capacity to create property rights is not limited to land. If Congress thus defines property rights and injuries and creates a correlative cause of action, has it acted appropriately and met Justice Kennedy's concern? The answer would seem to be affirnmative. The advantages of express legislative creation of a property right are that it would build on common law understandings and produce more focused congressional deliberation on the nature of the interest it is creating. The citizen suit 307. Lujan, 112 S. Ct. at 2146-47 (Kennedy, J., concurring). 308. 112 S. Ct. at 2147 (Kennedy, J., concurring). 309. The point may seem odd, but we can imagine an example. Suppose that an area in Argentina produces medicines especially beneficial to Americans. Suppose that the activities of private American companies in Argentina threaten to industrialize that area and thus to eliminate its medicinal capacities. Congress might respond by forbidding these activities and by creating a property right in all Americans, operating only against other Americans, to the continued productivity of the area. This could not possibly raise a constitutional issue, or even a problem of international law. Standing After Lujan has become a relatively automatic part of environmental law, with little legislative attention to its nature and consequences. If the citizen suit is in fact intended to give all citizens the equivalent of a beneficial interest in environmental quality, it may well be desirable to focus congressional attention on exactly that question. And if Congress concludes that it seeks to create this kind of property, there should be no constitutional problem. At least in general, standing depends on whether any source of law has created a cause of action. To a large extent, that question is for congressional resolution. Congress can create standing as it chooses and, in general, can deny standing when it likes. 311 As an abstraction companying text. Michigan Law Review independent of what the law says, an injury in fact is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for standing. Indeed, the notion of injury in fact is a form of Lochner-style substantive due process. It assumes that there can be a factual inquiry into "injury" independent of evaluation and of legal conventions. There can be no such law-free inquiry. It is a conceptual impossibility, indeed a form of metaphysics. Despite the holding of Lujan, Congress should be permitted to grant standing to citizens. The text and history of Article III provide no support for judicial invalidation of congressional grants of citizen standing. On the contrary, England, the American colonies, and early Congresses all granted standing to strangers. No one suggested that this practice violated the Constitution. The Lujan Court's unprecedented invalidation of a provision for citizen standing has no basis in Article III. The Court should not have reached its important conclusion without investigating the relevant history, and the odd evolution of standing doctrine, in much more detail.