University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1992 

Free Speech Now 
Free Speech Now 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Free Speech Now," 59 University of Chicago Law Review 255 (1992). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Free  Speech  Now
Cass R.  Sunsteint

The  radio  as  it  now  operates  among  us  is  not  free.  Nor  is  it
entitled  to  the  protection  of  the  First Amendment.  It  is  not
engaged  in  the  task  of  enlarging  and  enriching  human  com-
munication.  It  is  engaged  in  making  money.  And  the  First
Amendment  does not  intend to  guarantee  men freedom  to say
what  some  private  interest  pays  them  to  say  for  its  own
advantage.

The radio, as  we  now  have  it, is not  cultivating  those  qualities
of taste,  of  reasoned judgment,  of integrity,  of loyalty,  of mu-
tual  understanding  upon  which  the  enterprise  of  self-govern-
ment depends.  On the  contrary,  it  is a mighty  force  for break-
ing  them  down.  It  corrupts  both  our  morals  and  our
intelligence.  And  that  catastrophe  is  significant  for  our  in-
quiry,  because  it  reveals  how  hollow  may  be  the  victories  of
the freedom  of  speech  when  our  acceptance  of the  principle  is
merely  formalistic.  Misguided  by  that  formalism  we  Ameri-
cans  have  given  to  the  doctrine  merely  its  negative  meaning.
We  have used  it for the  protection  of private, possessive  inter-
ests  with  which  it  has  no  concern.  It  is  misinterpretations
such  as this which,  in our use  of the  radio, the moving  picture,
the  newspaper  and  other  forms  of  publication,  are  giving  the
name  'freedoms'  to  the  most  flagrant  enslavements  of  our
minds  and  wills.1

Alexander  Meiklejohn

t  Karl N. Llewellyn  Professor of Jurisprudence,  The University  of Chicago,  Law  School
and  Department of Political  Science. This Article  was  prepared  for The Bill of Rights in the
Welfare State: A  Bicentennial Symposium,  held at The  University  of Chicago  Law  School
on  October 25-26,  1991.  I  am  grateful  to Nancy Eisenhauer  for valuable  research  assistance
and  to Bruce  Ackerman,  Akhil  Amar, Mary  Becker,  Lee  Bollinger,  Elena Kagan,  Larry  Les-
sig,  Richard  Posner,  Nancy  Rosenbloom,  Geoffrey  Stone,  and  David  Strauss  for  helpful
comments  on  a  previous  draft.  Participants  in  a workshop  at  Brown  University  also  pro-
vided  valuable  help.  A revised  version  of this  essay will  appear  as  chapters  7 and  8  of Cass
Sunstein,  The  Partial Constitution (forthcoming  1993).

Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Free Speech  and  Its Relation  to  Self-Government  104-05

(Harper & Brothers,  1948).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  255 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

Even  when  the  words  remain  the  same,  they  mean  something
very  different  when  they  are  uttered  by  a  minority  struggling
against  repressive  measures,  and  when  expressed  by  a  group
that  has  attained  power  and  then  uses  ideas  that  were  once
weapons  of  emancipation  as  instruments  for  keeping  the
power  and  wealth  they  have  obtained.  Ideas  that  at one  time
are  means  of  producing  social  change  have  not  the  same
meaning  when  they  are  used  as  means  of  preventing  social
change.2

John Dewey

For  those  who  believe  either  that  the  judiciary  should  play  a
limited  role  in  American  government  or  that  the  Constitution's
meaning  is  fixed  by  the  original  understanding  of  its  ratifiers,  the
First Amendment  is a particular  embarrassment.  The  current  state
of free  speech in  America  owes  a great  deal  to extremely  aggressive
interpretations  by the  Supreme  Court,  which  has invalidated  legis-
lative  outcomes  on  numerous  occasions.  These  decisions  cannot  be
justified  by  reference  to  the  original  understanding  of  the  First
Amendment.3  Such  decisions  also  involve  a  highly  intrusive  judi-
cial  role  in  majoritarian  politics.

There  is  some  continuity,  however,  between  current  practice
and  the  original  understanding,  and  between  current  practice  and
principles  of  democratic  government.  The  continuity  lies  in  the
distinctive  American  contribution  to  the  theory  of  sovereignty.  In
England,  sovereignty  lay  with  the King.  "In  the  United  States,"  as
James  Madison  explained,  "the  case  is  altogether  different.  The
People,  not  the  Government,  possess  the  absolute  sovereignty."'4

2  John  Dewey,  The Future of Liberalism, in  John  Dewey,  11  Later Works  291  (South-

ern  Illinois,  1987).

3  Indeed,  the  protection  of free speech  originally  may have  been  thought to  confer pri-
marily a  ban  against "prior restraints"-licensing  systems and other  means of requiring pre-
publication  permission  from  government. See Leonard  W.  Levy, Emergence of  A  Free Press
272-74  (Oxford,  1985).  Under  this  limited  conception  of the  First Amendment,  subsequent
punishment  for  speech  usually  raises  no  constitutional  problem  at all.  Id.

Even  if  this  extreme  view  is  incorrect,  it  seems  clear  that  during  the founding  period,
much  of what we  now  consider  "speech"  was  thought  to be  unprotected,  and  speech  could
be regulated  if it could  be shown to cause  injury  or offense.  Joseph Story, A  Familiar Expo-
sition of  the  Constitution of  the  United States  §§  445-47  at  316-18  (Regnery  Gateway,
1986).  In any  case  it  is  revealing  that during  the founding  period  many people  thought that
the  infamous  Sedition Act-making  it  a  crime  to libel "the  government"  and  thus  criminal-
izing  a  wide range  of  criticism  of government-was  constitutional.  See  Philip  Kurland  and
Ralph  Lerner,  eds,  5  The Founder's Constitution (Chicago,  1987).

" James Madison,  Report on the  Virginia Resolution (Jan  1800),  in  Gaillard  Hunt, ed,

6  The  Writings of James Madison 386  (Putnam,  1906).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  256 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

The placement  of  sovereignty  in the  people  rather  than  in  the gov-
ernment  has  important  implications  for  freedom  of  speech.  As
Madison  understood  it,  the  new conception  of sovereignty  entailed
a  judgment  that  any  "Sedition  Act"  would  be  unconstitutional. 5
The  power  represented  by  such  an  Act  ought,  "more  than  any
other,  to  produce  universal  alarm;  because  it  is  levelled  against
that right  of  freely  examining  public  characters  and  measures,  and
of  free  communication  among  the  people  thereon,  which  has  ever
been  justly  deemed  the  only  effectual  guardian  of  every  other
right."6

With  Madison's  pronouncements  in  mind,  we  might  think  of
the American  tradition  of free  expression  as  a series  of struggles  to
understand  the relationship  between  this conception  of sovereignty
and  a  system  of  free  speech.  The  extraordinary  protection  now  ac-
corded  to political  speech  can well  be  understood  as an  elaboration
of  the  distinctive  American  understanding  of  sovereignty.

My goal  in this  Article  is  to  defend  this  basic  proposition  and
to  evaluate  the  current  system  of  free  expression  in light  of it.  As
we  will  see,  an  effort  to  root freedom  of  speech  in  a conception  of
popular  sovereignty  shows  that  our  current  understandings  are  off
the  mark.  Those  understandings  misdirect  the  basic  inquiry,  pro-
tect  speech  that  should  not  be  protected,  and  worst  of  all,  invali-
date  democratic  efforts  to  promote  the principle  of popular  sover-
eignty  under  current  conditions.

I.  THE  NEW  FIRST  AMENDMENT

American  children  watch  a  good  deal  of  television-about
twenty-seven  hours  per week-and  American  television  contains  a
good  deal  of  advertising.  For  adults,  every  hour  of  television  con-
tains  nearly  eight minutes  of  commercials.8  For most  of its  history,
the Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC) imposed  limits  on
the  amount  of  advertising  that  broadcasters  could  air  on  shows
aimed  at children.  In  1984,  the  FCC  eliminated  the  limits.'

In  the  wake  of  deregulation,  some  stations  air  between  eleven
and  twelve  minutes  per hour  of commercials  during  children's pro-

5 Id  at 386,  406.

World  Rep  65  (Feb  18, 1985).

1990).

68,  76  (Pantheon,  1986).

Id  at 393.
Geoffrey  Tooth,  Why  Children's TV  Turns  Off  So  Many  Parents, US  News  and

'  Barbara  Gamarekian,  Ads  Aimed  at  Children Restricted, NY  Times  D1 (Oct  18,

1  Tom  Engelhardt,  The  Shortcake Strategy, in  Todd  Gitlin,  ed,  Watching  Television

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  257 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

gramming  on weekends,  and  up to fourteen  minutes  on weekdays. 10
Some  shows  are  actually  full-length  commercials,  because  the  lead
characters  are  products."

In 1990  Congress  imposed,  for  children's  programming,  a  limit
of ten  and  one  half  minutes  of television  commercials  per  hour  on
weekends,  and  twelve  minutes  on  weekdays.  President  Bush with-
held  his approval,  invoking  the First  Amendment.  According  to  the
President,  the  First  Amendment  "does  not  contemplate  that  gov-
ernment  will  dictate  the  quality  or  quantity  of  what  Americans
should  hear-rather,  it  leaves  this  to  be  decided  by free  media re-
sponding  to  the free  choices  of individual  consumers."' 2  The Presi-
dent  did  "not  believe  that  quantitative  restrictions  on  advertising
should  be  considered  permissible  .... ,3

Nonetheless,  the  Children's  Television  Act of  1990  has become
law. 4  It  is possible  that  networks  will challenge  it  on constitutional
grounds.  Perhaps  the  constitutional  attack  will  be  successful.  The
plausibility  of  the  argument  has  affected  the  debate  over  controls
on  children's  advertising,  and  may  well  have  deterred  stronger  ef-
forts  to  encourage  high-quality  broadcasting  for  children.

This  episode  reveals  that  something  important  and  strange
has  happened  to  the  First  Amendment.  Whereas  the  principal
First  Amendment  suits  were  brought,  in  the  1940s,  1950s,  and
1960s,  by  political  protestors  and  dissidents,  many  of  the  current
debates  involve  complaints  by  commercial  advertisers,  companies
objecting  to  the  securities  laws,  pornographers,  businesses  selling
prerecorded  statements  of  celebrities  via  "900"  numbers,  people
seeking  to  spend  large  amounts  of  money  on  elections,  industries
attempting  to  export technology  to  unfriendly  nations,  newspapers
disclosing  names  of  rape  victims,  and  large  broadcasters  resisting
government  efforts  to  promote  diversity in  the media.  How has this
happened?,

To  attempt  an  answer,  we  must  step  back  a  bit.  From  about
1940  to  1970,  American  constitutional  debate  over  freedom  of  ex-
pression  was  divided  along  clear  lines:  On  one  side  were  those  ac-

'0 Gamarekian,  NY  Times  § D at  1  (cited  in  note  8).

"  On the  development  of this practice,  see  Engelhardt,  The Shortcake Strategy at 70-

81  (cited  in  note  9).

12 Statement on the Children's Television Act  of 1990, 26  Weekly  Compilation  of Pres-

idential  Documents  42,  1611-12  (Oct  17,  1990).

13 Id  at 1612.
"  The  President  did  not veto  the  bill  but  allowed  it to  become  law  without  his  signa-

ture.  He  did  not  explain  why  he  did  not veto  it.  Id  at  1611-12.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  258 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

cepting  what  came  to  be  the  dominant  position,  a  form  of  First
Amendment  "absolutism."  On  the  other side  were  the  advocates  of
"reasonable  regulation."  One  could  identify  the  two  sides  by  their
commitment  to,  or  rejection  of,  four  central  ideas.

The  first  idea  is  that the  government  is  the  enemy  of freedom
of  speech.  Any  effort  to  regulate  speech,  by  the  nation  or  the
states,  is threatening  to the  principle  of free  expression.  More  sub-
tly,  an  effort  to  regulate  speech  is  defined  as  a  governmental  at-
tempt  to  interfere  with  communicative  processes,  taking  the  ex-
isting  distribution  of entitlements-property  rights, wealth,  and  so
on-as  a  given.  I will  discuss  this  point  in  more  detail  below. 15

The  second  idea  is  that  we  should  understand  the  First
Amendment  as  embodying  a commitment to  a certain  form  of neu-
trality.  Government  may  not  draw  lines  between  speech  it  likes
and  speech  it  hates.  All  speech  stands  on  the  same  footing.  Thus
the  protection  accorded  to  speech  extends  equally  to  Communists
and  Nazis,  the Ku  Klux Klan  and  the  Black  Panthers,  Martin Lu-
ther King, Jr. and  George  Wallace.  Government  should  ensure  that
broadcasters,  newspapers,  and  others  can  say  what  they wish,  con-
strained  only  by the impersonal  pressures  of the  marketplace.  This
conception  of neutrality  among  different  points  of view  is  the  gov-
ernment's  first  commitment.

The  third  idea is that we  should  not limit the  principle  of free
expression  to  political  speech,  or  to  expression  with  a  self-con-
scious  political  component.  It is  extremely  difficult  to  distinguish
between  political  and  nonpolitical  speech.  Any  such  distinction  is
likely  to reflect illegitimate  partisan  politics.' 6  Thus the free  speech
principle  extends  to  more  than  self-conscious  efforts  to  contribute
to  democratic  deliberation.  It  extends  equally  to  sexually  explicit
speech,  music,  art,  and  commercial  speech.  Under  this  view,  the
First Amendment  sets  out  a  principle  not  limited  to  its  particular
historical  wellsprings.  "Speech,"  in  the  First  Amendment,  means
all  speech.

The  final  idea is  that any  restrictions  on  speech,  once  permit-
ted, have  a  sinister  and  inevitable  tendency  to  expand.  Principled
limits  on  government  are  hard  to  articulate;  to  allow  one  kind  of
restriction  is  in  practice  to  allow  many  other  kinds  as  well.  "Slip-
pery  slope"  arguments  therefore  deserve  a  prominent  place  in  the
theory  of  free  expression.  As  far  as  possible,  "balancing"  ought  to

,b  See  Section  II.
,e  See  Steven  H.  Shiffrin,  The  First Amendment,  Democracy, and  Romance  48-53

(Harvard,  1990).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  259 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law  Review

[59:255

play  no  role  in  free  speech  law.  Judges  should  not  uphold  restric-
tions  on speech  simply because  the  government  seems to  have  good
reasons  for  the  restriction  in  the  particular  case.  They  must  pro-
tect  against  the  likely  effect  of  the  decision  on  future  government
action.

In  the  past  quarter-century  these  four  principles  have  com-
manded  enormous  respect.  The  press  insisted  on them with  special
enthusiasm.  It  was  joined  by  many teachers  in law schools  and  po-
litical  science  departments,  and  by  numerous  litigators, most  nota-
bly  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union.

One  can  easily  identify  the  components  of  the  opposing  posi-
tion. 7  On  this  view,  balancing  is  an  inevitable  part  of  a  sensible
system  of  free  expression,  and  "reasonable  regulation"  should  be
upheld.  The  meaning  of  the  First  Amendment  should  be  deter-
mined  by  reference  to  its  history,  in particular  by  reference  to  the
relatively  limited  aims  of  the  Framers  and  the  complexities  of  the
of
Supreme  Court's 
speech-advocacy  of  crime,  especially  dangerous  speech,  commer-
cial  speech,  hate  speech,  sexually  explicit  speech,  and  libel-fall
outside  the  First  Amendment  altogether.  The  government,  accord-
ing to  this view, plays  a role  in maintaining  a civilized  society. This
means  that it may  guard,  for example,  against the  degradation  pro-
duced  by obscenity  or  the  risks  posed  by  speech  advocating  over-
throw  of  the  government.  Large-scale  neutrality  makes  no  sense.

own  precedents.  Certain 

categories 

From  the  perspective  of  the  1990s,  it  may  be  hard  to  remem-
ber  the  vigor  and  tenacity  with  which  the  opposing  camps  strug-
gled  over  their  respective  positions.  The basic  commitments  of the
absolutist  view  are  now  cliches,  even  dogma.  Despite  that  view's
novelty  and  the  lack  of  direct  historical  support  on  its  behalf,  it
has  won  a  dramatic  number  of  victories  in  the  Supreme  Court.
This  is  so  especially  with  restrictions  of  speech  on  the  basis  of  its
content, where  special  scrutiny  is  now routine,  except  in  quite  nar-
row  categories  of excluded  speech. 18 Thus  constitutional  protection
has  been  accorded  to  most commercial  speech;  to  most sexually  ex-
plicit speech;  to  many kinds of  libel;  to publication  of the names  of
rape  victims;  to the  advocacy  of crime,  even  of violent  overthrow  of
the  government;  to  large  expenditures  on  electoral  campaigns;  to

'  Much  of  this  is  stated  in  Robert  H.  Bork,  Neutral Principles and Some  First

Amendment  Problems, 47  Ind  L  J  1, 21-22  (1971).

"s Content-neutral  restrictions  are  of  course  subject  to a  form  of balancing.  See  gener-

ally  Geoffrey  R. Stone,  Content-Neutral Restrictions, 54  U  Chi  L Rev  46,  48-50  (1987).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  260 1992

19921

Free Speech Now

corporate  speech;  in  all  likelihood  to  hate  speech;  and  of  course  to
flag  burning. 9

It  is not an  overstatement  to  say that, taken all  together, these
developments  have  revolutionized  the  law  of  free  expression.  For
many, the  new  law  is  an  occasion  for  a  sense  of triumph  and,  per-
haps,  a belief  that  the  principal  difficulties  with  First  Amendment
law  have  been  solved.  The  remaining  problems  are  thought  to  be
ones  of  applying  hard-won  doctrinal  wisdom  to  ever-present
threats  of  censorship.

In  the  last  decade,  however,  the  commitments  that  emerged
from  the  last  generation  of  free  speech  law  have  come  under  ex-
tremely  severe  strain.  Emerging  controversies  have  appeared  over
such  issues  as  campaign  finance  regulation,  hate  speech,  "dial-a-
porn,"  the securities  laws,  scientific  speech,  nude  dancing, commer-
cial  advertising,  selective  funding  of  expression,  pornography,  and
regulation  designed  to  produce  quality  and  diversity  in  broadcast-
ing.  With  these  developments,  previous  alliances  have  come  apart.
Sometimes  the  new  disputes  seem  to  resurrect  the  belief  in  "rea-
sonable  regulation."  Often  they  draw  one  or more  of the  four  basic
commitments  of  the  absolutists  into  sharp  question.

The  ironies  in  all  this  are  abundant.  The  new  coalitions  have
spurred  plausible  arguments  of  hypocrisy,  with  free  speech  advo-
cates  claiming  that the  new  challengers  abandoned  the liberal  com-
mitment  to free  speech  as  soon  as  the  commitment  became  incon-
venient, or  required  protection  for unpopular  causes.  Indeed, it  has
been  charged  that,  for  many,  the  commitment  to  free  speech
stands  revealed  as  contingent  and  convenient,  and  not  principled
at all.

On  the  other  hand,  the  enthusiasm  for  broad  application  of
free  speech  principles  to the  new  settings  is ironic  as well.  The con-
stitutional  protection  accorded  to  commercial  speech,  for  example,
is  relatively  new.  Justices  Douglas  and  Black,20  probably  the  most
vigorous  advocates  of  free  expression  in  the  history  of  the  Court,
rejected  protection  for  commercial  speech,  as did many  others.  The
notion that the First Amendment  protects  libel of ethnic  groups,  or

"  Virginia Board of Pharmacy v  Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, 425  US  748,  770
(1976)  (commercial  speech);  New  York  Times  Co.  v  Sullivan, 376  US  254,  265-66  (1964)
(libel);  Florida Star v  BJF, 491 US  524,  533-34  (1989)  (names  of rape victims);  Brandenburg
v  Ohio, 395 US  444,  447-48  (1969)  (advocacy  of illegality);  Buckley  v  Valeo, 424  US  1,  22-23
(1976)  (campaign  expenditures);  First National Bank  of Boston v  Bellotti, 435  US  765,  776
(1978)  (corporate  speech);  Miller v  California, 413  US  15  (1973)  (obscenity);  Texas  v  John-
son,  491  US  397  (1989)  (flag-burning).

20  See  Valentine v  Chrestensen, 316  US  52,  54-55  (1942).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  261 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law  Review

[59:255

hate  speech,  is  a  quite modern  development,  if it  is  a  development
at  all.  Until  recently,  no  one  thought  that  the  First  Amendment
cast  any  doubt  on  the  securities  laws.  Until  the  last  few  decades,
the  states  had  very  broad  authority  to  regulate  sexually  explicit
material.  And  the  interaction  of  the  free  speech  principle  with
campaign  spending  and  broadcasting  surely  raises  complex  and
novel  issues.

Under  these  circumstances,  it seems peculiar  to  insist that any
regulatory  efforts  in  these  areas  will  endanger  "the  First  Amend-
ment"  or  inevitably  pave  the  way  toward  more  general  incursions
on  speech.  Insistence  on  the  protection  of  all  words  seems  espe-
cially  odd  when  it  is  urged  by  those  who  otherwise  proclaim  the
need  for  judicial  restraint,  for  the  freeing  up  of  democratic
processes  from  constitutional  compulsion,  and  for  close  attention
to  history.  These  ideas  would  seem  to  argue  most  powerfully
against  reflexive  invocation  of the  First  Amendment.

Current  law,  then, faces  a  new  set  of constitutional  problems,
raising  issues  that have  shattered  old  alliances  and that  promise to
generate  new  understandings  of the  problem  of  freedom  of  expres-
sion.  In  this  Article,  I  propose  and  evaluate  two  responses  to  the
current  state  of  affairs.  The  two  responses  have  the  same  source.
That source  is  the  distinctive  American  contribution  to  the  theory
of  sovereignty.

The  first proposal  calls  for  a  New  Deal with  respect to  speech.
It  applies  much  of  the  reasoning  of  the  New  Deal  attack  on  the
common  law  to  current  questions  of  First  Amendment  law.  Such
an  approach  would  produce  significant  changes  in  existing  under-
standings  of the  nature  of the  free  speech  guarantee.  It  would  call
for  a large-scale  revision  in  our  view  of when  a law  "abridges"  the
freedom  of speech.  At a  minimum, it  would  insist that many imag-
inable  democratic  interferences  with  the  autonomy  of  broadcasters
or  newspapers  are  not  "abridgements"  at  all.  The  New  Deal  for
speech  would  also  argue that  such  autonomy, because  it  is  guaran-
teed  by  law,  is  itself  sometimes  an  abridgement.  I  believe  that
there  is  much  to  be  said  in  favor  of this  approach,  and  in  certain,
well-defined  settings,  it  should  be  accepted.

The  second  proposal  is  less  dramatic.  It  proclaims  that  the
First  Amendment  is  best  understood  by  reference  to  the  demo-
cratic  process.  The  overriding  goal  of the  amendment,  rightly  per-
ceived,  is  to  protect  politics  from  government.  This  view  would
clarify  a  number  of  current  controversies  without  fundamentally
changing  existing  law.  I  conclude  that this  approach  should  also  be
adopted,  notwithstanding  the  likely  apprehension  from  those  ac-

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  262 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

customed  to  "slippery  slope"  arguments  in  the  First  Amendment
context.

Ultimately,  I  argue  that  an  insistence  that  the  First  Amend-
ment is  fundamentally  aimed  at protecting  democratic  self-govern-
ment,  combined  with  modest  steps  in  favor  of  a  New  Deal  for
speech,  would  resolve  most of  the  current  problems  in  free  speech
law  without  seriously  compromising  the  First  Amendment  or  any
other  important  social  values.  But  in  order  to  reach  this  conclu-
sion,  it  will  be  necessary  to  abandon,  or  at least  qualify,  the  basic
principles  that  have  dominated  judicial  and  academic  thinking
about  speech  in  the  last  generation.

II.  A  NEW  DEAL  FOR  SPEECH?

A.  Background

Perhaps  we  need  a New  Deal for  speech,  one that would  paral-
lel  what  the  New  Deal  provided  to  property  rights  during  the
1930s,  and  that would  be  rooted in  substantially  similar  concerns."
A  brief review  follows.

2  Something of this general  sort  is suggested  in  Onora  O'Neill,  Practices of Toleration,
in  Judith Lichtenberg,  ed,  Democracy and the Mass Media 155  (Cambridge,  1990);  Thomas
M.  Scanlon,  Jr.,  Content Regulation Reconsidered, in  id  at 331; Owen  M. Fiss, Free Speech
and Social Structure, 71  Iowa L  Rev  1405  (1986);  Owen  M. Fiss,  Why  the State?, 100  Harv
L  Rev  781  (1987);  J.M.  Balkin,  Some  Realism About Pluralism: Legal  Realist Approaches
to  the First Amendment,  1990 Duke  L J 375.  For reasons suggested  below,  I do  not go so far
as Fiss  in  this direction;  my treatment  overlaps with  the approach  outlined  in O'Neill, Scan-
lon,  and  Balkin.

Many of the concerns  expressed  here were set out  long ago  in  The Commission  on Free-
dom  of the Press,  A  Free and Responsible Press (Chicago,  1947).  That Commission,  headed
by  Robert  Hutchins  and  Zechariah  Chafee,  Jr.,  included  among  its  members  John Dickin-
son,  Harold  Lasswell,  Archibald  MacLeish,  Charles Merriam,  Reinhold Niebuhr,  and  Arthur
Schlesinger.  It  did  not recommend  legal  remedies  for  the current  situation, but  it  suggested
the  need  for  private measures  to  control  novel  problems.

The press has  been transformed  into an  enormous  and complicated  piece  of machinery.
As  a necessary  accompaniment,  it  has  become big business....  The right of free  public
expression  has  therefore  lost its  earlier  reality.  Protection  against  government  is  now
not  enough  to guarantee  that a  man  who  has  something  to say shall  have  a  chance  to
say  it.  The  owners  and  managers  of the  press  determine  which  persons,  which  facts,
which  versions  of the  facts,  and  which  ideas  shall  reach  the  public.

Id  at 15-16.  For  a  recent  statement  to  similar  effect,  see  James  S.  Fishkin, Democracy and
Deliberation: New  Directions for Democratic Reform  33  (Yale,  1991):

[T]he  system  of free  expression  cannot be  evaluated  merely  in  terms  of whether  some
positions are  forcibly suppressed.  Crucial voices  may fail to achieve  an effective  hearing
without the  need  to silence  any  of them.  In  a  modern, technologically  complex  society,
access  to the  mass  media  is  a  necessary  condition  for  a  voice  to  contribute  to the  na-
tional  political  debate.  Unless  the  media  permit  the  full  range  of  views  that have  a
significant  following  in  the society  to get access  to the media  on issues  of intense  inter-

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  263 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

Before  the  New  Deal,  the  Constitution  was  often  understood
as a constraint  on government  "regulation."  In practice, this meant
that  the  Constitution  was  often  invoked  to  prohibit  governmental
interference  with  existing  distributions  of  rights  and  entitle-
ments.2  Hence  minimum  wage  and  maximum  hour laws  were  seen
as  unjustifiable  exactions-takings-from  employers  for  the  bene-
fit of  employees  and  the  public  at  large.23  The  Due  Process  Clause
insulated  private  arrangements  from  public  control,  especially  if
the  government's  goals  were  paternalistic  or  redistributive.  In  op-
erating  under  the  police  power,  government  must  be  neutral  in
general,  and  between  employers  and  employees  in particular.  A  vi-
olation  of  the  neutrality  requirement,  thus  understood,  would
count  as  a  violation  of  the  Constitution.

On  the  pre-New  Deal  view,  existing  distributions  marked  the
boundary  not  only  between  neutrality  and  partisanship,  but  be-
tween  inaction  and  action  as  well.  Government  inaction  consisted
of respect  for  existing  distributions.  Government  action  was  under-
stood  as  interference  with  them.  The  rallying  cry  "laissez-faire"
embodied  such  ideas.  The  fear  of,  and  more  important,  the  very
conception  of  "government 
this  basic
approach.

intervention"  captured 

The  New  Deal  reformers  argued  that  this  entire  framework
was  built  on  fictions.  Their  response  is  captured  in  President
Roosevelt's  references  to  "this  man-made  world  of  ours '24  and  his
insistence  that  "we  must  lay  hold  of  the  fact  that  economic  laws
are  not made  by  nature.  They  are  made  by  human  beings. '25  The
pre-New  Deal  framework  treated  the  existing  distribution  of  re-
sources  and  opportunities  as  prepolitical,  when  in  fact  it  was  not.
It  saw  minimum  wage  and  maximum  hour  laws  as  introducing  gov-
ernment  into  a  private  or  voluntary  sphere.  But  the  New  Dealers

est to proponents  of those  views,  then the full realization of political  equality  has fallen
short.
2  Two  qualifications  are  necessary.  First, redistribution  through  taxation-most  nota-
bly  by  way  of  the  poor  laws  and  other  welfare  measures-was  permissible.  Second,  some
forms  of regulation  were  permissible  even  if  they  had  redistributive  features.  The  "police
power,"  for  example,  extended  to  protection  of  workers'  health,  although  the  Court  was
sometimes  skeptical  that  a  health justification  was  plausible.  See,  for  example,  Lochner v
New  York,  198  US  45,  57-58  (1905).

23  See  Adkins  v  Children's Hospital, 261  US  525,  558  (1923);  Lochner, 198  US at 57-58.
Of course  minimum  wage  and  maximum  hour  legislation  has  complex  redistributive  conse-.
quences;  it  does  not  simply  transfer  resources  from  employers  to  employees.

2  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt,  Message  to  Congress,  June  8,  1934,  reprinted  in  Robert  B.
Stevens,  ed, Statutory History of  the  United States: Income Security 61  (Chelsea  House,
1970).

2  1  The Public Papers of Franklin D. Roosevelt  657  (Russell & Russell,  1938).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  264 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

pointed  out  that  this  sphere  was  actually  a  creation  of law.  Rules
of  property,  contract,  and  tort  produced  the  set  of  entitlements
that  ultimately  yielded  market  hours  and  wages.2"

To  New  Deal  reformers,  the  very  categories  of  "regulation"
and  "government  intervention"  seemed  misleading.  The  govern-
ment did not "act"  only  when  it  disturbed  existing  distributions.  It
was  responsible  for  those  distributions  in  the  first  instance.  What
people  owned  in  markets  was  a  function  of  the  entitlements  that
the law  conferred  on  them. The  notion of "laissez-faire"  thus  stood
revealed  as  a  conspicuous  fiction.

To  the  extent  that property  rights  played  a role  in  market  ar-
rangements-as  they  inevitably  did-those  arrangements  were  a
creature  of  positive  law,  including,  most  notably,  property  law,
which  gave  some people  a right to  exclude  others  from  "their"  land
and  resources.  On  this  view,  market  wages  were  a  result  of legal
rules  conferring  rights  of ownership  on  certain  groups. Rather  than
superimposing  regulation  on  a  realm  of  purely  voluntary  interac-
tions,  minimum  wage  laws  substituted  one  form  of  regulation  for
another.

The  fact  that  an  existing  distribution  is  not  natural  or  pre-
political  provides  no  argument  against  it.28  When  one  regulatory
system  is  superimposed  on  another,  it  is  not true  that  all  bets  are
off, or  that we  cannot  evaluate  them in  constitutional  terms,  or  for
their  ability  to  diminish  or  to  increase  human  liberty,  or  other
things  we value.  Here  the  New Deal  reformers  were  often  too  cava-

20  Nothing  said  here  denies  that  people  often  work  for  what  they  have.  They  acquire
property  independently  of legal  rules, in  the  sense  that their  own  effort  contributes  to get-
ting  them  whatever  they  have.  While  legal  rules  create  preconditions  for  acquiring  property
and  may  help  along the  way,  they  do not  operate  in  a  vacuum  from  individual  initiative.  In
this  sense,  the  existing  distribution  of resources  and  opportunities  is  emphatically  not sim-
ply the  creation  of law;  it  is  instead  a  result of a  complex interaction  between  law  and  many
other things,  including  individual  effort.  The  New  Dealers  did  not deny  these propositions.
27  Dewey,  11  Later Works  at 291  (cited in  note 2).  Amartya  Sen, Poverty and Famines,
An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation (Oxford,  1981),  is  a  striking contemporary  illus-
tration  of similar  ideas.  Sen  demonstrates  that famines  are  not only or  always  a result  of a
decrease  in the supply  of food.  Instead, they  are  a  result of social choices,  prominent among
them  legal  ones,  deciding  who  is  entitled  to  what.  Sen  notes:

Finally,  the focus  on  entitlement has  the  effect of emphasizing  legal  rights. Other  rele-
vant factors,  for  example  market  forces,  can  be  seen  as  operating  through a  system  of
legal relations  (ownership  rights, contractual  obligations,  legal exchanges,  etc.).  The law
stands  between  food  availability  and  food  entitlement.  Starvation  deaths  can  reflect
legality  with  a  vengeance.

Id  at 165-66.  This claim can  be  understood  as a  special  case  of the  New  Deal  understanding
of "laissez-faire."

"'  See  John  Stuart  Mill,  On  Liberty and Other Essays  182  (MacMillan,  1926)  ("con-

formity  to  nature,  has  no  connection  whatever  with  right  and wrong").

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  265 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

lier.2 9 A  system  of  private  property  is  a  construct  of  the  state,  but
it is  also  an  important  individual  and  collective  good.  In  general,  a
market  system-for  property  or for  speech-promotes  both  liberty
and  prosperity,  and  its  inevitable  origins  in  law  do  not undermine
that  fact.

To  their basic point, then, the  New Dealers  added  a claim that
existing  distributions were  sometimes  inefficient or  unjust.3 0  Differ-
ent  forms  of governmental  ordering  had to  be  evaluated  pragmati-
cally  and  in  terms  of  their  consequences  for  social  efficiency  and
social  justice.  The  fact  that  markets  are  a  creature  of  law  meant
not that  they were  impermissible,  but that they  would  be  assessed
in terms  of what they did  on  behalf of the  human  beings  subject to
them.  Markets  would  not  be  identified  with  liberty  in  an  a  priori
way;  they  would  have  to  be  evaluated  through  an  examination  of
whether  they  served  liberty  or  not.

The  New  Dealers  were  not  socialists;  they  generally  appreci-
ated  the  contributions  of  markets  to  prosperity  and  freedom.3 1  At
the  very  least,  however,  a  democratic  judgment  that  markets  con-
strained  liberty-embodied  in  a  law  calling  for  maximum  hours  or
minimum  wages-was  plausible  and  entitled  to judicial  respect.

B.  Theory

These  ideas  have  played  little  role  in  the  law  of  free  speech.
For  purposes  of speech,  contemporary  understandings  of neutrality

29  There are many  contemporary  analogues.  See,  for example,  Allan  C.  Hutchinson,  The
Three  "R's"  Reading/Rorty/Radically, 103  Harv  L  Rev  555,  558-63  (1989)  (apparently  ar-
guing  that  contingency  is  a  reason  for  change);  Anthony  E.  Cook,  Beyond  Critical Legal
Studies: The Reconstructive Theology  of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., 103  Harv  L Rev 985,
990-91  (1990)  (same).

Compare  the following statement, very much  in the spirit of the  New Deal,  in Morris  R.

Cohen,  Property and Sovereignty, 13  Cornell  L  Q  8,  14  (1927):

[T]he  recognition  of private  property  as  a  form  of sovereignty  is  not  itself an  argument
against it.  Some form  of government  we must  always  have....  At  any  rate  it  is  neces-
sary to apply to the law  of property  all those  considerations  of social ethics and  enlight-
ened  public  policy  which  ought  to  be  brought  to  the  discussion  of any  just  form  of
government.
3  Compare  Robert  L.  Hale,  Coercion and Distribution in  a  Supposedly Noncoercive
State, 38  Pol  Sci  Q  470,  471-74  (1923),  who  rightly  draws  attention  to coercive  characteris-
tics  in  the  law  of  property,  but  assumes  that  this  insight  establishes  more  than  it  does.
Regulatory  interference  with  market  arrangements  does  not  disturb  an otherwise  prepoliti-
cal  status  quo,  but  it  may  produce  inefficiency  and  unfairness.  A  good  deal  of  theoretical
and  empirical  work  is  necessary  to assess  any  particular  interference.  Of course  many  of the
New  Deal  reforms  produced  unanticipated  adverse  consequences.

31  Not always,  though,  and  not  enough. See  especially  the  enthusiasm  for  cartels  in  the
"first"  New Deal,  discussed  in  Ellis W.  Hawley,  The New Deal and the Problem of Monop-
oly  270-80  (Princeton,  1966).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  266 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

and  partisanship,  or  government  action  and  inaction,  are  identical
to  those  that  predate  the  New  Deal.2

One  response  to  the  recent  First  Amendment  controversies
would  be  to  suggest that  they confirm  the wisdom  of the New  Deal
reformation  on  this  score.  On  this  view,  American  constitutional-
ism,  with  respect  to  freedom  of  expression,  has  failed  precisely  to
the  extent  that  it  has not  taken  that  reformation  seriously  enough.
I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  speech  rights  should  be  freely  sub-
ject to political  determination,  as  are  current issues  of  occupational
safety  and  health,  for  example.  I do  not mean to  suggest  that mar-
kets  in  speech  are  generally  abridgements  of  speech,  or  that  they
usually  disserve  the  First  Amendment.  I  do  mean  to  say  that  in
some  circumstances,  what  seems  to  be  government  regulation  of
speech  actually  might  promote  free  speech,  and  should  not  be
treated  as  an  abridgement  at  all.  I  mean  also  to  argue,  though
more  hesitantly,  that  what  seems  to  be  free  speech  in  markets
might,  in  some  selected  circumstances,  amount  to  an  abridgement
of free  speech.

A  general  clarification  is  necessary  at  the  outset.  It  will  be
tempting  to think  that  the  argument  to  follow  amounts  to  a  broad
and  puzzling  plea  for  "more  regulation"  of  speech.  Many  of  the
practices  and  conditions  I  will  challenge  are  commonly  taken  to
involve  private  action,  and  not to  implicate  the  Constitution  at all.
We  generally  treat  the  practices  of  broadcasters  and  managers  of
newspapers  as  raising  no  constitutional  question;  it  is "regulation"
of "the  market"  that is'problematic. In  fact there  should be  enthu-
siastic  agreement-for  reasons  of  both  text  and  principle 33-that
the  First  Amendment  is  aimed  only  at  governmental  action,  and
that  private  conduct  raises  no  constitutional  question.  The  behav-
ior  of  private  broadcasters  by  itself  poses  no  legal  problem.  It
seems  clear  too that  to find  a constitutional  violation,  one needs  to
show  that  governmental  action  has  "abridged 
the  freedom  of
speech."  That  action  must  take  the  form  of  a law,  a  regulation,  or
behavior  by  a  government  official.

32 The  major  qualification  is  the  remarkable  decision  in  Red  Lion Broadcasting Co.  v
FCC, 395  US  367,  390,  393-94  (1969),  in  which  the  Court  upheld  the  fairness  doctrine
against  First Amendment  attack.  See  text accompanying  notes  49-53.

33 The  text of course  says  that "Congress"  shall  make  no  law  abridging  the  freedom  of
speech, and  the Fourteenth  Amendment,  taken  to incorporate  the First, applies  its  proscrip-
tions  to  "states."  In  principle,  the  limitation  of  the  Constitution  to  state  action  has  the
salutary  consequence  of helping  to  constitute  and  free  up  a  private  sphere  from  legal  disa-
bilities.  See  text accompanying  notes  33-34  (discussing  what counts  as  the private  sphere).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  267 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law  Review

[59:255

But  if the  lesson  of the  New  Deal is  taken  seriously,  it  follows,
not  that  the  requirement  of  state  action  is  unintelligible  or  inco-
herent,  but  that  governmental  rules  lie  behind  the  exercise  of
rights  of property,  contract,  and  tort, especially  insofar  as common
law  rules  grant  people  rights  of  exclusive  ownership  and  use  of
property.  From  this it  does not  follow that  private  acts  are  subject
to  constitutional  constraint,  or even  that  legally-conferred  rights  of
exclusive  ownership  violate  any constitutional  provision. To  repeat:
The  acts  of  private  broadcasters  raise  no  First  Amendment  issue.
Private  acts  exist;  they  are  not  subject  to  the  First  Amendment.

To  find  a  constitutional  violation,  it  is  necessary  to  identify
some  exercise  of  public  power,  and  to  show  that  it  has  compro-
mised  some  constitutional  principle.  But  property  law  always  lies
behind  markets.  Displacement  of  property  law  may  be  constitu-
tional.  New  efforts  to  promote  greater  quality  and  diversity  in
broadcasting,  for  example,  are  claims  for  a new  regulatory  regime,
not for  "government  intervention"  where  none  existed  before.  And
property  law  might  itself violate  the  First  Amendment.

Another  clarification  is  in  order.  I  have  suggested  that  legal
rules  lie  behind  private  behavior,  and  it  will  be  tempting  to  think
that this  suggestion  dissolves  the  state  action  limitation.  If private
exclusion  of  speech  is  made  possible  by  law,  does  it  not  turn  out
that the First  Amendment  invalidates  private  behavior  after  all?  Is
not  all  private  action  therefore  state  action?  The  answer  is  that  it
is  not.  A  private  university,  expelling  students  for  (say)  racist
speech,  is  not  a  state  actor.  The  trespass  law,  which  helps  the  ex-
pulsion  to  be  effective,  is  indeed  state  action.  The  distinction  mat-
ters  a  great  deal.  The  trespass  law,  invoked  in  this  context,  is  a
content-neutral  regulation of speech  in  a  place  that is not plausibly
a  public  forum.  This regulation  does  not  violate  the  First  Amend-
ment. By  contrast,  the  behavior  of the  university  is content-based,
and  if  engaged  in  by  a  public  official,  would  indeed  violate  the
First Amendment.  We  always  need  to identify  the  exercise  of  pub-
lic  power.  Without  it,  there  is  no  free  speech  issue,  even  on  the
New  Deal  view.  And  such  power,  when  identified,  often  raises  no
serious  constitutional  issue  when  it  takes  the  content-neutral  form
of  protecting  ownership  rights.

What  I  want  to  suggest  here  is,  first  and  foremost,  that  legal
rules  that  are  designed  to  promote  freedom  of  speech  and  that  in-
terfere  with  other  legal  rules-those  of  the  common  law-should
not be  invalidated  if their  purposes  and  effects  are  constitutionally
valid.  It  may  also  follow  that  common  law  rules  are  themselves
subject to  constitutional  objection  if  and  when  such  rules  "abridge

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  268 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

the  freedom  of speech"  by preventing  people  from  speaking  at cer-
tain  times  and  in  certain  places.

For  the  moment,  these  general  proposals  must  remain  ab-
stract;  I  will  particularize  them  below.  And  while  the  proposals
might  seem  unconventional,  they  have  a  clear  foundation  in  no
lesser  place  than  New  York  Times  Co.  v  Sullivan,3 4  one  of the  de-
fining cases  of modern free  speech law. There  the  Court  held that a
public  official  could  not  bring  an  action  for  libel  unless  he  could
show  "actual  malice,"  defined  as  knowledge  of  or reckless  indiffer-
ence  to  the falsity  of the  statements  at issue.3 5 The Sullivan case  is
usually  taken  as  the  symbol  of  broad  press  immunity  with  respect
to  criticism  of  public  officials.  More  importantly,  observers  often
understand  Sullivan to  reflect  Alexander  Meiklejohn's  conception
of  freedom  of  expression36-a conception  of  self-government  con-
nected  to  the  American  conception  of sovereignty  and  built on  the
need  to  ensure  that  the  government  does  not  inhibit  political
expression.

It  is  striking  that  in  Sullivan,  the  lower  court  held  that  the
common  law  of  tort, and  more  particularly  libel,  was  not state  ac-
tion  at  all,  and  was  therefore  entirely  immune  from  constitutional
constraint.3 7  A  civil  action,  on  this  view,  involves  a  purely  private
dispute.  The  Supreme  Court  quickly  disposed  of  this  objection.
The  use  of public  tribunals  to  punish speech  is  conspicuously  state
action.38  What  is  interesting  is  not  the  Supreme  Court's  rejection
of  the  argument,  but  the  fact  that  the  argument  could  even  be
made  by  a  state  supreme  court  as  late  as  the  1960s.  How  could
reasonable  judges  perceive  the  rules  of  tort  law  as  purely  private?
The answer  lies  in  the  persistence  of the  pre-New  Deal  under-
standing  that  the  common  law  simply  implements  existing  rights
or  private  desires,  and  does  not  amount  to  "intervention"  or  "ac-
tion"  at  all.  The  view  that  the  common  law  of property  should  be
taken  as  prepolitical  and  just, and  as  a refusal  to  use  government
power-the  view  that  the  New  Deal  repudiated-was  the  same  as

3' 376  US  254  (1964).
"5 Id  at  280,  283.
36 See  Meiklejohn,  Free Speech  and its Relation to  Self-Government at  14-19,  22-27

(cited  in note  1).  The link  is made explicitly  in  William  J.  Brennan, Jr.,  The Supreme Court
and the Meiklejohn  Interpretation of the  First Amendment,  79  Harv  L  Rev  1,  12-14,  19
(1965).

"  New  York  Times  Co.  v  Sullivan, 144  S2d  25,  40  (Ala  1962).  It  is  notable  that  in
Sullivan, the government was  not a party-something  that distinguishes  the case  from most
others  in  which  First  Amendment  objections  have  been raised.  But to  see  this  as  meaning
that there  is  no state  action  is simply  another version  of the  problem  discussed  in  the  text.

38  Sullivan, 376  US  at  265.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  269 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law  Review

[59:255

the  view  of the  state  supreme  court  in  Sullivan. Reputation,  after
all,  is  a  property  interest.  Just  as  in  the  pre-New  Deal  era,  the
state  supreme  court  did  not  see  the  protection  of  that  interest  as
involving  government  action  at  all.

The Supreme  Court's  rejection  of that claim  seemed inevitable
in  Sullivan, and  this  aspect  of  the  case  is  largely  forgotten.  But
courts  base  much  of current  law on  precisely  the  forgotten  view  of
that  obscure  state  court.  We  might  even  generalize  from  Sullivan
the  broad  idea  that  courts  must  always  assess  the  protection  of
property rights  through  the  common  law  pragmatically,  in terms  of
its  effects  on  speech.3 9

Consider,  for  example,  the  issues  raised  by  a  claimed  right  of
access  to  the  media.  Suppose  that  most  broadcasters  deal  little  or
not  at  all  with  issues  of  public  importance,  restricting  themselves
to stories  about movie stars  or sex  scandals.  Suppose  too that there
is  no  real  diversity  of  view  on  the  airwaves,  but  instead  a  bland,
watered-down  version  of  conventional  morality.  If  so,  a  severe
problem  for  the  system  of  free  expression  is  the  governmental
grant  of legal  protection-rights  of  exclusive  use-to enormous  in-
stitutions  compromising  Madisonian  values.  Courts  usually  do  not
see  that  grant  of  power-sometimes  made  through  the  common
law,  sometimes  through  statute-as  a  grant  of  power  at  all,  but
instead  treat  it  as  purely  "private."  Thus  the  exclusion  of  people
and views  from  the  airwaves  is  immunized  from  constitutional  con-
straint,  on the  theory that the  act of exclusion  is purely private.  By

"  See  O'Neill, Practices of Toleration at  177-78  (cited in  note  21).
[N]o  society  can  institutionalize  zero-regulation  of  public  discourse.  The  choice  can
only  be  between  differing patterns  of regulation.  ...  No society  can  guarantee  that all
communicators  will  be able  to express  every  possible  content  in every  possible  context.
Supposed  attempts  to  do  this  by  laissez-faire  communications  policies  merely  assign
the regulation  of communication  to  nonstate  powers. They secure  a particular  configur-
ation  of freedom  of expression,  which  may  leave  some  unable  to find  their voices  and
does  not guarantee  the  expression  of diverse  views. A  better and  less  abstract  aim for  a
democratic  society  is  a  set  of practices  that  enables  a  wide  range  of communication,
especially  of public  communication,  for  all.
There is  a  difference  between Sullivan and  the cases  that follow.  In Sullivan, the  prop-
erty  right was  not asserted  by someone who  was simultaneously  speaker  and  owner. In  cases
that involve  a  claimed right of access  to the  media, the ownership  right that prevents  others
from  speaking  is  held  by  someone  who  is  himself  expressing  something.  But it  is  unclear
why  this difference  should  be  decisive.  The  question  is whether  the  legal  vindication  of the
property  right  is  constitutionally  acceptable.

Note  also  that the  shopping  center  cases,  see  notes  117-19,  really  are  close  to Sullivan,
for  they  too involve  the use  of a  property  interest protected  at common  law  to  stop  speech.
The only  differences  are  that  (a)  libel law  is content-based,  as  property  law  is  not, and  (b)
libel law  is aimed  particularly  at speech  whereas property  law  allows  the exclusion  of every-
one,  whether  a  speaker  or  not.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  270 1992

19921

Free Speech Now

contrast,  rights  of access  to  the  media  are  thought  to  involve  gov-
ernmental  intervention  into  the  private  sphere.40

In  Sullivan,  the  Supreme  Court  said,  as  against  a  similar
claim,  that  courts  should  inspect  common  law  rules  for  their  con-
formity  with  the  principle  that  government  may  not  restrict  free-
doms  of speech  and  press.  "The  test  is not the  form  in  which  state
power  has  been  applied  but,  whatever  the  form,  whether  such
power  has  in  fact  been  exercised."'41

We  can  apply  this  understanding  to  current  problems.  If we
regard  the  First  Amendment  as  an  effort  to  ensure  that people  are
not  prevented  from  speaking,  especially  on  issues  of  public  impor-
tance,  then  current  free  speech  law  seems  ill-adapted  to  current
conditions.  Above  all,  the  conception  of  government  "regulation"
misstates  certain  issues  and  sometimes  disserves  the  goal  of  free
expression  itself. Some  regulatory  efforts,  superimposed  on  the  es-
tablished  regulation  through  common  law  rules,  may  promote  free
speech.  Less  frequently,  the  use  of statutory  or  common  law  rules
to  foreclose  efforts  to  speak  might  themselves  represent impermis-
sible  content-neutral  restrictions  on  speech.  We  must  judge  both
reform  efforts  and  the  status  quo  by  their  consequences,  not  by
question-begging  characterizations  of  "threats  from  government."
It  is  tempting  to  understand  this  argument  as  a  suggestion
that  the  New  Dealers  were  concerned  about  private  power  over
working  conditions,  and  that  modern  courts  should  take  more  in-
terest  in  the  existence  of  private  power  over  expression  or  over
democratic  processes.42  But this  formulation  misses  the  real  point,
and  does  so  in  a way  that suggests  its  own  dependence  on pre-New
Deal  understandings.  The  problem  is  not that  private  power  is  an
obstacle  to  speech;  even  if it  is,  private  power  is  not  a  subject  of
the  First  Amendment.  Nor  would  it  be  accurate  to  say  that  em-
ployer  power  was  the  true  concern  for  the  New  Dealers.  The  real
problem  is  that  public  authority  creates  legal  structures  that  re-
strict  speech,  that  new  exercises  of  public  authority  can  counter
the  existing  restrictions,  and  that  any  restrictions,  even  those  of
the  common  law,  must  be  assessed  under  constitutional  principles
precisely  because  they  are  restrictions.

Consider,  for  example,  a  case  in  which  the  owners  of  a  large
shopping  center  exclude  from  their  property  war  protestors  who

40  See  text  accompanying  notes  56-57.
4"  Sullivan, 376  US  at 265.
42  It  is  sometimes  so argued.  See  David  Strauss,  Persuasion, Autonomy,  and Freedom

of Expression, 91  Colum  L Rev  334,  361-68  (1991).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  271 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

believe  that  the  center  is  the  best  place  to  draw  attention  to  their
cause.  The  Supreme  Court has  said that the  situation  does  not im-
plicate the  First  Amendment,  since  it does  not  involve  government
regulation  of  speech.  Private  property  owners  have  simply  barred
people  from  their  land.43

In fact,  this  is  a poor  way  to  understand  the  situation;  it  was
the  state  court's  view  in  Sullivan. The  owners  of  the  shopping
center  may  exclude  the  protestors  only  because  government  has
conferred  on  them  a legal right to do  so. The  conferral of that right
is  an  exercise  of  state  power.  It  is  this  action  that  restricts  the
speech  of  the  protestors.  Surely  it  is  a  real  question  whether  the
grant  of  exclusionary  power  violates the  First  Amendment,  at least
in  circumstances  in  which  it  eliminates  the  only  feasible  way  of
making  a  protest  visible  to  members  of  a  community.

Or  consider  a  case  in  which  a  network  decides  not to  sell  ad-
vertising time  to  a group  that wants to  discuss some  public issue  or
to  express  some  dissident  view.  Under  current  law,  the  refusal
raises  no  First  Amendment  question,  in  part  because  a  number  of
the  justices-perhaps  now  a  majority-believe  that  there  is  no
"state  action."4 4  But  government  gives  broadcasters  property
rights  in their  licenses,  and  their  exercise  of  those  rights  is a  func-
tion  of  law  in  no  subtle  sense.  It  is  generally  salutary  to  have  a
system  in  which  government  creates  ownership  rights  or  markets
in  speech,  just  as  in  property.  The  point  is  not  that  markets  are
bad, but that  a right  of exclusive  ownership  in  a television  network
is  governmentally  conferred.  The  exclusion  of the  would-be  speak-
ers  is  made  possible  by  the  law  of  civil  and  criminal  trespass,
among  other  things.  It 
is  thus  a  product  of  a  governmental
decision.

A  market  system  in  which  only  certain  speakers  express  only
certain  views  is  a  creation  of  law.  The  questions  are  (1)  whether
reform  efforts  eliminating  adverse  effects  of  exclusive  ownership
rights  by  conditioning  the  original  grant  are  consistent  with  the
First  Amendment,  or  (2)  whether  the  government  grant  of  exclu-
sive  ownership  rights  itself violates  the  First Amendment.  We  can-
not answer  such  questions  by saying  that  ownership  rights  are gov-
ernmental;  we  need  to  know  the  purposes  and  effects  of the  grant.

"  Lloyd Corp. v  Tanner, 407  US  551,  570  (1972);  Hudgens v  NLRB,  424  US  507,  519-

21  (1976).

11 CBS,  Inc. v  Democratic National Committee,  412  US  94  (1973).  There  only  three
Justices  said that there was  no state  action.  Id at 114-210.  But those  three justices  may now
represent  the  majority  view.  See  Flagg Bros.,  Inc. v  Brooks, 436  US  149,  163  (1978).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  272 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

And  we  cannot  answer  that  question  a priori  or  in the  abstract;  we
need  to  know  a  lot  of  details.

One  might  respond  that  the  Constitution  creates  "negative"
rights  rather  than  "positive"  ones,  or  at  least  that  the  First
Amendment  is  "negative"  in  character,  granting  a  right  to  protec-
tion against  the government,  not to  subsidies  from  the government.
The  claim  certainly  captures  the  conventional  wisdom,  and  an  ar-
gument  for  a  New  Deal  for  speech  must  come  to  terms  with  it.

There  are  two  responses.  First,  and  most  fundamentally,  no
one  is  asserting  a positive  right  in  these  cases.  Instead,  the claim  is
that  government  sometimes  cannot  adopt  a  content-neutral  rule
that  imposes  a  (negative)  constraint  on  who  can  speak  and  where
they  can  do  so.  When  someone  with  view  X  cannot  speak  on  the
networks,  it  is  because  the  civil  and  criminal  law  prohibits  him
from  doing  so.  This  is  the  same  problem  that  underlies  a  wide
range  of  familiar  claims  in  content-neutral  cases.  Consider  a  ban
on  door-to-door  soliciting.  An  attack  on  content-neutral  restric-
tions  is  not  an argument  for  "positive"  government  protection.  It  is
merely  a claim  that courts  must  review  legal  rules stopping  certain
people  from  speaking  in  certain  places  under  First  Amendment
principles.  In  fact  the  response  that  a  New  Deal  for  speech  would
create  a "positive  right"  trades  on  untenable,  Lochner era  distinc-
tions  between  positive  and  negative  rights.45

The  second  response  is  that  the  distinction  between  negative
and  positive  rights  fails  to  explain  even  current  First  Amendment
law.4 6  There  are two  obvious  counterexamples.  The  Supreme  Court
has  come  very  close  to  saying  that when  an  audience  becomes  hos-
tile  and  threatening,  the  government  is  obligated  to  protect  the
speaker.  Under  current  law, reasonable  crowd  control measures  are
probably  constitutionally  compelled,  even  if the result  is to require

'5 To say this  is not  to say  that the  distinction itself is untenable.  We can  understand  a
positive  right as  one  that requires  for  its  existence  some  act  by government  and  a negative
right as one that amounts  merely to an  objection to some  such act. There is nothing  incoher-
ent about  this distinction.  I  argue  here against  the view  that an objection  to  rights of exclu-
sive ownership  is  a  call  for  a positive  right. In  fact that objection  is  mounted  against some-
thing  that  government  is  actually  doing,  and  is  therefore  about  a  negative  right.  See
generally,  Jeremy  Waldron,  Homelessness and the Issue of Freedom, 39  UCLA  L Rev  295,
304-15  (1991)  (arguing  that property  law  invades  negative  rights  of  the homeless).

46  It also  fails  to  explain  constitutional  law  in  general.  The  Eminent  Domain  Clause
creates  a  positive  right  to  governmental  protection  of  property. The  Contracts  Clause  cre-
ates a  right to governmental protection  of contractual agreements.  In both cases,  the Consti-
tution  is  violated  by  a  governmental  withdrawal  from  the  scene.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  273 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

a  number  of  police  officers  to  come  to  the  scene.4  The  right  to
speak  may well  include  a  positive  right to  governmental  protection
against  a  hostile  private  audience.

The  area of libel provides  a second  example.  By  imposing  con-
stitutional  constraints  on  the  common  law  of  libel,  the  Court  in
effect  has  held  that  those  who  are  defamed  must  subsidize  speak-
ers,  by  allowing  their  reputations  to be  compromised  to  the  end  of
broad  diversity  of speech.  Even  more,  the  Court  has  held  that gov-
ernment  is  under  what  might  be  seen  as  an  affirmative  duty  to
"take"  the  reputation  of  people  whom  the  press  defames  in  order
to  promote  the  interest  in  free  speech.  The  First  Amendment  re-
quires  a  compulsory,  governmentally  produced  subsidy  of personal
reputation  (a  property  interest)  for  the  benefit  of speech. 48

These  cases  reveal  that  the  First  Amendment,  even  as  cur-
rently  conceived,  is  no  mere  negative  right.  It  has  positive  dimen-
sions.  These  dimensions  consist  of  a  command  to  government  to
take  steps  to  ensure  that  legal  rules  according  exclusive  authority
to  private persons  do not violate  the system  of free expression.  In a
hostile  audience  case,  the  government  is  obliged  to  protect  the
speaker  against  private  silencing.  In  the  libel  cases,  the  govern-
ment  is  obliged  to  do  the  same  thing-to provide  extra  breathing
space  for  speech  even  though  a consequence  is  an  infringement  on
the  common  law  interest  in  reputation.  It  is  incorrect  to  say  that
the  First  Amendment  creates  merely  a  right  to  fend  off  govern-
ment  censorship  as  conventionally  understood.

In  any  case,  a  broadcasting  system  in  which  government  con-
fers  on  networks  the  right to  exclude  certain  points  of  view  might
well  raise  a  constitutional  question.  The  creation  of  that  right  is
parallel  to  the  grant  of a right to  a hostile  audience  to  silence  con-
troversial  speakers,  subject  only  to  the speakers'  power  of self-help
through  the  marketplace  (including  the  hiring  of  private  police

41  See,  for  example,  Kunz  v  New  York,  340  US  290,  294-95  (1951);  Edwards v  South
Carolina, 372  US  229,  231-33  (1963);  Cox  v  Louisiana, 379  US  536,  550  (1965);  Gregory v
Chicago, 394  US  111,  111-12  (1969).  See also  Scanlon,  Content Regulation Revisited at 337-
39  (cited  in  note  21);  and  Fiss,  100  Harv  L  Rev  at 786  (cited  in  note  21),  discussing  this
point.

48  See Richard  Epstein,  Was  New York  Times  v.  Sullivan  Wrong?, 53  U  Chi  L Rev 782
(1986)  (discussing  libel  as a  form  of "taking").  A  qualification  is  necessary  here.  To  decide
whether  there  is  a  subsidy  one  needs a  baseline.  To  see  reputation  as  part  of the initial  set
of endowments  is  to proceed  in  good  common law  fashion;  and  any  social contract  version  of
this  idea  (the state  must  protect  certain rights  in  return  for the  decision  of citizens to leave
the  state  of  nature)  supports  the  same  view.  But it  would  be  possible  to  say  that on  the
correct  theory,  people  do not have  such  an  antecedent  right to  reputation,  and  therefore  no
subsidy  is  involved  in  the  libel  cases.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  274 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

forces).  In the  hostile  audience  setting, it  is  insufficient  to  say  that
any  intrusion  on  the  speaker  is  private  rather  than  governmental.
It  is  necessary  instead  to  evaluate  the  consequences  of  the  system
by  reference  to  the  purposes  of the  First Amendment-just  as it  is
necessary  to  evaluate  the  consequences  of  any  system  in  which
property  rights  operate  to  hurt  some  and  benefit  others.

None  of this  demonstrates  that the  creation  of property  rights
in  broadcasting  fails  to  produce  broad  diversity  of  views  and  an
opportunity  for  opposing  sides  to  speak.  If property  rights  do  pro-
duce  these  effects,  a  market  system  created  by  law  is  constitution-
ally  unobjectionable  on  the  merits.  This  is  a  question  of  fact,  on
which  courts  should  give  considerable  deference  to  other  branches.
But  it  is  imaginable  that  a  market  system  will  have  less  fortunate
consequences-an  issue  to which  I return  below.  At least  a legisla-
tive  judgment  opposed  to  free  markets  might,  on  the  appropriate
factual  record,  warrant judicial  respect.

Consider  the  Court's  remarkable  opinion  in  the  Red  Lion
case."9  There  the  Court  upheld  the  fairness  doctrine,  which  re-
quired5"  broadcasters  to  give  attention  to  public issues  and  provide
a  chance  for  those  with  opposing  views  to  speak.  In  Red Lion, the
Court  actually  seemed  to  suggest  that  the  doctrine  was  constitu-
tionally  compelled.  According  to  the  Court,  the  fairness  doctrine
would  "enhance  rather  than  abridge  the  freedoms  of  speech  and
press,"  for  free  expression  would  be  disserved  by  "unlimited  pri-
vate  censorship  operating  in  a  medium  not  open  to  all."'51  The
Court  suggested  that:

[A]s  far  as  the  First  Amendment  is  concerned  those  who  are
licensed  stand  no  better  than  those  to  whom  licenses  are  re-
fused.  A  license  permits  broadcasting,  but the  licensee  has  no
constitutional  right to  be  the  one  who  holds  the  license  or  to
monopolize  a  radio  frequency  to  the  exclusion  of  his  fellow
citizens.  There  is  nothing  in the  First  Amendment  which  pre-
vents  the  Government  from  requiring  a  licensee  to  share  his
frequency  with  others  and  to  conduct  himself  as  a  proxy  or
fiduciary  with  obligations  to  present  those  views  and  voices
which  are  representative  of  his  community  and  which  would
otherwise,  by  necessity,  be  barred  from  the  airwaves.

'9 Red  Lion Broadcasting Co.  v FCC, 395  US  367  (1969).
0 For  the most part, the requirement  was  theoretical  only. In practice  the  doctrine  was
rarely  enforced.  See  Robert  M.  Entman,  Democracy  Without  Citizens  104-06  (Oxford,
1989).

51 Red  Lion, 395  US  at  375,  392.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  275 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

[Tihe  people  as  a whole  retain  their  interest  in free  speech  by
radio  and  their  collective  right  to  have  the  medium  function
consistently  with  the  ends  and  purposes  of the  First  Amend-
ment.  It  is  the right of the  viewers  and  listeners,  not the right
of  the  broadcasters,  which  is  paramount.  It  is  the  purpose  of
the  First  Amendment  to  preserve  an  uninhibited  marketplace
of  ideas  in  which  truth  will  ultimately  prevail,  rather  than  to
countenance  monopolization  of  that  market,  whether  it  be  by
the  Government  itself  or  a  private  licensee.  It  is  the  right  of
the  public  to  receive  suitable  access  to  social,  political,  es-
thetic, moral, and  other  ideas and  experiences  which  is  crucial
here.  That  right  may  not  constitutionally  be  abridged  either
by  Congress  or  by  the  FCC.2

This vision  of the  First Amendment  does not stress  the  auton-
omy  of broadcasters  with  current  ownership  rights.  Instead  it  em-
phasizes  the  need  to  promote  democratic  self-government  by  en-
suring  that  people  are  presented  with  a  broad  diversity  of  views
about  public  issues.  A market  system may  compromise  this goal.  It
is  hardly  clear  that  "the  freedom  of  speech"  is  promoted  by  a re-
gime  in  which  people  may  speak  if  and  only  if  other  people  are
willing  to  pay  enough  to  hear  them.

This  argument  applies  most  conspicuously  to  broadcasters,
since  the  role  of  the  government  in  allocating  licenses  is  obvious.
But  it  has force  with  respect  to newspapers  as  well:  Their property
rights  also  amount  to  a  legally-conferred  power  to  exclude  others.
Simply  as  a  matter  of  fact,53  that  power  is  a  creature  of the  state.
In  general,  this is  hardly bad;  but we  must assess  the resulting  sys-
tem  in  terms  of  its  consequences  for  speech.

If all this is  correct, the  first two  commitments  of current First
Amendment  law come  under  severe  strain. The idea  that threats  to

52  Id  at 389-90  (citations omitted).  Compare  this  suggestion:

It  was  time  to  move  away  from  thinking  about broadcasters  as  trustees.  It  was  time  to
treat  them  the  way  almost  everyone  else  in  society  does-that  is,  as  businesses ...
[T]elevision  is just another  appliance.  It's  a  toaster  with  pictures.

Bernard  D.  Nossiter,  The FCC's Big  Giveaway Show, The Nation  402  (Oct 26,  1985)  (state-
ment  of Mark  Fowler,  former  Chairman  of the  Federal  Communications  Commission).

11  This point  is  not  a  criticism  of a  system  of private  property. To  say that  a  system is

state-created  is  not to disparage  it. See text  accompanying  notes  28-31.  A system  of private
property  is  an  individual  and  collective  good-in  large  part  because  it  immunizes  citizens
from  dependence  on the  state and  in  that way  creates  the  preconditions  for  prosperity, de-
mocracy,  and  citizenship.  This  point is  not in  any way  inconsistent  with  those  suggested  in
the  text.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  276 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

speech  come  from  government  is  correct, but  as  conventionally  un-
derstood,  it  is  far  too  simple.  Sometimes  threats  come  from  what
seems  to  be  the  private  sphere,  but  those  threats  are  fundamen-
tally  a  product  of  legal  entitlements  that  enable  some  private  ac-
tors but not others  to  speak  and to  be  heard. When  this is  so, these
legal  entitlements  pose  a large  risk  to  a  system  of  free  expression,
one  not  readily  visible  to  current  law.

Second,  the  idea  that government  should be  neutral  among  all
forms  of  speech  seems  correct  in  the  abstract.  But  as  frequently
applied  it  is  as  implausible  as  the  idea  that  government  should  be
neutral  between  the  associational  interests  of  blacks  and  those  of
whites  under  conditions  of  segregation, 54  or  between  the  freedom
of  employers  and  workers  under  conditions  in  which  market  pres-
sures  drive  hours  dramatically  up  and  wages  dramatically  down. 55
The  difficulty  with  this  conception  of neutrality  is that  it takes  ex-
isting  distributions  of  resources  and  opportunities  as  the  baseline
for  decision.

The  most  important  problem  here  is  that  neutrality  between
different  points  of  view  is  frequently  thought to  be  exemplified  in
the  use  of  economic  markets  to  determine  access  to  the  media  and
thus  an  opportunity  to  be  heard.  This  form  of  neutrality  actually
embodies  a  collective  choice.  The  choice  is  captured  in  the  use  of
the  market  and  the  creation  of  particular  legal  standards  for  its
operation  that  ensure  that  some  will  be  unable  to  speak  or  to  be
heard, and  at  the  same time that  others  will be  permitted  to  domi-
nate  expressive  outlets.  Markets  are  generally  good  things, both for
ordinary  products  and  for  speech.  But  when the  legal  creation  of a
market  has  harmful  consequences  for  free  expression-and  it
sometimes  does-then we  must reevaluate  it  in  light of free  speech
principles.

C.  Practice

A  core  insight  of the  Red  Lion case  is  that  the  interest  in  le-
gally  protected  private  autonomy  from  government  is  not  always
connected  with  the  interest  in  democratic  self-governance.  To  im-
munize  broadcasters  from  government  control  may  not  be  consis-
tent with  quality and  diversity  in broadcasting.  If so,  it  is not  con-
sistent  with  the  First  Amendment's  own  commitments.

"  See  Herbert  Wechsler,  Toward Neutral Principles of Constitutional Law, 73 Harv  L

Rev  1,  13-14,  33-34  (1959).

5' Lochner, 198  US  at 52-53,  64;  Adkins,  261  US  at  558,  560-61.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  277 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

We  could  generate,  from  the  suggested  First  Amendment
"New  Deal,"  a  large  set  of  proposals  for  constitutional  reform.  I
describe  those  proposals  in summary  fashion  here.  A  more  detailed
discussion  would  be  necessary  in order  fully  to  come  to terms  with
any  one  of them.

1.  Regulation  of  broadcasting.

For  much of its history, the  Federal  Communications  Commis-
sion  ("FCC") has imposed  on  broadcast licensees  the  "fairness  doc-
trine."  As  noted,  the  fairness  doctrine  requires  licensees  to  devote
time  to  issues  of public  importance,  and  it  creates  an  obligation  to
broadcast  speech  by  people  of  diverse  views.

The  last  decade  has  witnessed  a  mounting  constitutional  as-
sault  on  the  fairness  doctrine.  One  reason  for  the  doctrine  was  the
scarcity  of  licenses,  but  licenses  are  no  longer  scarce;  indeed,  there
are  far  more  radio  and  television  stations  than  major  newspapers.
The FCC  recently  concluded  that  the fairness  doctrine  violates  the
First  Amendment  because  it  is  a  government  effort  to  tell broad-
casters  what  they  may  say.  On  this view,  the  fairness  doctrine  rep-
resents  impermissible  government  intervention  into voluntary  mar-
ket  interactions. 6 
the  government's  obligation  of
"neutrality,"  defined  as  respect  for  market  outcomes.  Influential
judges  and  scholars  have  reached  the  same  conclusion. 57  The  mode
of  analysis,  in  particular  the  notions  of neutrality  and  inaction,  is
the  same  as  that  of  the  pre-New  Deal  Court.

It  violates 

The  Constitution  forbids  any  "law  abridging  the  freedom  of
speech." '5 8  But  is  the  fairness  doctrine  such  a  law?  Certainly  we
cannot  establish  the  proposition  merely  by  a  reference  to  the  con-
stitutional  text.  To  its  defenders,  the  fairness  doctrine  promotes
"the  freedom  of  speech"  by  ensuring  more  access  to  the  airwaves
and  more  diversity  of  views  than  the  market  provides.  The  fact
that  the  market  responds  to  consumption  choices  does  not  solve
the  problem. 9  The  FCC's  attack  on  the  fairness  doctrine  closely
parallels  pre-New  Deal  understandings.  It  asserts,  without  a  full
look  at the  real-world  consequences  of  different  regulatory  strate-

11  See In  re Complaint of Syracuse Peace Council, FCC  88-131,  FCC Rcd  2035,  64  Rad
Reg  (P&F)  1073  (Apr  7,  1988);  Entman,  Democracy Without  Citizens at  102-03  (cited  in
note  50)  (statement  of Chairman  Dennis  Patrick).

"  See  Lucas  A.  Powe,  Jr.,  American Broadcasting and the  First Amendment  214-15

(California,  1987).

11 US  Const,  Amend  I.

51 See  text accompanying  notes  106-07.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  278 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

gies,  that  the  doctrine  involves  governmental  interference  with  an
otherwise  purely  law-free  and  voluntary  private  sphere.

Those  entrusted  with  interpreting  the  Constitution  should  in-
stead  deal  with  the fairness  doctrine  by exploring  the  relationships
among  a  market  in  broadcasting,  alternative  systems,  and  the
goals,  properly  characterized,  of  a  system  of  free  expression.6 0  On
the  one  hand,  a  market  will  provide  a  fair  degree  of  diversity  in
available  offerings,  especially  in  a  time  of  numerous  outlets.  So
long  as  the  particular  view  is  supported  by  market  demand,  it
should  find  a supplier.  The  broadcasting  status  quo  is  far  prefera-
ble  to  a  system  of  centralized  command-and-control  regulation,  at
least  if such  a system  sharply constrains  choice.  Markets  do  offer  a
range  of  opinions  and  options.  A  command-and-control  system,  if
it  restricted  diversity  of view  and  attention  to  public  affairs,  would
indeed  abridge  the  freedom  of  speech.  Nothing  I have  said  argues
in  favor  of  governmental  foreclosure  of  political  speech.

We  might  therefore  distinguish  among  three  scenarios.  First,
the  market  might  itself  be  unconstitutional  if  it  could  be  shown
that  existing  property  rights  produce  little  political  discussion  or
exclude  certain  views.6 '  For reasons  suggested  below,  courts  should
be  cautious  here,  in  part  because  the  issue  turns  on  complex  fac-
tual  issues  not  easily  within  judicial  competence.  Second,  regula-
tion of the  market  might well  be  upheld,  as  against a  First Amend-
ment challenge,  if the  legislature  has  made  a  considered  judgment,
based  on  a record,  that the particular  regulation  will  promote  First
Amendment  goals.62  Third,  regulation  of  the  market  might  be  in-
validated  if  it  discriminates  on  the  basis  of  viewpoint,  or  if it  can
be  shown  that the  regulation  actually  diminishes  attention  to pub-
lic affairs  or  diminishes  diversity  of view.  On  this latter,  highly fac-
tual  question,  the  legislature  is  entitled  to  a  presumption  of
3
constitutionality.1

60 See  Scanlon,  Content Regulation Reconsidered at 350  (cited  in  note  21):

The  case  for  or  against  such  powers  must  be  made  out  on  the  basis  of  their  conse-
quences.  Statutes  requiring  that  opponents  of  newspaper  or  television  editorials  be
given  the opportunity  to  reply are  not, on  the  face  of it,  inconsistent  with  the  right of
freedom  of expression.  Everything  depends  on  what the  consequences  of such  statutes
would  be  as  compared  with  the  likely  alternatives.

See also Commission  on Freedom  of the Press, A Free and Responsible Press at 23-24  (cited
in  note  21)  ("the  great agencies  of  mass  communication  should  regard  themselves  as  com-
mon  carriers  of  public  discussion.  .
. . all  the  important  viewpoints  and  interests  in  the
society should  be  represented  in  its  agencies  of mass  communication").

See  text accompanying  notes  111-13.
62  See  text  accompanying  notes  66-109.
63  See  Red Lion, 395  US  367.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  279 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

Importantly,  a  market  will  make  it  unnecessary  for  govern-
ment  officials  to  oversee  the  content  of  material  in  order  to  assess
its  value.  The  fact  that  a  market  removes  official  oversight  counts
strongly  in  its  favor.  The  restrictions  of  the  market  are  content-
neutral.  The  restrictions  of the  fairness  doctrine,  or  any  similar  al-
ternative,  are  content-based.

On  the  other  hand,  a  market  in  communications  generates  a
range  of  problems.  Imagine,  for  example,  that  we  allocated  the
right  to  speak  to  those people  whose  speech  other  people  are  will-
ing  to  pay  to  hear-in  other  words,  through  a pricing  system,  like
that  used  to  allocate  soap,  or  cereal,  or  cars.  This  system  would
prevent  people  from  speaking  if  other  people  were  not  willing  to
pay  enough  for  them  to  do  so.  Surely  this  would  seem  a  strange
parody  of  democratic  aspirations-the  stuff  of  science  fiction,
rather  than  self-government.  It  would  be  especially  perverse  inso-
far  as  it. would  foreclose  dissident  speech-expression  for  which
people  are  often  unwilling  to  pay.  But  in  many  respects,  this  is
precisely  the  system  we  have.  The  FCC  allocates  broadcasting  li-
censes  very  much  on  the  basis  of  private  willingness  to  pay. 4

In one  respect  our system  is  even  worse, for  programming  con-
tent  is  affected  not  merely  by  consumer  demand,  but  also  by  the
desires  of  advertisers.  Viewers  are  thus  the  product  as  well  as  the
users  of  broadcasting,  and  this  introduces  some  additional  distor-
tions. 5  In  any  case,  the  First  Amendment  issues  must  depend  in
large  part  on  the  details.

a)  The  facts. Much  information  has  been  compiled  on  the
content  of local  television  news,  which  began,  incidentally,  as  a di-
rect  response  to the  requirements  of the  FCC's  fairness  doctrine.66
Local  news  programming  devotes  very  little  time  to  genuine  news.
Instead,  it  covers  stories  about movies  and  television  programs  and
sensationalized  disasters  of little  general  interest.17  "The  search  for
emotion-packed  reports  with  mass  appeal  has  led  local  television
news  to  give  extensive  coverage  to tragedies  like murders, deaths  in

6' To  be  sure,  there  are  many  ways  to  present  speech  regardless  of willingness  to  pay;
for  example,  one  can  distribute  leaflets.  If those  ways  were  sufficient  to  serve  Madisonian
ideals,  there  would  be  no  reason  to  worry  about  the  broadcast  media.  But  in  practice,  it
seems  unlikely  that there  is  sufficient  attention  to  public  affairs,  and  diversity  of view,  in
other  media  to  pick  up  the  slack.

65 See  Section  II.C.l.b.

66  See  Phyllis  Kaniss,  Making Local News  102  (Chicago,  1991).

"I See  Entman, Democracy Without  Citizens at  110-15  (cited  in  note  50).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  280 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

fires,  or  plane  crashes,  in  which  they  often  interview  survivors  of
victims  about 'how  they  feel.'  "68

During  a  half-hour  of  news  programming,  no  more  than  eight
to  twelve  minutes  involves  news.  Each story that does  involve news
typically  ranges  from  twenty  to  thirty  seconds.6 9  Even  the  news
stories  tend  to  focus  on  fires,  accidents,  and  crimes  instead  of  is-
sues  of  government  and  policy.70  Discussions  of  governmental  pol-
icy  are  further  de-emphasized  during  the  more  popular  evening
show.7 1  Coverage  of government  does not tend  to  describe  the  con-
tent  of  relevant  policies,  but  instead  focuses  on  sensational  and
often  misleading  "human  impact"  anecdotes. 2  In  addition,  there
has  been  great  emphasis  on  "features"-dealing  with  popular  ac-
tors,  or  entertainment  shows,  or  even  stories focusing  on  the movie
immediately  preceding  the  news.7
s Economic  pressures  seem  to  be
pushing  local  news  in  this  direction  even  if reporters  might  prefer
to  deal  with  public  issues  more  seriously.

With  respect  to  network  news,  the  pattern  is  similar.  In  1988,
almost  sixty  percent  of  the  national  campaign  coverage  involved
"horse  race"  issues-who  was winning,  who had momentum-while
about thirty  percent  involved  issues  and  qualifications.  In the  cru-
cial  period  from January  to  June,  1980,  one  network  offered  about
450  minutes  of  campaign  coverage,  of which  no  less  than  308  min-
utes  dealt  with  the  "horse  race"  issues.7 4

It  is notable  in this regard that for  presidential  candidates,  the
average  block  of  uninterrupted  speech  fell  from  42.3  seconds  in
1968  to  only  9.8  seconds  in  1988."5  There  is  little  sustained  cover-
age  of  the  substance  of  candidate  speeches;  instead  attention  is
placed  on  how  various  candidates  are  doing.  Citizenship  is exceed-
ingly  unlikely  to  flourish  in  this  environment.

There  has  been  an  increase  in  stories  about  television  and
movies  and  a  decrease  in  attention  to  questions  involving  govern-
ment  and  its  obligations.  In  1988,  there  was  an  average  of  thirty-
eight  minutes  per  month  of  coverage  of  arts  and  entertainment

68  Kaniss,  Making Local News  at 110  (cited  in  note  66).
9 Id  at  111.  If a  reporter  is  giving  the story,  the  range  is  one  to three  minutes.  Id.
70  Id  at  114.
71  Id  at  118.
72  Id  at 120-21.
71  Id  at 129-30.
74 Fishkin,  Democracy and Deliberation at  63  (cited in  note  21).
71  Kiku  Adatto,  Sound  Bite  Democracy: Network  Evening News  Presidential Cam-
paign Coverage, 1968 and 1988 4  (Research  Paper R-2)  (Harvard,  John F.  Kennedy  School
of Government,  1990)  (on  file  with  U Chi  L  Rev).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  281 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

news;  in the  first  half of  1990,  the  average  was  sixty-eight  minutes
per month. 6  According  to  one  person  involved  in the  industry,  "by
the  necessity  of  shrinking  ratings,  the  network  news  departments
have  had  to,  if  not  formally  then  informally,  redefine  what  is
news." 77  According  to  the  Executive  Producer  of  NBC's  Nightly
News,  "A  lot of what  we  used  to  do is  report on the  back  and  forth
of  how  we  stood  against  the  Russians.  But  there  is  no  back  and
forth  anymore.  I  mean  nobody  is  talking  about the  bomb,  so  you
have  to  fill  the  time  with  the  things  people  are talking  about."'78
There  is  evidence  as well  of advertiser  influence  over  program-
ming  content,  though  at  the  moment the  evidence  is  largely  anec-
dotal.7"  No  conspiracy  theory  appears  plausible;  but  some  recent
events  are  quite  disturbing. There  are reports  that advertisers  have
a  large  impact  on  local  news  programs,  especially  consumer  re-
ports.  In Minneapolis,  a local  car dealer  responded  to  a story about
consumer  problems  with  his  company  by  pulling  almost  one  mil-
lion  in  advertisements.  He  said:  "We  vote  with  our  dollars.  If I'm
out  trying  to  tell  a  good  story  about  what  I'm  doing  and  paying
$3000  for  30  seconds,  and  someone's  calling  me names,  I'm not go-
ing  to  be  happy."8  Consumer  reporters  have  increasingly  pointed
to  a  need  for  self-censorship.  According  to  one,  "we  don't  even
bother  with  most  auto-related  stories  anymore";  according  to  an-
other,  "I  won't  do the  car-repair  story,  or the  lemon  story  .... 
It's
not  worth  the  hassle."8 1

A  revealing  recent  episode  involved  the  effort  by  Turner
Broadcasting  Systems  (TBS)  and  the  Audubon  Society  to produce
a program  dealing  with the  "spotted  owl"  controversy  between  log-
gers  and environmentalists  in the  Pacific  Northwest. Believing that
the  program  was  biased,  a  group  representing  the  logging  commu-
nity  did  not want  TBS  to air  it.  As  a result, all  of the  eight adver-
tisers  (including  Ford,  Citicorp,  Exxon,  and  Sears)  pulled  their
sponsorship  of  the  program.  TBS  aired  the  program,  but  lost  the
$100,000  spent  on  production.2  And  NBC  had  severe  difficulties

J J.  Max  Robins,  Nets'  Newscasts Increase Coverage of Entertainment, Variety  3,  63

(Jul  18,  1990).
77  Id  at  3.
78  Id  at 63.
7  See  the discussion  of a  forthcoming  report from the  Center for  the Study of Commer-
cialism  in G.  Pascal  Zachary,  All  the News? Many Journalists See A  Growing Reluctance to
Criticize Advertisers, Wall  St  J  Al  (Feb 6,  1992).  The  report  describes  growing  newspaper
attentiveness  to  advertiser  views  on  stories.

80 Steven  Waldman,  Consumer News  Blues, Newsweek  48  (May  20,  1991).
81 Id.
82  Advertisers Drop Program About the  Timber Industry, NY  Times 32  (Sep 23,  1989).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  282 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

finding sponsors  for its  television  movie,  "Roe  v. Wade."  Fearful  of
boycotts  by  religious  groups,  hundreds  of  sponsors  solicited  by
NBC  refused  to  participate."3  It  seems  highly  unlikely  that  adver-
tisers  could  be  found  for  any  program  adopting  a  "pro-life"  or
"pro-choice"  perspective,  or  even  for  a  program  attempting  a  bal-
anced  discussion  of  the  issues.8 4

Consider  children's  television.  Educational  programming  for
children  simply  cannot  acquire  sponsors;  such  programming  can be
found  mostly on PBS.8 5 In the  1960s,  the  FCC issued  recommenda-
tions  and  policy statements  calling  for  "programming  in the  inter-
est of the  public"  rather  than  "programming  in the  interest of sala-
bility."' 
In  1974,  it  concluded  that  "broadcasters  have  a  special
obligation  to  serve  children,"  and  thus  pressured  the  industry  to
adopt  codes  calling  for  educational  and  informational  programs.87
In  1981,  the  new  FCC  Chair,  Mark  Fowler,  rejected  this approach.
For  Fowler,  "television  is just another  appliance.  It's a toaster  with
pictures." 88

Shortly thereafter,  network  programming  for  children  dramat-
ically  decreased,"  and  programs  based  on  products  increased.  Ac-
cording  to  one  critic,  by  1986  children's  television  had  become  "a
listless by-product  of an  extraordinary  explosion  of entrepreneurial
life  forces  taking  place  elsewhere-in  the  business  of  creating  and
marketing  toys." 90  In  1983,  cartoons  based  on  licensed  characters
accounted  for  fourteen  programs;  by 1985,  the number  rose  to  over
forty."'  It  continued  to  increase.  Most  of  the  resulting  shows  for
children  are  quite violent,  and  the  violence  has increased  since  de-
regulation.  Statistical  measures  will  of course  be  inadequate,  but  it
is  at least  revealing  that  before  1980,  there  were  18.6  violent  acts
per  hour  in  children's  programs,  whereas  after  1980,  the  number

83  Verne  Gay,  NBC v  Sponsors v  Wildmon Re: Telepic "Roe  v  Wade", Variety 71  (May

10,  1989).

814 Id  at 82.

"  Children  and  Television,  Hearing  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Telecommunications,
Consumer  Protection,  and  Finance,  House  of  Representatives,  98th  Cong,  1st  Sess  36-37
(Mar  16,  1983)  (statements  of Bruce  Christensen,  President  of the  National  Association  of
Public  Television  Stations).

88 Englehardt,  The Shortcake Strategy at 75  (cited  in  note  9).
87 Id.
88 Nossiter,  The  Nation  at  402  (cited  in  note  52).
8  From  11.3  to  4.4  hours  per  week;  there was  no  regularly  scheduled  children's  series
during  the  usual  after-school  time slot. Englehardt,  The Shortcake Strategy at 76  (cited  in
note  9).

80  Id  at 70.
91 Id.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  283 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

increased  to  26.4  acts  per  hour.92  Children's  daytime  weekend  pro-
grams  have  consistently  been  more  violent  than  prime-time
shows.93  Few  of  these  shows  have  educational  content.  They  are
often  full-length  advertisements  for  products.

More  generally,  there  is  a  high  level  of  violence  on  all  televi-
sion  programming.9 4  Seven  of ten  prime  time  programs  depict  vio-
lence.  During  prime time  in  1980, there  was  an  average  of between
five  and  six  violent  acts  per  hour.  By  1989,  the  number  increased
to  9.5  acts  per  hour.  In  1980,  ten  shows  depicted  an  average  of
more  than  ten  acts  of violence  per  hour;  by  1989,  the  number  was
sixteen;  the  high  mark  was  in  1985,  with  twenty-nine  such  shows.
Violence  on  children's  television  has  been  found  to  increase  chil-
dren's  fear  and  also  to  contribute  to  their  own  aggression.9

Empirical  studies  show that news  and  entertainment  program-
ming  sometimes  discriminates  on  the  basis  of  sex.  A  1986  study of
network  news  stories  found  that  when  women  appear  as  "private
individuals,"  they  are  most  frequently  depicted  as  falling  in  the
category  "family  members;  that is,  they were  the  mothers  or  other
relatives  of  hostages,  gunmen,  spies,  afflicted  children,  and  the
like." 96  Next  most  frequent  was  the  appearance  of  women  as  vic-
tims, including  battered  women,  stabbing  victims, and  residents  of
areas  affected  by earthquakes  and  toxic waste  sites.97  When  women
are  used  as  speaking  subjects  on a  public issue,  it  is  often  to  speak
against  a  position  traditionally  associated  with  women.  Thus
Christie  Hefner  was  used  as  a  prominent  critic  of  an  anti-
pornography  report,  and  a  woman  doctor  was  used  to  defend  a
company  policy  of  transferring  women  out  of  jobs  dealing  with
hazardous  chemicals.98  One  study of  situation  comedies  and  crime
drama  programs in  1975  found that women  were  often  portrayed  in
subordinate  roles. 99

"2 Sources  for  this  discussion  are  George  Gernber  and  Nancy  Signorielli,  Violence Pro-

file 1967  through 1988-89: Enduring Patterns 9  (Pennsylvania,  1990).

93 Id.
"  Id  at 9-10.
g' See  Jerome  L.  Singer,  and  Dorothy  G.  Singer,  and  Wanda  S.  Rapaczynski,  Family
Patterns and Television  Viewing  as Predictors of  Children's Beliefs  and Aggression, 34  J
Commun  73,  87-88  (1984).

90  Lana  F.  Rakow  and  Kimberlie  Kranich,  Woman  As  Sign  in  Television News,  41  J

Commun  8,  14  (1991).

97 Id.

(1977).

98 Id at 17.
"  Judith  Lemon,  Women  and Blacks on  Prime-Time Television, 27  J  Commun  70,  73

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  284 1992

19921

Free Speech Now

Children's  programming  frequently  consists  exclusively  of
male  characters,  and  when  a female  character  is  added  "a  group  of
male  buddies  will  be  accented  by a lone  female,  stereotypically  de-
fined."' 10 0  On  this  pattern,  "the  female  is  usually  a  little-sister
type,"  or  "functions  as  a  girl  Friday  to  . . . male  superheroes.'' 101
Thus  "[g]irls  exist  only  in  relation  to  boys."'0 2  Of major  dramatic
characters  in  one  survey,  women  made  up  only  sixteen  percent,
and  "females  were  portrayed  as younger  than males,  more likely  to
be  married,  less  active  and  with  lower  self-esteem.'1 0 3

b)  Correctives and the First Amendment.  Regulatory  strat-
egies  cannot  solve  all  of  these  problems,  but  they  could  help.  At
least  some  regulatory  strategies  should  not  be  treated  as  abridge-
ments  of  the  freedom  of  speech.

It  might  be  suggested  that  in  an  era  of  cable  television,  the
relevant  problems  disappear.  People  can  always  change  the  chan-
nel.  Some  stations  even  provide  public  affairs  broadcasting  around
the  clock.  In  this  light,  a  concern  about  the  market  status  quo
might seem  to  amount to  a puzzling  rejection  of freedom  of choice.
Both  quality  and  diversity  can  be  found  in  light  of  the  dazzling
array  of  options  made  available  by  modern  technology.  Why
should we  not view  a foreclosure  of expressive  options  as  infringing
freedom  of  speech?

There  are  several  answers.  First,  information  about  public  af-
fairs has  many  of the  characteristics  of a public  good,  like  national
defense  or  clean  air. 04  It  is  well-known  that  if we  rely  entirely  on
markets,  we  will  have  insufficient  national  defense  and  excessively
dirty  air.  The  reason  is  that  both  defense  and  clean  air  cannot  be
feasibly  provided  to  one  person  without  simultaneously  being  pro-
vided to  many or  all. In these  circumstances,  each  person  has  inad-
equate  incentives  to  seek,  or  to  pay  for,  the  right  level  of  national
defense  or  clean  air.  Acting  individually,  each  person  will  "free
ride"  on  the  efforts  of  others.  No producer  will  have  the  appropri-

100  Katha  Pollitt,  The Smurfette  Principle, NY  Times  6-22  (Apr  7,  1991).
101 Id.
102  Id.
103  John  Corry, Briefs  on  the  Arts:  Children's TV  Found Dominated by  White  Men,

NY  Times  C14  (Jul 15,  1982).

104 See  Daniel A.  Farber,  Free Speech  Without Romance: Public Choice and the First

Amendment,  105  Harv  L Rev  554,  558-62  (1991).  Information  is  not  a pure  public good,  for
it  is  often  feasible  to provide  it  to those  who  pay  for  it,  and  copyright  and  patent  laws  can
guarantee  appropriate  incentives  for  its  production.  But  it  does  have  much  in  common  with
pure  public goods.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  285 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law  Review

[59:255

ate  incentive  for  production.  The  result  will  be  unacceptably  low
levels  of  the  relevant  goods.

Much  the  same  is  true  of information,  especially  with  respect
to  public  affairs.  The  benefits  of  a  broad  public  debate,  yielding
large  quantities  of information-through  coverage  of public  issues,
disclosure  of  new  facts  and  perspectives,  and  diversity  of
view-accrue  simultaneously  to  many  or  all  people.  Once  informa-
tion  is  provided  to  one  person,  or  to  some  of  them,  it  is  also  pro-
vided to  many others  too, or  it  can  be  so  provided  at minimal  cost.
The production  of information  for  any person  thus  yields  large  ex-
ternal  benefits  for  other  people  as  well.  But-and  this  is  the  key
point-the  market  provides  no  mechanism  to  ensure  that  these
benefits  will  be  adequately  taken  into  account  by  those  who  pro-
duce  the  information,  in  this  case  the  newspaper  and  broadcasting
industries.At  the  same 
time,  the  benefits  of  informing  one  per-
-son-making him an effective  citizen-are  likely  to  accrue  to many
other  people  as well,  through  that person's  contribution  to multiple
practices  and  conversations,  and  to  political  processes  in  general.
But  the  external  benefits,  for  each  person,  will  not  be  taken  into
account  in  individual  consumption  choices.

Because  of the  "public  good"  features  of information,  no  single
person  has  sufficient  incentive  to  "pay"  for  the  benefits  that  he
receives.  The  result  will  be  that  the  market  will  produce  too  little
information.  Reliance  on  media  markets  will  therefore  have  some
of the  same  difficulties  as  reliance  on  markets  for  national  defense
or  environmental  protection.  For  this  reason,  a  regulatory  change,
solving  the  collective  action  problem, 
is  justified,  at  least  in
principle.

It  might  be  thought  that  the  distinctive  characteristics  of  the
broadcasting  market  provide  at  least  a  partial  solution.  Because
advertisers  attempt  to  ensure  large  audiences,  viewers  are  com-
modities  as  well  as  or  instead  of  consumers.  In  these  circum-
stances,  it  is  not  as  if  individual  people  are  purchasing  individual
pieces  of  information.  Instead,  advertisers  are  aggregating  individ-
ual  preferences  in  seeking popular  programming  and,  in  that sense,
helping  to overcome  the  collective  action  problem. Under  this view,
any  kind  of regulatory  change  is  therefore  unnecessary.

The  problem  with  this  response  is  that  the  advertisers'  desire
to  attract  large  audiences  does  not  adequately  serve  the  goal  of
overcoming  the  public  good  problem  with  respect  to  information
about  public  affairs.  A  program  with  a  large  audience  may  not  be
providing  information  at  all;  consider  most  of  network  television.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  286 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

As  we  have  seen,  advertisers  may  even  be  hostile  to  the  provision
of  the  relevant  information.  Their  economic  interests  often  argue
against sponsorship  of public service  or  controversial  programming,
especially  if  the  audience  is  relatively  small,  but sometimes  even  if
it  is  large.  The  external  benefits  of  widely-diffused  information
about  politics are  thus  not captured  in  a  broadcasting  market.  The
peculiarities  of the  broadcasting  market  do  overcome  a  kind  of col-
lective  action  problem,  by providing  a  system  for  aggregating  pref-
erences.  But they do  not respond  to  the crucial  difficulty. Thus far,
then,  it  seems  plain  that the  broadcasting  market  will  produce  in-
sufficient  information  about  public  issues.

So  much  for  the  public  good  issue.  The  second  problem  with
reliance  on  the  large  number  of  outlets  is  that  sheer  numbers  do
not  explain  why  there  is  a  constitutional  objection  to  democratic
efforts  to  increase  quality  and  diversity  by  ensuring  better  pro-
gramming  on  individual  stations.  Even  with  a large  number  of  sta-
tions,  there  is  far  less  quality  and  diversity  than  there  might  be.
Perhaps  people  can  generate  at least  a partial solution  by changing
the  channel.  But why  should  the  Constitution  be  thought  to  fore-
close  a  collective  decision  to  experiment  with  new  methods  for
achieving  their  Madisonian  goals?

The  third  problem  with  relying  on  decreasing  scarcity  is  that
it  is  important  to  be  extremely  cautious  about  the  use,  for  consti-
tutional  and  political  purposes,  of  the  notion  of  "consumer  sover-
eignty."  Consumer  sovereignty  is  the  conventional  economic  term
for  the virtues  of a free  market, in which  commodities  are  allocated
through  consumer  choices,  as  measured  through  the  criterion  of
private  willingness  to  pay.  Those  who  invoke  free  choice  in  mar-
kets  are  really  insisting  on  consumer  sovereignty.  But  Madison's
conception  of  "sovereignty"  is  the  relevant  one  for  First  Amend-
ment  purposes,  and  that  conception  has  an  altogether  different
character.

On  the  Madisonian  view,  sovereignty  entails  respect  not  for
private  consumption  choices,  but for  the  considered  judgments  of
the  citizens.  In  a  well-functioning  polity,  laws  frequently  reflect
those  judgments-what  might  be  described  as  the  aspirations  of
the  public as  a whole.' 0 5 Those  aspirations  can  and often  do  call for
markets  themselves.  But  they  might  also  diverge  from  consump-
tion  choices-a  familiar  phenomenon  in  such  areas  as  environmen-

"05  See  Howard  Margolis,  Selfishness, Altruism, and Rationality, A  Theory  of Social
Choice 17-25  (Cambridge,  1982);  Jon  Elster,  Ulysses  and  the Sirens  141-46  (Cambridge,
1979).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  287 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

tal  law,  protection  of  endangered  species,  social  security,  and  an-
tidiscrimination 
law.  Democratic  aspirations  should  not  be
disparaged.  Democratic  liberty should  not  be  identified  with "con-
sumer  sovereignty."  And  in the context  at hand, the  people,  acting
through their  elected  representatives,  might well decide  that demo-
cratic  liberty,  calling  for  quality  and  diversity  of view  in the  mass
media,  is  more  valuable  than  consumer  sovereignty.

Finally,  private  broadcasting  selections  are  a  product  of  pref-
erences  that are themselves  a result of the  broadcasting  status  quo,
and  not  independent  of  it.  In  a  world  that  provides  the  existing
fare,  it  would  be  unsurprising  if people  generally  preferred  to  see
what  they  are  accustomed  to  seeing.  They  have  not been  provided
with  the  opportunities  of  a  better  system.  When  this  is  so,  the
broadcasting  status  quo  cannot,  without circularity,  be justified  by
reference  to  the  preferences. 10 6  Preferences  that  have  adapted  to
an  objectionable  system  cannot  justify  that  system.  If  better  op-
tions  are  put more  regularly-in  view,  we  might  well  expect  that  at
least  some  people  would  be  educated  as  a  result,  and  be  more  fa-
vorably disposed  toward programming  dealing with public  issues in
a  serious  way.

It  is  tempting  but inadequate  to  object  that  this  is  a form  of
"paternalism"  unjustifiably  overriding  private  choice.  If  private
choice  is a product  of existing  options,  and  in  that sense  of law,  the
inclusion  of  better  options,  through  new  law,  does  not  displace  a
freely  produced  desire.  At least this  is so  if the new  law has  a dem-
ocratic  pedigree.  In  such  a  case,  the  people,  in  their  capacity  as
citizens,  are  attempting  to  implement  aspirations that diverge  from
their  consumption  choices.

For  those  skeptical  about  such  arguments,  it  may  be  useful  to
note  that  many  familiar  democratic  initiatives-including,  for  ex-
ample,  term  limitations  for  elected  offices-are  justified  on  pre-
cisely  these  grounds.  The  fact  that  voters  can  reject  a  two-term
president  is  hardly  a  decisive  argument  against  the  two-term  rule.
The whole  point  of the  rule  is to  reflect  a precommitment strategy.
To  those-who  continue  to  be  skeptical,  it  is  worthwhile  to  empha-
size  that  the  Constitution  is  itself a  precommitment  strategy,  and
that this  Constitution  includes  the  First  Amendment.

What  strategies  might  emerge  from  considerations  of  this
sort?  There  is  a  strong  case  for  public  provision  of  high  quality
programming  for  children,  or  for  obligations,  imposed  by  govern-

106  See  Jon  Elster, Sour  Grapes 109-40  (Cambridge,  1983).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  288 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

ment  on  broadcasters,  to  provide  such  programming.10 7 The  provi-
sion  of free  media  time  to  candidates  would  be  especially  helpful,
simultaneously  providing  attention  to  public  affairs  and  diversity
of  view,  while  overcoming  the  distorting  effects  of  "soundbites"
and  financial  pressures.  More  generally,  government  might  award
"points"  to  license  applicants  who  promise  to  deal  with  serious
questions  or  provide  public  affairs  broadcasting  even  if  unsup-
ported  by market  demand.  Government  might  require  purely  com-
mercial  stations  to  provide  financial  subsidies  to  public  television
or  to  commercial  stations that agree  to provide  less  profitable  high
quality  programming.

It is  worthwhile  to  consider  more  dramatic  approaches  as well.
These  might  include  a  compulsory  hour  of  public  affairs  program-
ming per  evening,  rights of  reply, reductions  in  advertising  on  chil-
dren's  television,  content  review  of children's  television  by nonpar-
tisan  experts,  or  guidelines  to  encourage  attention  to  public  issues
and  diversity  of  view.

Of course  there will be  room  for discretion,  and  abuse,  in  mak-
ing  decisions  about quality  and public affairs.  There  is thus a legit-
imate concern  that any governmental  supervision  of the  sort I have
outlined would  pose risks  more  severe  than those of the  status quo.
The  market,  surrounded  by  existing  property  rights,  may  restrict
speech;  but  at least  it  does  not  entail  the  sort  of  substantive  ap-
proval  or  disapproval,  or  overview  of speech content,  that would be
involved  in  the  suggested  "New  Deal."  Surely  it  is plausible  to  re-
spond  that  the relative  neutrality  of the  market minimizes  the  role
of  public  officials,  in  a  way  that makes  it  the  best  of  the  various
alternatives.

There  are three  responses.  The  first  is  that the  current  system
itself creates  extremely  serious  obstacles  to  a well-functioning  sys-
tem  of  free  expression.  The  absence  of  continuous  government  su-
pervision  should  not  obscure  the  point.  With  respect  to  attention
to  public  issues,  and  diversity  of  view,  the  status  quo  disserves
Madisonian  goals.

The  second  point  is  that  it  does  indeed  seem  plausible  to
think  that  such  decisions  can  be  made  in  a  nonpartisan  way,  as  is
currently  the  case  for  public  television.  Regulatory  policies  have
helped  greatly  in  the past. They  are  responsible  for  the  very  crea-
tion  of  local  news  in  the  first  instance.  They  have  helped  increase
the  quality  of children's television.  Public  television,  which  offers  a

107  See  Amy  Gutmann,  Democratic Education 238-55  (Princeton,  1987).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  289 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

wide  range  of high  quality  fare,  owes  its  existence  to  governmental
involvement.  We  have  no  basis  for  doubting  that  much ' larger  im-
provements  could  be  brought  about in  the  future.  Nor  is  there  any
reason  grounded  in  evidence-as  opposed  to  market  theology-to
think  that  a  regulatory  solution  of  this  sort  would  inevitably  be
inferior  to  the  current  system.

The  third  point  is  that  any  regulations  would  be  subject  to
First Amendment  scrutiny.  Viewpoint  discrimination  would  be  in-
valid  under  normal  standards.  Any  content  regulation  must have  a
high degree  of generality  and neutrality.  These requirements  would
be  satisfied  by  a  broad  requirement  that  public  affairs  program-
ming,  or  free  time  for  candidates,  be  provided;  they  would  be  vio-
lated  by  a  requirement  that  (for  example)  feminists,  pro-lifers,  or
the  Democrats  in  particular  must  be  heard.  And  the  legislature
must  generate  a  factual  record  to  support  any  regulatory  alterna-
tive  to  the  existing  regime.

How might these  points bear  on  the constitutional  question?  A
law  that  contained  suitable  regulatory  remedies  might  promote
rather  than  undermine  "the  freedom  of  speech,"  at  least  if we  un-
derstand  that  phrase  in light  of the  distinctive  American  theory  of
sovereignty.  The  current  system  does  not  promote  that  under-
standing.  Instead,  it  disserves  and  even  stifles  citizenship.

I have  not  argued  that  government  should  be  free  to  regulate
broadcasting  however  it  chooses.  As  noted,  regulation  designed  to
excise  a  particular  viewpoint  of  course  would  be  out  of  bounds.
More  draconian  controls  than those  I have  described-for  example,
a 
requirement  of  public  affairs  broadcasting  around 
the
clock-would  raise  more  serious  questions.  But  at  the  very  least,
legislative  "fairness  doctrines"  would  not  raise  serious  doubts.10 8
Legislative  efforts  to  restructure  the  marketplace  might  even  be
seen as  the discharge  of the  legislature's  constitutional  duty, a duty

108  Consider  Meiklejohn,  Free Speech  and Its  Relation to  Self-Government at  16-17

(cited  in  note  1):

[C]ongress  is  not  debarred  from  all  action  upon  freedom  of  speech.  Legislation  which
abridges  that freedom  is  forbidden,  but  not  legislation  to  enlarge  and  enrich  it.  The
freedom  of  mind  which  befits  the  members  of  a  self-governing  society  is  not  a  given
and  fixed  part  of human  nature.  It  can  be  increased  and  established  by  learning,  by
teaching,  by  the  unhindered  flow  of  accurate  information,  by  giving  men  health  and
vigor  and  security, by  bringing  them  together  in  activities  of communication  and  mu-
tual understanding.  And  the federal  legislature  is not  forbidden  to engage  in  that  posi-
tive  enterprise  of  cultivating  the  general  intelligence  upon  which  the  success  of self-
government so  obviously  depends.  On the  contrary,  in  that positive  field  the  Congress
of the  United  States  has  a  heavy  and  basic  responsibility  to  promote  the  freedom  of
speech.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  290 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

that courts  are reluctant,  for good  institutional  reasons,  fully to en-
force. 10 9  We  might  understand  the  courts'  unwillingness  to  require
something  like  a  fairness  doctrine  to  be  a  result  of the  judiciary's
lack  of  a  democratic  pedigree  and  limited  remedial  power.  A  legis-
lature  faces  no  such  institutional  limits. Its  actions might  therefore
be  seen  as  a response  to  genuine,  though  underenforced,  constitu-
tional  obligations.

2.  Campaign  finance.

Many  people  have  justified  restrictions  on  campaign  expendi-
tures  as  an  effort  to  promote  political  deliberation  and  political
equality  by  reducing  the  distorting  effects  of  disparities  in wealth.
On  this  view,  such  laws  promote  the  system  of  free  expression  by
ensuring  that  less  wealthy  speakers  do  not  have  much  weaker
voices  than  wealthy  ones.  But  some  have  forcefully  challenged
campaign  finance  laws  as  inconsistent  with  "the  marketplace  of
ideas."  Indeed;  some  say  these  laws  effect  a  kind  of  First  Amend-
ment  taking  from  rich  speakers  for  the  benefit  of  poor  ones.  On
this  rationale,  the  Supreme  Court  invalidated  certain  forms  of
campaign  finance  regulation  in  Buckley  v  Valeo." 0  In  the  crucial
passage,  the  Court  said  that  "the  concept  that  government  may
restrict  the  speech  of  some  elements  of  our  society  in order  to  en-
hance  the  relative  voice  of  others  is  wholly  foreign  to  the  First
Amendment  . .. .,,

Buckley  reflects  pre-New  Deal  understandings.  We  should
view  it  as  the  modern-day  analogue  of  Lochner v  New  York:" 2  a
decision to  take  the market  status quo  as just and prepolitical,  and
to  use  that decision  to  invalidate  democratic  efforts  at  reform.  Re-
liance  on  markets  is  governmental  neutrality.  Use  of  existing  dis-
tributions 
for  political  expenditures  marks  out  government
inaction.

From  what  I  have  said  thus  far,  it  should  be  clear  that  elec-
tions  based  on  those distributions  are  actually  subject  to  a regula-
tory  system,  made  possible  and  constituted  through  law.  That law
consists,  first,  in  legal  rules  protecting  the  present  distribution  of
wealth,  and  more  fundamentally,  in legal  rules  allowing  candidates
to  buy  speech  rights  through  markets.

"I' See Lawrence  Gene  Sager,  Fair Measure: The Legal Status of  Underenforced Con-

stitutional Norms, 91  Harv L  Rev  1212,  1239-42  (1978).

110  424  US  1,  58-59  (1976).

. Id  at 48-49.
112  198  US  45,  53  (1905).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  291 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

Because  it  involves  speech, Buckley  is  even  more  striking than
Lochner. Efforts  to  redress  economic  inequalities,  or  to  ensure that
they  do not  translate  into  political  inequalities,  should  not be  seen
as  impermissible  redistribution,  or  as  the  introduction  of  govern-
ment  regulation  where  it  did  not  exist  before.  Instead  we  should
evaluate  campaign  finance  laws  pragmatically  in  terms  of  their
consequences  for  the  system  of  free  expression.  There  are  some
hard  questions  here.  The  case  for  controls  on  campaign  expendi-
tures is  plausible  but hardly  clearcut. 113  An  inquiry  into  these  con-
siderations  would  raise  issues  quite  different  from  those  invoked
by  the  Buckley  Court.

3.  Private  right  of access.

If it  were  necessary  to  bring  about  diversity  and  attention  to
public  matters,  a  private  right  of  access  to  the  media  might  even
be  constitutionally  compelled.  The  notion  that  access  will  be  a
product  of  the  marketplace  might  be  constitutionally  trouble-
some. "' 4  I  have  suggested  that  a  democratic  polity  allowing  people
to  speak  in  accordance  with  the  amount  of  resources  that  other
people  are willing  to pay  in order  to hear them  makes a mockery  of
democratic  ideals.  With respect  to  much  important  and  influential
speech,  our  current  system  of  free  expression  has just that  feature
in  practice.

Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  group  objecting  to  a  war,  or  to
the  practice  of  abortion,  seeks  to  purchase  advertising  time  to  set
out its  view.  Suppose  too  that  the  purchase  is  refused  because  the
networks  object  to  the  message.  It  is  plausible  that  the  law  that
makes  the  refusal  possible  violates  the  First  Amendment,  at  least

13  Consider  John  Rawls,  The  Basic  Liberties  and  Their  Priority, in  Sterling  M.

McMurrin,  ed,  Liberty, Equality and Law, Selected  Tanner Lectures on Moral Philosophy
76  (Utah,  1987):

The  Court fails  to recognize  the essential  point that the fair-value  of the political  liber-
ties  is  required  for  a  just political  procedure,  and  that to  insure  their  fair-value  it  is
necessary  to prevent  those  with  greater  property  and  wealth,  and  the  greater  skills  of
organization  which  accompany  them, from  controlling  the electoral  process  to  their  ad-
vantage....  On  this view,  democracy  is a  kind  of regulated  rivalry  between  economic
classes  and  interest groups  in which  the  outcome  should properly  depend  on  the ability
and  willingness  of  each  to  use  its  financial  resources  and skills,  admittedly  very  une-
qual,  to make  its  desires  felt.
But such  regulation  might  be objectionable  on  other grounds,  for  example,  that  it  oper-
ates  in  purpose  or  effect  as  a  kind  of incumbent  protection  measure.  This  is  of course  a
quite  different  point from  that  in  Buckley.

"  See the discussion  in Meiklejohn,  Free Speech and its Relation to  Self-Government

at  104-05  (cited  in  note  1),  of the  failure  "of  the  commercial  radio."

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  292 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

if  other  outlets  are  unavailable  or  are  far  less  effective.  Effective-
ness  is  important  because  if  speech  involving  public  affairs  or  di-
verse  views  is  not  widely  heard,  the  Madisonian  system will  be  se-
verely  undermined.

If  the  courts  ought  to  deny  a  right  of  access,  it  is  largely  for
institutional  reasons.  Such  a right would  strain judicial  competence
in light  of the  courts'  limited  factfinding  and  policymaking  capaci-
ties.  But it  is  not clear  that these  considerations  should  be  decisive.

4.  Conventional  constitutional  claims.

What  I  have  said  so  far  suggests  that  we  need  to  reassess  the
constitutional  claims  of  television  and  radio  broadcasters  quite
generally.' 5  In  general,  the  production  of  most  television  shows  is
not  a  contribution  to  democratic  deliberation,  or  even  a  means  of
self-expression,  but instead  a fairly  ordinary business  decision. The
broadcast  of such  shows  bears  faint resemblance  to  the  production
of works  for  which  the  First  Amendment  was  designed  to  provide
protection.  From the  standpoint  of liberty, regulatory  intrusions  on
these  business  decisions  do  not  always  abridge  the  freedom  of
speech.  Indeed,  the  broadcast  media  in  many  respects  set  out  a
new  orthodoxy  on  social  and  political  questions-making  serious
criticisms,  from  the  left and  the right,  invisible  or  seem  too  silly or
invidious  to  deserve  consideration.' 1 6

I  do  not mean to suggest  that broadcasters  should  be  regulable
under  the  same  standards  applied  to,  say,  employers.  Broadcasters
are  engaged  in  speech,  and  this  fundamentally  alters  the  inquiry.
But  we  should  not  disable  a  constitutional  democracy  from  re-
sponding to  the  current  situation. A  constitutional  amendment  en-

,,5  Compare  John  Dewey,  The  Public and its  Problems 184"(Gateway,  1946):
We  have  but touched lightly  and  in passing  upon the conditions  which  must be  fulfilled
if  the  Great  Society  is  to  become  a  Great  Community;  a  society  in  which  the  ever-
expanding  and  intricately  ramifying  consequences  of  associated  activities  shall  be
known in  the full sense  of that word, so that an  organized,  articulate  Public  comes  into
being.  The  highest  and  most difficult  kind  of inquiry  and  a  subtle,  delicate,  vivid  and
responsive  art  of  communication  must  take  possession  of the  physical  machinery  of
transmission  and  circulation  and  breathe  life  into  it.  When  the  machine  age  has  thus
perfected  its  machinery  it  will  be  a  means  of life  and  not  its  despotic  master.  Democ-
racy  will  come  into  its  own,  for  democracy  is  a  name  for  a  life  of free  and  enriching
communion .... 
It  will  have  its  consummation  when  free  social  inquiry  is  indissolubly
wedded  to  the art  of full  and  moving  communication.
16  It  is  interesting to  compare  this phenomenon  with  the recent  attention  given  to  the
phenomenon  of "political  correctness."  In  any  culture  there are  ideas  about  what  is politi-
cally  correct,  and  in  our  culture  these  ideas  reflect  the  conventional  political  morality  of
television  and  radio.  Serious  criticism  of  that  political  morality,  from  any  point  of  view,
sometimes  counts  as  beyond  the pale.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  293 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

acted  in  order  to  ensure  democratic  self-determination  need  not
bar  a  democratic  corrective.

5.  Exclusive  property  rights.
The  creation  of  rights  of  exclusive  use  of  property  raises  con-
stitutional  problems  when  people  are  thereby  deprived  of a  chance
to  present  their  views  to  significant  parts  of  the  public.  Courts
should  review  the  creation  of  such  rights  under  the  standards  ap-
plied  to  content-neutral  classifications.  That  is,  courts  should  ap-
ply  some  form  of  balancing  to  the  use  of  property  law  to  exclude
people  from  places  plausibly  indispensable  for  free  and  open  dis-
cussion.  Government  should  have  to  show  that  the  adverse  conse-
quences  on  the  exercise  of  rights  of  free  speech  were  justified  by
important  governmental  interests.

This  would  entail  a new look at the  "shopping  center"  cases.11 7
In  these  cases,  people  sought  to  use  the  shopping  center  to  engage
in political  protest.  They  claimed  that  access  to  those grounds  was
necessary  if  the  public  was  to  hear  a  certain  point  of  view.  Their
claim  is  the  same  as  that which  underlies  the  notion,  accepted  by
the  Court,  that  the  state  may  not  ban  leafletting  or  door-to-door
solicitation." 8  In  view  of the  role  of  the  shopping  center  in  many
areas  of  the  country,  a right  of  access  seems  fully justified.

It follows  that insofar  as newspapers  invoke  the civil  and  crim-
inal  law  to  prevent  people  from  reaching  the  public,  we  might  be
able  to  regulate  them, in  a  viewpoint-neutral  way,  without  abridg-
ing  the  freedom  of  speech." 9  If the  government  seeks  to  promote
quality and  diversity  in the newspapers,  courts  should  uphold  mild
regulatory  efforts,  especially  in view  of the  fact that  many  newspa-
pers  operate  as  de  facto  monopolies.

6.  The  public  forum  doctrine.
We  would  also  have  to  rethink  the  public  forum  doctrine.12 °
Current  law  appears  to  take  roughly  the  following  form.  The  state
may  not  close  off streets,  parks,  and  other  areas  held  open  to  the

"  Food Employees  Union  v  Logan  Valley  Plaza, 391  US  308,  324-25  (1968);  Lloyd
Corp. v  Tanner, 407  US  551,  567-70  (1972);  Hudgens v  NLRB,  424  US  507,  521-23  (1976).
"'  See,  for  example,  Schneider v  State, 308  US  147,  165  (1939)  (leafletting);  Martin v

Struthers, 319  US  141,  145-49  (1943)  (door-to-door  solicitation).

1.9 This  claim  casts  doubt  on  the  outcome,  or  at least  the  rationale,  in  Miami Herald

Publishing Co.  v  Tornillo, 418  US  241,  254-58  (1974).

"'0 See  Hague v  CIO, 307  US 496,  514-18  (1939)  (Roberts writing for a plurality);  Clark

v  Community for  Creative Non-Violence, 468  US  288,  293-99  (1984).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  294 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

public  "from  time  immemorial";  here  the public  has  earned  a kind
of First Amendment  easement.  Courts  will uphold  reasonable  regu-
lations,  but government  cannot  eliminate  the  basic  right  of  access.
The  same  rules  apply to  other  areas  if they  have  been  "dedicated"
to  the  public,  that  is,  if  the  state  has  generally  opened  them  for
expressive  activities.  But  still  other  areas-and  this  is  a  very  large
category-need  not  be  open  at all.  Courts  will  uphold  any  restric-
tions  so  long  as  they  are  minimally  rational.

This  system  turns  on  common  law  rules.  It  gives  access  if the
area  has  been  "dedicated,"  by  tradition  or  practice,  for  public  ac-
cess,  and  this  determination  is  based  on  whether,  at  common  law,
the  area  in  question  was  held  open.'2 1  In  a period  in  which  streets
and  parks  were  principal  places  for  communicative  activity,  this
historical  test  was  sensible  functionally.  It  well  served  the  goal  of
the  public  forum  doctrine,  which  was  the  creation  of  access  rights
to  places  where  such  rights  were  most  effective  and  crucial.

The  streets  and  parks  no  longer  carry  out  their  common  law
roles.  Other  areas-mailboxes,  airports,  train  stations,  broadcast-
ing  stations-are  the  modern  equivalents  of streets  and  parks.  It  is
here  that  current  doctrine  is  ill-suited  to  current  needs.  To  keep
the  streets  and  parks  open  is surely important,  but it  is not enough
to  allow  broadly  diverse  views  to reach  the  public. For  this  reason
the  Court  should  abandon  the  common  law  test  and  look  instead
to  whether  the  government  has sufficiently  strong  and  neutral  rea-
sons  for  foreclosing  access  to  the  property.'22  Certainly  airports
and  train  stations  should  be  open  to  communicative  efforts.

7.  Content-based  versus  content-neutral  restrictions.

We  would  also  need  to  reassess  the  distinction  between  con-
tent-based  and  content-neutral  restrictions  on  speech-the  most
central  distinction  in  contemporary  free  speech  law.

Under  current  law,  the  Court  views  with  considerable  skepti-
cism  any  law that  makes  the  content  of speech  relevant  to  restric-
tion.  If, for  example,  Congress  tries  to  prevent  speech  dealing  with
a war  from  appearing  on billboards,  it  is  probably  acting  unconsti-
tutionally.  By  contrast,  if  Congress  bars  all  speech  on  billboards,
courts  will  subject  the  measure  to  a  balancing  test,  because  this
type  of  restriction  on  speech  is  content-neutral.  It  does  not  skew

"I  See  Davis v  Massachusetts, 167  US  43,  47-48  (1897),  where  this  idea  is  explicit.
122  Grayned v  Rockford,  408  US  104,  115-18  (1972).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  295 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law  Review

[59:255

the  thinking  process  of the  community,  and  it  is  unlikely to  reflect
an  impermissible  governmental  motivation. 12 3

There  is  a  great  deal  to  be  said  in  favor  of this  conception  of
neutrality. 124 In  certain  respects, however,  it  reproduces  the  frame-
work  of the  Lochner era.  It  takes  the  market  status  quo  as  natural
and  just insofar  as  it  bears  on  speech.  It  sees  partisanship  in  gov-
ernment  decisions  to  alter  that  status  quo,  and  neutrality  in  deci-
sions  that  basically  respect  it.  But  there  may  be  no  neutrality  in
use  of  the  market  status  quo  when  the  available  opportunities  are
heavily  dependent  on wealth, on the  common  law framework  of en-
titlements,  and  on  the  sorts  of  outlets  for  speech  that  are  made
available,  and  to  whom.  In  other  words,  the very  notions  "content-
neutral"  and  "content-based"  seem  to depend  on taking  the  status
quo  as  if  it  were  preregulatory  and  unobjectionable.

At least  two  things  follow.  The first  is  that many content-neu-
tral  laws  have  content-differential  effects.12 5  They  do  so  because
they  operate  against  a  backdrop  that  is  not  prepolitical  or  just. In
light  of  an  unjust  status  quo,  rules  that  are  content-neutral  can
have  severe  adverse  effects  on  some  forms  of  speech.  Greater  scru-
is  therefore  appropriate.'2 6
tiny  of  content-neutral  restrictions 
Above  all,  courts  should  attend  to  the  possibility  that  seemingly
neutral  restrictions  will  have  content-based  effects.  The  govern-
ment's  refusal  to  allow  Lafayette  Park  (across  the  street  from  the
White  House)  to  be  used  as  a  place  for  dramatizing  the  plight  of
the  homeless 127  is  a  prominent  example.

is  that  such  regulation  "skews" 

Second,  we  should  draw  into  question  a  familiar  justification
for  skepticism  about  content-based  regulation  of  speech.  That jus-
tification 
the  marketplace  of
ideas.  '  This idea  has  two  infirmities.  First, we  do  not  know  what
a well-functioning  marketplace  of  ideas  would  look  like.  The  pre-
conditions  of an economic  marketplace  can be  specified  by neoclas-
sical  economics;  the  same is  not  true for  the  preconditions  of a sys-
tem  of  free  expression. 2 9  Second,  the  idea  depends  on  taking  the
"marketplace"  as  unobjectionable  in  its  current  form.  If it  is  al-
ready  skewed,  content-based  regulation  may  be  a  corrective.  It

123  Geoffrey  R.  Stone,  Content Regulation and the First Amendment,  25  Wm  & Mary

L  Rev  189,  202,  208-09,  217-18,  227-28  (1983).

124  Id.
125  Id  at  217-27.
'2  See  Stone,  54  U  Chi  L Rev  at 82  (cited  in  note  18).
127 Clark, 468  US  at 289,  295-99.
128  See  Stone,  54  U  Chi  L Rev  at 55  (cited  in  note  18).
129 See  Strauss,  91  Colum  L  Rev  at  349  (cited  in  note  42).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  296 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

would  be  exceptionally  surprising  if  there  were  no  such  skewing.
The  point  bears  especially  on  the  debate  over pornography,  where
critics  often  say  that  the  "preregulatory"  status  quo  is  in  fact  a
regulatory  system-one 
favor  of  sexual
inequality. '3

is  skewed 

that 

in 

In  general,  the  existence  of an  unjust  status  quo  is  not a good
reason to  allow  content  regulation.  For  one  thing,  any  inquiry into
the  speech  status  quo  is  probably  beyond  governmental  capacity.
There  is  a  serious  risk  that  judicial  or  legislative  decisions  about
the  relative  power  of  various  groups,  and  about  to  whom  redistri-
bution  is  owed,  will  be  biased  or  unreliable.  Judgments  about  who
is  powerful  and  who  is  not must  refer  to  some  highly  controversial
baseline.  The  resulting judgments  are  not easily  subject  to  govern-
mental  administration.  Indeed,  government  will inevitably  be  oper-
ating  with  its  own  biases,  and  those  biases  will  affect  any  regula-
tory  strategy.  This  risk  seems  unacceptable  when  speech  is  at
stake.

What  is  distinctive  about regulation  of speech  is  that such  reg-
ulation  forecloses  the  channels  of  change;  it  prevents  other  views
from  being  presented  at  all.  Instead  of  allowing  restrictions,  we
should  encourage  efforts  to  promote  a  better  status  quo. 3 '  I  have
discussed  some  of  these 
in  connection  with  the  broadcasting
market.

8.  "Unconstitutional  conditions"?

Finally,  it  would  be  necessary  to  reemphasize  that  there  are
limits  on  government's  power 
to  affect  deliberative  processes
through  the  use  of  government  funds.  On  this  point,  it  is  excep-
tionally  hard  to  unpack  the  Court's  cases.  Some  of these  decisions
suggest  that  when  allocating  funds,  government  cannot  discrimi-
nate  on the  basis  of point of view.  It  would  follow that government
could  not allocate  funds  only  to  people  who will speak  in favor  of a
certain  cause.  Other  cases  draw  a  distinction  between  a  "subsidy"
and  a  "penalty,"  permitting  government  to  refuse  to  subsidize
speech,  but prohibiting  government  from  penalizing  it.

The  Court's  most  recent  decision  suggests  that  so  long  as  the
government  is  using  its  own  money  and  is  not  affecting  "private"

"  See  Catharine  A.  MacKinnon,  Francis Biddle's Sister: Pornography, Civil  Rights
and Speech,  in  MacKinnon,  Feminism Unmodified: Discourses on Life  and  Law  163-97
(Harvard,  1987).

'1'  Of  course  it is  necessary  to defend  the  characterization  of any  change  as a  "restric-

tion."  See  Section  II.B.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  297 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law  Review

[59:255

expression,  it  can  channel  its  funds  however  it  wishes.  The  prob-
lem  in  Rust  v  Sullivan"'  arose  when  the  Department  of  Health
and  Human  Services  issued  regulations  banning  federally  funded
family  planning  services  from  engaging  in  (a)  counseling  concern-
ing,  (b)  referrals  for,  and  (c)  activities  advocating  abortion  as  a
method  of family  planning.  The  plaintiffs  claimed  that these  regu-
lations violated  the First  Amendment,  arguing  that the  regulations
discriminated  on  the  basis  of  point  of  view.

The  Court  disagreed.  In  the  key  passage,  it  said,

The  Government  can,  without  violating  the  Constitution,  se-
lectively  fund  a  program  to  encourage  certain  activities  it  be-
lieves  to  be  in  the  public  interest,  without  at  the  same  time
funding  an  alternate  program  which  seeks  to  deal  with  the
problem  in  another  way.  In  so  doing, the  Government  has  not
discriminated  on  the  basis  of  viewpoint;  it  has  merely  chosen
to  fund  one  activity  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other. 133

In  response  to  the  claim  that  the  regulations  conditioned  the  re-
ceipt  of  a benefit  on  the  relinquishment  of  a right,  the  Court  said
that  "here  the  government  is  not denying  a  benefit  to  anyone,  but
is  instead  simply  insisting  that  public  funds  be  spent  for  the  pur-
poses  for  which  they  were  authorized.' ' 3 4

Rust seems  to  establish  the  important  principle  that  govern-
ment can  allocate  funds to  private  people  to  establish  "a  program"
that accords  with  the government's  preferred  point  of view.  In fact
the  Court  seems  to  make  a  sharp  distinction  between  government
coercion-entry  into  the  private  realm  of  markets  and  private  in-
teractions-and  funding  decisions.  So  made,  this  distinction  repli-
cates  pre-New  Deal  understandings.  But  there  is  no  fundamental
distinction  among  the law that  underlies markets,  the law that rep-
resents  disruption  of  markets,  and  the  law  that  calls  for  funding

'3,  111  S  Ct  1759  (1991).

"s  Id  at  1772.  The  Court  added:

To  hold  that  the  Government  unconstitutionally  discriminates  on  the  basis  of  view-
point when  it  chooses  to  fund  a  program  dedicated  to  advancing  certain  permissible
goals,  because  the  program  in  advancing  those  goals  necessarily  discourages  alternate
goals,  would  render  numerous  government  programs  constitutionally  suspect.  When
Congress  established  a  National  Endowment  for  Democracy  to encourage  other  coun-
tries  to  adopt  democratic  principles  ... 
it  was  not  constitutionally  required  to  fund  a
program  to encourage  competing  lines  of political  philosophy  such  as  Communism  and
Fascism.

Id  at 1773.

3I  Id  at  1774.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  298 1992

19921

Free Speech Now

decisions.  Courts must  assess all  of them in terms  of their  purposes
and  effects  for  free  speech. 135

Notwithstanding  the  apparent  implications  of  Rust,  it  would
be  intolerable  to  say that  government  can  target  funds,  or jobs, or
licenses,  or anything  else  that it  owns  only  for speech  with which  it
agrees.  Suppose,  for  example,  that the  government  decides  to  fund
only  those  projects  that  speak  favorably  of  Democrats.  However
government  is  acting,  the  First  Amendment  constrains  the  pur-
poses  for which  government  may  act,  and  the  effects  of  its  actions.
The  notion  that  the  First  Amendment  is  directed  only  at  criminal
punishment  or  civil  fines  depends  on  an  outmoded  notion  of what
government  does,  and  on  a  pre-New  Deal  understanding  of "inter-
ference"  with  constitutional  rights.  A  government  decision  to spon-
sor  speech  favorable  to  one  or  another  party  platform  would  run
afoul  of  a  central  commitment  of  the  First  Amendment.

For  this  reason  funding  decisions  that  discriminate  on the  ba-
sis  of  viewpoint  are  at  least  ordinarily  impermissible. 1 6  The  pro-
position  that  government  may  allocate  funds  however  it  chooses  is
rooted  in  anachronistic  ideas  about  the  relationship  between  the
citizen  and  the state.  It  poses  a genuine  threat to  free  speech under
modern  conditions.

D.  Conclusion:  A  New  Deal  For  Speech

A  reformulation  of  First  Amendment  doctrine  of  this  general
sort  has  much  to  be  said  in  its  favor.  Above  all,  such  a  reformula-
tion  would  reinvigorate  processes  of  democratic  deliberation,  by

13 This is  not to say  that we  should  treat funding decisions  the same  as  other decisions.
From  first  principles,  the  development  of  constitutional  limits  on  funding  that  affects
speech  raises  exceedingly  complex issues,  and I  restrict  myself to a  few  observations  here. A
key  feature  of funding  is  that  government  must  be  selective  in  dispensing  money,  and  the
inevitability  of  selection  means  that certain  judgments  will  be  acceptable  here  that  would
not  be  acceptable  elsewhere.  With  respect  to  the  arts,  for  example,  judgments  involving
esthetics  and  subject  matter  seem  unavoidable.  A  more  detailed  discussion, of government
funding  of speech  and  the arts can  be  found  in  Cass R.  Sunstein,  Why  the Unconstitutional
Conditions Doctrine is An  Anachronism, 70  B  U  L  Rev  593,  610-15  (1990).

"'  Rust  v  Sullivan is  an  unusual  case,  on  its  facts.  (1)  It  plausibly  involves  "private

speech"-counseling-rather  than  public  or  political  speech.  Private  speech  is  subject  to
more  deferential  scrutiny. See  Connick v  Myers, 461  US  138  (1983).  (2)  It  involves the abor-
tion  context,  where  the  government  has  a  legitimate  interest  in  protecting  fetal  life.  See
Maher v  Roe, 432  US  464 (1977).  (3)  The  speech  restriction  in Rust might  be  seen  as ancil-
lary  to  the prohibition  on  government  funding of abortion.  For these  reasons  we  may  doubt
whether  Rust  will  extend  to  viewpoint  discrimination  with  respect  to  public,  political
speech;  instead,  it  involved  a  limitation  on  a  governmentally  funded  private  counseling
program.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  299 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

ensuring  greater  attention  to  public  issues  and  greater  diversity  of
treatment  of  those  issues.

the 

Some  qualifications  are necessary  here. A  system  of markets  in
speech-surrounded  by 
law  of  property,  contract,  and
tort-has  major  advantages  over  other  forms  of  regulation.  Such
systems  are  content-neutral,  at  least  on  their  face.  This  is  an  im-
portant  point, above  all because  in markets,  no  government  official
is  authorized  to  decide,  in  particular  cases,  who  will  be  allowed  to
speak.  There  is  no need  to  emphasize  the risk  of bias  when govern-
ment  decides  that  issue.

In  addition,  markets  are  highly  decentralized.  With  respect  to
both  the  print  and  electronic  media,  there  are  numerous  outlets.
Someone  unable  to  find  space  in  the  New  York  Times  or  on  CBS
may  well  be  able  to  find  space  elsewhere.  A  great  advantage  of  a
market  system  is  that  other  outlets  generally  remain  available.  At
least  some other forms  of regulation  do not have  this  salutary  char-
acteristic.  In  any case  it is  important to  ensure  that  any regulation
does  not foreclose  certain  points  of  view.

But  our  current  system  of  free  expression  does  not  serve  the
Madisonian  ideal.  Free  markets  in  expression  are  sometimes  ill-
adapted  to the  American  revision  of the principle  of sovereignty.  If
we  are  to  realize  that  principle,  a  New  Deal  for  speech,  of the  sort
outlined  above,  would  be  highly  desirable.13 7

"a  There  is  no  argument  here  that government  may  silence  "the  powerful"  to protect
"the  powerless."  Such  a  position  would  create  a  legitimate  risk  that judicial  or  legislative
decisions  about the  relative  power of various  groups,  and  about who  should  receive  redistri-
bution, will  be  biased  or unreliable.  Judgments  about who  is  powerful  and  who  is  not  must
refer  to some  baseline.  That  baseline  will  of course  be  politically  contested.  When  the pow-
erful  are free  to redistribute  speech,  it  is likely  they will  distribute  it  in ways  that advantage
them.  The  resulting judgments  are  not  easily  subject  to governmental  administration.  This
risk  seems  unacceptable.

Moreover,  we  should regard  a  decision  to  silence  the  views  of the powerful  as an  objec-
tionable  interference  with  freedom,  even  if  it  might  promote  the  goal  of equality.  Well-off
people  might  not have  any  strong claim  of right to distributions  of wealth and  property  that
the  common  law  grants  them;  but surely  they  have  a  right to  complain  if they  are  silenced.
It  is  obvious  that what  they  have  to say  may  turn  out  to  be  correct,  may  spur  better  ap-
proaches  to  current  problems,  or may  add  a great deal  to the debate  simply by  virtue  of the
reasons  offered  by  those  who  respond.

These  are  the  most  conventional  Millian  arguments  for  the  distinctiveness  of  speech.
See Mill,  On Liberty at 20-21  (cited in  note 28).  They  do not  apply to  the recommendations
set out  here.  These  recommendations  turn not  on  "power"  or  on  "silencing  the  powerful,"
but  on  the application  of First  Amendment  scrutiny  to  all  legal rules.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  300 1992

1992]

1ree  Speech Now

III.  AN  ALTERNATIVE  PROPOSAL:  THE  PRIMACY  OF  POLITICS

Instead  of  or  in  addition  to  renovating  the  free  speech  tradi-
tion  in  this  way,  we  might  offer  a  more  cautious  proposal.  The
most  fundamental  step  would  involve  an  insistence  on the  original
idea  that the  First Amendment  is  principally  about political  delib-
eration. '38  The  fact  that  words  or  pictures  are  involved  is  not,
standing  by  itself, a sufficient  reason  for  full  constitutional  protec-
tion.  Bribery,  criminal  solicitation, 
threats,  conspiracies,  per-
jury-all  these  are  words,  but they  are  not  by  virtue  of  that  fact
entitled  to  the highest  level  of constitutional  protection.  They may
be  regulated  on  the  basis  of  a  lesser  showing. of  harm  than  is  re-
quired  for  political  speech.1 39  They are  not  entirely without  consti-
tutional  protection-they  count  as  "speech"-but  they  do  not  lie
within  the  core  of  the  free  speech  guarantee.140

A.  Theory

1.  The  two-tier  First  Amendment;  and  a  note  on  autonomy.

In  order  to  defend  this  proposal,  we  must  explore  whether
there  should  be  a  two-tier  First  Amendment.  The  view  that  some
forms  of  speech  are  less  protected  than  others  is  frequently  met
with  alarm.  Notwithstanding  its  controversial  character,  this  view
derives  strong  support from  existing  law.  Indeed  every  Justice  has
expressed  some  such  view  within  the  last  generation.

'  See  Meiklejohn,  Free Speech  and Its Relation to  Self-Government  at 94  (cited  in

note  1):

The  guarantee  given  by  the  First Amendment  is  not  ... 
assured  to all  speaking.  It  is
assured  only to speech  which  bears,  directly  or indirectly,  upon  issues  with which  vot-
ers  have  to  deal-only,  therefore,  to  the  considerations  of  matters  of public  interest.
Private  speech,  or private interest in  speech,  on  the other  hand,  has no  claim  whatever
to  the  protection  of the  First  Amendment.
139 Alexander  Meiklejohn,  the  greatest  philosopher  of  the  First  Amendment,  was  em-
phatic  on  the  point, distinguishing  between  "a  private  right  of speech  which  may  on  occa-
sion  be  denied  or  limited,  though  such  limitations  may  not  be  imposed  unnecessarily  or
unequally"  and  "the  unlimited  guarantee  of  the  freedom  of  public  discussion."  Id  at 39.
"There  are,  then,  in  the  theory  of the  Constitution,  two  radically  different  kinds  of utter-
ances.  The constitutional  status of a merchant advertising his  wares,  of a  paid lobbyist fight-
ing  for  the advantage  of his  client, is utterly different  from  that of a citizen  who  is planning
for  the  general  welfare."  Id.

140  Here  I  depart from  Meiklejohn,  who believed  that nonpolitical  speech  was  not  cov-
ered  by  the  First  Amendment  at all.  Much  of the  analysis  in  this  section  is  devoted  to  an
exploration  of how  to  protect  nonpolitical  speech  in  a  two-tier  First  Amendment.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  301 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

For  example,  the  Supreme  Court  accords  less  than  complete
protection  to  commercial  speech.14'  It  excludes  obscenity  from
First  Amendment  protection  altogether.'4 2  It  treats  libel  of private
persons  quite  differently  from  libel  of  people  who  are  public
figures. 43  The  fact  that  the  First  Amendment  does  not  protect
conspiracies,  purely  verbal  workplace  harassment  of  individuals  on
the  basis  of  race  and  sex,  bribery,  and  threats  appears  to  owe
something  to  a  distinction  between  political  and  nonpolitical
speech.

The  Court  has  yet to  offer  a  clear  principle  to  unify  the  cate-
gories  of  speech  that  it  treats  as  "low  value."  Indeed  the  apparent
absence  of  a unifying  principle  is a  source  of continuing  frustration
to  scholars  of  free  speech  law.  But  at least  it  seems  clear  that  all
the  categories  of  low-value  speech  are  nonpolitical.""

Thus  far,  then,  we  see  that  the  Supreme  Court  understands
the  First  Amendment  to  have  two  tiers.  But  is  a  two-tier  First
Amendment  inevitable,  or  desirable?  It  does  indeed  seem  that any
well-functioning  system  of  free  expression  must  ultimately  distin-
guish  between  different  kinds  of  speech  by reference  to  their  cen-
trality  to  the  First  Amendment  guarantee.'4 5

For  example,  courts  should  not  test  regulation  of  campaign
speeches  under the  same standards  applied  to  misleading  commer-
cial  speech,  child  pornography,  conspiracies,  libel  of  private  per-
sons,  and  threats. 4 6  If the  same standards  were  applied,  one of two
results  would  follow,  and  both  are  unacceptable. 4 7

The  first possible  result would be  to lower  the  burden  of justi-
fication  for  governmental  regulation  as  a  whole,  so  as  to  allow  for
restrictions  on  misleading  commercial  speech,  private  libel,  and  so
forth.  If  this  were  the  consequence,  there  would  be  an  unaccept-

"'  Central Hudson Gas v  Public Service Commission of New  York,  447  US  557,  562-63

(1980);  Posadas de  Puerto Rico  Associates v  Tourism Co.,  478 US  328,  340  (1986).

'  Miller v  California, 413  US  15,  23  (1973)  ("categorically  settled").
113  Gertz v  Robert  Welch, Inc., 418  US  323,  342-48  (1974);  see  also Milkovich  v  Lorain

Journal Co.,  110  S  Ct  2695,  2703-04  (1990).

.. This  is  so  at  least  in  the  sense  that I understand  the term  "political"  here.

"'  See  Thomas  M.  Scanlon,  Jr., Freedom of Expression and Categories of Expression,

40  U  Pitt  L Rev  519  (1979).

Id  at 537-39.

147  It 

is  tempting,  and  possible,  to  classify  some  speech  as  unprotected  because  it  is
"really"  action.  But this is  unhelpful.  Conspiracies  and  bribes are  speech,  not action.  If they
are  to be  treated  as  action-that  is,  if they  are  not to  be  protected-it  is because  of their
distinctive  features.  This  is  what  must  be  discussed.  The  word  "action" 
is  simply  a
placeholder  for  that  unprovided  discussion.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  302 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

ably  high threat to  political  expression.  A generally  lowered burden
of justification  would  therefore  be  intolerable.

The  second  possible  result  is  that  courts  would  apply  the
properly  stringent  standards  for  regulation  of  political  speech  to
commercial  speech,  private  libel,  and  child  pornography.  The  cen-
tral  problem with  this approach  is that  it  would  mean  that govern-
ment  could  not  control  speech  that  should be  regulated.  A  system
in  which  the  most  stringent  standards  were  applied  across  the
board  would  mean that  government  could  not regulate  criminal  so-
licitation,  child  pornography,  private  libel,  and  false  or  misleading
commercial  speech, among  others.  The harms  that justify  such  reg-
ulation  are  real,  but  they  are  insufficient  to  permit  government
controls  under  the  extremely  high  standards  applied  to  regulation
of  political  speech.  If courts  are  to  be  honest  about  the  matter,  an
insistence  that  "all  speech  is  speech"  would  mean  that  they  must
eliminate  many  currently  unobjectionable  and  even  necessary  con-
trols-or  more likely  that judgments  about value, because  unavoid-
able,  would  continue  to  be  made,  but  covertly.

If courts  must draw  a distinction  between  low-  and  high-value
expression,  the  many  efforts  to  understand  the  First  Amendment
as  a protection  of  "autonomy"  may  be  doomed  to  failure.'48  Some
have  suggested,  for  example,  that  the  free  speech  principle  guards
the  autonomy  of  speakers  or  of  listeners. 14 9  I  must  be  tentative
here,  but  it  seems  likely that  any  autonomy-based  approach  would
make  it  difficult  or  impossible  to  distinguish  between  different  cat-
egories  of  speech.' 50  Autonomy,  taken  in  the  abstract,  seems  to  ar-
gue  in  favor  of similar protection  of  all, or  most, forms  of speech.' 5

1

148  See  Thomas  Scanlon,  A  Theory  of Freedom of  Expression, 1 Phil  & Pub  Aff  204,
214-15  (1972);  Strauss,  91  Colum  L Rev  at 353-60  (cited in  note 42);  Martin  H.  Redish,  The
Value  of Free Speech,  130  U  Pa  L  Rev  591,  625  (1982).  Especially  notable,  it  is  for  this
reason  that Scanlon  revised  his  own  earlier  position,  see Scanlon,  40  U Pitt L  Rev at 533-34
(cited  in  note  145);  See  also  Charles  Fried,  The  New  First Amendment  Jurisprudence: A
Threat to Liberty, 59  U  Chi  L  Rev  225,  233  (1992).

"4  Strauss,  91  Colum  L  Rev  at  335-36  (cited  in  note  42).
180 It might be  tempting to ask  whether  the speech  in  question  is cognitive  or  affective,
and  to  accord  protection  only  to  the  former.  Some  of  the  Court's  opinions  can  be  so  read.
See,  for  example,  Chaplinsky v  New  Hampshire, 315  US  568,  573-74  (1942).  But  such  an
approach  would  be  unacceptable.  It would  disregard  the fragility  of the  distinction  between
the affective  and  the cognitive;  see  Martha  C.  Nussbaum,  Love's Knowledge, Essays on Phi-
losophy and Literature 291-97  (Oxford,  1990).  There  are  important  affective  components  of
much  political  speech,  or  speech  that  is  high-value  by  any  measure;  and  many  forms  of
speech  accorded  a  lower-level  of protection-like  commercial  speech  and  private  libel-are
surely  cognitive.

1'  But  see  note  153.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  303 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

Moreover,  an approach  rooted in a norm  of autonomy makes  it
difficult  to  understand  what is  special  about  speech. 5 2  Many  acts,
like most speech,  serve  the goal  of autonomy  as  it  is usually  under-
stood  by  advocates  of  an  autonomy-based  conception  of  the  First
Amendment. 5 3  If autonomy  in  the  abstract  is  the  principle,  there
appears  to  be  nothing  distinctive  about  speech  to  explain  why  it
has  been  singled  out  for  constitutional  protection.  An  approach  to
the First  Amendment  that  does  not  account  for  the  distinctiveness
of  speech  would  be  untrue  to  constitutional  text  and  structure.

2.  The  case  for  the  primacy, of politics.

We  must  still  decide  by  what  standard  courts  might  accom-
plish  the  task  of  distinguishing  between  low-value  and  high-value
speech.  To  support  an  emphasis  on  politics,  we  need  to  define  the
category  of  political  speech.  For  present  purposes  I  will  treat
speech  as  political  when it  is both intended and received as a con-
tribution to  public  deliberation about  some  issue.  It  seems  im-
plausible  to  think  that  words  warrant  the  highest  form  of  protec-
tion  if  the  speaker  does  not  even  intend  to  communicate  a
message;  the  First  Amendment  does  not  put gibberish  at  the  core
even  if it  is taken,  by  some  in the  audience,  to  mean  something. 54
By  requiring  intent,  I  do  not  mean  to  require  a trial  on  the  ques-
tion  of  subjective  motivation.  Generally  this  issue  can  be  resolved
simply  on  the basis  of the  nature  of the  speech  at issue.  By requir-
ing  that the  speech  be  received  as a  contribution  to  public  deliber-
ation,  I  do not  mean that  all  listeners  or  readers  must  see  the sub-
stantive  content.  It  is  sufficient  if some  do.  Many  people  miss  the
political  message  in  some  forms  of  political  speech,  especially  art
or  literature.  But  if no  one  sees  the  political  content,  it  is  hard  to
understand  why  the  speech  should  so  qualify.

Finally,  the  requirements  are  in  the  conjunctive,  though  in  al-
most  all  cases  speech  that  is  intended  as  a  contribution  to  public
deliberation  will  be  seen  by  some  as  such.  The  fact  that  speech  is

"5  Bork,  47  Ind  L  J  at  25  (cited in  note  17).

133  It  would  be  possible,  however,  to  have  a  more  refined  conception  of  autonomy.
Under  such  a  conception,  autonomy  is  not  a  right  to  say  and  do  what  you  "want,"  but
instead,  to  have  the  social  preconditions  for  autonomy,  understood  as  a  form  of  self-mas-
tery. This notion may  well  allow distinctions  among  different forms  of speech.  See  C.  Edwin
Baker,  Human  Liberty  and Freedom of  Speech  37-46  (Oxford,  1989);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,
Preferences and Politics, 20 Phil & Pub Aff  3,  11-14  (1991).  But it  will be very hard to  make
this  a  principle  for  speech.

I"  See  R.  George  Wright,  A Rationale from J.S. Mill for the Free Speech Clause, 1985

S  Ct  Rev  149.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  304 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

so  seen  by  some  is  insufficient  if it is  not so  intended;  consider, for
example,  commercial  speech,  obscenity,  or  private  libel.  If  some
people  understand  the  speech  in  question  to  be  a  contribution  to
public  deliberation,  it  cannot  follow  that  the  speech  qualifies  as
such  for  constitutional  purposes, without  treating  almost all speech
as political  and  therefore  destroying  the  whole  point of the two-tier
model.  Of  course  the  definition  I  have  offered  leaves  many  ques-
tions  unanswered,  and  there will be  hard intermediate  cases.  I  offer
it  simply  as  a  starting  point  for  analysis.

An  approach  that affords special  protection  to political  speech,
thus  defined,  is  justified  on  numerous  grounds.  Such  an  approach
receives  firm  support  from  history-not  only  from  the  Framers'
theory  of  free  expression,  but  also  from  the  development  of  that
principle  through  the  history  of  American  law.  There  can  be  little
doubt  that suppression  by the  government  of political  ideas  that it
disapproved,  or  found  threatening,  was  the  central  motivation  for
the  clause.  The  worst  examples  of unacceptable  censorship  involve
efforts  by  government  to  insulate  itself from  criticism.  Judicial  in-
terpretations  over  the  course  of  time  also  support  a  political  con-
ception  of  the  First  Amendment.1 5

5
This approach  seems  likely as  well to accord  with  our  initial  or
considered  judgments  about  particular  free  speech  problems.  Any
approach  to  the  First Amendment  will have  to  take  substantial  ac-
count of  those judgments,  and adjust  itself accordingly. 6'  It seems
clear  that  such  forms  of  speech  as  perjury,  bribery,  threats,  mis-
leading  or  false  commercial  advertising,  criminal  solicitation,  and
libel of private  persons-or  at least  most of these-are  not entitled
to  the  highest  degree  of  constitutional  protection.  No  other  ap-
proach  unifies  initial  or preliminary judgments  about these  matters
as  well  as  a political  conception  of  the  First Amendment.

In  addition,  an insistence  that government's  burden  is greatest
when  political  speech is  at  issue responds  well to  the fact  that here
government  is  most  likely  to  be  biased.  The  presumption  of  dis-

15  See  Levy,  Emergence of a  Free Press at  266-70  (cited  in  note  3).  Original  under-
standing  and  the  tradition  of legal  interpretation,  however,  are  not decisive.  The same  sup-
port  could  be  found  for  an  unacceptably  narrow  view  of  the  Equal Protection  Clause,  the
history  of which  suggests  validation  of  much  discrimination  on  the  basis  of sex  and  even
race.  But  a  position  is  surely  strengthened  if it  can  draw  on  a  good  historical  pedigree.

"  Thus  it  is not  unprincipled  or merely  convenient  to  adjust a  theory  when  it  proves
to  deal  inadequately  with  particular  cases.  Sometimes  the  adequacy  of the  theory  is  itself
tested by  how  well  it conforms to initial or considered  judgments  about particular  outcomes.
See  John  Rawls,  A  Theory  of  Justice  48-51 
(discussing  reflective
equilibrium).

(Harvard,  1971) 

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  305 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law  Review

[59:255

trust of  government  is  strongest  when  politics  are  at  issue.'5 7  It  is
far weaker  when  government  is regulating  (say) commercial  speech,
bribery,  private  libel,  or  obscenity.  In  such  cases  there  is  less  rea-
son  to  suppose  that  it  is  insulating  itself from  criticism. 15 8

Finally, this  approach  protects  speech  when  regulation  is  most
likely  to  be  harmful.  Restrictions  on  political  speech  have  the  dis-
tinctive  feature  of  impairing  the  ordinary  channels  for  political
change;  such  restrictions  are  especially  dangerous.' 5 9  If  there  are
controls  on  commercial  advertising,  it  always  remains  possible  to
argue  that  such  controls  should  be  lifted.  If the  government  bans
violent  pornography,  citizens  can  continue  to  argue  against  the
ban.  But if the  government  forecloses  political  argument,  the  dem-
ocratic  corrective  is  unavailable.  Controls  on nonpolitical  speech  do
not  have  this  uniquely  damaging  feature.

Taken  in  concert,  these  considerations  suggest  that  govern-
ment  should  be  under  a  special  burden  of  justification  when  it
seeks  to  control  speech  intended  and  received  as  a  contribution  to
public  deliberation.  To  be  sure,  there  are  some  powerful  alterna-
tive  approaches.  Perhaps  we  should  conclude  that  speech  is  enti-
tled  to protection  if it  involves  rational thought.  This would  extend
beyond  the  political  to  include  not  merely  literary  and  artistic
work,  but  commercial  and  scientific  expression  as  well.  But  there
would  be  serious  problems  with  any  such  approach.  For  example,
we  should  probably not  give  technological  data with potential  mili-
tary  applications  the same  degree  of protection  as  political  speech;
nor  should  we  give  misleading  commercial  speech  the  same  protec-
tion  as  misleading  political  speech.

Alternatively,  one  might  think  that  the  free  speech  principle
includes  any  representation  that  reflects  deliberation  or  imagina-
tion  in  a way  that is  relevant  to  the  development  of individual  ca-
pacities. 60  No one  has  fully  elaborated  an  approach  of this  sort. It

"  See  Frederick  Schauer,  Free Speech:  a  Philosophical Enquiry 35,  39,  45  (Cam-

bridge,  1982).

558  As  work  in  public  choice  theory  has  shown,  there  are  possible  bad  incentives  else-

where  too. For  example, restrictions  on commercial  advertising  might  be  an effort by  a well-
organized  group to eliminate  competition.  But  this does not distinguish regulation  of speech
from  regulation  of  anything  else,  and  so  it  provides  no  special  reason  to  be  suspicious  of
government  regulation  of speech.  Regulation  of political speech,  by  contrast, raises  the spec-
ter  of governmental  efforts  to  suppress  criticism  of  its  own  conduct  and  is  therefore  more
likely  to  be  biased.

See  John  Hart  Ely,  Democracy and Distrust: A  Theory  of Judicial Review  75-77

(Harvard,  1980).

'  This  idea  could  reflect  Aristotelian  ideas  involving  the  development  of individual
capacities.  See  Amartya  Sen,  Commodities  and  Capabilities (Elsevier  Science,  1985);

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  306 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

would  carry  considerable  promise.  But  such  an  approach  would
make  it hard  to  distinguish  between  scientific  and  political  speech.
It  also  might  protect  such  things  as  child  pornography.

Much  work  must  be  done  to  elaborate  and  evaluate  alterna-
tives  of  this  sort. But  a  conception  of  free  speech  that  centers  on
democratic  governance  appears  to  be  the  best  way  to  organize  our
likely  to  raise  hard  First
considered 
Amendment  questions.

judgments  about  cases 

If  the  First  Amendment  offers  special  protection  to  political
speech,  we  must  of  course  reject  the  proposition  that  all  forms  of
speech  stand  on  the  same  ground.  It  would  be  necessary  to  draw
distinctions  between  obscenity  and  political  protest,  or  misleading
commercial  speech  and  misleading  campaign  statements,  or  proxy
statements  and  party platforms.  We  must  resort  far  less readily  to
the  view  that  a  restriction  on  one  form  of  speech  necessarily  will
lead  to  restriction  on  another.

3.  Counterarguments.

The difficulties  with  a political  conception  of the First  Amend-
ment  are  not  unfamiliar;  they  raise  all  of  the  questions  that  pro-
duced  the  current  First Amendment  preoccupation  with  line-draw-
ing.  How,  for  example,  are  we  to  treat  the  work  of  Robert
Mapplethorpe,  the  music  of  a  rock  group,  or  nude  dancing?  Both
commercial  speech  and  pornography  are  political  in  the  crucial
sense  that they reflect  and  promote  a point  of view,  broadly  speak-
ing  ideological  in  character,  about  how  to  structure  important
things  in  the  world.  The  recent  attack  on  pornography  has  drawn
close  attention  to  its  political  character,  and  thus  ironically  might
be  thought  to  invalidate  efforts  to  regulate  it. 161

Is  it  so  clear  that speech that  has nothing  to do  with politics  is
not entitled  to First  Amendment  protection?  Must  we  exclude  mu-
sic or  art or  science?' 6 2  Surely  it  is philistine'6 3  or  worse  to  say that

Martha  Nussbaum,  Aristotelian Social Democracy, in R.  Bruce  Douglass,  Gerald  M.  Mara,
and  Henry  S.  Richardson,  eds,  Liberalism and the  Good 203  (Routledge,  1990).  The  idea
has  no  clear  defenders  in  current legal  writing.

1,1  See  American Booksellers Association, Inc. v  Hudnut, 771  F2d  323,  325  (7th  Cir

1985).

in  note  1):

1"2  See  Meiklejohn,  Free Speech  and Its Relation to Self-Government at 99-100  (cited

We  have assumed that the studies of the "scholar"  must have,  in all respects,  the abso-
lute  protection of the First Amendment.  But with the  devising  of "atomic"  and  "bacte-
riological"  knowledge  for the  use  of, and  under the  direction  of, military forces,  we  can
now see  how loose  and inaccurate,  at this point,  our  thinking has  been....  It may  be,

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  307 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law  Review

[59:255

the  First  Amendment  protects  only  political  platforms.  Often  the
deepest  political  challenges  to  the  existing  order  can  be  found  in
art,  literature,  music,  or  sexual  expression."'  Sometimes  govern-
ment  attempts  to  regulate  these  things  for  precisely  this  reason.

These  are  hard  questions  without  simple  solutions.  I will  ven-
ture  only  some  brief  remarks  in  response.  The  first  is  that  we
should  not  take  the  existence  of  hard  line-drawing  problems  to
foreclose  an  attempt to  distinguish  between  political and  nonpoliti-
cal  speech.  If the  distinction  is  otherwise  plausible,  and  if  systems
that fail  to  make  it  have  severe  problems,  the  difficulty  of  drawing
lines  is  acceptable.

Even  more  fundamental,  there  is  no  way  to  operate  a  system
of  free  expression  without  drawing  lines.  Not  everything  that
counts  as  words  or pictures  is  entitled  to full  constitutional  protec-
tion.  The  question  is  not  whether  to  draw  lines,  but  how  to  draw
the  right  ones.

Second,  we  should  understand  broadly  the  category  of the  po-
litical.  The  definition  I  have  offered  would  encompass  not  simply
political  tracts,  but  all  art  and  literature  that  has  the  characteris-
tics  of  social  commentary-which  is  to  say,  much  art  and  litera-
ture.16 5  Much  speech  is  a  contribution  to  public  deliberation  de-
spite  initial  appearances.  In  addition,  it  is  important  to  create  a
large  breathing  space  for  political  speech  by protecting  expression
even  if  it  does  not  fall  unambiguously  within  that  category.  Both
Ulysses  and  Bleak  House  are  unquestionably  political  for  First
Amendment  purposes.  The  same  is  true  of  Robert  Mapplethorpe's
work,  which  attempts  to  draw  into  question  current  sexual  norms
and  practices,  and  which  bears  on  such  issues  as  the  right  of pri-
vacy  and  the  antidiscrimination  principle.

To  say  this  is  emphatically  not  to  say  that  speech  that  has
political  consequences  is  by  virtue  of  that  fact  "political"  in  the
constitutional  sense.  Obscenity  is  political  in  that  it  has  political
well-springs  and  effects;  the  same is  true of commercial  speech  and

therefore,  that the time has  come  when  the guarding of human welfare  requires  that we
shall abridge the  private  desire  of the scholar-or  of those  who  subsidize  him-to study
whatever  he  may  please .... 
As  I write  these  words,  I  am  not  taking  a  final  stand  on
the issue  which  is  here suggested.  But  I  am  sure  that the  issue  is  coming upon  us  and
cannot  be  evaded.  In  a rapidly  changing  world,  another  of our  ancient  sanctities-the
holiness  of research-has  been  brought  under  question.
"I' See  Richard  A.  Posner,  Sex  and Reason (Harvard,  1992).
1'  Sex  is  familiarly  a  metaphor  for  social  rebellion.  See,  for  example,  George  Orwell,

Nineteen Eighty-Four 126-27  (Harcourt,  1949).

165  See  generally  Nussbaum,  Love's Knowledge  (cited  in  note  150).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  308 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

even  bribery-certainly  bribery  of  public  officials.  An  employer's
purely  verbal  sexual  or  racial  harassment  of  an  employee  surely
has  political  consequences,  including  the  creation  of  a disincentive
for  women  and  blacks  to  go  to  that  workplace  at  all.  But  these
forms  of  speech  are  not  by  virtue  of  their  effects  entitled  to  the
highest  form  of constitutional  protection.  To say  that speech  is  po-
litical  for  First  Amendment  purposes  because  it  has  political
causes  and  effects  is  to  say  that  nearly  all  words  or  pictures  are
immunized  from  legal  regulation  without  the  gravest  showing  of
clear  and  immediate  harm.  For  reasons  suggested  above,  that  can-
not  be  right.

For  purposes  of  the  Constitution,  the  question  is  whether  the
speech  is  a  contribution  to  social  deliberation,  not  whether  it  has
political  effects  or  sources.  Thus,  for example,  there is  a  distinction
between  a misogynist  tract, which  is entitled  to  full protection,  and
pornographic  movies,  some  of  which  are  in  essence  masturbatory
aids  and  not  entitled  to  such  protection.  Personal,  face-to-face  ra-
cial  harassment  by  an  employer  of  an  employee  is  not  entitled  to
full  protection,16 6  while  a  racist  speech  to  a  crowd  is.  There  is  a
distinction  between  a  racial  epithet  and  a  tract  in  favor  of  white
supremacy.  An  essay about  the  value  of unregulated  markets  in  oil
production  should  be  treated  quite  differently  from  an  advertise-
ment  for  Texaco-even  if  an  oil  company  writes  and  publishes
both.

The  definition  I  have  offered  would  exclude  a  wide  variety  of
speech  from  the  category  of high-value  expression,  and for this rea-
son  might  be  thought  to  pose  an  unacceptable  danger  of  censor-
ship.  A  more  general  response  to  the  suggestion  that  the  core  of
the  First  Amendment  involves  politics  and  democracy  is  that  this
theory  would  provide  fragile  safeguards  for  art,  music,  literature,
and  perhaps  much  of  commercial  entertainment.  A  First  Amend-
ment  that  offers  so  little  protection  to  so  much  might  be  embar-
rassingly  weak  and  thin.  If the  exclusion  of  such  materials  results
from  a  theory  of  free  speech  that  the  Constitution's  text  does  not
compel,  perhaps  the  Court  should  repudiate  that  theory.

In  fact,  however,  there  would  remain  room  for  powerful  First
Amendment  challenges  to  most  regulatory  efforts.  No  speech  can
be  regulated  on  the  basis  of  whim  or  whimsy.  Something  stronger
than  rationality  review,  though  weaker  than  "strict  scrutiny,"  is

"  This  is  a  harder  question  if  it is  not personal.  It could,  however,  still  count  as har-
assment  under  current  law.  See  Balkin,  1990  Duke  L  J  at  414-28  (cited  in  note  21),  on
"captive  audience"  ideas  in  this  setting.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  309 1992

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[59:255

and  should  be  applied  to  low-value  expression.  Thus,  for  example,
commercial  speech  occupies  an  intermediate  category,  regulable
when  government  can  show  a  good  reason  and  a  solid  connection
between  the  means  of  regulation  and  the  reason  in  question.  The
same  should  be  true  for  scientific  speech  and  private  libel.

In addition,  the  government  may  not regulate  speech-or  any-
thing  else-on  the  basis  of  constitutionally  disfavored  justifica-
tions.  Frequently,  the  reason  for  regulating  speech  will  be  disfa-
vored  even  if the  speech  is  low-value.  Courts  could  not  permit  the
regulation  of pornography  if the  purpose  of the  regulation  is to  re-
press  a message  rather  than to  redress  genuine  harms. 167 The  First
Amendment  makes  certain  reasons  for  regulation  illegitimate,  and
this  is  so  even  if  those  reasons  are  invoked  against  low-value
speech.

Government  may  not regulate  speech  of any  kind  if the  reason
is that it  disapproves  of the message  or  disagrees  with the  idea that
the  speech  expresses.  Regulation  can  be justified  only by  reference
to  genuine  harms.  An  effort  to  regulate  music  because  it  is  "offen-
sive,"  or  because  it  stirs  up passionate  feeling,  would  run  afoul  of
the  Free  Speech Clause.  Of course  there  will be  hard cases  in  which
courts  have  to  decide  whether  a legitimate  justification  is  at  work.
The  resolution  of  these  cases  cannot  be  purely  mechanical.  But
even  if we  understand  the First  Amendment  as centrally  concerned
with  political  speech,  there  is  little reason  to  fear  that  this  under-
standing  would  permit  a  large  increase  in  official  censorship.

B.  Practice

This  approach  would  not  entail  substantial  change  in  existing
law.  It  would help  us  deal  with the new  controversies,  but  generally
would  not  unsettle  resolution  of  the  old  ones.  The  Court  has  al-
ready  created  categories  of speech  that are  less  protected  or unpro-
tected.  But the  Court  has  not given  a  sense  of the  unifying  factors
that  justify  the  creation  of  these  categories.  It  is  highly  revealing
that  political  speech  never  falls  within  them,  and  that  all  speech
that does  so  is  usually  not  political  in  the  sense  that  I understand
the  term.  The  principal  difference  between  the  approach  I suggest

167  It is sometimes  said that the goal  of anti-pornography  laws  is to suppress  pornogra-
phy's  message  about  women.  If  this  were  the  reason  for  such  laws,  they  would  indeed  be
unconstitutional.  I  do not  enter that debate  here.  See  Cass  Sunstein, Neutrality in Consti-
tutional Law  (With  Special  Reference  to  Pornography, Abortion, and  Surrogacy),  92
Colum  L  Rev  1,  18-29 
for  pornography
regulations).

(discussing  harm-based  arguments 

(1992) 

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  310 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

and  current  law  is  the  explicit  statement  that  nonpolitical  speech
occupies  a lower  tier-a statement  that the  Court has  yet to  make.
For  reasons  suggested  below,  it  is  unclear  that  even  this  would
make  much  of  a  difference.

There  are  several  areas  of controversy,  however,  where this ap-
proach  would  likely  lead  to  different  results  than  those  reached
under  current  law. The  suggested  approach  would  mean  that  libel
of public  figures  not  involved  in  governmental  affairs-famous  ac-
tors,  for  example-would  not  be  subject  to  special  constitutional
disabilities.  Current  law  sharply  constrains  celebrities  from  bring-
ing libel actions. 16  But there is no  special  interest in protecting  the
"breathing  space"  of  the  press  in  discussing  athletes  or  movie
stars.  On  what  principle  must  a  legal  system  provide  special
"breathing  space"  to  untruths  about  famous  people? 6 9  The  test
for  special  protection  should  be whethei  the  matter  bears  on  dem-
ocratic  governance,  not whether  the  plaintiff  is  famous.

Treatment  of  sexually  explicit  speech  also  would  diverge  from
current  doctrine.  Under  current  law,  such  speech  usually  receives
protection 170  if  it  has  significant  social  value,  even  if  scientific  or
literary rather  than  political.  An  emphasis  on  the  political  founda-
tions  of  the  First  Amendment  appears  to  threaten  this  basic  pro-
tection.  But under the  approach  I suggest,  courts  should invalidate
regulation  of sexually  explicit speech  in most cases.  As  discussed  in
more detail  below,  such  regulation  usually would be  unsupportable
by  reference  to  a legitimate  justification.' 7 1

The  securities  laws  would  raise  no  serious  question.  Indeed,
many  of  the  controversies  with  which  I  began  would  be  resolved
fairly  automatically.  The  only  real  exception  is hate  speech,  which
plausibly  has  political  content  in  that  it  is  a  self-conscious  state-
ment  about  how  to  resolve  current  political  controversies.  The
analysis  would  depend  on  the  extent  to  which  something  labelled
as  "hate  speech"  is  actually  intended  or  received  as  a  contribution

186  Gertz  v Robert  Welch,  Inc., 418  US  323,  342  (1974).
168  A  possible  response  would  be  that many  famous  people  have  governmental  associa-
tions of some  sort, and the  notion  of "public  figures"  is  designed  to  overcome  the difficulties
of  case-by-case  inquiries.  Also,  many  people  not  involved  in  government  are  involved  in
activities  in  which  the  public  is  legitimately  concerned  on  democratic  grounds.  Consider
attempted  bribery  of public  officials  by  corporate  executives.  Probably  the  best  approach,
suggested  by  Justice  Marshall,  would  involve  an  inquiry  into  whether  the  issue  is  one  of
legitimate  public interest or  concern.  See Rosenbloom v  Metromedia, Inc., 403  US  29,  43-44
(1971)  (Marshall  concurring).

"I  Miller v  California, 413  US  15,  26  (1973).
'7  Literature  is generally  protected,  see  text accompanying  note  165.  With  the  regula-

tion  of sexually  explicit  speech,  illegitimate  motives  are  likely  to be  at work.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  311 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

to  thought  about  a  public  matter.  This  approach  might  deprive
speech  of  protection  if  it  amounts  to  simple  epithets,  showing  vis-
ceral  contempt.  On  an  analogy  to  the  obscene  telephone  call,  a
public  university  can  prevent  students  and  teachers  from  using
words  in  a  way  that  is  not  plausibly  part  of  social  deliberation
about  an  issue.  But  racist,  homophobic,  or  sexist  speech,  even  if
offensive  and  harmful,  would not  be  regulable  so  long  as  it  is plau-
sibly part  of the  exchange  of ideas.  It  follows  that the speech  codes
of public  universities  are  generally  unconstitutional,  except  insofar
as  they  apply to  the  narrow  category  of  epithets.17 2

This  approach  would  also  suggest  that government  may  regu-
late  some  forms  of  scientific  speech.  For  example,  the  government
could  regulate  the  export  of  technology  with  military applications.
This  is so  even  though the  showing  of harm is  in such  cases  insuffi-
cient  under  the  standards  properly  applied  to  political  speech. 173
What  of  art and  literature?  The  fact  that  they  are  frequently
political-combined  with  the  severe  difficulty  of  evaluating  their
political  quality  on  an  ad  hoc  basis-argues  powerfully  in  favor  of
the  view that  generally  art and  literature  should  be taken  as "core"
speech.  When  government  seeks  to  censor  art  or  literature,  it  is
Salmost  always  because  of  the  political  content,  making  the  censor-
ship  impermissible.  Even  when  art or  literature  stands outside  the
core, government  cannot  attempt  to regulate  speech  because it  dis-
agrees  with  the  message.  The  First  Amendment  requires  a  legiti-
is  almost  always
mate  justification.  A  legitimate  justification 
lacking.

This  approach  would  solve  most  of  the  current  First  Amend-
ment  problems  without  making  it  necessary  to  enter  into  complex
debates  about power  and  powerlessness,  or  about neutrality  in  con-
stitutional  law.  It  would  also  draw  on  history,  on  the  best theories
about  the  function  of the  free  speech  guarantee,  and  on  a sensible
understanding  about  when  government 
is  least  likely  to  be
trustworthy.

IV..  NOTES  ON  FOUNDATIONS:  DELIBERATIVE  DEMOCRACY

Thus  far  I have  not  said  anything  general  about  the  functions
of the  free  speech guarantee  or  about the  conception  of democracy

72  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Ideas,  Yes;  Assaults, No,  The  American  Prospect  35,  37-38

'3  See Cass R.  Sunstein,  Government Control of Information, 74 Cal  L Rev 889,  905-12

(Summer  1991).

(1986).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  312 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

that  we  should  take  it to  embody.  A  few  remarks  are  therefore  in
order.

We  might  understand  the  American  constitutional  system  to
create  a  deliberative  democracy. 174  This  is  a system  that  combines
a  degree  of  popular  accountability  with  a  belief  in  deliberation
among  representatives  and  the  citizenry  at large.  The system  is not
designed  solely to  allow  the  protection  of private  interests  and  pri-
vate  rights.  Even  more  emphatically,  its  purpose  is  not to  furnish
the  basis  for  struggle  among  self-interested  private  groups.  That
notion  is  anathema  to  American  constitutionalism.

Instead,  the  system  is  intended  to  ensure  discussion  and  de-
bate  among  people  who  are  differently  situated,  in  a  process
through  which  reflection  will  encourage  the  emergence  of  general
truths.175  A  distinctive  feature  of American  republicanism  is  hospi-
tality  toward  heterogeneity,  rather  than  fear  of  it. Indeed,  it was
along  this axis  that the  antifederalists  and  federalists  most sharply
divided.  Thus the  antifederalist Brutus  insisted:  "In  a republic,  the
manners,  sentiments,  and interests  of the  people  should  be similar.
If this  be  not  the  case,  there  will  be  a  constant  clashing  of  opin-
ions;  and  the  representatives  of  one  part  will  be  continually  striv-
ing  against  those  of  the  other.' 1 76  Alexander  Hamilton  responded
that  in  a  heterogeneous  republic,  discussion  will  be improved;  "the
jarring  of  parties"  will  "often  promote  deliberation.' ' 7 7  The Feder-
alists  did  not  believe  that  heterogeneity  would  be  an  obstacle  to
political  discussion  and debate.  On the  contrary,  they  thought that
it was  indispensable  to  it.

In  the  American  tradition,  politics  is  not  a  process  in  which
desires  and  interests  remain  frozen,  before  or  during  politics.  In-
deed,  some  suggested  early  on that  national representatives  should
take  instructions  from their  constituents  and  vote accordingly.  The
First  Congress  rejected  the  proposal  on  the  ground  that  it  would
destroy  the  purpose  of  the  meeting. 7 8  That purpose  was  to  ensure
an  exchange  of views,  one that would actually  change  opinions.  We
should  understand  the  protection  accorded  to  free  speech  in  this

M Joseph M.  Bessette, Deliberative Democracy: The Majority Principle in Republican
Government, in  Robert  A.  Goldwin  and  William  A.  Schambra,  eds,  How Democratic is the
Constitution? 102,  112-16  (American  Enterprise  Institute,  1980);  Cass  R.  Sunstein, Interest
Groups in  American Public Law,  38  Stan  L Rev  29,  45-48  (1985).

17I  This  is  a  pragmatic  conception  of truth.  See,  for  example,  William  James, Pragma-

tism and the Meaning of  Truth 78-79  (Harvard,  1935).

'  Brutus  in  Herbert  J.  Storing,  ed,  The Complete Antifederalist 369  (Chicago,  1980).
'77  Federalist  70  (Hamilton)  in  The  Federalist Papers 471,  475  (Wesleyan,  1961).
'71  Joseph  Gales,  ed,  1  Annals  of Congress 733-45  (Gales  and  Seaton,  1834).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  313 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

[59:255

view.  Its  overriding  goal  is  to  allow  judgments  to  emerge  through
general  discussion  and  debate.

This  view  does  not  depend  on  a  sharp  distinction  between
public  interest  and private  interest, or  on an  insistence that private
interest  should  not  be  a  motivation  for  political  action.  We  need
only to  claim  that  the  provision  of  new information,  or  alternative
perspectives,  can  lead  to  new  understandings  of what  interests  are
and  where  they  lie.

In this sense,  conceptions  of politics  as an  aggregation  of inter-
ests,  or  as  a  kind  of  "marketplace," 
inadequately  capture  the
American  system  of  free  expression.  Aggregative  or  marketplace
notions  disregard  the  extent  to  which  political  outcomes  are  sup-
posed  to  depend  on  discussion  and  debate,  and  on  the  reasons  of-
fered  for  or  against  the various  alternatives.  The  First Amendment
is  the  central  constitutional  reflection  of the  commitment  to  these
ideas.  It  is  part  and  parcel  of  the  constitutional  commitment  to
citizenship.  This  commitment  must  be  understood  in  light  of  the
American  conception  of sovereignty,  placing governing  authority  in
the  people  themselves.

The  proposals  set  out above  flow  directly from  this  conception
of the  First Amendment.  The  belief that politics  lies  at  the  core  of
the  amendment  is  an  outgrowth  of  the  more  general  structural
commitment  to  deliberative  democracy.  The  concern  for  ensuring
the preconditions  for  deliberation  among  the citizenry  is  closely  as-
sociated  with  this commitment.  The  proposals  suggested  here  thus
fit  with  the  highest  aspirations  of the  constitutional  commitments
of  which  the  First  Amendment  is  the  most  tangible  expression.

Through  this  route,  we  have  come  far  from  the  basic  ideas
that  characterize  current  thinking  about  free  speech.  The  aversion
to  line-drawing  with  respect  to  speech  seems  to  lead  to  insoluble
conundrums.  It  is  better  to  be  candid  about  the  matter  and  to  in-
sist  that  as far  as  the  First  Amendment  is  concerned,  all  speech  is
not  the  same.  Threats  to  free  speech  do  come  from  government,
but  the  general  understanding  of  what  this  means  is  far  off  the
mark. Such  threats  do take  the  form  of  conventional,  highly  visible
censorship.  But  they also  take the form  of what  is in  some respects
the  same  thing-the  allocation  by  government  of  rights  of  prop-
erty,  ownership,  and  exclusion  that  determine  who  can  speak  and
who  cannot,  and  that  involve  the  use  of  civil  and  criminal  law  to
protect  the  rights  of exclusion.  Government  neutrality  is  the right
aspiration,  but properly  understood,  neutrality  does  not  mean  re-
spect for  rights  of speech  as  these  can  be  vindicated  in light  of the
existing  distribution  of rights  and  entitlements.  It  is  thus necessary

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  314 1992

1992]

Free Speech Now

to reform  all  of the  commitments  that, with respect  to speech,  have
come  to  represent  the  conventional  wisdom  in  many  circles.

CONCLUSION

Over  the  last  forty  years,  the  American  law  of  freedom  of
speech  has  experienced  a  revolution.  The  revolution  has  accom-
plished  enormous  good. A  return  to the  pre-1950  law  of free  speech
certainly  would  not  provide  a  better  understanding  of  the  free
speech  principle,  or  sufficiently  serve  other valuable  social  goals  to
justify  abandonment  of  the  current  approach.  In  the  bicentennial
year  of the  Bill  of Rights-a  period  in which  appreciation  for  free-
dom  of speech  is  exploding  throughout the  world-it  is  more  than
appropriate  to  celebrate  our  tradition  of  liberty,  and  to  recognize
the  extent 
is  an  extraordinary  and  precious
achievement.

to  which 

it 

At  the  same  time,  a  crucial  part  of  that achievement  involves
the  dynamic  and  self-revising  character  of  the  free  speech  tradi-
tion.  Our  existing  liberty  of expression  owes  much  of its  content to
the  capacity  of  each  generation  to  rethink  and  to  revise  the  under-
standings  that  were  left  to  it.  To  the  economists'  plea  that  "the
perfect  is  the  enemy  of  the  good,"  we  might  oppose  Dewey's  sug-
gestion  that  "the  better  is  too  often  the  enemy  of  the  still  bet-
ter.' 1 79  The  conception  of  free  speech  in  any  decade  of  American
history  is  often  quite  different  from  the  conception  twenty  years
before  or  after.

An  adherence  to  current  understandings  is  inadequate  to  re-
solve  current  controversies,  and  it  threatens  to  protect  both  more
and  less  free  speech  than  it  should.  It  is  inadequate  for  current
controversies,  because  it  is  poorly  adapted  to  the  problems  raised
by  campaign  finance  regulation,  scientific  speech,  regulation  of
broadcasting,  government  funding,  content-neutral  restrictions  on
speech,  hate  speech,  commercial  advertising,  and  pornography.  It
protects  more  than  it  should,  because  it  includes,  within  the  cate-
gory  of protected  expression,  speech  that serves  few  or none  of the
goals  for  which  speech  is  protected,  and  that  causes  serious  social
harms.  It  protects  less  than  it  should,  because  current  doctrine
does  not sufficiently  serve the  central  goal of  producing  a  delibera-
tive  democracy  among  political  equals.  Ironically,  the  existing  sys-
tem  owes many of its  failures  to the  supposed  mandates  of contem-
porary  conceptions  of  the  First  Amendment.

179  See  John  J. McDermott,  ed,  The Philosophy of John Dewey 652  (Chicago,  1973).

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  315 1992

The  University of  Chicago Law Review

In  this Article  I  have  suggested  two  changes  in  existing  under-
standings;  both  of  them  derive  from  the  American  contribution  to
the  theory  of  sovereignty.  First,  some  forms  of  apparent  govern-
ment  intervention  into  free  speech  processes  can  actually  improve
those  processes.  We  should  not understand  these  as  an  objectiona-
ble  intrusion  into  an  otherwise  law-free  social  sphere.  In  these
ways,  such  intervention  should  not  always  be  taken  as  an  imper-
missible  "abridgement"  of the  free  speech  right. Efforts  of this  sort
do  not represent  "positive"  government  action  intruding  on consti-
tutionally  protected  "negative"  liberty. s0

Instead  these  proposals  entail  a  democratic  recognition  of  the
dangers  to  free  speech  posed  by  content-neutral  restrictions  that
limit  access  to  arenas  in  which  expression  should  occur.  Current
doctrine  generally  recognizes  the  risks  posed  by content-neutral re-
strictions.  The  gap  lies  in  the  unwillingness  to  see  that  the  speech
"market"  is  a  product  of  law  subject  to  legislative  improvements
and  to  First  Amendment  constraints.  A  salutary  recognition  that
decentralized  markets  generally  are  indispensable  to  promote  lib-
erty-for  products  and  for speech-is  not inconsistent  with the  ba-
sic  claim.  Nor  is  that  recognition  inconsistent  with  the  view  that
the  creation  of markets  might,  on  some  occasions  and  in  some set-
tings,  itself  be  an  abridgement  of  free  speech.

Second,  we  should  understand  the  free  speech  principle  to  be
centered  above  all  on political  thought.  In this way  the free  speech
principle  should  always  be  seen  through  the  lens  of  democracy.
Government  may  regulate  other  forms  of  speech  not  on  a  whim,
and  not for  illegitimate  reasons,  but  on  the  basis  of a  lesser  show-
ing  of  harm.

Taken  together, these  principles  would  bring  about  significant
changes  in  the legal  treatment  currently  accorded  to  electoral  cam-
paigns,  electronic  broadcasting,  and  the  assertion  of  ownership
rights  in  order  to  exclude  political  speech.  In  their  most  modest
form,  the  principles  would  provide  a  major  step  toward  resolving
current  free  speech  controversies  without  requiring  serious  revi-
sions  in  existing  law.  Rightly  understood,  these  principles  might
counteract  the  novel,  sometimes  invisible,  and  often  serious  obsta-
cles  that  now  lie  in  the  path  of  free  speech  in  America,  and  that
promise  to  do  so  in  an increasingly  threatening  way  in  the twenty-
first  century.

ISO  Here  the analysis  in  Fiss,  71  Iowa  L  Rev  at 1423-24  (cited  in  note  21),  seems  to  be

off  the  mark.

HeinOnline  -- 59 U. Chi. L. Rev.  316 1992

