 Cass R. Sunstein* Was Justice Thurgood Marshall an egalitarian? I Did he believe that the Constitution should be used to produce "equality of result" for those he happened to favor? I write at a time when many people, especially those in the federal judiciary, believe that both questions should be answered with an emphatic "Yes." But it isn't so. Today, education is perhaps the most important function of state and local governments. Compulsory school attendance laws and the great expenditures for education both demonstate our recognition of the importance of * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. The author was law clerk to Justice Marshall during the 1979 Term. 1. I understand the term to refer to the idea that the state should not permit significant disparities in wealth, income, or other resources. As we will see, Justice Marshall's conception of equality embodied a far more limited and conservative set of ideals. This Court has applied similar reasoning to analogous situations in the field of education, the very subject now before us. Thus children and parents are deprived of the liberty protected by the Due Process Clause when the children are prohibited from pursuing certain courses, or from attending private schools and foreign-language schools. Such prohibitions were found to be unreasonable, and unrelated to any legitimate governmental objective. Just as a government may not impose arbitrary restrictions on the parent's right to educate his child, the government must not impose arbitrary restraints on access to the education which the government itself provides.... We have no hesitation in concluding that segregation of children in the public schools is a far greater restriction on their liberty than were the restrictions in the school cases discussed above. education to our democratic society. It is required in the performance of our most basic public responsibilities, even service in the armed forces. It is the very foundation of good citizenship. Today it is a principal instrument in awakening the child to cultural values, in preparing him for later professional training, and in helping him to adjust normally to his environment. In these days, it is doubful that any child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if he is denied the opportunity of an education.4 Brown was a case about education. In this, I believe, lies the clue to understanding the wellsprings of Marshall's life, work, and vision of the Constitution. [Whites and blacks] are fighting together and living together. For example, today they are working together in other places.... I know in the South where I spend most of my time, you will see white and colored kids going down the road together to school. They separate and go to different schools, and they come out and play together. I do not see why there would necessarily be any trouble if they went to school together. 6 We now take it for granted that after Brown, the Court rapidly repudiated the "separate but equal" doctrine not only in education, but across the board, in a series of per curiam opinions.7 But these cases should not obscure Marshall's focus on education, and the reasons for that focus. 4. Brown, 347 U.S. at 493. 5. Professor Mark Tushnet stresses this point: Achieving voting rights and eliminating kangaroo courts were important, of course, but segregated education was different. Every African-American in the South was subjected to segregated education in grossly inadequate schools. Segregated schools were perhaps the central symbol of African-American subordination, a visible and daily demonstration to children as they were growing up that whites did not consider them fit to associate with. MARK TUSHNET, THURGOOD MARSHALL, CIVIL RIGHTS LAWYER, 1908-1961, at 304 (forthcoming 1992). Second, education is central to the system of self-government: "Education may instill the interest and provide the tools necessary for political discourse and debate. Indeed, it has frequently been suggested that education is the dominant factor affecting political consciousness and participation."11 In this way, education is connected to the democratic aspirations of the American legal tradition. 8. In 1986, at the Judicial Conference of the Second Circuit, Justice Marshall repeated words I heard at the end of a clerks' reunion: [Tihe goal of a true democracy such as ours, explained simply, is that any baby born in these United States, even if he is born to the blackest, most illiterate, most unprivileged Negro in Mississippi, is, merely by being born and drawing his first breath in this democracy, endowed with the exact same rights as a child born to a Rockefeller. me that it isn't the type of goal we should try to get to as fast as we can. [a] statute that erects special obstacles to education in the path of the poor naturally tends to consign such persons to their current disadvantaged status. By denying equal opportunity to exactly those who need it most, the law not only militates against the ability of each poor child to advance herself or himself, but also increases the likelihood of the creation of a discrete and permanent underclass.' 5 Thus Marshall understood the Constitution to create a "right of every American to an equal start in life,"' 6 at least in the sense of a right that the state provide legitimate reasons for failing to provide equal educational opportunity. In this way, Marshall's work on the Court maintained deep continuity with his work on the school segregation cases. Thus the equal protection principle did not ban all racial differentiation. It did not require color-blindness. For Marshall, this precept was ahistorical; it was insufficiently attuned to the particular history behind the Civil War Amendments. The principal point of those Amendments was not to require that people who were similarly situated be treated "the same." Instead, Marshall thought that the core meaning of the Equal Protection Clause was that the government could not translate morally irrelevant differences into a form of second-class citizenship. It could not take skin color, or gender, and turn these into social disadvantages for blacks or women.' 8 It is highly misleading to say that this is a vision of the Fourteenth Amendment that favored the "rights of groups" over "the rights of individuals." In any ing) (reiterating his view that a child's education is a fundamental interest). To Marshall, the deepest irony of the modem attack on affirmative action was that it ripped the hard-won victories against racial discrimination entirely out of their particular historical context, when it was precisely that context that made the words ones of opprobrium. Thus for Marshall, the constitutional assault on affirmative action "pervert[ed] the intent of the Framers by substituting abstract equality for the genuine equality the Amendment was intended to achieve." '23 By "genuine equality," Marshall did not mean equality of result. Instead, he referred to a system in which the caste-like features of American society had been dismantled-a dismantling that was part and parcel of the attack, decades earlier, on Jim Crow. Hence his unusually personal last paragraph in Bakke: I fear that we have come full circle. After the Civil War our Government started several "affirmative action" programs. This Court in the Civil Rights Cases and Plessy v. Ferguson destroyed the movement toward complete equality. For almost a century no action was taken, and this nonaction was with the tacit approval of the courts. Then we had Brown and the Civil Rights Acts of Congress, followed by numerous affirmative-action programs. Now, we have this Court again stepping in, this time to stop affirmative-action programs of the type used by the University of California.24 Thus far I have suggested that Marshall's constitutional vision included concurring in part and dissenting in part). This principle is hardly egalitarian. It merely affords a basic minimum. It allows enormous variations in living standards. There is no evidence that Marshall objected to such variations. But it would not permit people to fall below a specified floor. Certainly Marshall believed that poor people could not be deprived of access to the basic institutions of a democratic society, including the political process, the judicial process, 26 and education. In an appropriate case, I think that he would also have held that the government could not constitutionally deprive people of the basic means of subsistence century creation. It was enthusiastically endorsed by both Thomas Jefferson and James Madison-a point worth emphasizing in a period in which the welfare state is often said to be inconsistent with our founding aspirations. Jefferson wrote: I am conscious that an equal division of property is impracticable. But the consequences of this enormous inequality producing so much misery to the bulk of mankind, legislators cannot invent too many devices for subdividing property, only taking care to let their subdivisions go hand in hand with the natural affections of the human mind.... Another means of silently lessening the inequality of property is to exempt all from taxation below a certain point, and to tax the higher portions of property in geometrical progression as they rise. Whenever there is in any country, uncultivated lands and unemployed poor, it is clear that the laws of property have been so far extended as to violate natural right. The earth is given as a common stock for man to labor and live on. parties": 1. By establishing a political equality among all. 2. By withholding unnecessary opportunities from a few, to increase the inequality of property, by an immoderate, and especially an unmerited, accumulation of riches. 3. By the silent operation of laws, which, without violating the rights of property, reduce extreme wealth towards a state of mediocrity, and raise extreme indigence towards a state of comfort. Marshall was not an egalitarian. But in his conception of the Constitution, courts were to assume an aggressive role in promoting equality of opportunity. At a minimum, that role entailed vigilance over discrimination with respect to education, probably even a right to education; an attack on caste systems; and a willingness to look skeptically at any state action that allowed people to be subject to desperate conditions. Even when courts are effective, there are serious problems in judge-led reform from the standpoint of democratic legitimacy. Reform through the courts may dampen the practice of citizenship, an individual and collective good. And if reform does not have a democratic pedigree, it may run into severe resistance. Such resistance may in turn undermine the very causes that the Court purports to favor. The judicial struggle with abortion may well be an example. It is at least plausible to think that Roe v. Wade 33 de 27. See Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 508, 522 (1970) (Marshall, J., dissenting) (noting that the Supreme Court "has already recognized that when a benefit, even a 'gratuitous' benefit, is necessary to sustain life, stricter constitutional standards, both procedural and substantive, are applied to the deprivation of that benefit"). (citations omitted). The point can be made more generally: Constitutional law is an uneasy amalgam of substantive theory and institutional constraint. In developing constitutional principles, courts must be attentive not only to the best substantive interpretation of the relevant text, but also to institutional limits on judicial capacity. Even if the best substantive theory calls for something like Marshall's vision, institutional considerations would argue powerfully against it. The last words come from Marshall himself. In 1980, the city of Baltimore erected a statute of Thurgood Marshall. It was able to persuade him to attend the ceremony-a real accomplishment in light of his storied reluctance to receive public tribute. But this was a remarkable event. Baltimore had been a segregated city, and one of Marshall's first endeavors after graduating from law school was to desegregate Maryland's all-white law school. 37 The dedication of a statue honoring a black civil rights lawyer who had abolished American apartheid would have been unfathomable fifty or sixty years before. Some... feel we have arrived. Others feel there is nothing more to do. I just want to be sure that when you see this statue, you won't think that's the end of it. I won't have it that way. There's too much work to be done.38 35. Dred Scott v. Sandford, 60 U.S. (19 How.) 393 (1856). 36. It may be for this reason that Justice Marshall was extremely attuned to cases involving the availability of the political process for social reform. He was aware of the necessarily limited nature of judicial relief. See in particular his powerful dissenting opinion in City of Mobile v. Bolden, 446 U.S. 55, 103 (1980) (Marshall, J., dissenting).