164 168 170 171 173 177 220 t All rights reserved. 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard. - Ed. I am grateful to Akhil Amar, David Currie, Elena Kagan, Stephen Gilles, Michael McConnell, Richard Posner, and Peter Strauss for helpful comments, and to Gabriel Gore and Richard Madris for valuable research assistance. 
222 223 224 226 226 228 229 231 232 232 233 234 235 
INTRODUCTION 
In 1983, Judge Antonin Scalia, of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, published a dramatic and provocative essay on the law of standing. The thesis can be found in the title: 
Powers.I Only recently named a judge, and having taught administrative and constitutional law for many years, Judge Scalia called for a significant shift in the law of standing. 
Judge Scalia's argument hinged on a distinction between two kinds of cases. "[W]hen an individual who is the very object of a law's requirement or prohibition seeks to challenge it, he always has standing."'2 But standing should frequently be unavailable when "the plaintiff is complaining of an agency's unlawful failure to impose a requirement or prohibition upon someone else." 3 In the latter case, Judge Scalia contended that there was a serious interference with executive power. Judge Scalia concluded that in cases of the latter sort, courts should hold that Article III imposes "a limit upon even the power of Congress to convert generalized benefits into legal rights ....-"4The Court had not addressed this important and longdisputed issue before. 
In 1992, Justice Antonin Scalia wrote the dramatic opinion for the Supreme Court in Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife,5 which significantly Powers, 17 SUFFOLK U. L. REv. 881 (1983). 

shifts the law of standing. The opinion hinges on a distinction between two kinds of cases. "When... the plaintiff is himself an object of the action (or forgone action) at issue ... there is ordinarily little question" that he has standing. 6 "When, however, ... a plaintiff's asserted injury arises from the government's allegedly unlawful regulation (or lack of regulation) of someone else, much more is needed."' 7 In the latter case, there is the risk of serious interference with executive power, in the form of a "transfer from the President to the courts" of "the Chief Executive's most important constitutional duty, to 'take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed.' "8' Through Justice Scalia's opinion, the Court held that Article III required invalidation of an explicit congressional grant of standing to "citizens." 9 The Court had not answered this question before.10 
Lujan may well be one of the most important standing cases since World War II. Read for all it is worth, the decision invalidates the large number of statutes in which Congress has attempted to use the "citizen-suit" device as a mechanism for controlling unlawfully inadequate enforcement of the law.' Indeed, the decision ranks among the most important in history in terms of the sheer number of federal statutes that it apparently has invalidated.12 The citizen suit has become a staple of federal environmental law in particular: nearly every major environmental statute provides for citizen standing.13 The place of the 
citizen standing was constitutional even without a showing of injury in fact. See, eg., Evans v. Lynn, 537 F.2d 571 (2d Cir. 1976); Friends of the Earth v. Carey, 535 F.2d 165 (2d Cir. 1976); Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. Train, 510 F.2d 692 (D.C. Cir. 1975); City of Chicago v. General Motors Corp., 467 F.2d 1262 (7th Cir. 1972); Citizens for a Better Envt. v. Deukmejian, 731 F. Supp. 1448 (N.D. Cal. 1990). 
Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, 30 U.S.C. § 1270 (1988); Clean Water Act of 1976, 33 U.S.C. § 1365 (1988); Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1415(g)(1) (1988); Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. § 300j-8 (1988); Noise Control Act of 1972, 42 U.S.C. § 4911 (1988); Energy Policy and Conservation Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6305 (1988); Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6972 (1988); Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7604 1990) U.S.C. § 96 Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986, 42 U.S.C. § 11046(a)(1) (1988); Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act, 43 U.S.C. § 1349 (1988); Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979, 49 U.S.C. § 2014 (1988). Every major environmental statute except FIFRA authorizes a citizen suit. 
100312 (White, J., dissenting) (appendix). 
citizen in environmental and regulatory law has now been drawn into sharp question. 
But the importance of Lujan does not lie only in the invalidation of the citizen suit. The decision revises the law of standing in several other ways as well. And it raises a host of new puzzles for later cases to solve. 
In this article, I have two principal goals. The first is to explain why Lujan's invalidation of a congressional grant of standing is a misinterpretation of the Constitution. It is now apparently the law that Article III forbids Congress from granting standing to "citizens" to bring suit. But this view, building on an unfortunate innovation in standing law by Justice William 0. Douglas,14 is surprisingly novel. It has no support in the text or history of Article III. It is essentially an invention of federal judges, and recent ones at that. 
should not be accepted by judges who are sincerely committed to the original understanding of the Constitution and to judicial restraint. Nor should it be accepted by judges who have different approaches to constitutional interpretation. 
Lujan holds that the requirement of an "injury in fact" is a limitation on congressional power; but an "injury in fact," as the Court understands it, is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for standing. The relevant question is instead whether the law governing statutes, the Constitution, or federal common law has conferred on the plaintiffs a cause of action. 15 
fact" will both allow standing where it should be denied and deny standing where it should be granted. 
More fundamentally, the very notion of "injury in fact" is not merely a misinterpretation of the Administrative Procedure Act 16 and Article III but also a large-scale conceptual mistake. I hope to show that the injury-in-fact requirement should be counted as a prominent contemporary version of early twentieth-century substantive due process. It uses highly contestable ideas about political theory to invalidate congressional enactments, even though the relevant constitutional text and history do not call for invalidation at all. Just like its early twentieth-century predecessor, it injects common law conceptions of harm into the Constitution. Moreover, it acts as if injury can be assessed through a purely factual inquiry, rather than one that is inevitably a product of courts' value-laden judgments and of governing legal conventions. This deep problem has been obscured by the surprising evolution of modem standing principles. 
My second goal is to discuss the many new issues that will arise in the aftermath of Lujan. Under what circumstances can citizens now prove that they are not mere citizens, but people with the requisite "injury" or "personal stake"? How does Lujan affect environmental and other regulatory cases? What might Congress do to respond to the decision? These will be the key questions in the next decade. They will have considerable importance for the development of environmental law and risk regulation, and indeed for administrative and regulatory law in general. 
This article is divided into three Parts. Part I briefly sets out the history of the law of standing. Here I discuss the clear acceptance of "stranger" or "citizen" suits at the founding period in both England and early America. The Lujan Court should not have taken the extraordinary step of invalidating a congressional grant of standing without investigating the relevant history. 
I also describe the very recent creation of the "injury-in-fact" test. I will show that, in an exceedingly short period, a revisionist view of Article III, with no textual or historical support, has established injury in fact as a constitutional prerequisite. I also argue that, despite its apparent simplicity, the notion of injury in fact is heavily dependent on an assessment of law and is far from a law-free inquiry into facts. 
Part II describes and evaluates the various holdings in the Lujan question of substantive law, answerable by reference to the statutory and constitutional provision whose protection is invoked." 111 S. CL at 1704 (citing Fletcher, supra, at 229). case. I end the Part with two brief detours: a discussion of the role of the citizen suit in regulatory law and a general assessment of Justice Scalia's conception of Article III, as set out in his 1983 Suffolk Law Review article. The overlap between the 1992 Lujan opinion and the 1983 article is sharp and clear. The overlap makes the article a matter of considerable current interest. 
Part III discusses the future of the law of standing in the wake of Lujan. Here I try to show exactly which issues are open and which closed. One of my major purposes is to explore the effect of Lujan on current regulatory cases brought by beneficiaries. of regulatory statutes. I argue that in many such cases standing remains available, but that some cases brought by consumers and others are now drawn into sharp question. 
In order to overcome some of the uncertainties now facing citizen suits, I recommend that Congress create a system of bounties for citizens in cases involving both private defendants and the executive branch. Even after Lujan, such a system should raise no constitutional question. Congress may also have the power both to create property rights in the benefits provided by regulatory statutes and to establish standing to vindicate those property rights. I conclude with a discussion of this intriguing possibility. 
I. 
A CAPSULE HISTORY OF STANDING 
For convenience, we might think of American law as evolving through five different eras of standing doctrine. We are now in the midst of the fifth; its contours remain indistinct. But one of its principal features is an insistence that Article III requires injury in fact, causation, and redressability - requirements this Part, I outline the development of standing doctrine. 17 
It makes sense to begin with the text of Article III, which extends "Judicial Power" to certain specified "Cases" and "Controversies." 18 In the original understanding, "cases" included both civil and criminal disputes, whereas "controversies" were limited to civil disputes. 19 Article III contains no explicit constitutional requirement of "standing" or "personal stake." Nor does it ever refer to "injury in fact." It does require a case or controversy, and very plausibly there is no such thing 
without a cause of action. 20 If we are to impose additional standing requirements, we must do so on the basis not of text but of history, both before and at the time of the framing and through judicial practice over time.2 1 
An overview of opinions addressing the issue of standing will help illustrate the basic picture. In the history of the Supreme Court, standing has been discussed in terms of Article III on 117 occasions. 22 Of those 117 occasions, 55, or nearly half, of the discussions occurred after 1985 
that is, in the past seven years. Of those 117, 71, or over two thirds, of the discussions occurred after 1980 that is, in just over a decade. Of those 117, 109, or nearly all, of the discussions occurred since 1965. The first reference to "standing" as an Article III limitation can be found in Stark v. Wickard,2 3 decided in 1944. The next reference does not appear until eight years later, in Adler v. Board of Education.24 Not until the Data Processing case in 197025 did a large number of cases emerge on the issue of standing. The explosion of judicial interest in standing as a distinct body of constitutional law 26 is an extraordinarily recent phenomenon. 
What of "injury in fact"? Barlow v. Collins 27 in 1970. 
about ten cases during each succeeding five-year interval, until a leap to ten references in the brief period from 1990 to 1992.28 
HART & WECHSLER, THE FEDERAL COURTS AND THE FEDERAL SYSrEM (Paul M. Bator et al eds., 3d ed. 1988)). 

recency of the particular words obscures the tradition represented by the general concept. (b) Perhaps standing has become important only recently as a result of attempts to bring suit by people who would never even thought of doing so before. If (a) is true, the evidence tells us nothing. If (b) is true, the constitutional limit was always present but did not have to be often invoked until recently. 
The discussion in Part I should shed light on these possibilities. For the moment, a few brief words. The history suggests that (a) is only partly true. A cause of action has traditionally been required, and this requirement is indeed imposed by Article III. But standing, as a distinct body of law, represents a genuinely new development, not a traditional one. As Part I also suggests, (b) is only partly true as well. Stranger or citizen actions are familiar to English and American law. The suit to compel nondiscretionary government action is no innovation; it is part of the old idea of mandamus. On the other hand, the modem regulatory state has furnished many more occasions for this suit than was traditional. 
injury-in-fact test played no role in administrative and constitutional law until the past quarter century. 
To say this is not to deny that there were important antecedents for the requirement of standing. As we will soon see, there had always been a question whether the plaintiff had a cause of action, and this was indeed a matter having constitutional status. Without a cause of action, there was no case or controversy and hence no standing. This is an extremely important principle. Moreover, a handful of cases in the 1920s and 1930s relied on notions of "standing" without mentioning the word. These cases, too, are of considerable importance. But we will see that the modem understanding of standing is insufficiently self-conscious of its own novelty, even of its revisionism. 
A. 
The first period, by far the longest, ranges from the founding era to roughly 1920. In that period, there was no separate standing doctrine at all.29 No one believed that the Constitution limited Congress' power to confer a cause of action. Instead, what we now consider to be the question of standing was answered by deciding whether Congress or any other source of law had granted the plaintiff a right to sue. 30 To have standing, a litigant needed a legal right to bring suit. 
The notion of injury in fact did not appear in this period. The existence of a concrete, personal interest, or an injury in fact, was neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for a legal proceeding. People with a concrete interest could not bring suit unless the common law, or some other source of law, said so. But if a source of law conferred a right to sue, "standing" existed, entirely independently of "concrete interest" or "injury in fact."' 31 
Implicit in these ideas was a particular conception of Article III and a particular understanding of the relationship between Article III and standing. If neither Congress nor the common law had conferred a right to sue, no case or controversy existed. Whatever harm had occurred was not legally cognizable at all; this was a case of damnum Standing toSue in PublicActions: Is It a ConstitutionalRequirement?,78 YALE L.J. 816 (1969); Louis L. Jaffe, Standing to Secure JudicialReview: PublicAction. 74 HARV. L. REv. 1265, 1269-82 (1961); Winter, supra note 22, at 1394-425. I rely a good deal on these treatments here. 
the forms of action); supra note 15. Justice Scalia appears to have recognized this point, subject to his Article III caveats, in his 1983 article: "Standing requires ... the allegation of some particularized injury to the individual plaintiff. But legal injury is by definition no more than the violation of a legal right; and legal rights can be created by the legislature." Scalia, supranote 1, at 885. 
absque injuria. Courts had no power to hear the plaintiff's claim. There was therefore a sharp distinction between an injury on the one hand (a "harm") and a legal injury on the other. To this extent, the Article III requirement of a case or controversy did indeed constrain the category of persons who could bring suit. But the constraint had everything to do with whether the legislature or some other source of law had created a cause of action. It had nothing to do with "injury in fact." 
There is no evidence of constitutional limits on the power to grant standing. In both England and America, actions by strangers, or by citizens in general, were fully permissible and indeed familiar. There is no basis for the view that the English and early American conception of adjudication forbade suits by strangers or citizens. 
The practice in England is revealing, for it helps cast light on what the founding generation may have understood by "case or controversy." Before and at the time of the framing, the English practice was to allow strangers to have standing in the many cases involving the ancient prerogative writs. Of these writs, two of the most important were certiorari and prohibition. "The English tradition of locus standi in prohibition and certiorari is that 'a stranger' has standing, but relief in suits by strangers is discretionary." 3' 2 
The governing idea behind the writ of prohibition was that a usurpation of jurisdiction encroached on the royal prerogative. It followed that anyone could bring the writ.33 A key case was Articuloi Cler, reported by Coke in a passage that would have been familiar to the Americans of the late eighteenth century.3 4 The central passage says: "And the kings courts that may award prohibitions, being informed either by the parties themselves, or by any stranger, that any court temporall or eclesiasticall doth hold plea of that (whereof they have not jurisdiction) may lawfully prohibit the same ... ,,a3 No English court appears to have rejected the view that prohibition was available at the behest of strangers.3 6 
The writ of certiorari was similarly available to citizens, and not just those with a concrete or personal interest. A case in 1724 indi32. Jaffe, supra note 29, at 1274. 
ed., 1980); Jaffe, supra note 29, at 1274. 
cated that "one who comes merely as a stranger" was entitled to discretionary judicial relief.37 Suits by strangers were also permitted under a statute allowing an information of quo warranto.38 An English case expressly so held in the auspicious year of 1789.39 
There were other English precedents for the citizen suit. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, mandamus was available in England, even at the behest of strangers. 40 Thus Berger writes: From such cases a colonial lawyer might well have concluded that mandamus was capable of issuance at the suit of a stranger who sought to assert the public interest, especially because the analogy of mandamus to prohibition was early drawn, and because Coke, who had unequivocally stated the availability of prohibition to strangers, also made a massive assertion of mandamus jurisdiction. 4 1 The mandamus action is closely related to the modem citizen suit. The purpose of the mandamus action is to require the executive branch to do what the law requires it to do. This is the same idea that underlies the citizen suit, most conspicuously in the environmental area. 
Related devices in England were the informers' action and the relator action. In the informers' action, cash bounties were awarded to strangers who successfully prosecuted illegal conduct. In relator actions, suits would be brought formally in the name of the Attorney General, but at the instance of a private person, often a stranger. "[A]ny persons, though the most remote in the contemplation of the charity, may be relators ... ."42 Certiorari and prohibition remain available to strangers in England today.43 
The English history is sufficient to show that if we are thinking in historical terms, "the argument for a constitutional bar to strangers as complainants against unconstitutional action" is "without foundation."44 The modem injury-in-fact test, developed in the twentieth century, attempted to draw on the Westminster practice.45 But note 29, at 820-21 & n.29. 

Berger, supra note 29, at 823 & n.38 strangers to enforce acts of Parliament, as such acts were of interest to all in "the kingdom") [A] court will not decide a question unless the nature of the action challenged, the kind of injury inflicted, and the relationship between the parties are such that judicial determination enough has been said to show that this is a historical blunder. 
There is relatively little explicit material on the Framers' conception of "case or controversy." 46 
Certainly there is no direct evidence that injury in fact or concrete interest was intended to be a constitutional prerequisite under Article III. There is no reason to think that the Framers sought to limit Congress' power to create "cases" or "controversies" by conferring causes of action.4 7 To understand what the Americans understood, it is useful to consult the early American practice, looking at the state and federal levels. 
If we look at the practice in state courts, we will find no reason to think that the American practice was more restrictive than that in England. Several state cases built explicitly on the English practice. For example, a South Carolina court issued a writ of prohibition at the behest of a stranger.48 A New Jersey case in 1794 established stranger jurisdiction in certiorari, effectively allowing a citizen action. 49 Another New Jersey case issued a writ of certiorari on behalf of a citizen and expressly rejected the view that the "court ought not to award a certiorarion the mere prayer of an individual, unless he will previously fected by the operation of the by-law .... lay some cause before them tending to show that he is or may be af-5o 
Other cases in the first century of the republic suggested the same view. 5 1 Thus Louis Jaffe summarized his historical survey with the is consonant with what was, generally speaking, the business of the Colonial courts and the courts of Westminster when the Constitution was framed. 
Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Comm. v. McGrath, 341 U.S. 123, 150 (1951) (Frankfurter, J., concurring). 
CONSTrrUTION 212-373 (1987). 
right to a commission is something which the laws of the United States cannot enforce: In pursuing this inquiry, the first question which presents itself, is, whether this can be arranged with that class of cases which come under the description of damnun absque injuria- a loss without an injury. 
This description of cases never has been considered, and it is believed never can be considered, as comprehending offices oftrust, ofhonor or ofprofit. The office ofjustice of peace in the district of Columbia is such an office; it is therefore worthy of the attention and guardianship of the laws. It has received that attention and guardianship. It has been created by special act of congress, and has been secured, so far as the laws can give security to the person appointed to fill it, for five years. It is not then on account ofthe worthlessness of the thing pursued, that the injured party can be alleged to be without remedy.). 
present day. "The considerable weight of authority now supports the citizen-mandamus suit." Id. at 1276 & n.44. [V€ol. 91:163 suggestion that "the public action - an action brought by a private person primarily to vindicate the public interest in the enforcement of public obligations - has long been a feature of our English and American law."'52 
At the national level, there is no clear American tradition of reliance on the prerogative writs. According to the Supreme Court's interpretation of the All Writs Act, 53 Congress did not choose explicitly to create general mandamus, prohibition, or certiorari jurisdiction, though there were particular statutory and common law cases involving the writs, and it seems clear that their limited use was a matter of legislative discretion rather than constitutional command. 54 There are, however, revealing early precedents for the citizen suit at the national level. The writ of prohibition to restrain an allegedly unconstitutional tax was treated as a constitutional case in a relatively early decision of the Marshall Court, 55 and in 1875 the Supreme Court allowed a petition for mandamus at the behest of what it treated as citizens. In Union Pacific Railroad v. Hall,56 merchants brought suit to require a federally chartered railroad to create a certain railroad line. They invoked a general mandamus statute "to compel the Union Pacific Railroad Company to operate its road as required by law."'57 The Court said that the merchants were attempting to enforce "a duty to the public generally" and that they "had no interest other than such as belonged to others."' 58 Nonetheless, the Supreme Court allowed the action to go forward. 
Moreover, the early Congress was active as well. I believe that Congress supplied two precedents - the qui tam action and the informers' action - that operate as a powerful affirmative argument against the view that Article III bars "stranger" or "citizen" actions once these have been congressionally authorized. 
The most important development was the widespread early congressional creation of the qui tam action. The purpose of this action is to give citizens a right to bring civil suits to help in the enforcement of the federal criminal law. Under the qui tam action, a citizen - who might well be a stranger - is permitted to bring suits against offenders of the law. Qui tam actions are familiar to American law. "Statutes providing for actions by a common informer, who himself has no interest whatever in the controversy other than that given by statute, have been in existence for hundreds of years in England, and in this country ever since the foundation of our Government." 59 In the first decade of the nation's existence, Congress created a number of qui tam actions. 6° Explicit qui tam provisions were allowed under many statutes, including those criminalizing the import of liquor without paying duties, 6 1 prohibiting certain trade with Indian tribes, 62 criminalizing failure to comply with certain postal requirements, 63 and criminalizing slave trade with foreign nations." 
The qui tam action was accompanied by the informers' action. Through this action, people can bring suit to enforce public duties; successful plaintiffs keep a share of the resulting damages or fines. In the states, this action had become familiar in the early stages of American history. Notably, the informers' action was available against both private defendants and public officials. 65 Early Congresses created at least two informers' actions to assist in the enforcement of federal law. The first of these operated not only against private violators but against executive officials as well. 66 "Suits by those without personal injury who were acting as representatives of others were not viewed as raising constitutional problems under article III.1167 
For present purposes, what is especially revealing is that there is no evidence that anyone at the time of the framing believed that a qui tam action or informers' action produced a constitutional doubt. No one thought to suggest that the "case or controversy" requirement placed serious constraints on what was, in essence, a citizen suit. This fact provides extremely powerful evidence that Article III did not impose constraints on Congress' power to grant standing to strangers. 
There are two possible differences between the qui tam and informers' actions on the one hand and the modem citizen suit on the other. First, the former are usually brought against a private defendant. By contrast, the government is often the defendant in the citizen suit, as indeed it was in Lujan itself. If the requirement of injury is to be read in light of constitutional provisions relating to executive power,68 then the existence of the qui tam and informers' actions may not be decisive as against the claim that citizen or stranger suits are constitutionally forbidden. 
Second, the victor in a qui tam action is ordinarily entitled to recover money to be paid to himself, to the United States, or to both. The victor in an informers' action also receives some financial benefit. By contrast, the victor in a citizen action does not recover money. For this reason it is not completely odd to think that, as originally understood, the Constitution permitted stranger actions only if dollars were to change hands. 
These are not entirely implausible distinctions. But if they are set out as part of an argument that Article III forbids the citizen suit, they do make for quite a stretch. Most important, the informers' action was available against public as well as private defendants at the state and federal levels. It cannot be distinguished on the ground that it operated only against private defendants. Nor should it matter that money does not change hands. The history suggests that the bounty is designed to offer an incentive, not to create an injury where none existed before. A declaratory judgment or an injunction serves the same purposes as a victorious suit in a qui tam or informers' action. Indeed, mandamus suits did not involve money at all, and these too were accepted during the early period. 69 
More generally, if the stranger suit was thought constitutionally problematic, in all probability some constitutional concern would have been voiced about the qui tam action or the informers' action. The absence of any concern about these actions makes it exceedingly unlikely that the case or controversy requirement was believed to place 
any constraints on Congress' ability to grant causes of action to strangers. 70 
The Constitution may require courts to impose greater constraints on standing when the executive is the defendant.71 But if an "injury in fact" is required by Article III, it should not matter a great deal whether the defendant is public or private. Hence the qui tam and informers' actions do seem to be powerful evidence against the claim that an injury in fact is an Article III requirement. 
The discussion thus far has shown that early English and American practices give no support to the view that the Constitution limits Congress' power to create standing. The relevant practices suggest not that everyone has standing, nor that Article III allows standing for all injuries, but instead something far simpler and less exotic: people have standing if the law has granted them a right to bring suit. There is no authority to the contrary before the twentieth century, and, indeed, I think that there is no such authority before World War 11.72 
A general picture emerges from the words of the great administrative law teacher Frank Goodnow, writing in 1905. Goodnow's extensive treatise has no discussion of standing, then a foreign concept; but it does deal with the prerogative writs in America. Describing what had come to be the American practice, Goodnow wrote: The purpose of the writs is twofold. In the first place, they are issued mainly with the intention of protecting private rights; in the second place, some of them may be made use of also for the purpose of the maintenance of the law regardless of the fact whether in the particular case a privaterightis attacked or not Thus in the case of the certiorariit has been held that this writ may not be made use of simply for the maintenance of the law, that no one may apply for it unless he has some particular interest in its issue which is greater than that possessed by the ordinary citizen. The courts, however, have held with regard to the quo warranto that it may be issued on the demand of any citizen of responsibility; and the better rule would seem to be that in matters ofpublic concern any citizen or taxpayer may apply for the mandamus.73 
In this light, is it even possible to argue that the case or controversy requirement forbids the citizen action? Perhaps the English cases are not decisive, since the case-or-controversy requirement was makes the litigant the holder ofa kind of property right. See infra notes 130-32 and accompanying text. 
not present in English law. That requirement might even be seen as a check on certain suits cognizable in England. Nor is the American practice completely unambiguous. The prerogative writs were not generally available at the behest of strangers in the federal courts. As noted, the qui tam action operated against private persons, and money would always change hands. It might therefore remain possible to argue that Article III indeed requires a "personal stake" or an "injury in fact" because, in the United States, federal courts were not traditionally given jurisdiction in pure citizen suits. 
The history does not completely foreclose this argument, but it does make the argument seem far-fetched. There is absolutely no affirmative evidence that Article III was intended to limit congressional power to create standing. There is no affirmative evidence of a requirement of a "personal stake" or an "injury in fact" - beyond the genuine requirement that some source of law confer a cause of action. Nor is there reason to believe that the case-or-controversy requirement was designed to draw sharper limits than existed in English law. The general unavailability of the prerogative writs in federal court was a matter of legislative discretion, not constitutional compulsion. 74 It is at the very least highly suggestive that no one seemed to think that the qui tam or informers' action raised an Article III issue. In light of all this, the claim that Article III bars citizen standing - once Congress has created it - seems most adventurous as a matter of history. 
It would be possible to respond that particular historical understandings are not always binding in constitutional law. Segregation is unconstitutional even if the framers did not intend to abolish it;75 in the Due Process Clause, the meaning of "liberty" changes over time;76 the Contracts Clause has been understood to be far narrower than originally conceived. 77 Perhaps Article III should be treated the same way; perhaps we should not be bound by the framers' particular conception of its meaning. 
The general point about constitutional interpretation seems correct, but it does not justify the view that Article III prohibits Congress from granting standing to citizens. When the specific understandings are not binding, it is because the framers are taken to have set out a general principle capable of change over time, or because changed circumstances call for a departure from historically specific understand74. See supra note 54. 
citizen suit. ings.78 In Article III, the general principle is that a case cannot exist unless some source of law creates a cause of action. It is hard to understand why this principle should be abandoned in the context of a 79 
and New Deal Periods 
The second stage of standing law occurred in the early parts of this century. It was here that "standing" began to make a modest initial emergence as a discrete body of doctrine. To understand this development, a little background is in order. 
The preliminary development of standing doctrine should be understood as part and parcel of the heated struggle, in the 1920s and 1930s, within the country and the courts about the constitutional legitimacy of the emerging regulatory state. Courts frequently invoked the Constitution as a barrier to regulatory law.80 Justices Brandeis and Frankfurter were, in their somewhat different periods, the leading exponents of the view that courts should defer to the outcomes of democratic processes. 
In this light, it should come as no surprise that the principal early architects of what we now consider standing limits were Justices Brandeis and Frankfurter. 8 ' 
New 
Deal legislation from frequent judicial attack. 
Attempting to counter the aggressive Supreme Court of the period, Justices Brandeis and Frankfurter helped develop a range of devices designed to limit the occasions for judicial intervention into democratic processes. 
"controversy." In all likelihood, for example, Congress is barred from overcoming the ban on advisory opinions. See GEOFFREY R. STONE ET AL., CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 86 (2d ed. 1991). This ban is a plausible inference from the "Opinions in Writing" Clause, which allows the President to require opinions from heads of departments, but not from judges. U.S. CONsT. art. II, § 2, cl.1. Moreover, the notion of a "case," as historically understood, excludes the judicial provision of advice at the behest of public officials. Outside of the distinctive area of standing, then, there are barriers to Congress' power to create a "case" where one did not exist before. In very rare cases, there may even be barriers to the congressional conferral of standing for separation-of-powers reasons. Consider, for example, a grant of standing to all members of Congress to challenge all executive action. I do not deal with such exotic examples here. See also Hayburn's Case, 2 U.S. (2 Dall.) 409 (1792) (refusing to adjudicate case where judicial decision is subject to executive suspension and legislative revision). 
AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 573-74 n.23-25 (2d ed. 1988) (collecting cases). The connection between the New Deal and the development of standing doctrine is traced in illuminating detail in Winter, supra note 22, at 1452-57, and briefly discussed in Sunstein, supra note 15, at 1437-38. 

In the key cases, they repudiated constitutional attacks on legislative and administrative action by invoking justiciability doctrines.8 2 Prominent among these doctrines was the requirement of what we now think of as standing.8 3 The crucial cases involved efforts by citizens at large to invoke the Constitution to invalidate democratic outcomes.8 4 In such cases, the Court held that there was no personal stake for the invocation of judicial power. 
How are we to understand these cases? We might begin by asking whether there was any source of a cause of action. In each case, no common law right was at stake. In addition, no statute created a right to bring suit. Finally, it seemed implausible to suggest, in these cases, that the relevant constitutional provision created a private right of action. The very notion that private rights of action - or standing could be created by constitutional provisions was many years away.8 5 Even if some constitutional provisions created private rights, it seemed hard to accept the view that provisions in these cases did so, because the relevant duties could not be individuated and seemed to run to the public at large. I take up this matter below. 86 
The development of standing limitations in the early part of the twentieth century was indeed a novelty, in the sense that no separate body of standing law existed before this period. Notably, the relevant opinions did not even refer to the word standing. But we might well see the Brandeis-Frankfurter innovations as broadly compatible with preexisting law. For the most part, their opinions can be read to hold that no one has a right to sue unless some law has conferred a right to do so. In the cases in which the cause of action was denied, no such right had been conferred. This was the key point in the relevant opinions. 87 
As noted above, the requirement of a cause of action is indeed a command both of Article III and of tradition."" The relevant denials of standing were therefore properly based on the plaintiffs' inability to find a law that entitled them to sue. Thus the Supreme Court could write as late as 1939 that, to have standing, a plaintiff must have a "legal right - one of property, one arising out of contract, one protected against tortious invasion, or one founded on a statute which confers a privilege."8 9 
The third period in the development of standing consists of the enactment and interpretation of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) in 1946.90 The relevant provision of the APA was an effort to codify the developing body of judge-made standing law: "A person suffering legal wrong because of agency action, or adversely affected or aggrieved by agency action within the meaning of a relevant statute, is entitled to judicial review thereof." 91 This apparently cryptic phrase was actually designed to recognize standing in three straightforward categories of cases. All three categories had become well-established under previous law.92 
First, people could obtain standing by showing that they suffered a "legal wrong" because a common law interest was at stake. An invasion of a common law interest would certainly qualify as a legal wrong. Courts presumed that anyone who could show such an invasion would be entitled to bring suit. This idea had constitutional foundations, to the extent that a foreclosure of standing to people with common law interests might raise problems under the Due Process Clause or Article III. 93 
Second, plaintiffs could show that they suffered a legal wrong within the meaning of APA by demonstrating that their statutory incourts in a democracy, an argument that stems from political theory. But because that argument is obviously influencing the development of standing principles in the Supreme Court and elsewhere, it is worthwhile to address the argument here. 
In his 1983 essay, Justice Scalia argued that "courts need to accord greater weight than they have in recent times to the traditional requirement that the plaintiff's alleged injury be a particularized one, which sets him apart from the citizenry at large. '235 Scalia acknowledged that this was "not a linguistically inevitable conclusion." 2 36 The text of Article III does not suggest that a personal injury is necessary. But in his key statement, discussed above, Scalia defended the limitation on grounds of tradition.2 37 
Scalia explicitly claimed that "there is a limit upon even the power of Congress to convert generalized benefits into legal rights - and that is the limitation imposed by the so-called 'core' requirement of standing. ' 238 A central concern is what Scalia describes the recent rise of the courts as "equal partners" with the legislative and executive branches. In his view, this unfortunate development is related to the law of standing. Thus Scalia suggests that "[tihe sine qua non for emergence of the courts as an equal partner with the executive and legislative branches in the formulation of public policy was the assurance of prompt access to the courts by those interested in conducting the debate. ' 239 Unlimited standing gave people this prompt access, thus impairing the system of separation of powers in two ways: first, by providing more occasions for judicial review of executive action; second, by changing the timing of that review. 
The core of Scalia's argument, however, lies elsewhere. [Tihe law of standing roughly restricts courts to their traditional undemocratic role of protecting individuals and minorities against impositions of the majority, and excludes them from the even more undemocratic role of prescribing how the other two branches should function in order to serve the interest of the majority itself.24 ° It is through this lens that Scalia offers the distinction with which I began this article. In the first class of cases, "an individual who is the [V/ol. 91:163 very object of a law's requirement or prohibition seeks to challenge it"; here, standing is simple. In the second class, "the plaintiff is complaining of an agency's unlawful failure to impose a requirement or prohibition upon someone else"; here the harm is "a majoritarian one." 24 1 
The central point in the analysis is that [u]less the plaintiff can show some respect in which he is harmed more than the rest of us ... he has not established any basis for concern that the majority is suppressing or ignoring the rights of a minority that wants protection, and thus has not established the prerequisite for judicial intervention. 242 Thus, the "doctrine of standing... is an essential means of restricting the courts to their assigned role of protecting minority rather than majority interests. ' 243 Scalia urged that judges had been assigned this role by the Constitution, and also that the other role - the protection of majority interests - would be poorly executed by judges. 
After all, judges are removed from political accountability and selected from a highly educated elite. This situation is just perfect for a body that is supposed to protect the individual against the people; it is just terrible (unless you are a monarchist) for a group that is supposed to decide what is good for the people. Where the courts, in the supposed interest of all the people, do enforce upon the executive branch adherence to legislative policies that the political protcieosnss)itsteolfbweoeunlfdornciontgetnhfeorpceo,littihceayl parreejuldikiceelys (odfetshpeitier othwenbcelsatsso.2f4i4nten 
Scalia was alert to the concern that, without broad standing for beneficiaries, legislative enactments would be unlawfully underenforced within the bureaucracy. Indeed, he noted that statutes might get "lost or misdirected" in the executive branch; furthermore, he admitted that this was indeed the consequence of his proposal. 245 But and this is the article's striking conclusion - this is "a good thing. ' 246 Executive nonimplementation of statutes is part of a well-functioning democratic process, keeping law current with existing views. "Yesterday's herald is today's bore." 24 7 
This is a provocative and arresting argument, made in short compass. But it faces several difficulties. One problem is that the argument is strikingly ahistorical. The article does not address the question whether the Framers actually had this conception of Article III. As we have seen, there is no evidence that they did. There is considerable evidence to the contrary. 
A second problem is that the approach seems inconsistent with some of the most prominent aspects of Justice Scalia's own jurisprudence. Justice Scalia usually insists that judges should read constitutional provisions at a low level of generality and avoid infusing them with broad "values" of their own. In his view, such impositions increase the occasions for judicial invalidation of legislation.2 48 In this case, however, Scalia reads Article III broadly, invests it with general, controversial values, and ultimately recommends judicial invalidation of the outcomes of democratic processes. The theory of "minority rights" is after all a controversial theory of democracy, counselling courts to act in some cases but not in others. Let us assume that the argument is plausible, as it indeed appears to be. Should even a plausible theory of this kind be invoked in order to invalidate a law that is not inconsistent with the text and history of the Constitution? 
There is a further problem. In a case of beneficiary or citizen standing, courts are not enforcing "executive branch adherence to legislative policies that the political process itself would not enforce. '249 Instead, they are requiring the executive branch to adhere to the law, that is, to outcomes that the political process has endorsed. In Lujan, for example, the plaintiffs would have won only if they could have shown an unambiguous legislative judgment in their favor.250 Standing would produce "legislative policies that the political process itself would not enforce" 25 1 only if courts systematically misinterpreted statutes. But this seems to be an unsupportable assumption. 
In addition, it is hardly a good thing if agency implementation defeats legislative judgments. Suppose, for example, that the EPA decided that statutes calling for a form of cost-benefit balancing should be construed not to allow consideration of costs, and thus to require a kind of environmental absolutism. Would it be plausible to say that this is "a good thing," so long as the agency, supervised as it is by the President, had so concluded? Surely not. Agency rejection of con248. See Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 112 S. Ct. 2791, 2884-85 (1992) (Scalia, J., dissenting); Harmelin v. Michigan, II S. Ct. 2680 (1991); Michael H. v. Gerald D., 491 U.S. 110, 112 (1989) (plurality opinion of Scalia, J.). 

Clean Air Act would not be set aside unless such regulations were contrary to the express intent of Congress or based on an unreasonable interpretation of the statute). 
gressional enactments, even if motivated by the President himself, is inconsistent with the system of separation of powers. 
There are of course important political constraints on administrative behavior, and an understanding of those constraints is a valuable part of administrative law.252 Moreover, the power of the executive to temper legislative enactments is indeed an important aspect of democratic government. The President can appropriately exercise this power in many areas, including prosecutorial discretion, interpretation of ambiguities, incremental policymaking, and not-so-incremental judgments when Congress has spoken ambiguously. But the executive is not normally empowered to violate the law through enforcement activity in violation of the boundaries set by Congress. Justice Scalia cannot be taken to argue in favor of the "updating" that occurs when the President implements a law in such a way as to rewrite it. 
To bring this problem closer to the standing issue, suppose that an agency decides that the ESA should not be applied to American activities in foreign nations, when in fact Congress plainly intended that the ESA should apply abroad. Is this a good thing? On the contrary, it is a violation of democratic aspirations and (more relevant still) of the system for national lawmaking set up by Articles I and II of the Constitution. If agency enforcement beyond that intended by Congress is not "a good thing," even where the agency responds to political pressures, it is not "a good thing" where an agency undertakes a pattern of enforcement that violates congressional will through abdication or failure to act. Asymmetry on this point would simply translate judicial antipathy to regulation into administrative law. The foreclosure of standing cannot plausibly be defended as a means of allowing the bureaucracy to implement the law in a manner that conflicts with the governing statute. 
Let us turn, finally, to Justice Scalia's argument from democratic theory, referred to briefly in Lujan itself.253 That argument rests on a distinction between minority and majority interests. The distinction between regulatory objects and regulatory beneficiaries, for purposes of standing, is said to rest on this prior distinction, which is itself said to be well adapted to the special role of courts in the American legal system. "Objects" represent a minority whose interests require judicial protection; "beneficiaries" represent a majority who can protect their concerns through the political process. But there are two problems with this argument. The first is that it does not justify a 245 (1992). 
distinction between the objects and beneficiaries of regulation. The second is that it turns on an inadequate conception of the workings of American democracy. 
Suppose we agreed that courts should not protect majority interests through administrative law. The result would be to jeopardize standing for many objects of regulation, not merely for beneficiaries. Often the objects of regulation are indeed majority interests. A regulation might, for example, affect a large number of companies at once, and in the process impose costs principally on consumers, which is to say on nearly all of us. Majorities are affected even when "objects" are at risk. But objects are not therefore to be deprived of standing, at least not without wreaking havoc on traditional administrative law. Indeed, the objects of regulation are not systematically more likely to be "majorities" than the beneficiaries. If we were to build our theory of standing on majority status, we must rethink standing in important ways - but not in the ways recommended by Justice Scalia. The majority-minority distinction is too crude a basis for distinguishing beneficiaries from objects. 
Now let us turn to the workings of American democracy. Justice Scalia's argument seems to be that courts are well-suited to protecting minorities, which cannot protect themselves through the democratic process, whereas they are in poor position to protect majorities, whose natural forum is the democratic process. The politically responsive institution is in turn the executive branch. 
But this argument is too simple. Some minorities are especially well-organized and do indeed have access to the political process, including the executive branch. The point is well documented. 254 At least sometimes, regulated industries are a prominent example. But they are not therefore to be deprived of standing. 
Moreover, some majorities are so diffuse and ill-organized that they face systematic transaction costs barriers to the exercise of ongoing political influence. This point is well documented in the area of environmental protection and elsewhere.25 5 The citizen suit is designed as a corrective. 256 Essentially, this cause of action reflects the congressional judgment that some interests, including those of majorities, are so diffuse and unorganized that they require judicial protection in the implementation process. Congress' judgment to this effect 
Interest: An Economic Analysis, in PUBLIC INTEREST LAW 4 (Burton A. Weisbrod et al. eds., 1978). receives distinguished support from a significant body of empirical and analytic literature.2 57 Even ifjudges do not agree with that judgment, they sh6uld not foreclose the cause of action in the name of the Constitution. 
I conclude that Justice Scalia's essay does not justify the view that Article III forbids the citizen suit. If Congress has chosen to rely on the citizen suit, courts should not foreclose that choice. 
To make a full evaluation of Lujan, a good empirical picture of the citizen suit would be valuable. What effect does the citizen suit have on the real world? Is it a valuable instrument of environmental and regulatory policy? How many citizen suits have merit? Does the citizen suit produce greater compliance with the law or better regulatory policy? In how many cases does the citizen suit facilitate standing, or simplify standing issues, compared to a requirement of injury in fact? The answers to such questions may not help with the constitutional issue. But they will aid in an assessment of whether the demise of citizen suits is an important event for administrative law. 
these questions. In the early period of the citizen suit, exceptionally few plaintiffs filed such actions. 2 58 Advocates of this form of enforcement were both surprised and greatly disappointed. But recent years, starting with 1983, have seen greater activity, especially under the Clean Water Act.259 Betwee collecting data on citizen suits), there were over 800 notices of intent to sue under that Act.26° The government was the defendant in 165 of these suits. Plaintiffs have won a large number of citizen cases under the Clean Water Act.26 1 Indeed, plaintiffs readily prevail under the Clean Water Act, apparently because some of the statutory provisions speak quite plainly and mandate unambiguous action. 262 
Post-Lujan, most environmental suits will be able to go forward under the injury-in-fact requirements. An environmental organization will typically be able to find a member who has the requisite injury.263 But the need to show an injury will complicate such suits, and some occasions will arise when no plaintiff can be found. Moreover, regulatory cases will arise in which the insistence on an actual injury, as understood in Lujan, will bar the action altogether. I discuss this possibility in Part III. 
There is good reason to believe that the citizen suit has indeed helped bring about greater administrative compliance with law. But there is no reason to think that the citizen suit is a fundamental part of modem regulatory reform. I offer a brief account of a long story here.264 
In its current form, the citizen suit should be seen as part and parcel of a largely unsuccessful system of command-and-control regulation. Under this system, Congress entrusts agencies with the job of issuing a massive number of highly centralized, rigid, and often draconian regulatory requirements. It should be no surprise that agencies are often unable to undertake their legally required tasks, especially in view of the fact that they infrequently receive the necessary resources. The citizen suit is part of a complex system in which Congress delegates difficult or even impossible tasks, appropriates inadequate resources, imposes firm and sometimes unrealistic deadlines, 265 and enlists courts and citizens in order to produce compliance. 266 The system may well find explanation in terms of the self-interest of elected representatives. 267 Credit-claiming for apparently aggressive regulaof Persons With Standingto Seek JudicialReview ofAgency Rulemaking,39 ADMIN. L. REV. 139 (1987); Fadil, supra note 258; David S. Mann, Comment, Polluter-FinancedEnvironmentally BeneficialExpenditures: Effective Use or ImproperAbuse of CitizenSuits Underthe Clean Water Act, 21 ENVTL. L. 175 (1991); James L. Thompson, Citizen Suits and Civil Penalties Under the Clean WaterAct, 85 MICH. L. REV. 1656 (1987). 
EnvironmentalCitizen Suits Became an Entitlement Program,in ENVIRONMENTAL POLITICS, supra note 137, at 

HASSLER, CLEAN COAL/DIRTY AIR (1981); STEPHEN BREYER, REGULATION AND ITS REFORM (1982); DAVID OSBORNE & TED GAEBLER, REINVENTING GOVERNMENT (1992); SUNSTEIN, supra note 162. 

AdministrativeRegu 
tion can coexist with a range of real-world loopholes, helping industry to escape from government controls. But the public is often the loser. 
In these circumstances, the citizen suit is probably best understood as a band-aid superimposed on a system that can meet with only mixed success. Instead of band-aids, modem regulation requires fundamental reform. Congress should replace the command-and-control system with more flexible, incentive-oriented measures. 268 Instead of a continuing emphasis on judicial review, modem bureaucracy needs large-scale shifts introduced and implemented by legislators and administrators themselves.269 We should not, however, forget that bandaids can do some good. The citizen suit may serve as an effective if partial alternative to massive regulatory overhaul. In any case, the complex policy issues do not bear on the interpretation of Article III. 
From what has been said thus far, we can offer some brief general words about the law of standing and Lujan itself. With respect to standing in general, the key question is whether Congress (or some other relevant source of law) has created a cause of action. Without a cause of action, there is no standing; there is no case or controversy; and courts are without authority to hear the case under Article III. 
This point suggests that the real source of current difficulty is Data Processing, which diverted attention from the relevant question of cause of action to the irrelevant question of injury in fact. So long as injury in fact was thought to be the issue that Congress itself had made relevant under the APA, the difficulty was only minor. But when an injury in fact became both a necessary and sufficient condition for standing, the area grew badly confused. 
The result was that courts began to grant standing in cases in which it should have been denied, and to deny standing in cases in which it should have been granted. 270 Worse, the Court viewed the EcON. & ORGANIZATION 59 (1992) (discussing the symbiotic relationship between legislators and environmental groups). 
Reforming EnvironmentalLaw: The DemocraticCasefor Market Incentives, 13 COLUM. J. ENvrL. L. 171 (1988); Sunstein, supra note 137. 
JERRY L. MASHAW & DAVID L. HARFST, THE STRUGGLE FOR AUTO SAFETY (1990); Ackerman & Stewart, supra note 268; Melnick, supra note 161; Peter L. Strauss, Revisiting Overton Park: Politicaland JudicialControls Over AdministrativeActions Affecting the Community, 39 UCLA L. REV. 1251 (1992). 
(1973), an environmental case in which the law student plaintiffs could not easily show a cause of action conferred by Congress. Standing should almost certainly have been denied in SCRAP, even if an injury in fact might have been found. standing issue through the wrong lens. An injury in fact is not required by Article III, and it is not sufficient for standing.27 1 Both history and principle show that people with "injuries in fact" may or may not have standing. The question is whether Congress has conferred a right to bring suit. 
Under this view of the matter, Lujan was a relatively simple case. The first question was one of positive law: whether Congress had granted or denied standing to the plaintiffs. Congress' grant of standing resolved that issue. The grant created the relevant injury for Article III purposes. There was no need to start with injury in fact and redressability, or even to address these issues at all. And if it should be thought - contrary to the view presented here - that there are some Article III limits on legislative power to confer causes of action on citizens, those limits surely were not reached in Lujan. This was, after all, a case in which the plaintiffs claimed an intention to go to a place where allegedly unlawful government expenditures placed endangered species at risk. The Constitution did not forbid that action from going forward. The Lujan Court should not have discussed redressability; the congressional grant of standing disposed of the issue. If redressability was relevant, the Court should have said that the injury created by Congress - to prevent the U.S. government from threatening to produce extinction - would indeed have been redressed by a decree in the plaintiffs' favor.272 
Lujan settled some important questions. But it left many issues open, and it raised at least as many new ones. The future looks particularly murky in light of Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion, which refused to join the plurality on redressability, questioned any focus on the common law as the exclusive source of injury, and suggested relatively broad congressional power on the issues of injury and causation. 273 
In this Part, I outline the settled and unsettled issues. I also suggest how some of the current puzzles should be resolved. The most important conclusions involve possible congressional responses to LuJan. I suggest that the simplest and most effective response would be the creation of a bounty for successful citizen plaintiffs. Such a bounty 
to confer a property interest on citizens). 
would build directly on the qui tam and informers' actions, and it should not raise a constitutional problem in the aftermath of Lujan. 
A more complex response would be for Congress expressly to create a property interest in the various regulatory "goods" that it wants to authorize citizens to protect. It might, for example, say that citizens generally have a beneficial interest in certain endangered species that are at risk from acts of the U.S. government. This somewhat adventurous strategy would have the advantages of building on common law notions of interest and injury and of forcing focused congressional attention on the precise nature of the rights at stake. It would also respond to some of the concerns in Justice Kennedy's concurrence. Despite its relative novelty, an approach of this sort should also be constitutional. 
A. 
The Lujan opinion does not reject a number of cases in which courts have given standing to environmental plaintiffs. On the contrary, it expressly endorses many such cases, even when the plaintiff is complaining that the executive has taken inadequate action to enforce the law. To this extent, the invalidation of the citizen suit allows a good deal of room for private litigants - regulatory beneficiaries - to initiate proceedings against the executive branch. The case therefore introduces some uncertainty into the law, but it probably does not work any fundamental shift in the environmental area. 
The Court thus makes clear that, if an environmental plaintiff can show that its members use the particular environmental resource that is at risk, standing is available. It follows, for example, that a citizen in New York could, post-Lujan, complain about the failure to enforce clean air or clean water requirements in New York. The Court suggests as much by invoking the Japan Whaling case274 to show that an environmental organization could complain of excessive whale harvesting when the "whale watching and studying of their members w[ould] be adversely affected by continued whale harvesting. ' 275 The Court also says that a citizens' council has standing to bring suit to challenge environmentally harmful construction in the area where its members live.276 n.4). 
Council, 490 U.S. 332 (1989)). 
It also remains clear that some procedural injuries can produce standing under Article III. The Court writes: 
This is not a case where plaintiffs are seeking to enforce a procedural requirement the disregard of which could impair a separate concrete interest of theirs (ag., the procedural requirement for a hearing prior to denial of their license application, or the procedural requirement for an environmental impact statement before a federal facility is constructed next door to them).2 7 7 A citizen can thus complain about a failure to prepare an environmental impact statement (EIS) even though it is "speculative" whether the statement will cause the project to be abandoned.278 
Standing remains available in all cases under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)279 whenever plaintiffs can show that the project, if completed, would adversely affect their interests. A concrete injury of this kind is sufficient even if ordinary redressability cannot be shown. "The person who has been accorded a procedural right to protect his concrete interests can assert that right without meeting all the normal standards for redressability and immediacy. 2 80 
It is clear that the Court believes this; but, as noted above, it is not clear why the Court does so. If Article III requires redressability, most NEPA suits indeed seem unconstitutional. In the typical NEPA action, there is no assurance that completion of an adequate EIS would have any consequence at all for the plaintiffs. One might well think, as the government urged in Lujan, that NEPA suits frequently violate Article III. 
But as the Lujan Court appears to acknowledge, this would be an odd and far-reaching conclusion. It is almost always the case that procedural rights have only speculative consequences for a litigant. If a judge is found to have ruled in favor of party A after taking a bribe from party A, it remains speculative whether an unbiased judge would have ruled for party B. Does party B therefore lack standing? Or suppose that an administrator is found to have violated the Administrative Procedure Act by promulgating a regulation without first publishing it for comment in the Federal Register. It is entirely speculative whether compliance would make any difference to the complainants. The Lujan Court, however, does not want the redressability requirement to bar standing in such cases. 
Perhaps the Court is endorsing Justice Kennedy's suggestion that "Congress has the power to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a case or controversy where none existed before. ' 281 More deeply, however, I think that the Court's conclusion on this point exemplifies several of the problems associated with the whole notion of redressability. A procedural right is created, not because it necessarily yields particular outcomes, but because it structures incentives and creates pressures that Congress has deemed important to effective regulation. The same is true for the sorts of interests at stake in the ESA and in many other environmental statutes. Congress is attempting not to dictate outcomes but to create procedural guarantees that will produce certain regulatory incentives. Redressability in the conventional sense is irrelevant. 
This point might well have arisen in Lujan itself. Even though it did not, the opinion makes clear that procedural harms remain cognizable when ordinary injuries are involved, despite the absence of redressability. 
B. 
Thus far I have explained the types of suits Lujan has left untouched. But it is equally clear that Lujan forecloses "pure" citizen suits. In these suits, a stranger with an ideological or law-enforcement interest initiates a proceeding against the government, seeking to require an agency to undertake action of the sort required by law. Many environmental statutes now allow such actions, and plaintiffs have brought many suits of this kind. Under Lujan, these suits are unacceptable. Congress must at a minimum "identify the injury it seeks to vindicate and relate the injury to the class of persons entitled to bring suit. '2 82 If Congress has simply given standing to citizens, 283 this requirement has not been met. The plaintiff must point to a concrete injury, not merely to a congressional grant of standing. 
The discussion thus far has focused to a large extent on changes in the law of injury in fact. Lujan extends this change, placing a renewed emphasis on the notion that the harm must be imminent and nonspeculative. This requirement will likely carry more weight than it has in the past. Before Lujan, requiring people to obtain a plane ticket or to make firm plans to visit the habitat of endangered species might 
well have been unnecessarily formalistic. Now such actions are apparently required. But this is not a fundamental revision of previous law. The celebrated SCRAP case284 is probably a relic. But on that point, the handwriting had been on the wall a long time, and, if the analysis thus far is correct, there is no reason to mourn for SCRAP, in which Congress had not conferred a right to bring suit. 
Harder questions could arise in consumer cases, which play a large role in contemporary administrative law. Suppose, for example, that the government imposes on automobile manufacturers fuel economy requirements that are less stringent than the law requires. 28 5 Typically, plaintiffs will argue that their injury consists of a diminished opportunity to purchase the products in question.286 After Lujan, standing becomes a difficult issue in such cases. A court might find that the plaintiffs lack a concrete or particularized interest. They are perhaps not readily distinguished from the public at large. There is an issue about speculativeness as well: perhaps the relationship between a consumer and a product that he allegedly wants is the same as the relationship between the Lujan plaintiffs and an endangered species, in the sense that in neither case is it clear that the injury will occur as a result of the complained-of government acts. 
A consumer case of this sort may differ from Lujan, however, in the important sense that a consumer who complains of a diminished opportunity to purchase a product can very plausibly claim that he will in fact purchase that product. This claim is probably less speculative than that in Lujan. It is possible to discount an "intention" to undertake difficult foreign travel at an unspecified time; the intention may not show sufficient likelihood of harm. But it is harder to discount an intention to purchase a specified product, which usually applies to a single, simple transaction. The distinction suggests that, at least as Lujan stands, it does not significantly affect the standard consumers' action. In the automobile case, the key point is that a moreor-less sharply defined category of consumers is distinctly affected in a relatively nonspeculative way, and this is probably enough for standing. 287 
The same would be true in the standard broadcasting case, in 
1986), and Center for Auto Safety v. Thomas, 806 F.2d 1071 (D.C. Cir. 1986), vacated per curtam, 810 F.2d 302 (D.C. Cir. 1987), reinstatedper curiam, 847 F.2d 843 (D.C. Cir.) (en bane) (by an equally divided court), vacatedper curiam, 856 F.2d 1557 (D.C. Cir. 1988). 
Thomas, 847 F.2d at 849. 
which listeners or viewers in a defined area, or of defined programming, challenge an FCC decision that bears on their programming choices. 288 If the FCC refuses to license a classical music station, there is a concrete injury, and it is sufficiently particularized under Lujan. The intention to listen to a station is not as conjectural as the travel intention at issue in Lujan. 
Greater difficulties may arise in some similar actions, as when, for example, consumers challenge an FDA or EPA regulation allowing carcinogens to be added to food. 289 There may be serious standing problems in such cases. A person complaining about such a regulation might be said to be suffering an injury that is speculative or generalized. This is especially likely insofar as the injury is characterized as an actual incidence of cancer. It is extremely speculative to suggest that the introduction of carcinogenic substances into food additives will produce cancer in particular human beings. 
The issue becomes harder if the injury is characterized as a greater risk of cancer. In that event, the injury is less speculative; but it is unclear that it is sufficiently particularized. On Justice Kennedy's view, there is probably enough for standing, for he insisted that standing can exist even if the injury is very widely shared. 290 This is indeed the correct view, because it is the most plausible conception of the injury that Congress sought to prevent.29 1 But the issue is now open. 
Because only four justices concluded that the redressability requirement had not been met in Lujan, the case probably offers no real lessons on that issue. After Lujan, the law of redressability thus remains as it was before: Extremely fuzzy and highly manipulable. It is manipulable, first, because there is no clear metric by which to decide whether it is "speculative" to say that a decree will remedy the plaintiff's injury. It is manipulable, second, because, as we have seen, whether an injury is redressable depends on how it is defined. If the injury in the Bakke case was defined as the right to attend law school, the redressability requirement was violated. If the injury in a standard environmental case is defined as the right not to suffer concrete personal health damage as a result of environmental harm, many environ288. See, eg., Office of Communication of the United Church of Christ v. FCC, 359 F.2d 994, 1002 (D.C. Cir. 1967). 
(D.C. Cir. 1987). 

mental plaintiffs will be unable to show redressability. If, however, the injury is defined as freedom from a certain risk of health damage, there is no problem of redressability. This indeed appears to be the way courts conventionally treat the issue. 
Consider, for example, some of the regulatory cases described above. If an agency changes its policy for determining fuel efficiency, will prospective purchasers of fuel-efficient vehicles be affected? The answer is not clear. Perhaps manufacturers would simply pay civil penalties, rather than change their behavior. 292 It is speculative whether government policies will change the policies of manufacturers soon enough to affect particular consumer choices. 293 If the EPA refuses to allow carcinogens onto the market, perhaps the consumer will get cancer in any event; perhaps he will not get cancer whatever the EPA does. In fact, the EPA decision may well not make the difference in the life of any particular person. Standing might therefore be denied on grounds of redressability. 
If we were to start afresh, the best way to handle the issue would be to say that the question of standing depends on whether Congress has authorized the plaintiff to bring suit. We should be asking whether the injury that Congress sought to prevent would likely be redressed by a favorable judgment.2 94 The redressability requirement might be understood as a crude way of asking that very question under the general rubric of "injury in fact." We might therefore try to answer the redressability question by characterizing the injury in the way desired by Congress, and then seeing if that injury would be removed by a decree in the plaintiff's favor. Through this route, the question of characterization could be resolved through legislative judgments, not judicial ones. And while the resulting issues of statutory interpretation will not always be simple, they raise the right questions. 
E. 
The status of the citizen suit is somewhat obscure after Lujan. At dissenting). 
[Tihe causation and redressability question is meaningful only at the level of determining whether a cause of action should exist for a certain group of plaintiffs under a particular statutory or constitutional provision .... [G]iven the different purposes of different statutory and constitutional provisions, some variation is entirely appropriate from one provision to another.... The question is whether, under the statutory or constitutional provision at issue, the particular provision should be read to protect against the injury asserted by the kind of person who is seeking to bring suit. 
Id. at 242-43. a minimum, we know that Congress cannot grant standing to people who have no personal stake in the outcome of an agency action. But Justice Kennedy, joined by Justice Souter, said that Congress "has the power to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a case or controversy where none existed before. '2 95 This is a potentially crucial phrase. What does it mean? At a minimum, it means that Congress can create rights foreign to the common law. These include the right to be free from discrimination,2 96 the right to occupational safety,2 97 indeed, the vast panoply of statutory rights going beyond common law understandings. It must also mean that Congress has the power to find causation, perhaps deploying its factfinding power, where courts would not do so. 298 Justice Kennedy thus suggests that Congress can find causation and redressability even where courts would disagree. Perhaps courts will review such findings under a deferential standard. 
This view would not change the outcome in Lujan. In that case, there was no injury in fact. But it might well make a difference in the several cases in which the Court has previously rejected standing on grounds of causation and redressability. Congress might well have the power to alter those outcomes. 
Suppose, for example, that Congress found that efforts to produce desegregation were adversely affected by a grant of tax deductions to schools that discriminated on the basis of race. This finding might well call for a reversal of the outcome in Allen v. Wright.29 9 Or suppose that Congress found that failure to attain national ambient air quality standards in New York had adverse health effects on the citizens of New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, and Pennsylvania. Perhaps courts would have to respect this finding. 
The more difficult question involves constraints on Congress' 
Metropolian Life Ins. Co., 409 U.S. 205, 212 (1972) (White, J., concurring). As noted above, the Havens Court found an injury to a "statutorily created right to truthful housing information," which it held sufficient for standing. 455 U.S. at 374. Effectively, Congress had created a kind of property interest in such information. The Lujan Court does not explain why Congress may not do the same for endangered species, or for the rainforest, or for clean air in an area in which one does not live. See supra text accompanying note 202; cf United States Parole Commn. v. Geraghty, 445 U.S. 388, 404 (1980) (noting that a class action does not become moot after the named plaintiff's substantive claim has expired as the representative retains a "personal stake" in obtaining class certification). 

Separation of Powers and Deference to CongressionalFindings in the StandingAnalysis, 59 U. CHI. L. REv. (forthcoming 1992). 
"power to define injuries." Can Congress say that opportunity-type injuries are legally cognizable? Might Congress follow the Bakke strategy and conclude that standing exists in many cases involving increases in risks or attempts to alter incentives? Lujan provides no authoritative answer. But Justice Kennedy's concurrence suggests that Congress does possess power to define these events as injuries for purposes of standing. Justice Kennedy emphasized that standing need not be based solely on common law-like injuries; his concern was that, in creating the citizen suit, Congress had not even identified the injury it was attempting to redress. Congress can meet this concern by identifying injuries, building on the common law framework to recognize probabilistic, systemic, or regulatory harms. The decreased probability of injury, the grant of opportunities, and the provision of appropriate incentives are key goals of the regulatory state. It should not be dificult for Congress to connect these goals to the injuries it seeks to prevent. Nothing in Article III forbids this course, even after 
Many citizen-suit provisions in the environmental laws give the citizen the option of initiating proceedings against the private defendant allegedly operating in violation of federal law. Formally, Lujan did not address this strategy because the case involved a governmental defendant. Does Lujan affect suits against private persons? The answer is unclear. We have seen that a large part of the Court's opinion relies on the fear that, without a particularized injury, courts will be displacing executive power under the Take Care Clause. This concern is entirely inapplicable when the executive is not even a party. 3°° On the other hand, if Article III does indeed require a personal stake, the identity of the defendant should not matter. A case in which a citizen initiates proceedings against a private defendant would indeed test the claim that the Take Care Clause is a major impetus behind the Lujan decision. 
I have argued that this claim makes little sense. If so, and if Lujan remains good law, a citizen should not have standing to proceed against a private defendant unless he can show some kind of personal enforce federal statutory law, there is a lurking issue about private interference with the exercise of prosecutorial discretion, and hence with the President's "Take Care" power. But this issue surely does not have constitutional status. Parallel public and private remedies are most familiar to American law; they do not violate the Constitution. stake. After Lujan, the citizen-suit provisions are probably unconstitutional even when the defendant is a private citizen or corporation. 
G. 
Perhaps Congress can respond to Lujan by granting cash bounties to citizen plaintiffs. Indeed, this possibility might produce some of the most important and difficult post-Lujan issues. If Congress wants to reinstate the citizen suit after Lujan, a cash bounty would be the simplest strategy. Indeed, an exceedingly short amendment to existing law, giving a bounty to all successful citizen plaintiffs, should be sufficient. For reasons that follow, the bounty should create an interest and hence standing. In this way, a system of bounties would fully overcome the post-Lujan doubts about the citizen suit. A bounty system would also be more straightforward than the principal alternative strategy now available to Congress, involving restructured property rights. 30 1 
A bounty system would have the important advantage of building on the clear historical precedents of qui tam and informers' actions, precedents that are firmly established in American law.302 To the extent that the citizen suit is a helpful device,303 Congress should be encouraged to take this step. At least where administrative inaction is both harmful and predictable, and where it cannot be prevented through more fundamental regulatory reform, 304 a bounty system would make a great deal of sense. Indeed, the creation of a system of citizen bounties could well be a major step in administrative law. 
In the first case, Congress might allow citizens to proceed against polluters or others without requiring a conventional injury in fact, but with provision for a financial bounty to victorious citizen litigants. Does the bounty create the requisite personal interest or concrete stake? 
In this context, Lujan is probably inapplicable by its own rationale. There is no risk that courts will usurp executive functions under the Take Care Clause. The executive is not a defendant. Not only is the executive not involved, but the plaintiff has a concrete interest in the form of the bounty. Standing seems perfectly appropriate. In fact, the 
Lujan Court seemed to invite this conclusion: "Nor, finally, is [this] the unusual case in which Congress has created a concrete private interest in the outcome of a suit against a private party for the government's benefit, by providing a cash bounty for the victorious plaintiff. ' 30 5 The qui tam action and the informers' action 30 6 seem to be decisive precedents in favor of this conclusion. In both of these actions, a bounty was provided, and it would be most adventurous to say that these arrangements violated Article III. 
In the second case, Congress might give a cash bounty to litigants who have prevailed against the government. It might, for example, award $500 to plaintiffs in cases involving environmental harms. It might even amend all current citizen-suit provisions in order to provide a cash bounty. A simple statute could accomplish this goal. Would this entail a different outcome from that in Lujan? 
The answer is unclear. On the one hand, the executive remains a defendant, and the Lujan objection from the Take Care Clause remains. On the other hand, the existence of a cash bounty gives the plaintiff the equivalent of a personal stake in the outcome, just like a case in which she has a right to obtain damages from a common law tortfeasor. This personal stake is probably sufficient to create standing. Here the informers' action is a direct precedent. 
The Take Care Clause, even as understood in Lujan, is likely to be held irrelevant where a bounty is at stake. According to the Court, the clause furnishes no objection in a case in which the plaintiff can show that the government's allegedly unlawful inaction impairs her enjoyment of some environmental asset. Hence the Take Care Clause is not a freestanding objection to suits of this general kind. It is called into play only in cases without a personal stake for the plaintiff. If a plaintiff can show that she stands to gain or lose from the outcome of the action, she is no longer interested only in "law enforcement for its own sake." She thus has standing to initiate the action. 
If this analysis is correct, Congress has available a relatively simple corrective to Lujan if it believes that the decision will significantly undermine its regulatory goals. Existing statutes can be simply amended through the grant of a bounty to victorious citizen plaintiffs. No Article III problem would result from this initiative. If Congress wants to overcome Lujan, this is the best and simplest route. It would make the various citizen-suit provisions constitutional in cases in which Lujan draws them into severe doubt. 
I have criticized the injury-in-fact test on the ground that it undermines Congress' power to create property rights where they had not existed before. In Lujan, the plaintiffs might well have asserted that the conferral of a cause of action amounted to the creation of a form of property. Justice Kennedy had an answer to this claim: "Congress has the power to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a case or controversy where none existed before. '30 7 But here Congress has refused to "identify the injury it seeks to vindicate and relate the injury to the class of persons entitled to bring suit. ' 30 8 Apparently, plaintiffs had no property right under the ESA, because Congress failed explicitly to define the relevant injury when it provided for citizen suits. 
Suppose, then, that Congress attempts to create a citizen suit in the following way. It announces, first, that all Americans have a kind of property right - a tenancy in common - in some environmental asset. The asset might be clean air anywhere in the country, or pristine areas, or the continued existence of endangered species in the United States or abroad. If this seems odd, we might note that Congress could surely create property rights in unowned land within the United States; to the extent that such rights do not interfere with the claims of a competing sovereign, Congress can create them with respect to unowned land outside our territorial borders. 309 And surely Congress' capacity to create property rights is not limited to land. If Congress thus defines property rights and injuries and creates a correlative cause of action, has it acted appropriately and met Justice Kennedy's concern? 
The answer would seem to be affirnmative. The advantages of express legislative creation of a property right are that it would build on common law understandings and produce more focused congressional deliberation on the nature of the interest it is creating. The citizen suit 
Argentina produces medicines especially beneficial to Americans. Suppose that the activities of private American companies in Argentina threaten to industrialize that area and thus to eliminate its medicinal capacities. Congress might respond by forbidding these activities and by creating a property right in all Americans, operating only against other Americans, to the continued productivity of the area. This could not possibly raise a constitutional issue, or even a problem of international law. has become a relatively automatic part of environmental law, with little legislative attention to its nature and consequences. If the citizen suit is in fact intended to give all citizens the equivalent of a beneficial interest in environmental quality, it may well be desirable to focus congressional attention on exactly that question. And if Congress concludes that it seeks to create this kind of property, there should be no constitutional problem. 
Indeed, the case would seem to be very close to Havens Realty,3 10 discussed above. If there is a difference, it is that, in the cases under discussion, Congress has created a tenancy in common with respect to a collective good - that is, property that is jointly owned. In Havens Realty, by contrast, the property right could be held by individuals rather than many people at once. 
Under Justice Scalia's conception of standing, this distinction would make a difference. In the collective good case, unlike in Havens Realty, we are hardly dealing with "minorities." Majorities may have less need for the citizen suit. But this conception of standing faces many problems, as elaborated above. In any event, Justice Kennedy clearly disagrees on this point. His opinion plainly says that standing is not to be denied simply because many people are adversely affected. 
If all this is correct, some of the most interesting developments in the law of standing may arise when Congress is explicit in its intention to create new forms of property adapted to the problems and aspirations of modem regulation. If Congress creates property rights in environmental assets of various sorts, and grants correlative causes of action, it should be able to overcome the strictures of Lujan. Faced with such an enactment, the Court would not be dealing with a "citizen suit" at all. Instead it would be faced with a suit brought by property holders equipped with causes of action; and it would be odd if congressional initiatives in this direction would be held inconsistent with Article III. 
CONCLUSION 
At least in general, standing depends on whether any source of law has created a cause of action. To a large extent, that question is for congressional resolution. Congress can create standing as it chooses and, in general, can deny standing when it likes. 311 As an abstraction accompanying text. 
Due Process Clause. On Article III, see Richard H. Fallon, OfLegislative Courts,Administrative Agencies, andArticle II 101 HARv. L. REv. 915 (1988); on due process, see Yakus v. United independent of what the law says, an injury in fact is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for standing. Indeed, the notion of injury in fact is a form of Lochner-style substantive due process. It assumes that there can be a factual inquiry into "injury" independent of evaluation and of legal conventions. There can be no such law-free inquiry. It is a conceptual impossibility, indeed a form of metaphysics. 
Despite the holding of Lujan, Congress should be permitted to grant standing to citizens. The text and history of Article III provide no support for judicial invalidation of congressional grants of citizen standing. On the contrary, England, the American colonies, and early Congresses all granted standing to strangers. No one suggested that this practice violated the Constitution. The Lujan Court's unprecedented invalidation of a provision for citizen standing has no basis in Article III. The Court should not have reached its important conclusion without investigating the relevant history, and the odd evolution of standing doctrine, in much more detail. 
Lujan answers a long-unresolved issue; but it leaves a number of other significant questions unanswered. I have tried to describe how they might be resolved. It seems clear that citizen-suit provisions are now impermissible in the absence of a showing of injury in fact. But Lujan permits environmental actions whenever plaintiffs can show that environmental degradation will affect their geographical area in the form of dirtier air, dirtier water, or inferior aesthetics. Many suits by regulatory beneficiaries will thus remain viable. 
Perhaps most important, Congress probably retains a relatively simple mechanism by which to accomplish the purposes that underlie current provisions for citizen actions. Certainly it can grant citizens standing against private defendants so long as it allows some kind of bounty for a victorious lawsuit. Almost certainly, Lujan permits Congress to allow citizens to bring suit against the government for insufficient regulatory action, if a bounty is made available in the event of success. 
Most intriguingly, Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion leaves open the possibility that Congress has the power to create quite novel property interests, to grant those interests to many people or even to citizens, and to confer standing to enable people to vindicate those interests. It may be that, in cases raising this issue, we will see the ultimate depth of the Court's commitment to Lujan's odd adventure in substantive due process. 
