University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1992 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Informing America: Risk, Disclosure, and the First Amendment 
Informing America: Risk, Disclosure, and the First Amendment 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Informing America: Risk, Disclosure, and the First Amendment," 20 Florida State 
University Law Review 653 (1992). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

INFORMING  AMERICA:  RISK,  DISCLOSURE,  AND THE
FIRST  AMENDMENT

CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN*

WE are  in  the  midst  of  an  extraordinary  period  of  democratiza-
tion.  All  over  the  world,  authoritarian  regimes  are  being  re-
placed  with  systems  that  aim  for  democratic  self-governance.
American  aspirations,  for  a  long  time  so  controversial  both here  and
abroad,  appear  to  have  emerged  triumphant  after  an  era  of  intense
competition.  But  perhaps  the  international  movement  for  democrati-
zation  can  help  cast  light on  our  own  problems  and  dilemmas  as  well.
Perhaps  it  can  make  us  rethink  some  of  our  own  basic  practices.  So,
at  least,  I  will  be arguing.

In the last  fifty years,  national government  in America  has  taken  on
entirely  new  dimensions.'  Massive  bureaucracies  are  entrusted  with
basic  social  tasks:  promoting  economic  efficiency,  redistributing  re-
sources  to  the  needy  (and  not  so  needy),  increasing  employment,  re-
flecting  public  values,  and reducing  risks.  The reduction  of social  risks
has  perhaps  been  the  most  intense  preoccupation  of  regulatory  gov-
ernment  in  the  last  quarter  century.  An extraordinarily  wide  range  of
agencies-including  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  the  Federal
Aviation  Administration,  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  the
Federal  Trade  Commission,  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Ad-
ministration,  the  Consumer  Product  Safety  Administration-are
obliged  to  protect  Americans  against  the  dangers  they  face  in  daily
life.  Here  democratic  aspirations  loom  large.  Here  those  aspirations
have often  been disappointed.

A  full  account  of  the  reasons  would  require  a  long  story.2  But  a
pervasive  problem  is  the  use  of  rigid,  highly  bureaucratized  "con-

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  University  of Chicago,  Law School  and
Department  of Political  Science.  This  Essay,  originally delivered  as  the  Ladd  Lecture at  Florida
State  University  in  March  1992,  is a  companion  piece to Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Democratizing Amer-
ica  Through Law,  25  SUFFOLK  U.  L.  REv.  949  (1991).  That  Essay  briefly  discusses  economic
incentives,  informational  strategies,  and  decentralization  as  reforms  to  the  current  regulatory
state;  this Essay  focuses  in  much  more detail  on  informational  strategies.  There  is  some  overlap
between  the two  essays.

1.  Some of this is  well-discussed  in THEODORE  J.  Lowi,  THE  PERSONAL  PRESIDENT:  POWER

INVESTED,  PROMSE  UNFULFILLED  (1985).

2.  Part  of it  can  be  found  in  CAsS  R.  SUNSTEIN,  AFTER  THE  RIGHTS  REVOLUTION:  RECON-
CEIINO THE  REGULATORY  STATE  (1990)  and  in  Cass  R.  Sunstein, Administrative Substance, 1991
DUKE  L.J.  607.

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 653 1992-1993

654 

FLORIDA STATE  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW 

[Vol.  20:653

mand  and  control"  regulation,  which  dictates,  at  the  national  level,
risk  control  strategies  for  hundreds,  thousands,  or  millions  of compa-
nies  in  an exceptionally  diverse  nation.  Such  regulation  is  widely  inef-
ficient.  It  wastes  billions  of  dollars  by 
ignoring  the  enormous
differences  among  plants  and  industries  and  among  geographical  ar-
eas.  It  is  not  sensible  to  impose  the  same  technology  on  industries  in
diverse  areas-regardless  of whether  they  are polluted  or clean,  popu-
lated or empty,  or expensive  or cheap  to  clean  up.

Equally  fundamental,  such  strategies  are  deficient  from  the  stand-
point  of  a well-functioning  democratic  process.  They  ensure  that  out-
comes  will  be  dictated  from the  center.  They  make no  effort  to benefit
from  or  to  increase  citizen  participation  in  selecting  social  outcomes.
Often  they  ensure  that  citizens  and  representatives  will  be  focusing
their  attention  not  on  what  levels  of  risk  reduction  are  appropriate,
but instead  on  isolated  extreme  cases,  or  on  the  largely  incidental  and
nearly impenetrable  question  of what  technologies  are now  available.
They  focus  on  the  question  of  regulatory  "means,"  a  focus  that  in-
creases  the  power  of  well-organized  private  groups  by  allowing  them
to  press  the  law  in  the  service  of  their  own  parochial  ends.  In  this
light,  it is no  wonder that  some  observers  think  our  current  system is  a
kind  of  Madisonian  nightmare  in  which  James  Madison's  vision  of
deliberative  democracy  has  been  transformed  into  a  system  of govern-
ment as  a series  of interest  group  deals.'

I  think that  we  should try  to  start  over.  In  many  areas,  perhaps  the
first  and  most  basic  problem  is  that  Americans  lack  the  necessary  in-
formation.  With respect  to  social  risks,  perhaps the  first  goal ought  to
be  to  ensure  genuinely  informed  choices,  rather  than  to  dictate  out-
comes  from  Washington.  In  short,  our  first  line  of defense  should  be
educative,  rather  than  regulatory.  Thus  far,  we have  tended  to  pursue
the  opposite  strategy-regulate  first,  educate  only  in  exceptional
cases.  Might  we reverse  our priorities?

Such  a  reversal  would  steer  a  middle  course  between  the  1980s  en-
thusiasm  for  laissez-faire  and  the  1970s  embrace  of regulatory govern-
ment.  Markets  do  fail;  markets  for  risk  are  especially  unreliable.  But
we  know  enough  about  command-and-control  government  to  under-
stand that  regulation  is  no  panacea.  It often  interferes  with  individual
liberty.  It  exacts  a  large  toll in  terms  of economic  efficiency,  and it  is
a disaster  from the standpoint  of democracy.

This  Essay  comes  in  four  parts.  Part  I  outlines  the  basic  case  for
informational  remedies.  Part  II  describes  current  initiatives  and  em-

3. 

See Richard  B. Stewart,  Madison's  Nightmare,  57  U.  Cwi.  L.  REv.  335  (1990).

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 654 1992-1993

19931

INFORMING AMERICA

pirical findings.  Part  III  qualifies  my basic  argument,  showing  ways in
which  informational  remedies  may  fail.  Part  IV  explains  how  the  ar-
guments  suggested  here  might  require  a  large-scale  revision  in  our  un-
derstandings  about  the system  of  free  expression.  Through  this  route,
I  hope to  suggest  that  the discussion  of risk regulation  might bear  very
generally  on  the  problem  of information  and on the  government's  role
in providing  it.

I.  THE CASE  FOR  INFORMATIONAL  REMEDIES

Many  Americans  are  unaware  of  the  risks  they  face  in  day-to-day
life.  Workers  often  do  not  know  about  toxic  substances  in  the  work-
places  or  about  the  risks  that  these  substances  cause.  Consumers  of
ordinary  foods  are unable  to  evaluate  the  dangers  posed  by  fats,  cal-
cium,  sugar,  and  salt.  People  in  small  communities  do  not  know  that
toxic  waste  dumping  has  occurred.  If they  know  the facts,  they  do  not
know  the risks.  From  all  this,  we  can  generate  a  strong  argument  for
informational  remedies-on  grounds  of  liberty,  economic  efficiency,
and democracy.

A.  Liberty

If  people  are  unaware  of  the  consequences  of  their  choices,  they
are,  to  that  extent,  less  free.  Workers  who  choose  a  certain  place  of
employment  do not  do so  freely  if they  do not  know about  the level  of
risk  of getting  cancer  from  exposure  to chemicals.  Someone  who  buys
a  lawn  mower  has  not  done  so  freely  if  he  or  she  is  unaware  of  the
risks  of an  accident.  People who  vote  on policies  or  candidates  have  a
lot  less  liberty  if  they  lack  relevant  information  about  the  conse-
quences.  There  is  room  for  disagreement  about  how  much  informa-
tion  is  too  little  and  about  the  efficacy  of  governmental  disclosure
policies.  But  it  is  hard  to dispute  the  proposition  that the disclosure  of
information  can  increase  human  liberty  under  any  view  of that  admit-
tedly controversial  term.

B.  Economic Efficiency

When  information  is  lacking,  there  may  well  be a  conventional  case

of market  failure  under  economic  criteria.4  To be  sure,  information-
like  other  goods-is  a  scarce  commodity.  Perhaps  the market  has  pro-

4.  See  PETER  ASCH,  CONSUMER  SAFETY  REGULATION,  PuTrINc  A  PRICE  ON  LIFE AND  LIMB
(1988);  Susan  Rose-Ackerman,  Progressive Law  and Economics-and the  New Administrative
Law, 98  YALE  L.J.  341  (1988).

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 655 1992-1993

656 

FLORIDA STATE  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  20:653

duced  the  optimal level  of information.  The  optimal  level  is  not com-
plete  information.  If the  optimal  level is  produced,  there  is  no  market
failure,  even  if there  might  be  a  problem  under  noneconomic  criteria.
But there  are  several  reasons  why  the  market  for  information  may in-
deed  fail.

First,  information  is  sometimes  a  public  good.  Once  it  is  available
at  all,  or  to  anyone,  it  may  be  available  to  everyone  or  to  many  peo-
ple.  People  can thus  capture  the benefits  of information  without  hav-
ing  to  pay  for  its  production.  Once  created,  a  report  discussing  the
risks posed  by  carcinogens  in  the workforce  may  well  benefit  employ-
ees  a  great  deal-but  no  individual  employee  has  the  right  incentives
to  pay  his  proportional  share  for  the  report.  Each  employee  has  the
incentive to  "free  ride"  on the  efforts  of others.  The result  is  that too
little information  will be  forthcoming.

The  point  applies to  materials  about  shared  risks  in  general.  Indeed,
the  point  applies  to  materials  about  all matters  of shared  importance.
It  suggests  that  there  is  a  strong  case,  on  economic  grounds,  for  a
good  deal  of governmental  interference  in  the information  market.

Second,  manufacturers  may  have  poor  incentives  to  provide  infor-
mation  about  hazardous  products.  Competition  over  the  extent  of
danger  may  decrease  total  purchases  of the  product,  rather  than  help
any  particular  manufacturer  to  obtain  greater  sales.  The  phenomenon
has  sometimes  played  a  role  in  discouraging  competition  over  safety
among  manufacturers  of tobacco  products.'

Information  asymmetries  may  produce  a  "lemons"  problem  in
which  dangerous  products  drive  safe  ones  out  of  the  market. 6  Imag-
ine,  for  example,  that  producers  know  which  products  are  safe  but
that consumers  cannot tell.  Safe  products  may  not be able  to compete
if they  sell  for  a  higher  price  than  dangerous  ones  if safe  products  are
more  expensive  to  produce,  and  if  consumers  are  unable  to  tell  the
difference.  In  that  case,  the  fact  that  sellers  have  information,  while
buyers  do  not,  will ensure that  "lemons"-here  dangerous  products-
will  dominate  the  market.  All  this  suggests  that  there  is  frequently  a
market  failure  in  the  provision  of information.  At least  as  a presump-
tive  matter,  government  remedies  are  an  appropriate  response.  These
remedies  should  ordinarily  take  the  form of  governmentally  provided
information,  education  campaigns,  or  disclosure  requirements 
im-
posed  on  private  firms.  Strictly  on  economic  grounds,  there  is  much

5.  There  are,  however,  many  cases  where  companies  compete  over  safety  and,  in  that

sense,  the market  often  works  as an effective  check  on dangerous  products.

6.  See George  A.  Akerlof,  The  Market for "'Lemons": Quality Uncertainty and the Mar-

ket Mechanism, 84 Q.J.  EcoN.  488  (1970).

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 656 1992-1993

19931

INFORMING AMERICA

to  be  said  in  favor  of these  remedies.  They  may  fortify  the  operation
of the  marketplace.  They  may  also  be  a  precondition  for  free  choice,
the background  assumption  of efficient  markets.

C.  Democracy

Suppose  that  we  wanted  to  increase  the  democratic  character  of
contemporary  government  by  promoting  citizen  participation  in  and
control  over  governmental  processes.  A  good  initial step  would  be  for
government 
to  provide  enough  information  for  people  to  make
knowledgeable  judgments.

Government  itself  might  supply  information  or  require  disclosure
by  private  citizens  and  companies.  Consider,  for  example,  the  matter
of expenditures  per lives saved .7 There  is  now considerable  data on the
amount  of money  spent to save  lives  in various  government  programs.
What  emerges  is  a  crazy  quilt,  and  very  few  people  know  about  it.
Some  programs  pay  for themselves  in  terms of health  and  related  sav-
ings;  others  are  extremely  hard to defend.  At  the  very least,  the  Amer-
ican  public  should  be  informed  of  these  disparities  so  that  it  can
evaluate  them.  Provision  of  information  about  the  content  and  ex-
pense  of  regulatory  programs  should  be  high  on  the  governmental
agenda.  Without  such  information,  people  cannot  evaluate  govern-
mental  policies.  They  will  respond  to  sensationalistic  anecdotes  or
misleading  stories,  rather  than analyze  the facts.

Consider  the  question  of  risk  regulation  in  general.  On  that  ques-
tion,  people  are  poorly  informed.'  For  example,  they  appear  not  to
know  that the risks  of nuclear  power  are substantially  smaller  than the
risks  posed  by other  energy  sources.  They  appear  not  to  have  a  clear
sense  of the  relationships  among  different  risks  that are  confronted  in
everyday  life.  Smoking,  for  example,  produces  more  than  345,000
deaths  per  year; 9  all  occupations  produce  about  11,000  annual
deaths, 0  although  this  number  is  disputed;  and  nearly  50,000  deaths
come  from automobile  accidents."l

7.  See SuNsTEiN,  RIGHTs  REvOLuTIoN,  supra note 2,  app. B.
8.  See generally  STEPHEN  G.  BREYER,  BtAKINO  Tm  VIciOUS  CIRCLE:  TowARD  EFFEcTV
RISK  REGULATION  (forthcoming  1993).  Some  of this  is  undoubtedly  a  product  of  heuristics  of
various  sorts.  See Paul Slovic  et  al.,  Informing the Public About  the Risks from Ionizing Radia-
tion,  in  JUDGMENT  AND  DECISION  MAKING:  AN  INTERDISCIPLINARY  READER  (Hal  R.  Arkes  &
Kenneth  R.  Hammond  eds.,  1986).  More  information,  however,  could  help  overcome  some  of
the  relevant biases.

9.  See ROBERT  E.  GOODIN,  No SMOKING:  THE  ETHIcAL IssuEs  8 (1989).
10.  See W.  Ki  Viscusi,  FATAL  TRADEOFFS:  PUBLIc  AND  PRIVATE  REsPoNsmarias  FOR  RISK

3 (1992).
11. 

Id.

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 657 1992-1993

658 

FLORIDA STATE  UNIVERSITY LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  20:653

Information  of this  sort  ought  to  be  widely  available.  The  fact  that
it is  not creates  a  significant  failure  in  government  regulation.  At  least
equally  important,  it  presents  a  large  obstacle  to  citizenship.  The
problem  appears  in  the  private  sector,  in  local government,  and  at  the
state  and  national  levels.  Workers  uninformed  of  risks  are  unable  to
participate  usefully  in  the  process  of  deciding  among  different  possi-
ble  levels  of  workplace  safety.  Local  communities,  seeking  to  decide
whether  to  allow  toxic  waste  sites  or  plants  that  produce  sulfur  diox-
ide,  need  to be in  a  position to  make informed  choices.

A  large  virtue  of  a  federal  system  is  that  it  permits  different  states,
having  different  values,  to  make  different  choices  about  social  ar-
rangements.  In  the  context  at  hand,  many  decisions  about  the  rela-
tions  among  industrial  development,  employment,  pollution,  and  risk
must  be  made  at the  state  level.  An  absence  of information  is  a  severe
obstacle  to  this  process.  The  same  is  true  at  the  national  level,  where
sensational  anecdotes  displace  reasoned  analysis  of the  alternatives.

The  most  general  way  to  put  the  point  is  to  note  that  on  the  fra-
mers'  view,  America  was  supposed  to  be  a  deliberative  democracy  in
which  representatives,  accountable  to  the  people,  would  make  deci-
sions  through  a  process  of  deliberation  uncontrolled  by  private  fac-
tions.' 2  Without  better  information,  neither  deliberation  nor
democracy  is  possible.  Legal  reforms  designed  to remedy  the situation
are a precondition  for democratic  politics.

D.  The Comparative Advantages of Informational Remedies
Thus  far,  we  have  seen  that  provision  of  information  may  well  be
an  improvement  over  a system  of  laissez-faire.  We  can simultaneously
promote  liberty,  efficiency,  and  democracy  with  informational  reme-
dies,  even  though  these  goals  are  sometimes  thought  to  conflict.  Such
remedies  would  also  make  for  large  gains  as  compared  with  existing
regulatory  measures,  at  least  in  many  contexts.  As  noted,  those  struc-
tures  consist  of massive command-and-control  structures,  dictating  in-
dividual  outcomes  for  hundreds,  thousands,  and  even  millions  of
individuals  and  groups.  How  would  informational  strategies  compare
with  current  approaches?

From  the  standpoint  of liberty,  those  approaches  have  large  draw-
backs.  Most  important,  they  do  not  allow  individuals  to  make  in-
formed  choices  among  possible  options.  There  are two  problems  here.

12.  See  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  10  (James  Madison);  Joseph  M.  Bessette,  Deliberate Democ-
racy: The  Majority Principle, in AaERICA  GOVERNxENT,  How  DEMOCRATIC  IS THE  CONSTITU-
TION?  102  (Robert  A.  Goldwin  & William  A.  Schambra  eds.,  1983);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Interest
Groups in American Public Law,  38 STAN.  L.  REv.  29 (1985).

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 658 1992-1993

19931

INFORMING AMERICA

The  first  is that  inadequate  information  is  a serious  obstacle  to  liberty.
To  the  extent  that  current  approaches  do  not  provide  information,
they  disserve  this goal.

The  second  problem  is  that  governmentally  prescribed  outcomes  un-
necessarily  diminish  the  role  of  individual  decisions  and  choices  in
forming  individual  lives.  At  least  across  a  broad  range  of possibilities,
people  should  be  allowed  to  select  their  preferred  mixes  of  risk,  em-
ployment,  salary,  medical  care,  and  so  forth.  If  their  choice  is  irra-
tional,  or  if  it  has  large  consequences  for  others,  the  government  is
entitled  to  intervene.  But  the  presumption  should  be  in  favor  of  pri-
vate  choice.  Because  current  regulatory  law  forecloses  private  choice
in  favor  of  nationally  mandated  outcomes,  it  disserves  liberty,  cer-
tainly in  comparison  to  a system  in  which  information  is  provided.

It  is  no  answer  to say  that  private  choices  are  often  constrained  by
lack  of  sufficient  opportunities  or  by  unjust  background  conditions.
Mandated  regulatory  systems  often  seem  best  because  without  them,
people  in  difficult  conditions  may  be  forced  to  take  risky  (but  rela-
tively  remunerative)  jobs,  or  to  purchase  less  safe  but  inexpensive
products.  This  is  often  true;  people  in  difficult  conditions  will  trade
off greater  risk  for  other  goods  they  favor,  and  sometimes  the  risks
will  be  serious.  We  should  do  everything  we  can  to  increase  opportu-
nities,  to  prevent  or  ease  difficult  conditions,  and  to  diminish  injus-
tice.  But  a  regulatory  requirement  that  forecloses  the  best  of  a  set  of
bad  options  is  a  singularly  poor  strategy  for  accomplishing  any  of
these  goals.  If  people  are  forced  to  accept  higher  risks  for  more
money,  that  is  their  choice.  At  least  as  a general  rule,  we  do  them  no
favors  if we  require  them  to  have  less  money  and  lower  risks,  if  they
want  (as  we  are  assuming)  more  money  and  higher  risks.  Thus  far,
then,  the  provision  of  information  seems  far  preferable  to  govern-
mentally  mandated  outcomes,  at  least  on grounds  of liberty.

What  of  economic  efficiency?  The  sad  truth  is  that  existing  pro-
grams  are  often  extremely inefficient. 3  They cost far  more than is  nec-
essary  to  accomplish  their  salutary  goals.  They  waste  billions  of
dollars.  They penalize  investment,  both  in  general  and  (especially  per-
verse)  in  newer,  safer  technologies.  Precisely  because  of  their  unifor-
mity,  they  force  a  wide  range  of  actors  into  the  same  mold.  In  this
way,  too,  they  diminish  economic  efficiency,  which  calls  for  the  in-
vestment  of  social  resources  in  places  where  they  will  do  the  most
good.  Existing  programs  are  extremely  expensive  to  enforce  both  be-

13.  Bruce  A.  Ackerman  & Richard  B.  Stewart,  Reforming Environmental Law:  The Demo-

cratic Casefor Market Incentives,  13  COLUM.  J.  ENvrt. 

L.  171  (1988).

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 659 1992-1993

660 

FLORIDA STATE  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  20:653

cause  of  the  burden  they  impose  on  government  and  because  of  the
high  cost of private resources  that must  be spent on  compliance.

On  all  of these  scores,  informational  approaches  have  large  advan-
tages.  They  are  much  more  flexible.  Because  they  leave  considerable
room  for  freedom  of choice,  they  avoid  the  inefficiencies  of  central-
ized  dictation  of  outcomes.  They  are  generally  far  less  expensive  to
implement  for  private  industry  and  to  enforce  for  government.  They
impose  much  less  of  a  disincentive  to  productive  investment.  Indeed,
precisely  because  they  call  attention  to social  risks,  they  create  a good
incentive  for  technological  advances  in  the  area  of  safety.  This  is  a
huge  advantage  over  existing  systems,  where  the  incentive  often  runs
in the opposite direction.

Along  the  dimension  of  democracy,  informational  strategies  have
equivalent  strengths.  Command-and-control  regulation  has  especially
serious  democratic  drawbacks.  Usually  centralized  in  Washington,  it
is  far  too remote  to  encourage  or benefit  from widespread  citizen par-
ticipation.  A  national  decision  about  the  appropriate  technological
controls  on  a toxic  air  pollutant  will  have  only an  attenuated  connec-
tion to democratic  processes.

In  addition,  the  current  system  strongly  encourages  interest  group
maneuvering.  If  Congress  is  attempting  to  specify  the  particular
means  by  which  to  decrease  the  pollution  brought  about  by  gasoline,
it  will be  especially  vulnerable  to well-organized  private  groups.  Such
groups  will  attempt,  and  have  often  attempted,  to  promote  their  own
welfare  through  obtaining  pollution  control  technologies  that  benefit
them.  The  creation  of  such  incentives  is  poorly  suited  to  democrati-
cally  controlled  risk  reduction.  It  is  highly  likely  that  Congress  will
end  up  pleasing  the  relevant  groups  with  a  mechanism  that  helps  the
most powerful  and well-organized  lobbyists.

Finally,  and perhaps  most important,  a command-and-control  strat-
egy will  have  democratic  defects  precisely  to  the extent  the  citizenry  is
poorly  informed.  We  cannot  expect  people  to  participate  well,  or  to
participate  at  all,  if  they  lack  information  about  the  relevant  prob-
lems.

In  these  circumstances,  the  provision of  information  seems  to  have
large  democratic  advantages  over  the regulatory  status  quo.  It  should
promote  decentralization,  not  only  by  allowing  markets  to  function,
but  also  by  eliminating  nationally  mandated  solutions  and  increasing
the  power  of  states  and  local  communities.  It  should  diminish  the
power of well-organized  private  groups;  interest  group  maneuvering  is
certainly  possible,  but  probably  less  likely,  when  the  government  is
simply  providing  or requiring  provision  of information.  And  it  should

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 660 1992-1993

19931

INFORMING AMERICA

help  democratic  self-governance  precisely  to  the  extent  that  it  ensures
that people  will  be more  informed.

II.  EMPIucAL  EVIDENCE:  WHAT  WE'VE  DONE,  WHAT  WE  KNow

Thus  far,  we  have  seen  that informational  strategies  have important
advantages  over  both  laissez-faire  and the current  system  of regulating
social  risks.  But  the  discussion  has  been  relatively  abstract  and  a  bit
speculative.  In  this  section,  I  turn  to  some  details.  Part  A  discusses
current  initiatives.  Part B  outlines the current  record.

A.  What  We've  Done

The  national  government  has  started  a  series  of  steps  in  the  direc-
tion  of information  disclosure.  Mandatory  messages  about  risks  from
cigarette  smoking,  first  set  out  in  1965  and  modified  in  1969  and  1984,
are,  of course,  the  most  familiar  example.' 4  The  FDA  has  long  main-
tained  a  policy  of  requiring  risk  labels  for  pharmaceutical  products."
The  EPA  has  done  the  same  for  pesticides  and  asbestos. 6  Congress
requires  warnings  on  products  with  saccharin.  There  are  numerous
other  illustrations.  Indeed,  the effort  to  provide information  counts as
one  of  the  most  striking,  if  still  incipient,  developments  in  modern
regulatory  law.  Three recent  initiatives are especially  notable.

In  1983  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  issued
a  Hazard  Communication  Standard  (HCS)  that  applied  to  the  manu-
facturing  sector.  In  1986  the  HCS  was  made  generally  applicable.'
Under  the  HCS,  chemical  producers  and  importers  must  evaluate  the
hazards  of  the  chemicals  they  produce  or  import;  develop  technical
hazard  information  for materials  safety  data  sheets  and  for hazardous
substances  labels;  and,  most  importantly,  transmit  this information  to
users  of  the  relevant  substances.  All  employers  must  adopt  a  hazard
communication  program-including  individual  training-and  inform
workers  of the relevant  risks.

In  1986  Congress  enacted  an  ambitious  new  statute,  the  Emergency
Planning  and  Community  Right  to  Know  Act  (EPCRA). 8  Under  this
statute,  firms  and  individuals  must  report  to  state  and  local  govern-
ment  the  quantities  of potentially  hazardous  chemicals  that  have  been
stored  or  released  into the  environment.  Users  of such  chemicals  must

14. 

15  U.S.C.  §§  1331-1334  (1988);  see  also  W.  Yap  Viscusi,  SMOKiNG:  MAKING  THE  RISKY

DEcISIoN  (1992).

21  U.S.C.  §§  351-360ee  (1988).
15. 
15  U.S.C.  §§  2601-2655  (1988).
16. 
17.  29C.F.R.  §  1910.1200(1989).
42 U.S.C.  §§  9601-9622  (1988).
18. 

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 661 1992-1993

662 

FLORIDA STATE  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  20:653

report  to  their  local  fire  departments  about  the  location,  types,  and
quantities  of stored  chemicals.  They  must  also give  information  about
potential  adverse  health  effects.  A  detailed  report  suggests  that  EP-
CRA  has  had  important  beneficial  effects,  spurring  innovative,  cost-
effective  programs  from  the  EPA  and  from  state  and  local  govern-
ment. 9

The Food  and  Drug Administration  has also  adopted  informational
strategies.  In  its  most  ambitious  set  of proposals,20  the  FDA  seeks  (a)
to  compel  nutritional  labeling  on  nearly  all  processed  foods,  including
information  relating  to  cholesterol,  saturated  fat,  calories  from  fat,
and  fiber;  (b)  to  require  compliance  with  government  specified  serving
sizes;  (c)  to  compel  companies  to  conform  to  government  definitions
of  standardized  terms,  including  "reduced," 
and
"low";  and  (d)  to  allow  health  claims  only  if  these  (1)  are  supported
by  scientific  evidence  and  (2)  communicate  clear  and  complete  infor-
mation  about  such  matters  as  fat  and  heart  disease,  fat  and  cancer,
sodium  and  high  blood pressure,  and  calcium  and  osteoporosis.

"fresh," 

"free," 

B.  What  We Know

We now  have  some empirical  information  about  disclosure of  risks.
In  general,  the  information  suggests  that  disclosure  can  be  a  helpful
and  cost-effective  strategy. 2'  Workers  appear  to  respond  to new  infor-
mation  about  risks  by quitting  or demanding  higher salaries.  Consum-
ers  often  react  well  to  the  disclosure  about  danger  levels.  There  is
every  reason  to  think  that  governmentally-mandated  disclosure, 
if
suitably  designed,  is  an  effective  mechanism  for  promoting  economic
efficiency  and other  regulatory  goals.

Let  me  add  some  specifics.  The  Superfund  statute,  EPCRA,  re-
quires  a  "toxic  release  inventory"  requiring  reports  on  toxic  emis-
sions. 22  A  1991  government  report  shows  that  the  statute  has  had
substantial  good  effects. 2  The  inventory  played  a large  informational
role  in  the  1990  Clean  Air  Act  Amendments.24  It has  also  contributed

19. 

See  G.A.O.,  Toxic  Chemicals: EPA's  Toxic  Release Inventory  is  Useful But  Can Be

20. 
21. 

Improved, REP.  TO  CONGREaSS  (June  1991).
21  C.F.R.  § 101.9 (1989).
See W.  Kip  VISCUsI  &  WESLEY  A.  MAGAT,  LEARNING  ABOUT  RISK  (1987);  W.  Kip  Vis-
cusi  et  al.,  Informational  Regulation  of Consumer  Health  Risks: An  Empirical Evaluation  of
Hazard Warnings, 17  RAND  J.  ECON.  351  (1986);  W.  Kip  Viscusi  &  Charles  J.  O'Connor,  Adap-
tive  Responses to  Chemical Labeling: Are  Workers Bayesian Decision Makers?, 74  AM.  ECON.
REV.  942  (1984).  The  empirical  work  also  shows  the  need  for  care  in  designing  disclosure  re-
quirements.  See also G.A.O.,  supra note  19.

42  U.S.C.  §§  9601-9622  (1988).

22. 
23.  See G.A.O.,  supra note  19.
24. 

Id.  at  3.

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 662 1992-1993

19931

INFORMING AMERICA

to  legislative  efforts  in  many  states,  including  Oregon  and  Massachu-
setts.  It  has  greatly  assisted  the  EPA  in  its  pollution  prevention  strat-
in  risk  regulation,  and  it  has  also
egy,  a  leading  new  weapon 
contributed  to  the  development  of  cross-environmental  media  ap-
proaches. 2  Environmental  groups  and  the media  have  made  good  use
of the  inventory,  listing  the  highest  polluting companies. 26  Best  of all,
the  inventory  has  led  major  companies  to  reduce  pollution  even  with-
out  legislation. 27  It appears  that  more  than  half  of all reporting  facili-
ties  have made changes  as  a  result of the inventory  requirement.2

Evidence  of  this  sort  is  highly  suggestive,  but  it  does  not  show
whether  consumers  and  citizens  react  rationally  to  new  information.
We  know disclosure  has  had  some  political  consequences.  It is  impor-
tant  also  to  know  how  such  information  is  received  by  ordinary  peo-
ple.  Here  too,  however,  we  are  beginning  to  accumulate  valuable
data.

A study  of consumer reactions  to hazard  warnings  contains interest-
ing  lessons.2 9  In  this  study,  two  products  were  tested:  a  liquid  bleach
and  a liquid  drain  opener.  Both  of  these  posed  short-term  risks.  Peo-
ple who  drink  bleach  (usually children)  experience  vomiting  and  stom-
ach  aches,  a  risk  that  can  be  avoided  by  keeping  the  products  away
from  children.  Bleach  mixed  with  ammonia  can  produce  chloramine
gas  poisoning,  which  involves  headaches  and  possible  hospitalization.
The  risk  can  be  avoided  by  not  mixing  bleach  with  ammonia.  Drain
opener,  if  accidentally  ingested,  can  lead  to  severe  mouth  burns  and
possibly  loss  of the  esophagus.  Spilling the  product  can  produce  pain-
ful  burns  and  swollen  blisters.  Rubber  gloves  can  prevent  these  ef-
fects.

In the  study,  there  was  a comparison  between  "no  warning"  labels
and  different  labels  with  different  warnings.  All  but  one  of the  latter
labels  informed  consumers  of the relevant  risks,  but some  were  larger
and  highlighted  the  relevant  precautions.30  One  label,  called  "Test,"
was  designed  by  labeling  experts.  The  study  showed  that  the  regular
warning  labels generally  had  significant  effects on  consumer  behavior,
labels produced  by  far the most  substantial  conse-
but that the  "Test" 
quences.  Statistically  significant  results  were  shown  in  almost  all
label.  For  example,  consumers'
groups  of  people  seeing  the  "Test" 
willingness  to  store  bleach  in  childproof  locations  was  increased  by

Id. at 21.
Id.  at 25-26.
Id. at 3.
Id. at 24.

25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29.  See Viscusi  et al., supra note 21,  at  351.
30. 

Id.

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 663 1992-1993

664 

FLORIDA STATE  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  20:653

thirty-three  percent  over  the  "no  warning"  labels.  Once  informed  of
the  risks,  moreover,  consumers  showed  a  desire  to  pay  more  to  avoid
the  need  for  precautions.  In  general,  the  relevant  information  was
processed  reliably.  Thus  the  authors  of  the  study  concluded  that  the
"results  presented  here  provide  a more optimistic  view  of the potential
efficacy  of  informational  approaches  ....  Households  facing  partic-
ularly  large  risks  were  more likely to undertake  protective  actions,  and
differences  in  the  information  provided  produced  the  expected  ef-
fects." 3

Another  study  attempted  to test workers'  responses  to labels  of po-
tentially  hazardous  chemicals.3 2 There  was  evidence-suggestive  by  it-
self-that  workers  in  dangerous  occupations  received  risk  premiums
for the  dangers  they  faced.  Workers  who  perceived  their  jobs  as  quite
dangerous  received  an  annual  risk  premium  of  $700  to  $800,  while
workers  who  thought  their  jobs  were  only  somewhat  risky  received  a
premium  of  about  $100  less.  I say  that  this  evidence  is  suggestive  by
itself  because  it  shows  that  workers  will  demand  a  higher  salary  or
other  compensating  benefits  when  they know that  they  face  workplace
dangers.

The  study  presented  each  worker  with  a  hazard  warning  label  for  a
chemical  that  was  not a  current  part  of his  job.  When  presented  with
the  labels,  workers  generally  adjusted  their  perception  of  the  risk  as-
sessment  in  their jobs.  Thus  the  adjustment  shows  a  rational  learning
process.  Moreover,  and  crucially,  the  workers  indicated  they  would
require  a  higher  salary,  calibrated  to  the  degree  of  risk  that  was  dis-
closed.  Many  workers  also  indicated  they would  refuse  to  continue  to
work  in  the  now-riskier  job.  The  greater  the  information,  the  better
the  reaction.

There  is  also  a  valuable  study  of  the  effects  of  warning  labels  on
diet  soft  drinks  containing  saccharin.33  The  data  show  that  after  the
warning  labels  were  required,  there  were  significant  adverse  effects  on
sales.  The initial  effects  were  produced  primarily by well-educated  and
high-income  households.  Soon  thereafter  there  were  similar  effects  on
households  with  young  children.  Interestingly,  there  was  no  such  ef-
fect  on the  soft drink purchase  habits of the elderly.
- Consumer  behavior  was  also  significantly  modified  by  a  Stanford
study  designed  to promote  heart  disease  education.Y  Three  California

Id. at  365.

31. 
32.  Viscusi & O'Connor,  supra note  21,  at  942.
33.  George  W.  Schucker  et  al.,  The  Impact  of the  Saccharin  Warning  Label  on  Sales  of

Diet Soft Drinks in  Supermarkets,  2 J.  PuB.  POL'Y  & MKTo.  46 (1983).

34. 

See  Robert  S.  Adler  & R.  David  Pittle,  Cajolery  or  Command:  Are  Education  Cam-

paigns an Adequate  Substitute for Regulation,  I  YALE J.  ON  REo.  159,  184  (1984).

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 664 1992-1993

19931

INFORMING AMERICA

communities  were  selected;  two  of them  were  saturated  with  informa-
tion  about  lifestyle  changes  that  would  reduce  heart  disease.  A  "con-
trol  town"  was  not  affected.  Knowledge  increases  were  significant  in
the  two  saturated  communities;  there  were  no  real  changes  in the con-
trol  town.  Intriguingly,  there  were  large gains  in  knowledge  in  the less-
advantaged  Spanish-speaking  community.  Behavioral  changes  were
also  shown  with  respect  to  reported  changes  in  diets,  exercise,  and
smoking,  and  also  with  weight  and  plasma  cholesterol  levels.  Plasma
cholesterol  levels  changed  significantly  during  the  course  of the  cam-
paign.

Less  encouraging  is  the  evidence  from  educational  campaigns  de-
signed  to  increase  seat  belt  use.  It  seems  clear  that  if everyone  used
seat  belts,  motor  vehicle  deaths  could  be  halved,  and  billions  of  dol-
lars  could  be  saved.3"  But  efforts  to  promote  seat  belt  use  have  pro-
duced  little  results,  at  least  in  the United  States.  (Campaigns  in  Great
Britain  and  Sweden  produced  increased  usage  rates  of twenty  percent
to  thirty-five  percent.)  In  its  most  recent,  more  sophisticated  efforts,
the  government's  campaign  showed  a  negligible  2.6%  increase,  rang-
ing  from  11.301o  to  13.9%.36

California's  Proposition  65,  requiring  cancer  warnings,  appears  to
have  been  only  a  mixed  success.  One  study  shows  that  it  has  actually
decreased  information  by  making  people  think  certain  products  are
much  more  dangerous  than  they  are  in  fact.37  Similarly,  one  study
shows  that  widely  used  chemical  labels  had  minimal  effects  because
the  relevant  information was  not  provided in an  effective  manner.8

On  balance,  the  existing  evidence  gives  reason  for  cautious  opti-
mism  at  the  very  least.  Certainly  much  more  research  is  necessary;
here  the  obligatory  call  for  further  empirical  work is  especially  impor-
tant.  But  what  we  know  is  sufficient  to  suggest  that  it  is  fully  appro-
priate  to  continue  to  work  with  information  strategies  and  that  such
strategies  can  accomplish  their  intended  purposes  in  many  settings.  I
discuss  possible  lessons  for reform  in Part  III.

III.  THE  LIMITS  OF  INFORMATION

The  picture  thus far  has  been  quite  optimistic,  and  I  do believe  that
optimism  is  on  the  whole  quite  warranted.  But  the  case  for  informa-
tional  remedies  is  not  unqualified.  There  are  three  major  problems

35.  See id. at  171-78.
Id. at  176.
36. 
37.  See  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Predicting the Effects of Food Cancer Risk  Warnings on Consum-

ers, 43  FooD DRUG  Cosm.  L.J.  283  (1988).

38.  See Viscusi  et al.,  supra note  21,  at  365.

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 665 1992-1993

666 

FLORIDA  STATE  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  20:653

with  such  strategies.  First,  the  provision  of information  can  be  expen-
sive.  Second,  the  provision  of information  is  sometimes  ineffectual  or
even  counterproductive.  Third,  informational  strategies  deal  inade-
quately  with some  external  effects  of risk.

A.  Expense

Consider,  for  example,  the  fact  that  the  government  estimates  the
cost  of  the  new  FDA  rules  as  no  less  than  $1.7  billion  over  twenty
years.  The  President  of  the  National  Food  Processors  Association
claims  that  the  first-year  costs  alone  will  exceed  $2  billion. 9  In  either
case,  the  cost  is  high.  OSHA's  hazard  communication  policy  is  esti-
mated to  save  200  lives  per  year-a lot-but at  an annual  cost of  $360
million. 40 The  expenditure  per life  saved  is  therefore  $1.8  million.  This
is  far  better  than  a  large  number  of  regulations,  and  probably  an
amount  well  worth  spending,  but it  is  more  than  many  agencies  spend
for life-saving  regulations.  It  is  therefore  not the  case  that  the  OSHA
rule  stands  out as a  means  of saving lives  especially  cheaply.  There  are
many  life-saving  programs  that  achieve  the same  goal-saved  lives-at
lower  cost.

When  informational  strategies  are  costly,  there  are  two  possible  re-
sponses.  The  first  is to  do  nothing.  If the savings-in  terms  of  health,
life,  informed  choice-are  relatively  low,  costly  strategies,  even  infor-
mational  ones,  make  little  sense.  There  will,  therefore,  be  circum-
stances  in  which  a government  remedy  for  an  absence  of  information
is  unwarranted.  Sometimes  laissez-faire  is  indeed preferable.

When  the  costs  are  high,  the  second  possibility  is  to  impose  a  regu-
latory strategy  rather  than to  require  disclosure.  By  a  regulatory  strat-
egy,  I  mean  a  mandatory outcome,  such as  a flat  ban  on  the  materials
in  question,  or  governmental  specification  of a  particular  outcome,  as
in  a  mandated  maximum  level  of  carcinogens  in  the  workplace.  It  is
surprising  but  true  that  sometimes  the  regulatory  strategy  will  be
cheaper  because  the  price  of  disclosing  information-changing  pack-
aging  and  so  forth-is  so  high.  This  is  likely  to  be  the  right  response
when most  or  all people  would  respond  to the information  in  the same
way.  In  that  case,  it  is  unnecessary  to provide  information.  It  is  better
simply  to  dictate  an  outcome  that,  by  hypothesis,  is  generally  pre-
ferred.  A  flat  ban  is generally  appropriate  for an especially  dangerous

39.  Nancy  Ryan  &  Linda  M.  Harrington,  FDA  Offers New Rules  on  Food Labels,  Claims,

Cmi.  Tram.,  Nov.  7,  1991,  §  1, at 2.

45  (1986).

40.  The  figures  come  from  John  F.  Morrall,  1II,  A  Review of the Record,  10  REULATION

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 666 1992-1993

19931

INFORMING AMERICA

substance,  one that  reasonable  people  would  not  choose  to  encounter
and that  has  safer  substitutes.

B.  Little, No, or Bad Effects

1.  How Information  Can  Go  Wrong: An  Outline

Even  when  informational  strategies  are  not  prohibitively  expensive,
they  may  be  ineffectual  and  thus  have  low  benefits.  There  are  many
possible  problems  here.

(a) 

Information  Processing

A  central  difficulty  is  that  people  have  limited  ability  to process  in-
formation. 4'  They  have  a  notoriously  difficult  time  in  thinking  about
low-probability  events.  Sometimes  they  discount  such  events  to  zero;
sometimes  they  treat them  as  much  more dangerous  than they  actually
are.  If  people  are  told,  for  example,  that  a  certain  substance  causes
cancer,  they may  think  it is  far  more  dangerous  than  it  is  in  fact.  But
some  carcinogenic  substances  pose little risk.

For  example,  California's  Proposition  65,  an  initiative  designed  to
promote  citizen  awareness  of  risk  levels,  requires  warnings  for  expo-
sure  to  carcinogens.  At  first  glance,  the  requirement  seems  unexcep-
tionable,  indeed  an  important  advance.  It  seems  to  have  all  of  the
advantages  discussed  in  the  first  sections  of this  Essay.  But  Proposi-
tion  65  has  in  some cases  been  counterproductive  or even  worse.  Con-
sumers  appear  to  think  that  twelve  of  every  100  users  of  a  product
with  the  required  warning  will  die  from  cancer.  This  estimate  exceeds
reality  by  a  factor  of  1000  or  more.42  The  presence  of  the  warning
makes  people more  confused  rather  than  more  aware.

We  can  generalize  from  the  example.  With  respect  to  information,
less  may  be  more.  If information  is  not provided  in  a  clear and  usable
form,  it  may  actually  make  people  less  knowledgeable  than  they  were
before.

(b)  Heuristics That Produce Errors

The  problem  is  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  in  evaluating  social
risks,  people  tend  to  use  heuristic  devices  that  produce  systemic  er-
rors.  A  particular  problem  here 
the  "availability  heuristic,"
through  which  people  tend  to  think  an  event  is  probable  if  they  can

is 

41.  See  generally JUDGMENT  AND  DECISION  MAKING:  AN  INTERDISCIPLINARY  READER,  supra

note  8; Viscusi,  supra  note  10.

42.  See  Viscusi,  supra  note  37.

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 667 1992-1993

668 

FLORIDA STATE  UNIVERSITY  LAW REVIEW 

[Vol.  20:653

readily bring  to  mind  memories  of its  occurrence.  Thus,  for example,
an  airplane  disaster  will  sometimes  be  thought  relatively  probable,
whereas  a  death  from  diabetes  usually  will  not  be.  There  is  a  good
deal  of evidence  that  people  overestimate  risks  from  highly  visible  or
sensational  causes  but  underestimate  risks  from  less  dramatic,  but
more  serious,  ones.13  The  availability  heuristic  may  distort  informa-
tional  remedies  since  people  may  fit  the  information  to  assumptions
that are false  or skewed.

(c)  Motivational Distortions

There  is  evidence  as  well  of  another  problem  with  informational
strategies:  People  often  believe  themselves  to  be  immune  from  risks
that they  acknowledge  are significant  and  real  with  respect  to  others."
In  one  study,  for  example,  ninety-seven  percent  of  those  surveyed
ranked themselves  as average  or  above  average  in their  ability  to avoid
both bicycle  and  power mower  accidents. 45  Disclosure  of information
,may  be  an  unhelpful  tool  when  people  do  not  internalize  the  new
data, thinking  that it  is really  relevant  only  to other  people.

There  is  also  evidence  that  people  feel  frustrated  and  frightened  by
probabilistic  information  and  greatly  prefer  a  certain  answer.  The  de-
sire  to  reduce  cognitive  dissonance-to  prevent  the  world  from  being
confusing  and  frightening-may  prevent  people  from recognizing  that
risks  are  real,  even  when  information  is  provided.4  The  same  desire
may  undermine  efforts  to  provide  risk  information  when  the  truth  is
that  people  must  inevitably  operate  under  conditions  of  uncertainty.
For  similar  reasons,  people  may  fail  to  recognize  that  conditions  are
dangerous  even  in the face  of  solid information  to this  effect.  Finally,
initially  held  beliefs  are  not  easy  to  modify,  even  when  new  informa-
tion that undermines  those beliefs  has been  presented.47

(d)  Overload

There  is  also a pervasive  risk of information  overload,  causing  con-
sumers  to  treat  a large  amount  of information  as  equivalent  to  no  in-
formation  at  all. 4  If  employers  are  forced  to  list  all  risks  and  to

43.  See  Slovic  et al., supra note  8.
44. 
45. 
46. 

Id.  at  116.
Id.
See George  A.  Akerlof  &  William  T.  Dickens,  The Economic Consequences of Cogni-

tive Dissonance, 72  Am.  ECON.  REv.  307 (1982).

47. 

See Slovic  et  al.,  supra note  8,  at  118;  see also ROBERT  C.  ELLICKSON,  ORDER  WITHOUT

LAW:  How NEIGHBORS  SETTLE  DISPUTES  (1991).

48. 

See Jacob  Jacoby ct  al.,  Corrective Advertising and Affirmative Disclosure Statements:

Their Potential for Confusing and Misleading the Consumer, 46  J.  MKTO.  61,  70  (1982).

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 668 1992-1993

1993]

INFORMING AMERICA

explain  them  in  detail,  people  may  absorb  little  or  nothing.  If  adver-
tisers  are  required  to  have  detailed  disclosure  labels,  consumers  may
obtain  relatively  little information.

(e)  Disclosure Requirements that Deter Disclosure

Yet  another  problem  is  that  companies  may  respond  to  disclosure
requirements  by  refusing  to  provide  information  at  all  (if this  is  an
available  option).  If industry  responds  to a  requirement  of evidentiary
support  for  scientific  claims  with  mere  "puffing,"  consumers  may
have  less  information  than  they  did  to begin  with.  If advertisers  must
conduct  extensive  tests before  they  are  permitted  to make  claims,  they
will  be  given  a  strong  incentive  to  avoid  making  claims  at  all.4 9  The
result  will  be  the  removal  from  the  market  of information  that  is  use-
ful overall.

(f)  Disclosure and the Disadvantaged

Disclosure  strategies  may  also  have  disproportionately  little  effect
on  people  who  are  undereducated,  elderly,  or  poor. 0  This  is  to  be
expected,  for  information  remedies  require  an  ability  to  read  and
process.  This ability  is  most  pronounced  among  the  well-educated  and
the wealthy.

(g)  Public Good Issues

Finally,  information  may  be  an  inadequate  strategy  when  greater
safety  is  a public  good."  Imagine,  for  example,  that  the  replacement
of carcinogen  X with  safe  product  Y  would  benefit  all  workers  simul-
taneously  because  all  of  them  would  simultaneously  be  exposed  to  Y
rather  than  X.  Imagine  too  that  each  worker  is  bargaining  separately
with  the  employer.  In  that  case,  no  individual  employee  may  have  a
sufficient  incentive  to  decrease  his  demand  for  wages  and  other  bene-
fits  to  obtain  increased  safety.  Because  the  benefits  of  the  new  sub-
stance  are  provided  to  everyone,  no  individual  employee  will  "pay"
enough  to  obtain  them,  preferring  instead  to  take  a  free  ride  on  oth-
ers.  The  result will  be  too little  safety  on  conventional  economic  crite-
ria.  Here a  regulatory  response  is appropriate.

49.  See Richard  Craswell,  Interpreting Deceptive Advertising, 65  B.U.  L.  REv.  657,  710-11

(1985).

50.  See Schucker et  al.,  supra note 33,  at 55.
51. 

See Rose-Ackerman,  supra note  4,  at 356.  For  its  plausibility,  this argument  depends  on
transactions cost  barriers  to free mobility  of labor.  If labor  were completely  mobile,  the problem
should disappear.

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 669 1992-1993

670 

FLORIDA  STATE  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  20:653

C.  Externalities

I  can  be  brief  on  this  point.  Sometimes  risks  are regulated  because,
when  they  come  to  fruition,  many  people  are  harmed.  When there  are
adverse  "external"  effects  from  risk-generating  activity,  the  solution
is  not  merely  the  provision  of  information.  If  people  are  told  that
companies  are  producing  pollution,  that  is  all  to  the  good.  But  it  is
often  not  enough.  Regulation  should  require  the  company  to  reduce
pollution  levels  to  reduce  external  harms,  either  by  taking  additional
care  or by reducing  the level  of polluting activity.

When  the  risk-generating  activity  creates  harms  to  people  not  likely
to  be  in  a  contractual  relation  with  those  who  engage  in  that  activity,
it  is  desirable  to  supplement  information  strategies  with  economic  in-
centives  designed  to  produce  the  optimal  activity  level.  If  a  company
is  emitting  carbon  dioxide  into  the  atmosphere,  it  is  not  enough  for
everyone  to  know  about  this  fact.  Instead  the government  should  im-
pose  a tax  or  emissions  fee  designed  to  require  the company  to  "inter-
nalize"  the  cost  of  its activity.  Economic  incentives  are in  this  sense  a
necessary  supplement  to informational  strategies. 2

D.  Responding to Limitations

All  this  suggests  that  there  are  real  limitations  to  informational
strategies.  The  limitations  should,  however,  be  taken  merely  as  quali-
fications  of  the  broader  point,  or  as  providing  helpful  guidance  to
those  seeking  to  design  effective  information  requirements.  They  do
not  argue  fundamentally  against  reform  efforts.  While  informational
strategies  are  no  panacea,  they  would  accomplish  considerable  good,
at least  if the possible  obstacles  are kept  firmly  in mind.

The  first and  most important  point  is  that some  of these  very limita-
tions  can  be  overcome  through  more  and  better  information.  An
awareness  of the distorting  effects  of  current  heuristics  can  help  over-
come  those  effects.  General  publicity  about  those  effects  might  there-
fore  supply  a  corrective.  The  "availability"  heuristic  in  particular
would  be  overcome  through  making  public  and  private  sector  changes
in  what  risks come  readily to  mind.

Existing  studies  also  suggest  that  some  disclosure  remedies  will
work  better  than  others.  Well-tailored  programs  would  minimize  the
relevant  risks  by  putting  the  information  in  its  most  understandable
form.  Instead  of labeling  a substance  a  "carcinogen,"  a  uniform  sys-
tem  of risk  regulation  could  give  better  awareness  of risk  levels. 3  Ex-

52. 
53. 

See Sunstein,  supra note  *.
See Viscusi  et  al., supra note 21,  at  365.

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 670 1992-1993

1993]

INFORMING AMERICA

cessive  detail  should  be  avoided;  the  relevant  information  should  be
crisp  and  simple.  Any  disclosure  requirements  should  attend  to  diffi-
culties  in  processing  information.

In  this  light,  the  current  initiatives  are  simply  a  beginning.  Broader
and  more  ambitious  programs,  coordinating  the  general  communica-
tion  of social  risks,  are  very much  in  order.  It has  been  suggested  that
government  might  eventually  develop  a  "national  warnings  system"
containing  a  systematized  terminology  for  warnings.14  Such  a  system
could  apply  to  all  contexts  and  risks  and  give  a  uniform  sense  of risk
levels.  The existence  of  a  uniform  language  would  make  it  possible  to
assess  risks  across  a  wide range  of social  spheres.  This  step  would  in-
troduce  a healthy  degree  of coordination  and  priority-setting  in  regu-
lation.

Most  important  of all,  such  a  system  would  perform  a  vital  educa-
tive  function,  one  that  could  complement  the  functioning  of markets
and  provide  a  necessary  precondition  for  democratic  choice.  We
should  ultimately  aspire  to go far  beyond  risk regulation,  to  introduce
information  bearing  on  democratic  affairs  in  general.  The  First
Amendment  is  a good  place  to start.

IV.  RECONCEIVING  THE  FIRST  AMENDMENT:  A NOTE

We  have  become  accustomed  to  the view  that  the First  Amendment
is  a  barrier  against  content-based  restrictions  on  the  autonomy  of
speakers.  Our  core  conception  of  a  free  speech  violation  is  a  case  in
which  the government silences  a  speaker  because  it objects  to  what the
speaker  is  saying.  This  conception  has  accomplished  enormous  good;
it  has  served  as  the  basic  model  for  a  series  of  dramatic  victories  for
free expression.

Under current  conditions,  however,  this  conception  may well  be  in-
adequate."  A  system  of free  expression  will  be in  great jeopardy  when
there  is  insufficient  information  about  public  affairs.  An  absence  of
information  may be a  product  not of direct  government  controls,  but

54. 

See  Viscusi  & MAGAT,  supra note 21,  at 155,  for an illustration of systemized  warnings;

see also  Viscusi, supra  note  14,  at  149-51.

55. 

See J.M.  Balkin,  Some Realism About Pluralism: Legal  Realist Approaches  to the First
Amendment,  1990  DUKE  L.J.  375;  Owen  M.  Fiss,  Free Speech and Social Structure, 71  IOWA  L.
REV.  1405 (1986);  Onora O'Neill,  Practices of Toleration, in DEMOCRACY  AND  THE  MASS  MEDIA:
A  COLLECTION  OF  EssAYs  155  (Judith Lichtenberg  ed.,  1990);  T.M.  Scanlon,  Jr.,  Content Regu-
lation Reconsidered,  in DEMOCRACY  AND  TH  MASS  MEDIA:  A COLLECTrON  OF  ESSAYS,  supra,  at
331.  See generally Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Free Speech Now,  59  U.  Cm.  L.  Rav.  255  (1992),  on  which
I  draw  here.  The  argument  of that  essay  will  appear  in  much  more elaborate  form  in  a  book,
FRE  SPEECH  Now  (forthcoming  1993).

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 671 1992-1993

672 

FLORIDA  STATE  UNIVERSITY LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  20:653

of  free  markets5 6  in  information.  If  so,  the  purposes  of  the  First
Amendment  might  be  promoted,  not  undermined,  by  content-based
regulatory  initiatives.

Let me  be more  concrete.  Imagine  that the  consequence  of the  cur-
rent  system  of  free  speech is  a  regime  in which  most Americans  do  not
read  or see  much  in  the  way  of substantive  argument  about  what gov-
ernment  is  doing  or  ought  to  be  doing.  Imagine  too  that  there is  little
diversity  of  view.  In  such  a  system,  the  system  of  free  expression
might  be  dominated  by  situation  comedies,  or  sensationalistic  stories
about  celebrities,  or  material  that  combines  sex  with  violence.  Even
news  programming  might  feature  misleading  anecdotes  or  "horse
race"  stories  rather  than  substance.  Imagine too  that access  to the  me-
dia is  largely  a  product  of how  much other people are  willing  to  pay to
hear  the  relevant  voice-and  that  this  system  is  importantly  affected
by  the  desires  of  advertisers  who  indirectly,  sometimes  directly,  exer-
cise  some control  over programming  content.

Is  it  so clear  that the  First Amendment  would  be  violated  by  regula-
tory  initiatives  designed  to  increase  attention  to  public  affairs  and  di-
versity  of  view?  If  the  arguments  set  out  thus  far  are  persuasive,  a
democratic  correction may  well  be desirable.  If we understood  the sys-
tem  of free  expression  to  be  concerned  with  the  dissemination  of in-
formation,  especially  about  public  affairs,  then  such  a  corrective  may
well  be compatible  with,  even  required  by,  our  First Amendment  prin-
ciples.

At this  point it  might  be suggested  that  in  an era  of cable  television,
the  relevant  problems  disappear.  People  can  always  change  the  chan-
nel.  Some  stations  even  provide  public  affairs  broadcasting  around
the  clock.  Both  quality  and diversity  can be  found  in  light  of the  daz-
zling  array  of options  made  available  by modern  technology.  Viewers
can  now choose  from  a wide  range  of options.  In  this  light,  a  concern
about  the market  status quo  might  seem  to amount  to  a puzzling,  even
bizarre  rejection  of freedom  of choice.  Ought  not a foreclosure  of ex-
pressive  options be  thought to  infringe on freedom  of speech?

There  are  several  answers.  The  first  point  would  reemphasize  my
earlier  suggestion  that  information  has many  characteristics  of  a  pub-
lic  good,  like  national  defense  or  clean  air."  It  is  well-known  that  if

56.  The  term  "free  markets"  may  be  misleading  if  it  diverts  attention  from  the  fact  that
markets  are  created  by  law and  impose  legal  constraints  on  who may  do  what.  In the context  at
hand,  for  example,  people  are  deprived  of access to  the  media,  not by voluntary  private  acts,  but
by  the  civil  and criminal  law,  which  prohibit  one  person  from  (for example)  getting  on  CBS  or
ABC  to  state  a particular  view.

57.  See  Daniel  A.  Farber,  Free Speech  Without  Romance:  Public Choice  and the  First

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 672 1992-1993

19931

INFORMING AMERICA

we  rely  entirely  on markets,  we  will have  insufficient  national  defense
and  excessively  dirty  air.  The reason  is that  both defense  and  clean  air
cannot  be  feasibly  provided  to  one  person  without  simultaneously  be-
ing  provided  to  many  or  all.  In  these  circumstances,  each  person  has
inadequate  incentives  to seek,  or to  pay  for,  the  right  level  of national
defense  or  clean  air.  Acting  individually,  each  person will  "free  ride"
on the  efforts  of others.  No  producer  will  have  the  appropriate  incen-
tive  for  production.  The  result  will  be  unacceptably  low  levels  of the
relevant  goods.

Much  the  same  is  true  of  information,  especially  with  respect  to
public  affairs.  The  benefits  of a  broad  public  debate,  yielding  large
quantities  of  information-through  coverage  of public  issues,  disclo-
sure  of  new  facts  and  perspectives,  and  diversity  of  view-accrue  si-
multaneously  to many  or  all  people.  Once  information  is  provided  to
one  person,  or  to  some  of  them,  it  is  also  provided  to  many  others
too,  or it  can  be  provided  at  minimal  cost.  The  production  of infor-
mation  for  one  or  some  person  thus  yields  large  external  benefits  for
other  people  as  well.  But-and  this  is  the  key  point-the  market  pro-
vides  no  mechanism  to  ensure  that  these  benefits  will  be  adequately
taken  into account  by those who  produce the  information,  in  this case
the  newspaper  and broadcasting  industries.

At  the  same  time,  the  benefits  of  informing  one  person-making
him  or  her  an  effective  citizen-are  likely  to  accrue  to  many  other
people  as  well  through  that  person's  contribution  to  multiple  conver-
sations  and  to  political  processes  in  general.  But  the  external  benefits
for each  person will  not be  taken  into account  in  individual  consump-
tion  choices.5"

Because  of  the  "public  good"  features  of  information,  no  single
person  has  sufficient  incentive  to  "pay"  for the  benefits  he  receives.
The  result  will  be  that  the  market  will  produce  too  little  information.
Reliance  on  media  markets  will  therefore  have  some  of the same  diffi-
culties  as  reliance  on  markets  for  national  defense  or  environmental
protection.  For  this  reason,  a  regulatory  solution,  solving  the  collec-
tive action  problem,  is justified. 9

Amendment,  105  HiAsv.  L.  REv.  554  (1991).  Information  is not  a  pure  public  good because  it  is
often  feasible  to  provide  it  to  those  who  pay  for  it.  Copyright  and  patent  laws  can  guarantee
appropriate  incentives  for  its production.  But  information  does have  much  in common with  pure
public  goods.

58.  Compare  the discussion of participatory  goods  in Denise  Reaume,  Individuals, Groups,

and Rights to  Public Goods,  38 U.  TORONTo  L.J.  1 (1988).

59. 

It might  be  thought  that  the  distinctive  characteristics  of the broadcasting  market  pro-
vide  at least  a partial solution.  Because  advertisers  attempt  to  ensure  large  audiences,  viewers  are
commodities as  well  as or  instead  of consumers.  In these circumstances,  it  is not as  if individuals

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 673 1992-1993

674 

FLORIDA  STATE  UNIVERSITY  LA W  REVIEW 

[Vol.  20:653

So  much  for  the  public  good  issue.  The  second  point  is  that  the
absence  of scarcity  of outlets  does  not explain  why there  is  a  constitu-
tional  objection  to  democratic  efforts  to increase  quality  and  diversity
by  ensuring  better  programming  on  individual  stations.  Even  with  a
large  number  of  stations,  there  is  far  less  quality  and  diversity  than
there  might  be.  Perhaps  people can  generate  at least  a  partial  solution
by  changing  the channel.  But  why should  the  Constitution  be thought
to  foreclose  a  collective  decision  to  experiment  with  new  methods  for
achieving  the goals  of a  system  of free  expression?

Third,  it  is  important  to  be  extremely  cautious  about  the  use,  for
constitutional  and  political  purposes,  of the notion  of "consumer  sov-
ereignty."  Consumer  sovereignty  is  the  conventional  economic  term
for  the  virtues  of a  free  market,  in  which  commodities  are  allocated
through  consumer  choices  and  valued  through  the criterion  of private
willingness to pay.  Those  who invoke  the  notion  of free  choice  in mar-
kets  are  really  insisting  on  consumer  sovereignty.  But  the  constitu-
tional  conception  of  "sovereignty"-rooted  in  the  writings  of James
Madison-is the  relevant  one. 6  That conception  has  an  altogether  dif-
ferent character.

On  the  Madisonian  view,  sovereignty  entails  respect  not  for  private
consumption  choices  but  for  the  considered  judgments  of  a  demo-
cratic  polity.  In  a  democracy,  laws  frequently  reflect  those  judgments
or  what  might  be  described  as  the  aspirations  of  the  public  as  a
whole. 61  Those  aspirations  can  and  often  do  call  for  markets  them-
selves.  But  they  might  also  diverge  from  consumption  choices-a  fa-
miliar  phenomenon  in  such  areas  as  environmental  law,  protection  of
endangered  species,  social  security,  and  antidiscrimination  law.  For
present  purposes,  the  most notable  point  is  that  information  is  crucial
for  the  development  and  expression  of  democratic  aspirations.  These

are  purchasing  individual  pieces  of  information.  Instead,  advertisers  are  aggregating  individual
preferences  in  seeking  popular  programming  and,  in  that sense,  helping  to  overcome  the collec-
tive  action problem.

The  problem  with  this  response  is  that  the  advertisers'  desire  to  attract  large  audiences  does
not  adequately  serve  the goal  of  overcoming  the  public  good  problem  with  respect  to  informa-
tion about  public  affairs.  A  program  with  a  large  audience  may not  be  providing  information  at
all;  consider  most  of network  television.  Advertisers  may  even  be  hostile  to  the provision  of the
relevant information.  Their economic  interests  often  argue  against  sponsorship  of  public  service
or  controversial  programming,  especially  if  the audience  is relatively  small,  but  sometimes  even
if  it  is  large.  The  external  benefits  of  widely-diffused  information  about  politics  are  thus  not
captured  in a broadcasting market.  The peculiarities  of the  broadcasting  market  overcome  a  kind
of collective action  problem  by  providing  a  system  for  aggregating  preferences,  but  they do  not
overcome  the crucial  problem.

60.  See Sunstein,  supra note 55.
61. 

See  JoN  EISTER,  ULYSSES  AND  THE  SIENS:  STUDIES  IN  RATiONALtY  AND  IRRATIONALITY

(1979);  HowARsD  MARGOLIS,  SELnsmNESS,  ALTRUiSm,  AND  RATIONALITY  (1982).

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 674 1992-1993

1993]

INFORMING AMERICA

aspirations  ought  not  to be  disparaged.  Democratic  liberty should  not
be  identified  with  "consumer  sovereignty."  And  in  the  context  at
hand,  the  people,  acting  through  their  elected  representatives,  might
well  decide  that  democratic  liberty,  producing  greater  information,  is
more  valuable  than  consumer sovereignty.

Finally,  private  broadcasting  selections  are  a product  of preferences
that  are a  result  of the  broadcasting  status quo  and  are  not  independ-
ent  of it.  In  a  world  that provides  the existing  fare,  it  would  be  unsur-
prising  if  people  generally  preferred  to  see  what  they  are  accustomed
to  seeing.  They  have  not  been  provided  with  the  opportunities  of  a
better  system.  When  this  is  so,  the  broadcasting  status  quo  cannot,
without  circularity,  be justified  by reference  to  the  preferences.6
1  Pre-
ferences  that  have  adapted  to  an  objectionable  system  cannot  justify
that  system.  If  better  options  are  put  more  regularly  in  view,  it  might
well  be  expected  that  at  least  some  people  would  be  educated  as  a
result  and  be  more  favorably  disposed  toward  programming  dealing
with  public  issues  in  a serious way.

It  is  tempting  but  inadequate  to  object  that this  is  a  form  of "pater-
nalism"  unjustifiably  overriding  private  choice.  If private  choice  is  a
product  of  existing  options, 
then  the  inclusion  of  better  options,
through  new  law,  does  not  displace  a  freely  produced  desire.  At  least
this  is  so  if the  new  law  has  a democratic  pedigree.  In  such  a  case,  the
people,  in their  capacity  as  citizens,  are  attempting  to  implement  aspi-
rations that  diverge  from  their  consumption  choices.

What  strategies  might  emerge  from  considerations  of  this  sort?  Re-
call  that  the  overriding  goal  is  to  increase  public  information  about
public  affairs-a  goal  that  calls  for  substantive  attention  to  public  is-
sues  and  an opportunity  to speak  for divergent  views.  There  is  thus  a
strong  case  for  public  provision  of high-quality  programming  for  chil-
dren  or  for  obligations,  imposed  by  government  on  broadcasters,  to
provide  such  programming.  The  provision  of  free  media  time  to  can-
didates  would  be  especially  helpful.  Such  a  route  would  simultane-
ously  provide  attention  to  public  affairs  and  diversity  of  view  and
overcome  the  distorting  effects  of  "soundbites"  and  financial  pres-
sures.

More  generally,  government  might  award  "points" 

to  license  appli-
cants  who  promise  to  deal  with  serious  questions  or  provide  public
affairs  broadcasting  even  if unsupported  by market  demand.  Or gov-
ernment  might  require  purely commercial  stations  to provide  financial
subsidies  to  public  television  or  to  commercial  stations  that  agree  to

62.  See  JON  ELSTER,  SOUR  GRAPES:  STUDIES  IN TiE  SUBVERSION  OF  RATIONALITY  (ed.  rev.

1984).

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 675 1992-1993

676 

FLORIDA STATE  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  20:653

provide  less  profitable  but  higher  quality  programming.  Government
itself  should  surely  subsidize  such  programming  or  use  its  ownership
rights  (over,  for  example,  airports  and  subways)  so  as  to  encourage
attention  to  public  issues.  It  is  worthwhile  to consider  more  dramatic
approaches  as  well-such  as  reductions  in  advertising  on  children's
television,  content  review of such  television  by nonpartisan  experts,  or
guidelines  to  encourage  attention  to  public  issues  and  diversity  of
view.

Views  of this  sort  would  reconceive  the  responsibilities  of  the mass
media.  They  would  call  for  both  public  and  private  action,  and  pre-
cisely  in  the  name  of the  First  Amendment.  Under  this  approach,  the
free  speech  principle  would  bear  on  much  more  than  governmental
interferences  with  the  autonomy  of  speakers  with  current  ownership
rights.  It  would  also make  it  necessary  for  us  to  assess  the  connection
between  the  existing  free  speech  "market"  and  the  informational  and
citizenship  goals  of a  system  of  free expression.  It  would  draw  on  ex-
isting  knowledge  of the  limits  of current  "markets" 
in  information  to
support  new  free  speech  initiatives.  Above  all,  it would  refuse  to  iden-
tity laissez-faire  in speech  with  the dictates  of the First Amendment.

V.  CONCLUSION

Our  current  regulatory  system  is  too  rigid  and  too  centralized;  it
provides  too  little  basis  for  improving  either  private  decisions  in  the
marketplace  or  public  decisions  in  the  ballot  box.  Instead  of  mandat-
ing  particular  solutions  or  leaving  people  to  the  vicissitudes  of  the
market,  government  should,  as  its  first  line  of defense,  require  disclo-
sure  of information  or  provide  information  on  its  own.  A  step  of this
sort  could  revolutionize  the  activities  of  many  government  agencies,
including  the  EPA,  the  FDA,  the  CPSC,  and  OSHA.  Eventually  it
could  help  produce  a  "national  warnings  system"  that  provides  clear
and  concise  information about  the risks  faced  in day-to-day  life.

I  have  spent  most  of  my  time  on  informational  strategies  with  re-
spect  to  social risks,  but  the  analysis  may extend  much  further.  It  sug-
gests  reasons  to  question  some  of the  received  wisdom  with  respect  to
free  speech.  The  defects  in  information  markets  may  well  call  for gov-
ernmental  improvements  designed  to  promote  attention  to  public  is-
sues  and to generate  a diversity  of views.

The  broader  point  is  that  the  movements  for  democratization
throughout  the  world-in  South  Africa  and  Russia,  Romania  and
China,  Israel  and  Kuwait,  Bulgaria  and  Ukraine-are  far from  irrele-
vant  to  current  reform  efforts  in the  United  States.  The massive  regu-
latory  state,  an  outgrowth  of the  twentieth  century,  has  accomplished
considerable  good,  but it  has  also  severely  compromised  the American

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 676 1992-1993

19931 

INFORMING AMERICA 

677

commitment  to  democratic  self-governance.  There  could  be no  better
first step,  by  way  of reform,  than  to  embark  on the  project  of substi-
tuting,  for  our inflexible  and  interest-prone  current  controls,  a system
designed  to  ensure  that  in  their  capacity  as  consumers,  workers,  and
voters,  Americans  are well-informed.

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 677 1992-1993

HeinOnline  -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 678 1992-1993

