 Rights, aspirations and state action in Eastern European constitutions. The theory of what belongs in a constitution remains in a surprisingly primitive state. Indeed, the theory has been in transition in the last hundred, fifty, or even twentyfive years. With respect to the matter of rights, scholars have suggested that there have been three distinct generations of understandings. The "first generation" rights involve the conventional civil and political liberties, most prominently the right to own property, to freedom of contract, to freedom of speech, and to freedom of religion. The "second generation"-still quite controversialincludes rights to positive state protection of human wellbeing, including the right to social security, to decent housing, to leisure, and to food. The "third generation" of rights involves the environment, peace, and economic development. The act of constitution-making in Eastern Europe-against the backdrop of the demise of Communism-affords a distinctive opportunity for self-conscious reflection about the proper place of different conceptions of rights in a constitution. What emerges should provide important, and quite general, lessons about the theory and practice of constitutionalism. In approaching the current drafts, it is useful to distinguish between two conceptions of constitutionalism, between which the current reform efforts are now poised. Most of the old-regime Eastern European constitutions were similar to or modelled on the Stalinist constitution of the Soviet Union. Westerners often think that Sovietstyle constitutions are not constitutions at all. In fact, however, they embody a distinctive conception of consti tutionalism, with three especially interesting features. First, and crucially, such constitutions do not distinguish between public and private spheres. They apply their prohibitions and permissions to everyone, not only to the government. No civil society is immunized from constitutional constraint. The "state action" doctrine of course plays an important role in American constitutionalism, immunizing the behavior of private persons (and corporations) from constitutional constraints. The Soviet constitution contains no such doctrine, and the same is true for the post-1946 constitutions of Poland, East Germany, Romania, Bulgaria, Albania, and Czechoslovakia. The refusal to incorporate a state action doctrine in these constitutions is a predictable consequence of the attack on the public-private distinction and the traditional Communist reluctance to foster a civil society independent of the state. Second, such constitutions contain duties as well as rights. They do not merely grant privileges to citizens, but also impose obligations on them. The Soviet constitution, for example, created a duty for citizens "to make thrifty use of the people's wealth" (Article 61), "to preserve and protect socialist property" (Article 61), to "work conscientiously" (Article 60), and "to concern themselves with the upbringing of children" (Article 65). have a right to be free from racial discrimination, others are under a duty not to act on the basis of the color of your skin. Because legal rights create legal duties, and vice versa, the apparent failure of Western constitutionalism to create duties must be understood through the lens of the state action doctrine. The rights created by such constitutions generally do not run against private persons. It is therefore the state, and not private persons, that is under constitutionally enforceable duties. Soviet-style constitutions are distinctive in their willingness expressly to impose duties on private persons. With this background, we are in a position to make some general comments about the rights recognized in the draft constitutions and the new constitutions of Bulgaria and Hungary. There are many surprising developments here. One of the most remarkable features of these documents is that in many respects, they are much closer to their Soviet-style predecessors than to Western constitutions. Like Soviet-style constitutions, they do not make distinctions between the public and private spheres. In general, the text of all of the drafts suggest that they apply equally .to public and private actors. The constitutions do not attempt to foster or even anticipate a civil society, except insofar as they make occasional references to religious institutions or labor unions. compensation, for example, seems to run only against official organs. The same is almost certainly true of the right to free education and to social security. But there is no general understanding, in any of these documents, that the constitution applies only to the government. In this respect, the drafts are a surprisingly conspicuous outgrowth of their predecessors. the Albanian draft, however, makes it clear that the law will recognize and guarantee private ownership of property (Art. 15). The draft constitutions also contain an extraordinary panoply of other rights. For present purposes I will be very brief. What we might call "participatory rights" are generally included-including the freedom to speak, to vote, to join and leave associations, and to strike. The Albanian constitution, for example, grants a general right to elect and to be elected to all citizens over the age of 18. There are broadly defined rights against the police. In their range and detail, these go well beyond the American constitution, and give a remarkable picture of the abuses against which the post-Communist nations have thought it most necessary to guard. In view of the widespread denial of political rights under Communism, and the frequent brutality of the police during that period, these provisions are of particular interest. requires; the Bulgarian, Lithuanian, and Romanian documents are especially notable here. Large parts of the Western public in general and liberal intellectuals in particular are dismayed by the outbursts of nationalist politics and ethnic strife that have emerged in the post-Communist societies. At the risk of increasing their dismay, I would argue (a) that the "ethnification" of the politics of transition is the outcome of powerful causal forces that cannot easily be wished away, and (b) that it is exceedingly difficult to design institutional or constitutional arrangements that would conform to universalist standards and pave the way for the peaceful coexistence of ethnic groups within East European states. In short, the ills of ethnic politics have strong causes and weak cures. and other associations formed, in the name of fostering the well-being of one ethnic community while excluding those who don't belong. In all three of these strategies, ethnicity plays the role of the dominant cleavage and the source of symbolic representations.