University of Chicago Law School ersity
Cass R. Sunstein
Was Justice Thurgood Marshall an egalitarian? Did he believe that the Constitution should be used to produce "equality of result" for those he happened to favor?
I write at a time when many people, especially those in the federal judiciary, believe that both questions should be answered with an emphatic "Yes." But it isn't so.
Above all, Thurgood Marshall will be remembered for his role in Brown v. Board of Education,2 and indeed it is in that case that one can find many of the central elements of Marshall's conception of the Constitution. Brown is commonly thought to have been a case about racial discrimination. It is even said to have established a constitutional norm of "color-blindness." But to the participants in the case, and to the Court at the time, the case was fundamentally about education.3 The briefs and oral argument stressed not color-blindness, but the need for equal educational opportunity. And the Court listened. In the passage that Justice Marshall particularly liked to quote, the Court said:
Today, education is perhaps the most important function of state and local
governments. Compulsory school attendance laws and the great expenditures for education both demonstate our recognition of the importance of
STANFORD LAW REVIEW education to our democratic society. It is required in the performance of our most basic public responsibilities, even service in the armed forces. It is in awakening the child to cultural values, in preparing him for later professional training, and in helping him to adjust normally to his environment. In these days, it is doubful that any child may reasonably be expected to
education.4 Brown was a case about education. In this, I believe, lies the clue to understanding the wellsprings of Marshall's life, work, and vision of the Constitution.
The long struggle by the NAACP-a struggle within and against the "separate but equal" doctrine-was undertaken, first and foremost, with an eye toward the achievement of equal educational opportunity. The original challenge to that doctrine was part and parcel of this goal. Above all, Marshall and others objected to a practice that would engrain second-class citizenship in children, and do so with respect to the social service most indispensable for an equal chance in life. Segregated education stamped notions of racial inferiority into children at an early, even decisive stage. Hence what seems to me the most revealing moment in Justice Marshall's argument in Brown. In response to a question from Justice Reed about whether the state should consider desegregation's potential negative impact on "law and order," Marshall said:
[Whites and blacks] are fighting together and living together. For example, today they are working together in other places.... I know in the
South where I spend most of my time, you will see white and colored kids
going down the road together to school. They separate and go to different
necessarily be any trouble if they went to school together.
We now take it for granted that after Brown, the Court rapidly repudiated the "separate but equal" doctrine not only in education, but across the board, in a series of per curiam opinions.7 But these cases should not obscure Marshall's focus on education, and the reasons for that focus.
Marshall's early commitment to equal educational opportunity carried
THUR GOOD MARSHALL over to his work on the Court. It helps explain many of his votes and writings it unites a number of seemingly disparate ideas.8 A conspicuous example is Marshall's greatest opinion, dissenting in San Antonio School District v. Rodriguez,9 a case that has emerged as one of the most important since Brown itself. In that case, the Supreme Court upheld significant disparities in per-pupil expenditures in school financing in Texas. Marshall's dissenting opinion rested above all on the centrality of education to constitutionally protected liberties. First, Marshall said, education is connected with freedom of speech: "Education directly affects the ability of a child to exercise his First Amendment rights, both as a source and as a receiver of information and ideas, whatever interests he may pursue in life."
Second, education is central to the system of self-government: "Education may instill the interest and provide the tools necessary for political discourse and debate. Indeed, it has frequently been suggested that education is the dominant factor affecting political consciousness and participation."11 In this way, education is connected to the democratic aspirations of the American legal tradition.
Third, Marshall argued that education is a crucial mechanism for allowing people to overcome disadvantaged conditions. It ensures, not equality of resources or outcomes, but a fair chance. "[T]he right of every American to an equal start in life, so far as the provision.., of education is concerned, is far too vital to permit state discrimination on grounds as tenuous as those presented by this record."' This is not an egalitarian theme. It is about prospects from the start, not results in the middle. Here Marshall's Rodriguez dissent is linked to the deepest goals behind Brown.
The same themes appear throughout Marshall's work. For him, education supplies "the basic tools and opportunities that might enable [people] to rise."' Thus the Constitution should be seen to reflect "a deep distrust of policies that specially burden the access of disadvantaged persons to the governmental institutions and processes that offer members of our society an
1269
STANFORD LAW REVIEW opportunity to improve their status and better their lives."' Such distrust is justified because
[a] statute that erects special obstacles to education in the path of the poor
naturally tends to consign such persons to their current disadvantaged status. By denying equal opportunity to exactly those who need it most, the
law not only militates against the ability of each poor child to advance herself or himself, but also increases the likelihood of the creation of a discrete 1270 [Vol. 44:1267
Thus Marshall understood the Constitution to create a "right of every American to an equal start in life,"' at least in the sense of a right that the state provide legitimate reasons for failing to provide equal educational opportunity. In this way, Marshall's work on the Court maintained deep continuity with his work on the school segregation cases.
Marshall was not an egalitarian. His conception of equality was extremely old-fashioned. An outgrowth of his experiences with segregation, that conception involved, as its defining feature, a commitment to equality of opportunity. In Marshall's constitutional vision, this commitment entailed, first and foremost, a right to equal prospects in education. But it also required more generally an opposition to all caste systems-understood as second-class citizenship, in which one group is systematically below others on the basis of a morally irrelevant factor such as race, sex, or disability. In his view, rejection of caste was the central lesson of the Civil War Amendments: "The intent of the Fourteenth Amendment was to abolish caste legislation. When state action has the predictable tendency to entrap the poor and create a permanent underclass, that intent is frustrated.'
Thus the equal protection principle did not ban all racial differentiation. It did not require color-blindness. For Marshall, this precept was ahistorical it was insufficiently attuned to the particular history behind the Civil War Amendments. The principal point of those Amendments was not to require that people who were similarly situated be treated "the same." Instead, Marshall thought that the core meaning of the Equal Protection Clause was that the government could not translate morally irrelevant differences into a form of second-class citizenship. It could not take skin color, or gender, and turn these into social disadvantages for blacks or women.' It is highly misleading to say that this is a vision of the Fourteenth Amendment that favored the "rights of groups" over "the rights of individuals." In any
STANFORD LAW REVIEW a commitment to equality of opportunity, particularly in education, and a rejection of caste. Of all Justices to serve on the Supreme Court, Marshall was also by far the most insistently protective of poor people. Indeed, he moved very close to a belief in a constitutional right to freedom from desperate conditions. This right is the third and final cornerstone in Marshall's conception of equality. It was also connected, though less directly, with the original wellsprings of Brown.
At the very least, Marshall believed that any system that left an identifiable class of Americans in conditions of this kind should be subject to careful scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause. Under this view, no one should be deprived, without good reason, of adequate education, police protection, food, shelter, or medical care.25
This principle is hardly egalitarian. It merely affords a basic minimum. It allows enormous variations in living standards. There is no evidence that Marshall objected to such variations. But it would not permit people to fall below a specified floor. Certainly Marshall believed that poor people could not be deprived of access to the basic institutions of a democratic society, including the political process, the judicial process, and education. In an appropriate case, I think that he would also have held that the government could not constitutionally deprive people of the basic means of subsistence1272 [Vol. 44:1267
STANFORD LAW REVIEW mobilized the women's movement, contributed to the defeat of the Equal Rights Amendment, and helped create the moral majority, in a way having quite adverse effects for the cause of equality on the basis of sex.3
The point can be made more generally: Constitutional law is an uneasy amalgam of substantive theory and institutional constraint. In developing constitutional principles, courts must be attentive not only to the best substantive interpretation of the relevant text, but also to institutional limits on judicial capacity. Even if the best substantive theory calls for something like Marshall's vision, institutional considerations would argue powerfully against it.
In any case, the era of Brown-an era that produced so many extraordinary developments in American law, many of them engineered by Marshall-was an exceptional one in American history. It had no real predecessors. It is doubtful whether it will have any real successors. Many of those captivated by Marshall's achievement in Brown have hoped, for the last thirty years, for one, two, three, or a dozen Browns-in which federal courts, following Marshall's lead, reform the multiple unjust practices of American society. For now and for the foreseeable future, this hope looks like nostalgia, based on an anachronistic vision of the role of courts in American society.
[Vol. 44:1267
The capacities of the courts are one thing the relationship of the Constitution to American life is another. Many Americans continue to live in desperate conditions. They are without hope, food, or shelter. They are subject to both random and systemic criminal violence-usually from the private sector, sometimes from the police. Blacks and women are disproportionately victims. Many children are without decent life prospects. A system with caste-like features currently exists with respect to race, sex, and disability. Many Americans never receive a decent education. In educational opportunities there are persistent, extraordinary, and unnecessary disparities, and these are correlated with race and other moral irrelevancies.
Even if the Supreme Court of the United States lacks the willingness, the tools, or the competence to respond to the situation, it remains plausible to think that the Constitution of the United States is not an irrelevance. Other institutions, most notably Congress, the President, and state governments, have duties of fidelity to the founding document. Those institutions are not burdened with the limits that face the judiciary. Their duties of fidelity might well be discharged in a way that is attuned to the fact that for them, institutional disabilities are not present.
We might even think of the judicial rather than legislative enforcement of the Fourteenth Amendment as the most profound irony in American constitutional history-one for which Marshall is above all others responsible. On the original view, it was Congress, not the courts, that would enforce the
Civil War Amendments. In the aftermath of the Dred Scott decision,35 the ratifiers could not possibly have anticipated the extraordinary role of the judges, associated above all with Brown and its aftermath. It may well be that in the next generation, there will be an institutional shift more in keeping with the original understanding of that Amendment and, perhaps, with better understandings of the appropriate allocation of authority among Congress, the President, and the judiciary.
In these circumstances, it is fully plausible to think that Marshall's vision of the Constitution will continue to have a conspicuous place in American constitutional thought. But increasingly, its place will be the halls of the legislatures and the bureaucracies, rather than the judiciary. This is an extraordinary irony: More than anyone else, Marshall is responsible for the idea that social reform, through the courts in the name of the Constitution, was both possible and desirable. But the irony is one that Marshall appears fully to appreciate.
The last words come from Marshall himself. In 1980, the city of Baltimore erected a statute of Thurgood Marshall. It was able to persuade him to attend the ceremony-a real accomplishment in light of his storied reluctance to receive public tribute. But this was a remarkable event. Baltimore had been a segregated city, and one of Marshall's first endeavors after graduating from law school was to desegregate Maryland's all-white law school. The dedication of a statue honoring a black civil rights lawyer who had abolished American apartheid would have been unfathomable fifty or sixty years before.
Surely this was an occasion for celebration-of an extraordinary life of accomplishment, and of the remarkable achievements of the civil rights revolution. But if celebration meant complacency, Marshall would have nothing of it:
Some... feel we have arrived. Others feel there is nothing more to do. I
just want to be sure that when you see this statue, you won't think that's the
end of it. I won't have it that way. There's too much work to be done.38 Summer 1992]
