 Confirmation Process David A. Strausst and Cass R. Sunsteintt It is difficult to find anyone who is satisfied with the way Supreme Court Justices are appointed today. Many of the criticisms are prompted by partisanship, of course. But there is a substantial element of truth in the complaints made by partisans on both sides. And those who are not partisan, but who simply want a healthy process that conforms to the constitutional design and is likely to produce the best appointments, have perhaps the most to criticize. In this Essay, we suggest that a return to the confirmation process contemplated by the text and structure of the Constitution-a process in which the Senate plays a more independent role than it does today-would help eliminate aspects of the system that both sides, Administration supporters as wel as Administration critics, find objectionable. It would also produce a better Court along two dimensions: a Court with Justices of greater distinction, and a Court that reflects a more appropriate diversity of views. The Administration's opponents reply that the real problem is that, for the Administration, filling vacancies on the Supreme Court has become a public relations offensive: one that consists of managing images and hiding the ball, while at the same time pushing the Court in a consistent and (to them) unhealthy direction. The President, his opponents say, chooses "stealth" nominees whom he has reason to believe are deeply conservative, but whose views the Senate will not be able to uncover. The White House then carefully prepares the nominees for the confirmation hearings, to the point where there is now practically a script: the nominee is open-minded, has "no agenda," enthusiastically accepts both Brown v. Board of Education1 and Griswold v. Connecticut,2 is humbled by the difficulty of being a Justice, and admires Justice Harlan.3 The nominees commit themselves to liberal-sounding principles of privacy and racial and gender justice; but the commitments are at such a high level of platitudinous abstraction that they reveal nothing about the nominees' views on controversial issues.4 And if anything potentially embarrassing surfaces from the nominees' records, the Administration's opponents say, the nominees try to distance themselves from it or to shift attention to other, more attractive aspects of their backgrounds. The consequence is a confirmation process that amounts to a media event unedifying for the public, undignified for the country, and unlikely to produce outstanding Justices or an outstanding Court. 1. 347 U.S. 483 (1954) (invalidating segregation of public schools). 2. 381 U.S. 479 (1965) (striking down ban on use of contraceptives). 3. The near-compulsory admiration of Justice Harlan is an especially interesting development. It may be based not only on Justice Harlan's evident thoughtfulness and open-mindedness, but also on the fact that he was simultaneously (1) the most conservative Justice on the late Warren Court and (2) the preeminent intellectual source of the modem approach to substantive due process, an approach which culminated in both Griswold and Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973). For a critique, see Bruce Ackerman, The Common Law Constitution of John Marshall Harlan, 36 N.Y.L. ScH. L. REv. 5 (1991). the matter-improbable that existing procedures are well suited to its fulfillment. The Constitution fully contemplates an independent role for the Senate in the selection of Supreme Court Justices.7 Article II, Section 2 provides that 7. An especially helpful account is James E. Gauch, Comment, The Intended Role of the Senate in Supreme Court Appointments, 56 U. CHL L. REV. 337 (1989); see also Charles L. Black, Jr., A Note on Senatorial Consideration of Supreme Court Nominees, 79 YALE L.J. 657 (1970) (arguing that constitutional considerations demand enhanced senatorial scrutiny when giving advice and consent to judicial, as opposed Confirmation Process the President "shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint... Judges of the supreme Court."' These words assign two distinct roles to the Senate-an advisory role before the nomination has occurred and a reviewing function after the fact. The consent requirement, if the Senate takes it seriously, places pressure on the President to give weight to senatorial advice as well. At the same time, the advisory function makes consent more likely. The clause thus envisions a genuinely consultative relationship between the Senate and the President. It assumes a deliberative process, jointly conducted, concerning the composition of the Court.' History supports this view of the text. The most explicit and elaborate contemporaneous exposition was given by George Mason in 1792. Mason wrote: I am decidedly of opinion, that the Words of the Constitution... give the Senate the Power of interfering in every part of the Subject, except the Right of nominating.... The Word 'Advice' here clearly relates in the Judgment of the Senate on the Expediency or Inexpediency of the Measure, or Appointment; and the Word 'Consent' to their Approbation or Disapprobation of the Person nominated; otherwise the word Advice has no Meaning at all-and it is a well known Rule of Construction, that no Clause or Expression shall be deemed superfluous, or nugatory, which is capable of a fair and rational Meaning. The Nomination, of Course, brings the Subject fully under the Consideration of the Senate; who have then a Right to decide upon its Propriety or Impropriety. The peculiar Character or Predicament of the Senate in the Constitution of the General Government, is a strong Confirmation of this Construction.10 As the records of the Constitutional Convention demonstrate, the Constitution's drafters widely shared Mason's view. The Convention had four basic options of where to vest the appointment power: it could have placed the power (1) in the President alone, (2) in Congress alone, (3) in the President with congressional advice and consent, or (4) in Congress with Presidential advice and consent. Some version of each of these options received serious consideration. It is important to understand that during almost all of the Convention, the Framers agreed that the Senate alone or the legislature as a whole would appoint the judges. The current institutional arrangement emerged in the last days of the process. On June 5, 1787, the standing provision required "that the national Judiciary be [chosen] by the National Legislature." 12 James Wilson spoke against this provision and in favor of Presidential appointment.13 He claimed that "intrigue, partiality, and concealment" would result from legislative appointment, and that the President was uniquely "responsible.' '14 John Rutledge responded that he "was by no means disposed to grant so great a power to any single person. The people will think we are leaning too much towards Monarchy.' 15 James Madison agreed with Wilson's concerns about legislative "intrigue and partiality," but he "was not satisfied with referring the appointment to the Executive.' 16 Instead, he proposed to place the power of appointment in the Senate, "as numerous eno' to be confided in-as not so numerous as to be governed by the motives of the other branch; and as being sufficiently stable and independent to follow their deliberative judgments."17 Thus, on June 5, by a vote of nine to two, the Convention accepted the vesting of the appointment power in the Senate.'8 On June 13, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney and Roger Sherman tried to restore the original provision for appointment of the Supreme Court by the entire Congress. 9 Madison renewed his argument and the motion was withdrawn. In the end, the Ghorum proposal was rejected by a vote of six to two. At that point, Ghorum suggested, as an alternative, that the President should nominate and appoint judges with the advice and consent of the Senate. On this the vote was evenly divided, four to four.' The motion was defeated by six to three. By the same vote, the earlier Madison proposal, in which the Senate would appoint the Justices, was accepted.31 The issue next arose on August 23. Robert Morris argued against the appointment of officers by the Senate, considering "the body as too numerous for the purpose; as subject to cabal; and as devoid of responsibility."32 But it was not until September 4 that the provision appeared in its current form.33 Morris made the only recorded pronouncements on the new arrangement and seemed to speak for the entire, now unanimous assembly. Morris said, "[A]s the President was to nominate, there would be responsibility, and as the Senate was to concur, there would be security."' ' Great weight should be given to the remarks made by Morris because of their timing. The Convention accepted the provision with this understanding. Consent by the Senate This picture leaves something of a puzzle. For almost all of the Convention, the appointment power was vested in the Senate. At the last moment, it was shifted to the President, with the advice and consent of the Senate. What accounts for the shift? We speculate that two developments played an important role. First, on July 16, 1787, the Convention approved the Great Compromise, allowing equal representation for the states within the Senate despite their differences in population. This additional security for the small states may have provided those states with a degree of reassurance that made a Presidential initiative in the appointments process significantly less threatening. That reassurance, going to the structure of the document, may have made it less necessary to insist on limiting the President's role in appointments. 5 Second, the assessment of Presidential powers appears to have changed in a major way when the Founders devised the Electoral College, thereby allowing a degree of representation of states qua states in the selection of the President.36 As we have seen, much of the resistance to Presidential power came from the small states, which feared that the President would be inattentive to their interests. Once it was decided that the President would be selected through the new, protective route, the small states had a new degree of security against the obvious risks, from their point of view, of pure majoritarianism. They therefore would have found it less threatening to vest the power of appointment in the President in the first instance. The Framers could accomplish the central goal of ensuring "responsibility" without undue risk to state interests. These simultaneous powers would bring about a healthy form of checks and balances, permitting each branch to counter the other. That system was part and parcel of general deliberation about Supreme Court membership. The Convention debates afford no basis for the view that the Senate's role was designed to be meager. On the contrary, they suggest a fully shared authority over the composition of the Court. That shared authority was to include all matters that the Senate deemed relevant, including the nominee's point of view. As we have noted, this argument derives particular force from the centrality of the question of states' interests to the debate over the appointments process. The split between the large and small states was among the most important political issues of the period. Some delegates were fearful that all judicial nominees would come from large states. More generally, state rivalry, dominating the debates over the appointments clause, was the functional equivalent of the most sharply disputed of current legal and political debates. There can be no question that the "advice and consent" role was intended to provide, in Morris' terms, "security." And there can be no question that a central aspect of "security" was the power to refuse to confirm nominees insensitive to the interests of a majority of the states. In this sense, political commitments were understood to be a properly central ingredient in senatorial deliberations.' 4 C. The Early Practice The practice of the Senate in the early days of the republic and thereafter attests to the same conclusion. 45 George Washington's nomination of John Rutledge, then Chief Justice of South Carolina, as Chief Justice of the United States is the most revealing case in point.46 Rutledge's challenge to the Jay Treaty, 47 negotiated by Washington with Great Britain, played a pivotal role in the confirmation process. The Jay Treaty was challenged by the Republicans as a concession to Britain but approved by the Federalists as a way of keeping the peace. Rutledge attacked the treaty in a prominent speech in Charleston. The Federalists sought to block the Rutledge appointment on straightforwardly political grounds. Hamilton, a leader of the support for the Jay Treaty, led the opposition to Rutledge. The Senate ultimately rejected Rutledge for political reasons, by a vote of fourteen to ten.4 Nor was the Rutledge rejection unique. In 1811, the Senate rejected Madison's appointment of Alexander Wolcott, partly on the basis of political considerations. In 1826, President Adams' appointment of Robert Trimble was nearly rejected on political grounds. The 1828 nomination of John Crittenden, a Whig, was ultimately prevented through postponement, and squarely on ideological grounds. Similar episodes occurred in the first half of the nineteenth century. In fact, during the nineteenth century, the Senate blocked one of every four nominees for the Court, frequently on political grounds.49 The Senate has at times insisted on the "advice" segment of its constitutional mandate. In 1869, President Grant nominated Edwin Stanton after receiving a petition to that effect signed by a majority of the Senate and the House.50 In 1932, the Chair of the Judiciary Committee, George W. Norris, insisted on the appointment of a liberal Justice to replace Oliver Wendell Holmes.5 1 Greatly influenced by a meeting with Senator William Borah, President Hoover eventually appointed Benjamin Cardozo to the Court. The Senator persuaded President Hoover to move Cardozo, then at the bottom of the President's list of preferred nominees, to the top. 52 D. The Constitutional Structure We have established that the constitutional text and history support an independent role for the Senate in the confirmation process. In the particular context of judicial appointments, there is an additional and highly compelling concern, one that stems from constitutional structure. It may be granted that the Senate ought generally to be deferential to Presidential nominations involving the operation of the executive branch. For the most part, executive branch nominees must work closely with or under the President. The President is entitled to insist that those nominees are people with whom he is comfortable, both personally and in terms of basic commitments and values.53 For much of the twentieth century, the Senate has not made independent judgments of the kind we urge for Supreme Court nominees. Until 1968, only one nominee had been rejected by the Senate in this century.5 There is some controversy over exactly how independent a role the Senate played in the nineteenth century.55 since 1969, circumstances have changed. Current conditions-conditions that are unique in our history-justify a more active role for the Senate.56 These circumstances include a large number of consecutive appointments by Presidents of one party during a period of divided government; the danger of intellectual homogeneity on the current Court; overt ideological attacks by the President on the Court and the self-conscious screening of nominees to the Court by the executive branch; the effective exclusion of the Senate from the selection of lower federal court judges; and the increased importance of separation of powers questions. Under these conditions, deference by the Senate is likely to produce neither a Court of high quality nor a Court with the appropriate range of views5 A. Eleven Consecutive Appointments During a Period of Divided Government The most important circumstance is, of course, prolonged divided government-specifically, the eleven consecutive Republican appointments, all made while the Democrats controlled the House, nine while the Democrats controlled the Senate.5 American politics has not, in general, been characterized by the alternation of parties in power.59 Republicans dominated the national government between the Civil War and the New Deal.6° Democrats then dominated until 1968,61 and Republicans have won five of the last six Presidential elections. 57. The Senate is always entitled to take an independent role and to consider likely voting patterns. It is free to do so even in a period in which the same party controls the Senate and the Presidency. But the argument that such a role would be a structural imperative of the constitutional plan-as opposed to constitutionally authorized-would be far weaker in that event, for reasons set out below. See infra Parts Ml.A, Ml.E. The argument for an independent role would be further weakened if the Court were not, in the relevant sense, monolithic. A Court with a balance of respectable views, see infra Part ILF, poses a far less urgent case for careful inspection by the Senate of likely voting patterns. For these reasons, we believe that the case for an independent role is currently far stronger than it was, for example, at the time of the nomination of Judge Robert Bork. was a war hero, President Eisenhower. See infra Appendix. When the people over time elect Presidents of different parties, and Presidents of each party contribute to the Court, this function is well served. The Court's membership then has some connection with the political balance in the country. When, as during the Roosevelt and Truman Administrations and during most of the post-Civil War period, the people turn over both Congress and the Presidency to one party, this function is again served, though in a different way. The Court does not reflect a balance between the parties-because there is no such balance in the country. Rather, the Court reflects the dominance of one side of the debate. After 1936, for example, the New Deal "won";68 the nation Of course, in these instances, the same party controlled both the white House and the Senate-a crucial difference from current circumstances, as we explain in the text. President Washington was not formally a member of any party, but he was generally thought to be affiliated with the Federalists, who controlled the Senate during his administration. See JOHN C. MILLER, THE FEDERAUST ERA 122-24 (1960). Confirmation Process was thoroughly committed to it, and Democrats dominated both branches. The Court, with thirteen consecutive appointees by Democratic Presidents, properly reflected the fact that the nation had made up its mind.69 But in the last twenty-five years the nation has not made up its mind. It has elected mostly Republican Presidents, but mostly Democratic Senates. The composition of the Supreme Court played a role in Presidential campaigns, and it is possible that this issue helped settle the elections as well. We know of no evidence that the composition of the Court has ever played a significant role in either Presidential or senatorial elections. Of course, it is theoretically possible that people voted for Republican Presidential candidates because they wanted a certain kind of Supreme Court; but it is also possible that the composition of the Court played a role in senatorial elections. Any relevant mandate is therefore quite muddled. A series of appointments by one party will not necessarily reflect that party's ideology.7" Some appointments in the history of the Court have been indisputably nonideological and nonpartisan; sometimes Presidents simply sought a distinguished figure.71 In such cases, the members of the Senate, even in a period of divided government, cannot complain that their mandate from the people is being ignored by the President. We do not argue that this is necessarily an inappropriate thing for a President to do. Concerns of this sort can be a fully legitimate part of the nomination process. Nor do we contend that the resulting nominees have been undistinguished. But when a President has criticized the Court so strongly on such grounds, the President's appointments can be counted on to reflect his own commitments. When the people elect a Senate with different convictions from those of the President, there is no reason for the appointments to reflect the President's views alone. Under the constitutional plan, the Senate need not sit idly by while a consistent stream of Presidential appointments leads the Court in a direction of which it disapproves. Voting Patterns and Judicial Commitments If the President, regardless of his statements during a campaign, deliberately sought to make nonpartisan appointments, the Senate would have much less warrant for injecting concerns about likely voting patterns. But with two arguable exceptions-Justices Stevens and Powel174-there can be little doubt that recent Republican Presidents have made appointments on the basis of their criticisms of the Court, attempting to fill vacancies with people with certain predictable commitments. We do not suggest that there has necessarily been a "litmus test" on such issues as abortion or affirmative action. But it seems [We] have, therefore, reached the point as a Nation where we must take action to save the Constitution from the Court and the Court from itself ... We want a Supreme Court which will do justice under the Constitution-not over it.. . . This plan will save our National Constitution from hardening of the judicial arteries. indisputable that these Presidents have generally attempted to choose Justices with predictable views about the role of the Court, and whose positions on the most controversial issues facing the Court were likely to conform to the President's own views. In the Reagan and Bush Administrations, the screening of Justices has been institutionalized. (The same is true of federal lower court judges, an important point we consider below.) Officials in the Department of Justice and the White House have played a prominent role in selecting Justices."7 The public statements of Presidents Reagan and Bush have also generally confirmed that the nominees were chosen because of their conceptions of the appropriate judicial role. D. The Effective Exclusion of the Senate from the Selection of Lower Federal Court Judges During the last few years, the Senate has been effectively excluded from the selection of lower federal court judges. This aspect of the current situation is not widely noted, but it adds to the case for Senate independence in the selection of Supreme Court Justices. In the last twenty-five years, there have been two very significant changes in the composition of the courts of appeals. First, the size of those courts has expanded enormously. Second, the Adminis convictions within the political process. See supra notes 68-69 and accompanying text. Confirmation Process Because the Senate is essentially unable to affect the composition of the lower courts, Supreme Court appointments are even more important today than in the past. They are the Senate's only realistic opportunity to influence the orientation of the federal judiciary. Unlike an appointment to a court of appeals, a Supreme Court appointment is so infrequent and so important that the Senate can afford to invest the resources needed to investigate nominees thoroughly. If the Senate is not willing to take an independent look at Supreme Court nominees, however, then a committed executive is free to dominate the entire federal judiciary. As one would expect, the era of divided government has given rise to an unusually large number of disputes between the branches. Often the Court must resolve disputes involving the allocation of power between the President and the Congress. The constitutionality of the independent counsel provision of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978,85 the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act,8 6 and the Sentencing Commission s7 are recent illustrations. In the future, there is likely to be litigation over the constitutionality of institutional arrangements designed to limit Presidential control of the administrative process. 88 The problem, however, goes much deeper. Recurring and now sharply debated issues of statutory construction have raised important conflicts between the executive branch and the Congress. Such issues include, most notably, the role of legislative history in statutory interpretation 9 and the degree of deference to be given to administrative interpretations of statutes. In the resolution of such conflicts lies much of the de facto power of the executive branch and the legislature. For example, there would be a large increase in executive power, in some ways at the expense of the Congress, if the Supreme Court were to hold that legislative history is irrelevant and that administrative interpretations prevail in the face of any slight ambiguity in the statutory text. Presidential review of regulations). Other things being equal, the Court benefits when it is composed of Justices with a range of views. The qualifier is important: we do not mean to suggest that the Court should have a member who believes that Brown v. Board of Education93 should be overruled, or who considers welfare laws unconstitutional. 4 But with respect to a significant number of issues, the Court can perform its task better if there is a diversity of opinions. legal problems that other judges do not see-not through ignorance or malice, but because of differing priorities. Once an issue is brought to general attention, everyone might agree on what the outcome should be. But the issue might not have come to the Court's attention at all were it not for the distinctive concerns of one of the Justices. The certiorari process has often benefitted from intellectual diversity of this kind, and it is important that it continue to do so. We suspect that the principal source of concern about an independent Senate role is not that it would be inconsistent with the Constitution. Rather, the concern-and it is obviously an important one-is that an independent Senate role would unduly politicize the process of choosing Justices, thus 99. Sometimes, of course, ajudge whose convictions diverge from the national consensus might well be desirable if the judge's own convictions are based on good reasons. Part of the point of judicial independence is to allow this phenomenon to occur. But it seems hard to design an appointments process that would systematically produce such judges. exacerbating the serious difficulties of the current situation. In fact, however, there is good reason to think that the approach we suggest would result in a less politicized appointment process, and one less likely to have the other undesirable characteristics that have led to so much dissatisfaction. In addition, as we will discuss, there are ways to help limit any adverse effects of an independent Senate role. As we have shown, many Presidents, including most of those who appointed the last eleven Justices, more or less overtly considered a candidate's likely voting patterns in choosing a nominee. Under the current understanding, the process is political in this sense, but only at one end: the President is free to choose as conservative a nominee as he thinks he can get away with, but in order to reject the nominee the Senate must do more than merely object to the nominee's political or legal orientation. In order to reject a nominee, the Senate has to find some major deficiency in character or has to brand the nominee as "out of the mainstream." There is no question that, if the Senate were to assume the independent approach we suggest, Senators would have to be prepared to make judgments about how nominees would be likely to vote if they became Justices. In this sense, our approach might add elements to the process that can be characterized as "political." But part of what has politicized the process is the approach of recent Presidents.1"' Requiring the Senate to be nonpolitical will not cure that. role would require a longer discussion than we can provide here. of the Appointment Process More important, there is reason to think that our approach would actually make the process less political. We do not want to overstate this point, which is somewhat speculative. But ironically, a system in which only one side is free to be political might inject more politics into the appointment process than a system in which the two sides battle on equal terms. If the Senate were free to oppose a nominee explicitly because it disagreed with those convictions, 1' 4 the President would have a stronger incentive to compromise by selecting a nominee whose views were more in keeping with those of the Senate. In the current climate, under the approach we advocate, it is not at all implausible that the President and the Senate might agree on a moderate nominee of genuine distinction. The President, knowing that he could not rely on the confirmation of an extreme conservative, might find such a nominee the second-best choice. The Senators, knowing they had done all they could to obtain a more moderate nominee, would have less incentive to attack the nominee's record in ways that might be unfair. Both sides, having checkmated each other on this dimension, might be more concerned with the nominee's qualities of intellect and vision. 104. The point raises an important and controversial question: Should Senators be allowed to question the nominee about votes in specific cases? In brief, we advocate the following approach. Members of the Senate are fully entitled to ask such specific questions as they like. Nominees are entitled to refuse to answer-if they do refuse, they may do so in part on the plausible ground that no assurances should be given in advance, lest judicial independence be compromised. But for its part, the Senate is entitled to take into account the refusal to answer-subject to the important qualifications we discuss below. See infra Part IC. Senators may conclude that the absence of relevant assurances counts against confirmation. No one would welcome an appointments process in which nominees to the Court made campaign promises--commitments about how they will vote on particular issues-to various Senators in the hope of gaining enough votes to be confirmed. Of course, once a nominee is confirmed, any such commitment is unenforceable. But a nominee who promised during a Senate hearing that she would not, for example, vote to overrule Roe v. Wade 05 would inevitably think twice about the public uproar that would result if she were persuaded by contrary arguments as a Justice and reneged on that promise. 105. 410 U.S. 113 (1973). 106. The point is not partisan: the Roosevelt Administration would not have appointed anyone who stated that the New Deal was unconstitutional, and a Democratic President in the near future is unlikely to appoint anyone who unequivocally opposes Roe. views while taking pains not to ask for commitments on specific issues. Moreover, Senators realize that public questioning of a well-coached nominee, by Senators who must be careful not to look too partisan or too bullying, is a particularly ineffective way to find out what a nominee really thinks. As our previous arguments suggest, an independent Senate role might, perhaps paradoxically, diminish the importance of the confirmation hearings. Currently, the confirmation hearing is a climactic media spectacle that determines whether the President can slip his nominee (whom everyone knows was chosen in part for her likely voting patterns, despite the President's claims that merit was the exclusive basis) past the Senate (which is also concerned with the nominee's likely votes, notwithstanding the Senators' contention that they are concerned only with character, competence, and whether the nominee is in the "mainstream"). The fate of legislation is not decided in this manner. For the reasons outlined above, judicial appointments would not be decided in this way either, if the Senate approached them with the same independence it brings to the President's legislative initiatives. the central role of the confirmation hearing. Whether or not the Senate adopts a more independent view of its role (and perhaps especially if it does), a number of steps might be taken to reduce the significance of the hearing and to improve the process in general. 107. See supra notes 1-4 and accompanying text. We note in particular the distortions of the prenomination record of Judge Robert Bork, catalogued in ROBERT H. BORK, THE TEMPT1NG OF AMIERICA: THE POLMCAL SEDUCTION OF THE LAW 323-36 (1988); the extensive preparation of nominees David Souter and Clarence Thomas before their hearings; the reliance on general appearance before the camera in the Bork, Souter, and Thomas hearings; the effects of television coverage on some Senators' behavior, and the uninformative generalities provided by several recent nominees in their statements to the Senators. nature of the Court, and of constitutional law generally, is unnecessarily obscured; hearings can serve to enlighten. But the current system offers only minor advances in public education, and it does so while introducing a range of distortions into the process. Moreover, it appears that the hearings can be truly educative only on those occasions when the system is, in a sense, out of equilibrium. This occurs, for example, when the questioners unexpectedly change their tactics and the Administration and nominee are caught unprepared. Once the executive adjusts, the hearings become stylized and their educative value is reduced. Reducing the centrality of the hearings would significantly advance the goal of a healthy confirmation process.'0 8 (3) The Senate should place the burden of proof-with respect to character, excellence, and point of view--on the nominee. No one has a right to sit on the Supreme Court. The country need not accept nominees simply because they might ultimately prove distinguished or open-minded. A "hope" to this effect is insufficient."0 9 In exercising its consent power, the Senate is entitled to reject nominees simply because they have not established that they have the requisite qualities, even if there is considerable uncertainty on that point. 108. A reduced emphasis on the hearings might, however, also work against an independent senatorial role, at least to the extent that such hearings mobilize public opposition to a nominee. We hope that such a role does not depend on such mobilization, produced as it sometimes is by arbitrary or irrelevant factors. 109. It follows that the burden of proof required in a criminal trial is inappropriate in the confirmation hearings. A heavy burden of proof is correctly placed on governmental efforts to incarcerate someone, or to convict him of a criminal offense; in view of the enormous harm of a mistake-the conviction of an innocent person-the state must bear an extraordinary burden. In a confirmation hearing, the possibility of harm argues in precisely the opposite direction. Someone wrongly denied a seat on the Court may be embarrassed or worse, but is hardly placed in the position of a convicted criminal. Someone wrongly placed on the Court is in a unique position to commit social harm. For this reason we think much of the "heavy burden of proof' rhetoric in the confirmation hearings involving Justice Thomas was misconceived-though we do not confront the many complexities of those hearings, unfortunate by any standard, in this space. 110. As argued at the time by Bork's supporters, an unfortunate consequence of the Bork hearings has been precisely this. The Constitution contemplates an important role for the Senate in the confirmation process. It provides that there will be senatorial "advice" before the fact. It ensures that no nominee may serve without senatorial "consent." There is especially strong structural support for such a role in connection with appointments to the branch of government that resolves disputes and allocates power between the other two branches. TABLE 1. Judicial Appointments by President John Jay CJ John Rutledge William Cushing James Wilson John Blair James Iredell Thomas Johnson William Paterson Samuel Chase Oliver Ellsworth C Bushrod Washington Alfred Moore John Marshall CJ William Johnson H. Brockholst Livingston Thomas Todd Joseph Story Gabriel Duvall Smith Thompson Robert Trimble Samuel Nelson Levi Woodbury Robert C. Grier Benjamin R. Curtis John A. Campbell a Letter symbols for political parties: Ad - Administration; C - Coalition; D - Democratic; DR - Democratic-Republican; William Strong Joseph R Bradley Ward Hunt Morrison R. Waite C" John M. Harlan William B. Woods Stanley Matthews Horace Gray Samuel Blatchford David J. Brewer Henry B. Brown George Shiras, Jr. Howell E. Jackson Edward D. White Rufus W. Peckham Oliver W. Holh2s, Jr. Wiliam R. Day William H. Mocdy Horace H. Larton Charles E. Hughes Edward D. White Cl Willis Van Devanter Joseph R. Laina Mahlon Pitney James C. McReynolds Louis D. Brandeis John H. Clarke b The Senate was evenly divided in the 47th Congress, with Vice-President Chester Arthur giving the Republican Party control. Eisenhower (5) William IL Taft CJ George Sutherland Pierce Butier Edward T. Sanford Hugo L. Black Stanley F. Reed Felix Frankfurter William 0. Douglas Frank Murphy Harlan F. Stone Cle James F. Bymes Robert H. Jackson Wiley B. Rutledge Er Warren CJ John M. Harlan William J. Brennan, Jr. Charles E. Whittaker Potter Stewart Byron R. White Arthur J. Goldberg Abe Fortas Thurgood Mtarshal Warren E. Burger CT Harry A. Blacinnun Lewis F. Powell Wiliam H. Rehnquist Sandra Day O'Connor e Willam H. Rehnquist Ci Antonin Scalia Anthony M. Kennedy John Paul Stevens d The Republican Party held the Senate'by a two-vote margin in the 66th Congress. e Denotes a Chief Justice who was elevated from the position of Associate Justice. The Republican Party held the Senate in the 83d Congress by only one vote, with one Senator affiliating with neither the Democratic nor the Republican Party. Republican nor the Democratic Party. TABLE 2. Appointments and Senate Majority Party Harding/Coolidge/Hoover Eisenhower Nixon/FordReagan/Bush Roosevelt/Ifuman Kennedy/Johnson Carter in the Nixon/Ford/Reagan/Bush era.