 Cass R. Sunstein* Much of modem constitutional law and theory is organized around two ideas. Both of them are associated with prominent strands in contemporary legal and political thought. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor ofJurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. This Article was originally prepared for a panel on The Future of Liberal Constitutionalism, at the annual meeting of the American Political Science Association, held in September 1990. I am grateful to my copanelists, Don Herzog, Michael Sandel, and Rogers Smith, for their helpful comments on that occasion. Stephen Holmes, a copanelist on that occasion as well, has been an invaluable source of ideas, criticism, and encouragement. Constitution (forthcoming 1992). All of these positions tend to depend on a conception of neutrality rooted in existing distributions. Both aggregative conceptions of politics and opposition to paternalism are usually rooted in the idea that current preferences should be taken as prepolitical or as defining individual welfare, and therefore used as the basis for social choice. Purely 2. See, e.g., Robert H. Bork, Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment 6. See, e.g., Posner, supra note 4, at 20-22. 7. 73 Harv. L. Rev. 1 (1959). 8. Four qualifications are necessary here. First, sometimes the belief in taking existing distributions as the baseline stems from the perception that alterations in market outcomes will be counterproductive-as in, for example, the view that the minimum wage increases unemployment. These more pragmatic concerns, see Richard A. Posner, The Problems ofJurisprudence (1990), do not posit a natural orjust private sphere, but instead claim that efforts to change existing distributions will hurt the very people one wants to help or will have ancillary adverse effects. In some contexts, this view does indeed argue in favor of respect for existing distributions. I do not deal with these concerns here. Third, a system that keeps constant institutions and distributions is likely, other things being equal, to create far more stability than a system that does not. That kind of stability is an important individual and collective good. A system in which existing distributions are continually reexamined is likely to break down along factional lines and also to undermine both security and planning. Coherent reform requires selectivity; most things (at any single time) must be left unreformed. Moreover, the status quo, whether or not natural, may well be a basis for legitimate expectations. See Jon Elster, related belief in the need for a certain kind of abstraction and generality, a belief that turns out to produce a set of biases of its own. I suggest that this view supplies a secure justification for the abortion right. It also provides worthy competition to the now dominant positions on pornography and surrogacy, although I do not attempt to resolve these issues here. Before getting down to cases, it will be useful to say something general about neutrality as a constitutional imperative.12 The most celebrated essay in all of constitutional law is probably the place to begin. In Toward Neutral Principles of Constitutional Law, 13 Herbert Wechsler criticized the Supreme Court's opinion in Brown v. Board of Education 14 on the ground that the Court had not supplied a "neutral" justification for its decision. For Wechsler, the problem of segregation involved a conflict between two sorts of associational preferences: the desire of blacks to attend school with whites and the desire of whites to attend school without blacks. As far as Wechsler was concerned, the Court had established no neutral principle to permit a choice between these two sets of desires. Wechsler was unable to come up with any such principle on his own. The decision was therefore not shown to be permissibly neutral.15 For current observers, Wechsler's demand for neutrality, as he understood that concept, seems to have an otherworldly quality. 16 The notion that the associational desires of whites and blacks should be put on the same plane, and given the same status, appears exceedingly peculiar. Those desires have entirely different origins and consequences. The idea that neutrality demands that the desires be "equally" respected disregards the historical context of inequality, that is, the system of racial segregation that reflected and helped create and perpetuate those desires. 12. Some of the ideas in this section are discussed from a somewhat different angle The problem is a general one. In a nutshell, it is this: For purposes of constitutional law, the question whether there is partisanship always depends on the baseline from which measurements are made. In the cases, and in ordinary legal or political discussion, the baseline frequently consists of existing distributions of wealth and entitlements. Existing distributions are treated as natural and exogenous to the legal system, and the normal role of government is thus seen as the ratification and protection of these distributions, based in part on existing preferences. These preferences are in turn at least to some extent a function of existing distributions and hence of law; but they are also treated as entirely independent of law. Nothing else explains the fact that governmental repeal of a trespass law, or refusal to enforce a contract, counts as state action 19whereas a repeal of an antidiscrimination law probably does not. 20 Or consider the fact that enforcement of an antidiscrimination law is 17. Wechsler, supra note 7, at 34; see also Martha Nussbaum, The Rosenthal Lectures, Lecture 3: It Has Nothing to Do with the Law 36-37 (1991) (unpublished manuscript, on file with the Columbia Law Review) (comparing the Aristotelian view of neutrality with that used by Wechsler). clearly state action (although, of course, lawful on the merits) while, in general, enforcement of a trespass law or invocation of the courts to enforce a contract is not.2 1 Results of this sort can be attributed not to the requirement of state action, but to a substantive theory that defines (constitutionally troublesome) action and partisanship, and their (constitutionally invulnerable) corollaries, inaction and neutrality, by reference to existing practices and distributions. discriminate against whites but not blacks represents impermissible partisanship. It reveals the commitment to the antidiscrimination principle to be merely contingent and strategic, even hypocritical and cynical-no principle at all. Consider, as a final example, the frequently repeated view that the Constitution protects only negative rights and not positive ones.2 5 centralized judicial invalidation of an important aspect of employment policy for thousands and perhaps millions of employers, schools, and others. It seems quite "collectivist" to advocate centralized judicial preclusion of programs set out by widely divergent treating all forms of discrimination "the same," depends not on "individualism" but on a claim from neutrality. individuals and groups. Under this rubric, the Constitution affords no right to welfare, medical care, or protection against violence. 26 As it operates in the cases, however, the description of a right as positive or negative depends on the baseline. The right to private property and protection of contractual freedom are uncontroversial, and properly so;27 but they are fully positive. Their existence depends on the willingness of state officials to enforce trespass laws and contractual arrangements. 28 These relatively uncontroversial constitutional rights are thus positive in character. The rejection of a right to welfare or to freedom from private discrimination cannot rest on a claim that all constitutional rights are "negative" in the sense that they do not require governmental involvement. The line between constitutionally protected rights and unprotected interests depends not on the distinction between negative and positive rights, but on substantive ideas about what government normally or naturally does. It remains entirely possible that existing law is sound. The point is that its soundness must depend on something other than the claim that the Constitution protects only negative rights. fusal to subsidize" those rights. This split also treats existing distributions-the prewelfare state status quo-as natural and just. See Chapter 10 of Sunstein, The Partial Constitution, supra note *. These ideas come together in one of the most important general questions in free speech law, which involves the power of government to regulate the speech "market" in the interest of a well-functioning deliberative democracy. The issue has arisen frequently during discussions of campaign finance legislation and efforts to regulate television and radio.3 3 According to one view, any government regulation of speech is impermissible partisanship.3 4 If government removes speech power from some people because, for example, they are rich, it takes from them for the benefit of others. 31. This is a familiar argument within the liberal tradition. The great expositors of liberalism in the 19th and 20th centuries are insistent on the point. See, e.g., John Stuart Mill, The Subjection of Women 4-6 (Susan M. Okin ed., 1988) (1869) (refusing to view the subjugation of women as a natural institution simply because of existing desires and its long existence); Rawls, supra note 1, at 260-63. The same ideas are played out in the debate over the increasingly prominent view that the government should not concern itself with the airwaves and that total reliance on private markets and consumer preferences is the appropriate strategy for government with respect to broadcasting.38 Despite the emerging consensus, it is hardly clear that neutrality lies in respect for a system in which access to the media is a product of private willingness to pay. At least in principle, rights of private access to the media for differing positions, and other regulatory controls, might be thought congenial to the free speech guarantee. Especially in light of the consequences of broadcasting for beliefs and preferences, it is far from clear that government acts properly when it allows existing distributions of wealth to be translated into access to the media. Here, as in many other cases, a conception of neutrality that begins with existing distributions, and denominates disturbance of those distributions as "action" and "partisanship," plays a large role. It is important to understand, however, the many complexities in the use of "nature" or "the natural" as the basis for evaluating social practices. In classical philosophy, nature was a normative notion; it connoted human flourishing in connection with a certain kind of activity, and the lack of obstacles to that flourishing. 39 Nature did not refer to the absence of social or legal intervention. In modern political and legal theory, this normative notion of nature is sometimes conflated with an altogether different conception of the natural, one that is based on an inquiry into what would happen without social or legal action. The Court fails to recognize the essential point that the fair value of the political liberties is required for a just political procedure, and that to insure their fair-value it is necessary to prevent those with greater property and wealth, and the greater skills of organization which accompany them, from controlling the electoral process to their advantage. 40. Both Mill and Rousseau disposed of claims of justificatory power for nature, notwithstanding the persistence of those claims in some surprising places: If the artificial is not better than the natural, to what end are all the arts of life? To dig, to plough, to build, to wear clothes, are direct infringements on the injunction to follow nature. for doing to one another, are nature's every day performances. to nature, has no connection whatever with right and wrong.... That a thing is unnatural, in any precise meaning which can be attached to the word, is no argument for its being blamable.... I now turn to the three areas that will receive principal attention in this essay. As we will see, there are strong parallels in the debates over pornography, abortion, and surrogacy. In these three debates, the prevailing conception of neutrality rules out of bounds, as partisan, an argument that is at least highly plausible and that might indeed have a claim to ultimate support. In these three debates, an exploration of the context of the history and practice under attack is often identified with impermissible partisanship.4 1 It will be useful to summarize the general argument before applying it to each area. Much of the debate in all of these contexts consists of a conflict between two well-known positions. According to one view, the government should not repress or interfere with natural drives, especially as these are expressed through sexual and reproductive processes. These drives have special claims, arising out of the need to permit intimacy with respect to practices that are central both to individual development and mutual recognition. 4 2 The law should respect the privacy of those who wish to see or read'sexually explicit material,43 terminate pregnancies, 4 4 or enter into surrogacy arrangements; 4 5 and all these for essentially the same reason, having to do with the individual's in matters of sexuality and reproduction. 46 to self-determination right Under the second view, the law properly controls sexual and reproductive behavior in order to ensure that sexuality and reproduction, in their natural or best forms, are not polluted or altered through artificial external influences. 4 7 The profane should not intrude on the sacred. are prepolitical or natural. See infra notes 77-81 and accompanying text. The law properly ensures the separation of the private sphere of sexuality from the public sphere of the marketplace, by controlling obscenity;4 8 properly protects against abortion, most fundamentally to protect the interest in fetal life, but also to ensure that sexuality is for purposes of reproduction; 49 and properly protects reproduction and sexuality from the commodification produced by surrogacy. 50 For all their differences, these positions share important premises. Both of them posit a currently just private sphere of reproduction and sexuality. 5 1 Sometimes, though not always, advocates of both of them posit a natural or prepolitical sexual and reproductive sphere.5 2 The first position, with its neo-Freudian foundations, tends to stress the need to free up drives from the repressive arm of the state. The second position, with its neo-religious roots, usually relies on the need to protect drives, also in their natural form, from harmful external influences. 53 Because of this commonality, advocates of both positions are critical of a third, which they deem impermissibly partisan or selective.5 4 ("Civil society cannot afford to be neutral toward the various forms and degrees of human sensuality which may emerge within it."). 48. See Clor, supra note 47, at 176-201. 49. This position plays a large role in the antiabortion movement, although it is logically separable from it. See Kristin Luker, Abortion and the Politics of Motherhood 163-68 (1984). expression" in the political and economic spheres: The theory assigns a certain intrinsic rightness in this original structure, rightness in the sense of conferring upon them a title to pass into direct action, except when they directly and evidently interfere with similar self-manifestation in others. The idea thus overlooks the part played by interaction with the surrounding medium, especially the social, in generating impulses and desires. They are supposed to inhere in the "nature" of the individual when that is taken in a primal state, uninfluenced by interaction with an environment. The latter is thus thought of as purely external to an individual, and as irrelevant to freedom except when it interferes with the operation of native instincts and impulses. A study of history would reveal that this notion.., is a "faint rumor" left on the air of morals and politics by disappearing theological dogmas, which held that "nature" is thoroughly good as it comes from the creative hand of God, and that evil is due to corruption through artificial interference and oppression exercised by external or "social" conditions. This principle is grounded in a familiar conception of equality. 56 At a minimum, this principle means that a legislature may take steps to ensure that morally irrelevant characteristics-most conspicuously race and sex-are not translated into systemic sources of social disadvantage. A systemic disadvantage is one that operates along standard and predictable lines, in multiple important spheres of social life, and that applies in such crucial realms as education, freedom from violence, wealth, political representation, and political influence. The claim that women's sexual and reproductive capacities may not be turned into objects for the control and use of third parties is simply a particular application of this general idea. This general conception of equality has strong roots in the history And there are so many causes tending to make the feelings connected with this subject the most intense and most deeply-rooted of all those which gather round and protect old institutions and customs, that we need not wonder to find them as yet undermined and loosened than any of the rest by the progress of the great modem spiritual and social transition; nor suppose that the barbarisms to which men cling longest must be less barbarisms than those which they earlier shake off. In the context at hand, a restriction on access to abortion turns women's reproductive capacities into something to be used by fetuses. Surrogacy arrangements do the same, but here the users are strangers seeking a child, and the vehicle is the market rather than the government.66 Finally, the production and consumption of pornography are 59. See Charles Fairman, Does the Fourteenth Amendment Incorporate the Bill of 67. This third view might be thought to embody an anticaste principle, one that insists that existing choices are sometimes an outgrowth of unjust background conditions. See Sunstein, supra note 56, at 770-73. 70. See supra text accompanying notes 25-28. 71. I specify some of those considerations below. See infra text accompanying note With respect to pornography, two positions, mirroring the first two views outlined above, have captured the current constitutional landscape, at least in the courts. According to the first, some categories of expression are simply excluded from the category of protected "speech." In the well-known formulation, "obscenity" is defined to include materials that appeal to the prurient interest, are patently offensive by contemporary community standards, and lack serious social value. 72 Obscenity does not count as speech; the Supreme Court treats it as sex rather than expression. The alternative view is that all speech stands on the same ground and that government has no business censoring speech merely because some people, or some officials, are puritanical or offended by it.75 Ac cording to this view, obscenity is speech, not sex-just as a movie filled with violence is a representation rather than the thing itself. And on this view, government must remain neutral among different conceptions of the good, above all, among those conceptions as they are expressed through words and pictures. A decision to single out obscenity for special treatment is a conspicuous violation of the neutrality requirement of the First Amendment. It might be stressed here that sexuality, as described in obscene speech, is part of existing social practice. Surely existing practice ought to be protected insofar as it is merely depicted, however offensive it may be to some. 81. See Nussbaum, supra note 17, at 58-59. Of course, it remains necessary to spell out the appropriate conditions, and there will be some difficulty in working out the relationship between the belief in a protected realm for sexual life and the commitment to eliminating sex-based caste systems. The difficulty is likely to be much greater in the abstract, however, than in working with particular disputed cases. It is clear, for example, that the law should punish (as in most states it does not) rape within marriage, even though such punishment intrudes in some sense into (at least one person's) erotic life. With an eye toward the historical treatment of homosexuals, it might'be tempting to oppose antipornography efforts on the basis of a general fear of governmental control of sexuality and an insistence that sexual desires should be free from the constraints of the state. In view of the relevant history, the notion that sexual desires should be freed from legal controls might seem irresistible. The antipornography position is the least well-represented of the three in current constitutional law; and its present legal status has everything to do with prevailing conceptions of neutrality. What has made the antipornography approach so controversial is that it is rooted in beliefs that the reproductive status quo is itself sometimes a place of inequality, that women are treated unequally to men, that sexual violence by men against women is a greater social problem than sexual violence by women against men, and that social inequality can be both expressed and perpetuated through sexuality. The rejection of these beliefs-a refusal to recognize existing inequality, transmuted into a claim of partiality-has turned out to be critical to constitutional law. The objection here is that the antipornography position is selective (especially compared with the antiobscenity approach), and that in its selectivity lies its partisanship, which is what makes it fatally inferior to its competitors. As we will see,8 5 this objection accounts for the weakness of the antipornography position in current law. pornography in creating inequality in part through its place in the sexual objectification of women. It is more than plausible to think that objectification is a serious social harm. I deal here, however, with pornography as a subject of regulation only to the extent that it is associated with violence against women (an important ingredient in sexual inequality). The broader understanding of the harms of pornography, including the very large category of objectification, raises even more severe First Amendment difficulties. Objectification is common not only in advertising, but in literature and film as well; legal regulation of work that contains objectification would surely be unacceptably broad. Moreover, the notion of objectification is one with which it is extremely difficult for a legal system to work. On either view, at least some forms of pornography are far from the core of constitutional concern. Under current doctrine, and under any sensible system of free expression, speech that lies at the periphery of constitutional concern may be regulated on the basis of a lesser 86. See, e.g., Geoffrey R. Stone, Comment, Anti-Pornography Legislation as View To say this is hardly to say that the definition of the core and the periphery will be simple. Under nearly any standard, however, at least some pornographic materials will be easily classified in the periphery. Such materials fall in the same category as commercial speech, libel of private persons, conspiracies (which are after all words), bribes, perjury, or threats. The reason is that these forms of speech do not amount to part of an appeal to deliberative capacities about public matters, or about matters at all-even if this category is construed quite broadly, as it should be, and even if we insist, as we should, that emotive and cognitive capacities are frequently intertwined in deliberative processes. The second point is that pornographic material causes sufficient harms to justify regulation under the more lenient standards applied to speech that does not fit within the core. Of course it is possible to question the extent of the relevant harms. For present purposes, it is enough to suggest their plausibility by way of contrast to the antiobscenity position, which relies on less tangible aesthetic goals, and which is said for that reason to be preferable from the standpoint of neutrality. (low-value speech). Second, there is a causal connection between pornography and violence against women. 9 4 The extent of the effect and the precise relationship between exposure to pornography and sexual violence are sharply disputed. 95 No one suggests that sexual violence would disappear if pornography were eliminated, or that most consumers of violent pornography act out what they see or read. But a review of the literature suggests that there can be little doubt that pornography does increase the incidence of sexual violence against women. 96 The real question is not the existence of a causal connection, but its degree. In light of current information, it is plausible to expect significant benefits from regulation of violent pornography. One need not believe that the elimination of violent pornography would bring about sexual equality, eliminate sexual violence, or change social attitudes in a fundamental way, in order to agree that a regulatory effort would have some effect in reducing violence and in diminishing views that contribute to existing inequalities. the "moral consensus" position, the antipornography approach has the advantage of concentrating on concrete, real-world harms rather than on the less tangible, more aesthetic problems captured in the use of contemporary community standards. It sees that the private realm of sexuality might sometimes be the problem rather than the solution insofar as that realm can be a place of discrimination and violence. In this sense, there is a close alliance be political argument against pornography; but it probably should not be part of the First Amendment debate. Thus far, however, the courts have rejected the antipornography position. In the leading decision on the subject, the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, in a decision affirmed summarily by the Supreme Court, invalidated an antipornography ordinance. 10 2 The court reasoned that an argument that would allow regulation of pornographic materials by reference to the harms referred to above is worse, not better, than the obscenity approach. Indeed, it would be worse than the obscenity approach even if the category of speech suppressed turned out to be far narrower than the category that can be suppressed under existing law. The key point is that under the antipornography approach, depictions of sexuality that involve rape and violence against women may be subject to regulation, whereas depictions that do not are uncontrolled. According to the court, any statute that imposed sanctions on a subcategory of obscene speech, defined by be unconstitutional.10 3 these harms, would reference to For the court, such an approach would constitute impermissible "thought control," since it would "establish[] an 'approved' view of women, of how they may react to sexual encounters, [and] of how the sexes may relate to each other."' 0 4 The nonneutrality of antipornography legislation-its focus on violence against women-is its central defect. People with the approved view can speak; people with the disapproved view cannot. That, in the court's view, is what the First Amendment centrally prohibits. In all of these cases, the partisanship of the regulation is not apparent because there is so firm a consensus on the presence of real-world harms that the objection from neutrality does not even register. The spectre of partisanship does not arise because a decision to control the speech in question has obvious legitimate justifications, and an extension of the prohibition to other areas appears not compelled by neutrality but instead an unnecessary form of censorship. The answer lies in the fact that antiobscenity law takes existing social consensus as the foundation for decision, whereas antipornography law is directed against that consensus. Current norms and practices are the target of the antipornography approach, or what that approach frain from committing a tort. Along the axis of neutrality, however, the distinction between antiobscenity and antipornography law cannot be sustained. That distinction would be plausible only if existing norms and practices themselves embodied equality. Since they do not, the distinction fails. Indeed, we could imagine a society in which the harms produced by pornography were so widely acknowledged and so generally condemned that an antipornography ordinance would not be regarded as viewpoint-based at all. With abortion, as with pornography, two positions seem to dominate the constitutional territory. According to the first view, the fetus has the status of a human life, for religious or other reasons. Because it 109. A fundamental point of this approach is that sexuality, as ordinarily practiced, is sometimes an ingredient in sexual inequality; the effort to control violent pornography is intended in part to establish that point. See MacKinnon, supra note 82, at 146-62. has that status, nearly any governmental burden on the pregnant mother, if necessary to protect the fetus, is adequatelyjustified. 1 2 This view is often closely identified with the understanding-which is not a part of the first view as a logical or necessary matter-that sexual activity should be exclusively for purposes of reproduction. At least some of the controversy over abortion lies at bottom on this issue, with many critics of abortion concerned that its free availability will promote promiscuity, remove a built-in check on sexual self-discipline, and encourage sexual activity for nonreproductive purposes.'13 Certainly not all members of the prolife movement share these concerns; but these ideas lie close to the conceptual heart of the movement. 112. Cf. Richard A. Epstein, Substantive Due Process by Any Other Name: The Abortion Cases, 1973 Sup. Ct. Rev. 159, 171-85 (evaluating whether interests of mother can be weighed against those of fetus and state, assuming fetus should be treated as a person under Due Process Clause). cussing abortion). 117. For reasons suggested above, however, there is no need for privacy arguments to be based on this ground. See supra text accompanying notes 77-81. disability is imposed on men. Unlike the privacy view, this argument does not and need not take a position on the status of the fetus. It acknowledges the, possibility that fetuses are in important respects human beings. It is entirely comfortable with the claim that the destruction of a fetus is at least a morally problematic act. But it asserts that under current conditions, the government cannot impose on women alone the obligation to protect fetuses through a legal act of bodily cooptation. supra text accompanying notes 17-23. The argument should be seen instead as rooted most straightforwardly in a norm of equality on the basis of sex: a right on the part of women not to have their bodies used by others when men's bodies are not similarly used. It would be most surprising if a general right of bodily ownership could not also be justified for both men and women, see infra note 143, but I need not explore that question here. abortion, it should readily be seen as a sex-based classification. A law saying that "no person" may obtain an abortion has the same meaning. for example, male doctors-does not mean that restrictions on abortion are sex-neutral. Laws calling for racial segregation make it impermissible for whites as well as blacks to desegregate, and this does not make such laws race-neutral. Nor would it be correct to say12 3 that restrictions on abortion merely have a discriminatory impact on women, and that they should therefore be treated in the same way as neutral weight and height requirements having disproportionate effects on women. With such requirements, men and women are on both sides of the legal line; but abortion restrictions exclusively target women. A law that prohibited pregnant women, or pregnant people, from appearing on the streets during daylight would readily be seen as a form of dejure sex discrimination. A restriction on abortion has the same sex-based features. If we suppose that a restriction on the abortion right is a form of sex discrimination, the problem is hardly resolved. The question remains whether the interest in protecting the life of the fetus allows the state to compel women to bring the fetus to term. The second point in defense of an equality right to abortion would not devalue that interest, or refer generally to the right to control one's body, but would stress instead the selectivity of the compulsion. The basic problem is that an inquiry into whether there are real differences. Whether a "real difference" justifies social disadvantage is the question to be decided. See UAW v. Johnson Controls, Inc., 111 S. Ct. 1196, 1204 (1991); MacKinnon, supra note 82, at 32-45. And even if it does, pregnancy is a particular kind of real difference, one whose exclusive targeting is in fact likely to reflect prejudice. decision to give birth should be seen as a choice). Indeed, it seems clear that a proposal to impose duties of bodily imposition on parents or others would be treated as a frightening and unacceptable intrusion on personal autonomy-even when life is at stake, even when death would result from refusal to carry out the relevant duty, and even when the people to be protected owe their existence and vulnerability to the people on whom the imposition would be placed. It is striking that no American legislature has imposed such a duty and that courts have refused to do so as well. 12 7 The fact that similar impositions are not made in cases in which men are involvedthe existence of facial discrimination in the imposition of the burdensuggests that the prohibition of abortion is a form of impermissible selectivity. It indicates that a discriminatory purpose is ultimately at work. The third point, buttressing the second, is that the notion that women should be compelled in this way is a product of constitutionally unacceptable stereotypes about the proper role of women in society. The connection is not a matter of logic but of past and current practice; it is fully possible to reject these stereotypes and the practice of abortion. But the history of abortion restrictions unambiguously supports the claim that in fact, such restrictions are closely tied up with, indeed in practice driven by, traditional ideas about women's proper role.' 3 4 132. Note also that the draft is in an important sense less or at least differently invasive than a prohibition on abortion, because the imposition on the body is wholly external. During wartime the draft may subject a conscript to a serious and potentially fatal bodily invasion, but internal bodily cooptation is not a requirement of the draft. were among the most defensive groups in the country on the subject of changing traditional sex roles.... To many doctors the chief purpose of women was to produce children; anything that interfered with that purpose, or allowed women to "indulge" themselves in less important activities, threatened ... the future of society itself. Abortion was a supreme example of such an interference for these physicians. To be sure, some people oppose with equal fervor both abortion and those traditional ideas. But the restrictions that do or could exist in this world would in all probability have failed to pass without the involvement and support of people holding and relying on unacceptable stereotypes. quotes an 1871 statement of the influential Committee on Criminal Abortion of the American Medical Association, describing the woman seeking an abortion: "She becomes unmindful of the course marked out for her by Providence, she overlooks the duties imposed on her by the marriage contract.... Let not the husband of such a wife flatter himself that he possesses her affection. Nor can she in turn ever merit even the respect of a virtuous husband." Id. would be invalidated). Even if these statistics are overstated, and even if the number and rate of abortions has increased more substantially as a result of Roe, at least it seems clear that the principal effect of the decision was not to increase fetal deaths, but instead to produce a shift from dangerous to safe abortions. If this is so, restrictions on abortion do not materially advance the goal of protecting life at all. Instead, they increase maternal deaths while decreasing the termination of fetal lives much less than might be expected or hoped. 142 The evidence on the futility of antiabortion restrictions also suggests, though it certainly does not demonstrate, the presence of a dis Moreover, these arguments have a large advantage in that unlike privacy or liberty arguments, they do not devalue the legitimate interest in protecting the fetus, and indeed make it unnecessary to take any po 143. I do not mean to suggest that such an argument is necessarily unpersuasive or that it is impossible to argue that an interest in autonomy or in freedom from bodily invasion justifies an abortion right. But one of several difficulties with those arguments is that they must come to terms with the moral or political status of the fetus, a problem that the equality argument successfully avoids. And the presence of a strong claim from liberty joins with the equality argument to increase the power of the basic position: It is not as if the abortion context involves an inequality with respect to something trivial. There are two possible challenges to the line of argument thus far: first, that pregnancy results from a voluntary activity that creates a special duty; and second, that the equal protection argument fails to address legitimate claims of the fetus. Neither argument, however, responds sufficiently to the equality argument. 144. A large puzzle lies beneath the surface here: why are admittedly discriminatory measures not upheld if the interest is strong, even when the interest is tied up with discrimination? I do not attempt to answer that question here. Instead I build on conventional legal principles. (I am indebted to Michael Sandel for raising this point.) ity may be based on failure to act where there is a legal duty to act). If the argument thus far is correct, the answer to that'question must be negative. As we have seen, the imposition of that duty is deeply implicated in violations of the equality guarantee in terms of its wellsprings. Moreover, it remains impermissibly selective despite the genuine fact that the state cannot, as a biological matter, conscript men to protect fetuses. The reason is that even in cases in which men's bodies could be conscripted to protect children-for whose existence they are in part responsible, and for whom they therefore could well be said to have assumed the risk-the state imposes no such obligations. The selectivity comes in the state's across-the-board failure to impose on men a duty of bodily use to protect children. Blood transfusions are never required by law. Finally, antiabortion restrictions serve their own purposes too poorly to be acceptable, even if the voluntariness of pregnancy could be established, and could be shown to distinguish the situation from others. argument). rejoinder to the claim of impermissible sex discrimination. Even if fetuses are a vulnerable group, and even if they are entitled to special protection against discrimination, they do not have a claim to conscript bodies of another vulnerable group on their behalf. The analogy here-an imprecise one, to be sure 4 9-would be a law requiring Hispanic people to devote their bodies (through blood donations and compulsory kidney transplants, for example) to the protection of vulnerable black children, or imposing such a duty on the parents of black children alone. Even if the group to be protected has a special claim to protection, the state cannot selectively impose the relevant duty on another vulnerable group. An argument from sex equality seems preferable to one that posits a general or acontextual privacy right, and also to the view that restrictions on abortion simply do not raise constitutional questions. In particular, the "prochoice" position in that it does not rest on privacy; freely acknowledges and, indeed, insists on the strength of the interest in protecting fetal life; and stresses rather than disregards the fact that women alone become pregnant and the existence of discrimination and coercion in the realm of reproduction. The reasons for these advantages closely parallel those in the antipornography context. The equality argument has advantages over the "prolife" position as well, insofar as the equality argument stresses both that restrictions on abortion are unlikely to protect life at all and the selectivity of the imposition on women. Indeed, it seems reasonable to conclude that an argument from sex discrimination is not merely a worthy competitor to the two alternatives, but on balance correct. This approach takes male biological capacities as the baseline against which to assess the equality issue. 15 3 This is the parallel in the abortion context to the use, in other contexts I have discussed, of existing social practices as the baseline from which to assess deviations from neutrality. In fact, it is a version of the same phenomenon. Of course, there is no obvious reason to ask the equality question in this way. Indeed, if we do so, we will fail to see inequality in cases where it plausibly exists (and see equality in cases in which it is plausibly absent1 5 4). Surely a law that turns a biological capacity into a social and legal disability for a part of the population, and for only that part, should be seen as raising questions of discrimination. If a biological capacity limited to one gender is made a basis for social disadvantage 151. See MacKinnon, supra note 82, at 32-34; Martha Minow, Making All the Difference 56-60 (1990). It might be useful to explore a legal system taking female biological capacities as the norm: Imagine, for example, a state giving every citizen the choice of either bearing a child or giving the government nine months in salary. Such a law should readily be seen as a form of discrimination against men, even though it is a far weaker case for invalidation than laws burdening female reproductive capacity in light of (a) the fact that the burdened class consists of infertile women as well as men and (b) the fact that laws that burden female reproductive capacity are part of a system of subordination on the basis of sex, something that cannot be said for laws that burden male capacities. "differences" approach to sex equality). Many courts and state legislatures are in the process of deciding whether and how to regulate arrangements by which women sell their reproductive capacities, and the children who result, to couples who are infertile or otherwise unwilling to adopt children or to have a biological child between them. Thus far, the Constitution has played little role in this setting. But freedom of choice, and indeed contractual liberty, is the rallying cry for advocates of surrogacy agreements.15 5 At least one lower court has suggested that constitutional liberty forbids government restrictions on such agreements.1 56 On this view, surrogacy arrangements are acceptable for the same reason that Roe is right. Freedom of choice and control over one's body and reproductive processes are the governing principles. What matters is not that the choice be correct, but that it be remitted to individuals rather than to the state. This view is espoused by many who believe that Roe was right, and who support surrogacy arrangements for the same reason that they accept Roe.15 7 As in the case of abortion and pornography, there is a familiar competing position. According to this view, reproductive capacities and babies should be thought sacrosanct in the sense that they cannot be purchased and sold. To trade reproductive capacities-or peoplefor money is to diminish and degrade them. Sexuality and reproduction should be protected from hedonism and profit-making. In this respect, surrogacy arrangements are wrong for the same reason that Roe is wrong. Both are insufficiently respectful of the special claims of sexuality and reproductive processes, in their traditional forms, to protection from various forms of debasement. Similar ideas underlie the antiobscenity position. 158 Advocates of surrogacy arrangements might well be prompted to ask (perhaps tendentiously) why women ought not to be permitted to sell their offspring if, under Roe, they are permitted to kill them. They 159. A qualification is necessary here. Perhaps the privacy right means only that bodies cannot be literally invaded, not that there is a general right to autonomy with respect to reproduction. On this view, the abortion right is more secure than the right to participate in surrogacy arrangements, since literal invasion of the body by the state is not involved in the latter context. (This formulation does answer some hard questions in contestable ways.) 160. There is also, perhaps, a distinctive autonomy concern here as well. A unique intrusion is imposed on people who are forced to give up a child that they have borne through pregnancy. That intrusion may be sufficient for allowing the relevant contracts to be voidable even without an equality dimension. In the context of surrogacy, this argument faces serious difficulties. A decision to constrain surrogacy might itself be seen as a mechanism for social control of the reproductive choices of women. In light of the fact that surrogacy agreements are (by hypothesis) voluntary and thus provide benefits for the women involved, it is necessary to explain why a decision to allow this voluntary choice should be seen as a form of harmful discrimination. It is plainly inadequate to invoke the term "exploitation," or (what may be the same thing) to refer to the background conditions faced by women who participate in such agreements. Disallowance of the agreement does nothing to eliminate those conditions. It simply eliminates one mechanism by which women might try to counteract them. These are altogether different strategies. Elimination of the most-preferred option is hardly a sensible way of dealing with background injustice or hardship. The second problem is that there will be some inevitable external effects from social legitimation of the practice of exchanging women's reproductive capacities, and the children who result, in return for cash. A choice to allow these to be treated as objects for sale and use may affect how men perceive women, how womeh perceive themselves, and how both perceive children. Here the questions of surrogacy and prostitution become closely allied.163 In particular, a world in which female sexual and reproductive services are freely traded on markets would legitimate and reinforce a pervasive form of inequality-one that sees the social role of women as that of breeders, and that uses that role to create second-class citizenship. Surrogacy arrangements, if widespread, could affect attitudes, on the part of both men and women, about appropriate gender roles. Social stigmatization of the sale of those services might therefore bejustified on antidiscrimination grounds. There is no parallel problem for men. In view of the social (and to some extent biological) differences between men and women, a decision to allow male reproductive capacities to be bought and sold has no such consequences. To treat the sale of male and female reproductive capacities in the same way is thus not required by neutrality, in view of the vastly different purposes and effects of such sales. joke would be on the old woman who is soliciting. What makes the story repeatable, in its current form, is that it trades on the institution of female prostitution and thus on the social commodification of female sexuality. In view of those things, Shaw is able to establish that all women are prostitutes; only the price is in doubt. The humor of the story results from Shaw's cleverness in being able to establish this. The joke is emphatically on her. If surrogacy arrangements are troublesome, however, it is for reasons that argue for, rather than against, the outcome in Roe v. Wade. If those reasons are persuasive, there is no inconsistency in simultaneous approval of the abortion right and rejection of surrogacy arrangements. That position will seem inconsistent only to those who have already set forth the premises on which the discussion is to be conducted. Those premises have everything to do with a certain conception of neutrality. If the arguments I have offered thus far are sound, the prevailing conception of neutrality often operates as a device for ruling out of bounds, as impermissibly partisan, views that see existing distributions of entitlements, wealth, and preferences as partisan and a product of law. Moreover, the very category of government action is defined by reference to existing distributions and to a correlative notion of what partisanship is. 165. The point suggests a far broader one. In constitutional law, as elsewhere, there are severe limits to how much can be accomplished through conceptual analysis and through even plausible speculations about likely effects. To reach closure, a large amount of empirical evidence is often necessary. This point need not, however, be taken to suggest that other, less ambitious conceptions of neutrality are similarly impossible goals. These less ambitious conceptions are not the'source of appropriate baselines, in the sense that they do not provide the substantive foundations for legal decisions. But they are nonetheless of great importance. I want to conclude by outlining several uses of the notion of neutrality in law. There are a number of distinct conceptions here, and it is possible and, I think, desirable to hold them simultaneously. None of them is wedded to existing distributions of any kind. All of them recognize the role of human beings in creating the background against which norms of neutrality must operate. 173. See supra notes 11, 164 and accompanying text. 174. See, e.g., MacKinnon, supra note 82, at 162-67. 175. But see Ackerman, supra note 1, which is an effort to build a set of outcomes from a neutrality principle. For a response, seeJames S. Fishkin, Can There Be a Neutral Theory ofJustice?, 93 Ethics 348 (1983). To reject the idea that neutrality can generate a set of substantive results-is not to say that respect for disparate conceptions of the good cannot be defended, substantively, as a neutrality principle. But this idea would take me well beyond the present discussion. Third, the idea of neutrality is unobjectionable insofar as it imposes, in certain contexts, a requirement of impersonality or abstraction on certain decisionmakers. In this view, neutrality restricts the kinds of considerations to which those in a position of authority may point. Ajudge in a tort case ordinarily pays no attention to the religion or race of the parties. If she does, she is violating her duty of impartiality. So too, a legislator distributing defense department grants should pay no attention to attempted bribes, personal friendships, political affiliation, or even campaign contributions. Fourth, neutrality might refer to decisions made in accordance with the appropriate baseline. For example, a decision to exclude from the workplace those who require wheelchairs, or care for children, might seem objectionable because it turns morally irrelevant differences into a source of systemic social disadvantage.' 8 ' Objections about selectivity, made against the reflexive use of biased norms, are a familiar and indispensable part of legal and political argument. In this usage, the development of the appropriate baseline is doing the serious work. Notions of neutrality are derivative in the sense that they depend on that baseline, which is rooted in substantive ideas having a source independent of neutrality itself. Those substantive ideas, of course, should cohere with one another, both in their mode of derivation and in their content. To say all this is hardly to disparage the use of a certain conception of neutrality. come the baseline problem and to put to one side morally irrelevant differences.