 The radio as it now operates among us is not free. Nor is it entitled to the protection of the First Amendment. It is not engaged in the task of enlarging and enriching human communication. It is engaged in making money. And the First Amendment does not intend to guarantee men freedom to say what some private interest pays them to say for its own advantage. Alexander Meiklejohn t Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, The University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. This Article was prepared for The Bill of Rights in the Welfare State: A Bicentennial Symposium, held at The University of Chicago Law School on October 25-26, 1991. I am grateful to Nancy Eisenhauer for valuable research assistance and to Bruce Ackerman, Akhil Amar, Mary Becker, Lee Bollinger, Elena Kagan, Larry Lessig, Richard Posner, Nancy Rosenbloom, Geoffrey Stone, and David Strauss for helpful comments on a previous draft. Participants in a workshop at Brown University also provided valuable help. A revised version of this essay will appear as chapters 7 and 8 of Cass Sunstein, The Partial Constitution (forthcoming 1993). Even when the words remain the same, they mean something very different when they are uttered by a minority struggling against repressive measures, and when expressed by a group that has attained power and then uses ideas that were once weapons of emancipation as instruments for keeping the power and wealth they have obtained. Ideas that at one time are means of producing social change have not the same meaning when they are used as means of preventing social change.2 For those who believe either that the judiciary should play a limited role in American government or that the Constitution's meaning is fixed by the original understanding of its ratifiers, the First Amendment is a particular embarrassment. The current state of free speech in America owes a great deal to extremely aggressive interpretations by the Supreme Court, which has invalidated legislative outcomes on numerous occasions. These decisions cannot be justified by reference to the original understanding of the First Amendment.3 Such decisions also involve a highly intrusive judicial role in majoritarian politics. With Madison's pronouncements in mind, we might think of the American tradition of free expression as a series of struggles to understand the relationship between this conception of sovereignty and a system of free speech. The extraordinary protection now accorded to political speech can well be understood as an elaboration of the distinctive American understanding of sovereignty. American children watch a good deal of television-about twenty-seven hours per week-and American television contains a good deal of advertising. For adults, every hour of television contains nearly eight minutes of commercials.8 For most of its history, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) imposed limits on the amount of advertising that broadcasters could air on shows aimed at children. In 1984, the FCC eliminated the limits.' In the wake of deregulation, some stations air between eleven and twelve minutes per hour of commercials during children's pro ' Barbara Gamarekian, Ads Aimed at Children Restricted, NY Times D1 (Oct 18, 1 Tom Engelhardt, The Shortcake Strategy, in Todd Gitlin, ed, Watching Television The University of Chicago Law Review gramming on weekends, and up to fourteen minutes on weekdays. 10 Some shows are actually full-length commercials, because the lead characters are products." In 1990 Congress imposed, for children's programming, a limit of ten and one half minutes of television commercials per hour on weekends, and twelve minutes on weekdays. President Bush withheld his approval, invoking the First Amendment. According to the President, the First Amendment "does not contemplate that government will dictate the quality or quantity of what Americans should hear-rather, it leaves this to be decided by free media responding to the free choices of individual consumers."' 2 The President did "not believe that quantitative restrictions on advertising should be considered permissible .... ,3 Nonetheless, the Children's Television Act of 1990 has become law. 4 It is possible that networks will challenge it on constitutional grounds. Perhaps the constitutional attack will be successful. The plausibility of the argument has affected the debate over controls on children's advertising, and may well have deterred stronger efforts to encourage high-quality broadcasting for children. To attempt an answer, we must step back a bit. From about 1940 to 1970, American constitutional debate over freedom of expression was divided along clear lines: On one side were those ac The second idea is that we should understand the First Amendment as embodying a commitment to a certain form of neutrality. Government may not draw lines between speech it likes and speech it hates. All speech stands on the same footing. Thus the protection accorded to speech extends equally to Communists and Nazis, the Ku Klux Klan and the Black Panthers, Martin Luther King, Jr. and George Wallace. Government should ensure that broadcasters, newspapers, and others can say what they wish, constrained only by the impersonal pressures of the marketplace. This conception of neutrality among different points of view is the government's first commitment. ,b See Section II. ,e See Steven H. Shiffrin, The First Amendment, Democracy, and Romance 48-53 play no role in free speech law. Judges should not uphold restrictions on speech simply because the government seems to have good reasons for the restriction in the particular case. They must protect against the likely effect of the decision on future government action. categories From the perspective of the 1990s, it may be hard to remember the vigor and tenacity with which the opposing camps struggled over their respective positions. The basic commitments of the absolutist view are now cliches, even dogma. Despite that view's novelty and the lack of direct historical support on its behalf, it has won a dramatic number of victories in the Supreme Court. This is so especially with restrictions of speech on the basis of its content, where special scrutiny is now routine, except in quite narrow categories of excluded speech. 18 Thus constitutional protection has been accorded to most commercial speech; to most sexually explicit speech; to many kinds of libel; to publication of the names of rape victims; to the advocacy of crime, even of violent overthrow of the government; to large expenditures on electoral campaigns; to ' Much of this is stated in Robert H. Bork, Neutral Principles and Some First It is not an overstatement to say that, taken all together, these developments have revolutionized the law of free expression. For many, the new law is an occasion for a sense of triumph and, perhaps, a belief that the principal difficulties with First Amendment law have been solved. The remaining problems are thought to be ones of applying hard-won doctrinal wisdom to ever-present threats of censorship. hate speech, is a quite modern development, if it is a development at all. Until recently, no one thought that the First Amendment cast any doubt on the securities laws. Until the last few decades, the states had very broad authority to regulate sexually explicit material. And the interaction of the free speech principle with campaign spending and broadcasting surely raises complex and novel issues. customed to "slippery slope" arguments in the First Amendment context. A. Background Perhaps we need a New Deal for speech, one that would parallel what the New Deal provided to property rights during the 1930s, and that would be rooted in substantially similar concerns." A brief review follows. [T]he system of free expression cannot be evaluated merely in terms of whether some positions are forcibly suppressed. Crucial voices may fail to achieve an effective hearing without the need to silence any of them. In a modern, technologically complex society, access to the mass media is a necessary condition for a voice to contribute to the national political debate. Unless the media permit the full range of views that have a significant following in the society to get access to the media on issues of intense inter The University of Chicago Law Review Before the New Deal, the Constitution was often understood as a constraint on government "regulation." In practice, this meant that the Constitution was often invoked to prohibit governmental interference with existing distributions of rights and entitlements.2 Hence minimum wage and maximum hour laws were seen as unjustifiable exactions-takings-from employers for the benefit of employees and the public at large.23 The Due Process Clause insulated private arrangements from public control, especially if the government's goals were paternalistic or redistributive. In operating under the police power, government must be neutral in general, and between employers and employees in particular. A violation of the neutrality requirement, thus understood, would count as a violation of the Constitution. The New Deal reformers argued that this entire framework was built on fictions. Their response is captured in President Roosevelt's references to "this man-made world of ours '24 and his insistence that "we must lay hold of the fact that economic laws are not made by nature. They are made by human beings. '25 The pre-New Deal framework treated the existing distribution of resources and opportunities as prepolitical, when in fact it was not. It saw minimum wage and maximum hour laws as introducing government into a private or voluntary sphere. But the New Dealers est to proponents of those views, then the full realization of political equality has fallen short. 2 Two qualifications are necessary. First, redistribution through taxation-most notably by way of the poor laws and other welfare measures-was permissible. Second, some forms of regulation were permissible even if they had redistributive features. The "police power," for example, extended to protection of workers' health, although the Court was sometimes skeptical that a health justification was plausible. See, for example, Lochner v New York, 198 US 45, 57-58 (1905). To New Deal reformers, the very categories of "regulation" and "government intervention" seemed misleading. The government did not "act" only when it disturbed existing distributions. It was responsible for those distributions in the first instance. What people owned in markets was a function of the entitlements that the law conferred on them. The notion of "laissez-faire" thus stood revealed as a conspicuous fiction. 20 Nothing said here denies that people often work for what they have. They acquire property independently of legal rules, in the sense that their own effort contributes to getting them whatever they have. While legal rules create preconditions for acquiring property and may help along the way, they do not operate in a vacuum from individual initiative. In this sense, the existing distribution of resources and opportunities is emphatically not simply the creation of law; it is instead a result of a complex interaction between law and many other things, including individual effort. The New Dealers did not deny these propositions. 27 Dewey, 11 Later Works at 291 (cited in note 2). Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines, An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation (Oxford, 1981), is a striking contemporary illustration of similar ideas. Sen demonstrates that famines are not only or always a result of a decrease in the supply of food. Instead, they are a result of social choices, prominent among them legal ones, deciding who is entitled to what. Sen notes: Finally, the focus on entitlement has the effect of emphasizing legal rights. Other relevant factors, for example market forces, can be seen as operating through a system of legal relations (ownership rights, contractual obligations, legal exchanges, etc.). The law stands between food availability and food entitlement. Starvation deaths can reflect legality with a vengeance. formity to nature, has no connection whatever with right and wrong"). lier.2 9 A system of private property is a construct of the state, but it is also an important individual and collective good. In general, a market system-for property or for speech-promotes both liberty and prosperity, and its inevitable origins in law do not undermine that fact. These ideas have played little role in the law of free speech. For purposes of speech, contemporary understandings of neutrality [T]he recognition of private property as a form of sovereignty is not itself an argument against it. Some form of government we must always have.... At any rate it is necessary to apply to the law of property all those considerations of social ethics and enlightened public policy which ought to be brought to the discussion of any just form of government. 3 Compare Robert L. Hale, Coercion and Distribution in a Supposedly Noncoercive State, 38 Pol Sci Q 470, 471-74 (1923), who rightly draws attention to coercive characteristics in the law of property, but assumes that this insight establishes more than it does. Regulatory interference with market arrangements does not disturb an otherwise prepolitical status quo, but it may produce inefficiency and unfairness. A good deal of theoretical and empirical work is necessary to assess any particular interference. Of course many of the New Deal reforms produced unanticipated adverse consequences. One response to the recent First Amendment controversies would be to suggest that they confirm the wisdom of the New Deal reformation on this score. On this view, American constitutionalism, with respect to freedom of expression, has failed precisely to the extent that it has not taken that reformation seriously enough. I do not mean to suggest that speech rights should be freely subject to political determination, as are current issues of occupational safety and health, for example. I do not mean to suggest that markets in speech are generally abridgements of speech, or that they usually disserve the First Amendment. I do mean to say that in some circumstances, what seems to be government regulation of speech actually might promote free speech, and should not be treated as an abridgement at all. I mean also to argue, though more hesitantly, that what seems to be free speech in markets might, in some selected circumstances, amount to an abridgement of free speech. But if the lesson of the New Deal is taken seriously, it follows, not that the requirement of state action is unintelligible or incoherent, but that governmental rules lie behind the exercise of rights of property, contract, and tort, especially insofar as common law rules grant people rights of exclusive ownership and use of property. From this it does not follow that private acts are subject to constitutional constraint, or even that legally-conferred rights of exclusive ownership violate any constitutional provision. To repeat: The acts of private broadcasters raise no First Amendment issue. Private acts exist; they are not subject to the First Amendment. the freedom of speech" by preventing people from speaking at certain times and in certain places. the view of the state supreme court in Sullivan. Reputation, after all, is a property interest. Just as in the pre-New Deal era, the state supreme court did not see the protection of that interest as involving government action at all. Consider, for example, the issues raised by a claimed right of access to the media. Suppose that most broadcasters deal little or not at all with issues of public importance, restricting themselves to stories about movie stars or sex scandals. Suppose too that there is no real diversity of view on the airwaves, but instead a bland, watered-down version of conventional morality. If so, a severe problem for the system of free expression is the governmental grant of legal protection-rights of exclusive use-to enormous institutions compromising Madisonian values. Courts usually do not see that grant of power-sometimes made through the common law, sometimes through statute-as a grant of power at all, but instead treat it as purely "private." Thus the exclusion of people and views from the airwaves is immunized from constitutional constraint, on the theory that the act of exclusion is purely private. By " See O'Neill, Practices of Toleration at 177-78 (cited in note 21). [N]o society can institutionalize zero-regulation of public discourse. The choice can only be between differing patterns of regulation. ... No society can guarantee that all communicators will be able to express every possible content in every possible context. Supposed attempts to do this by laissez-faire communications policies merely assign the regulation of communication to nonstate powers. They secure a particular configuration of freedom of expression, which may leave some unable to find their voices and does not guarantee the expression of diverse views. A better and less abstract aim for a democratic society is a set of practices that enables a wide range of communication, especially of public communication, for all. There is a difference between Sullivan and the cases that follow. In Sullivan, the property right was not asserted by someone who was simultaneously speaker and owner. In cases that involve a claimed right of access to the media, the ownership right that prevents others from speaking is held by someone who is himself expressing something. But it is unclear why this difference should be decisive. The question is whether the legal vindication of the property right is constitutionally acceptable. In Sullivan, the Supreme Court said, as against a similar claim, that courts should inspect common law rules for their conformity with the principle that government may not restrict freedoms of speech and press. "The test is not the form in which state power has been applied but, whatever the form, whether such power has in fact been exercised."'41 We can apply this understanding to current problems. If we regard the First Amendment as an effort to ensure that people are not prevented from speaking, especially on issues of public importance, then current free speech law seems ill-adapted to current conditions. Above all, the conception of government "regulation" misstates certain issues and sometimes disserves the goal of free expression itself. Some regulatory efforts, superimposed on the established regulation through common law rules, may promote free speech. Less frequently, the use of statutory or common law rules to foreclose efforts to speak might themselves represent impermissible content-neutral restrictions on speech. We must judge both reform efforts and the status quo by their consequences, not by question-begging characterizations of "threats from government." It is tempting to understand this argument as a suggestion that the New Dealers were concerned about private power over working conditions, and that modern courts should take more interest in the existence of private power over expression or over democratic processes.42 But this formulation misses the real point, and does so in a way that suggests its own dependence on pre-New Deal understandings. The problem is not that private power is an obstacle to speech; even if it is, private power is not a subject of the First Amendment. Nor would it be accurate to say that employer power was the true concern for the New Dealers. The real problem is that public authority creates legal structures that restrict speech, that new exercises of public authority can counter the existing restrictions, and that any restrictions, even those of the common law, must be assessed under constitutional principles precisely because they are restrictions. believe that the center is the best place to draw attention to their cause. The Supreme Court has said that the situation does not implicate the First Amendment, since it does not involve government regulation of speech. Private property owners have simply barred people from their land.43 In fact, this is a poor way to understand the situation; it was the state court's view in Sullivan. The owners of the shopping center may exclude the protestors only because government has conferred on them a legal right to do so. The conferral of that right is an exercise of state power. It is this action that restricts the speech of the protestors. Surely it is a real question whether the grant of exclusionary power violates the First Amendment, at least in circumstances in which it eliminates the only feasible way of making a protest visible to members of a community. The second response is that the distinction between negative and positive rights fails to explain even current First Amendment law.4 6 There are two obvious counterexamples. The Supreme Court has come very close to saying that when an audience becomes hostile and threatening, the government is obligated to protect the speaker. Under current law, reasonable crowd control measures are probably constitutionally compelled, even if the result is to require '5 To say this is not to say that the distinction itself is untenable. We can understand a positive right as one that requires for its existence some act by government and a negative right as one that amounts merely to an objection to some such act. There is nothing incoherent about this distinction. I argue here against the view that an objection to rights of exclusive ownership is a call for a positive right. In fact that objection is mounted against something that government is actually doing, and is therefore about a negative right. See generally, Jeremy Waldron, Homelessness and the Issue of Freedom, 39 UCLA L Rev 295, 304-15 (1991) (arguing that property law invades negative rights of the homeless). a number of police officers to come to the scene.4 The right to speak may well include a positive right to governmental protection against a hostile private audience. These cases reveal that the First Amendment, even as currently conceived, is no mere negative right. It has positive dimensions. These dimensions consist of a command to government to take steps to ensure that legal rules according exclusive authority to private persons do not violate the system of free expression. In a hostile audience case, the government is obliged to protect the speaker against private silencing. In the libel cases, the government is obliged to do the same thing-to provide extra breathing space for speech even though a consequence is an infringement on the common law interest in reputation. It is incorrect to say that the First Amendment creates merely a right to fend off government censorship as conventionally understood. [A]s far as the First Amendment is concerned those who are licensed stand no better than those to whom licenses are refused. A license permits broadcasting, but the licensee has no constitutional right to be the one who holds the license or to monopolize a radio frequency to the exclusion of his fellow citizens. There is nothing in the First Amendment which prevents the Government from requiring a licensee to share his frequency with others and to conduct himself as a proxy or fiduciary with obligations to present those views and voices which are representative of his community and which would otherwise, by necessity, be barred from the airwaves. [Tihe people as a whole retain their interest in free speech by radio and their collective right to have the medium function consistently with the ends and purposes of the First Amendment. It is the right of the viewers and listeners, not the right of the broadcasters, which is paramount. It is the purpose of the First Amendment to preserve an uninhibited marketplace of ideas in which truth will ultimately prevail, rather than to countenance monopolization of that market, whether it be by the Government itself or a private licensee. It is the right of the public to receive suitable access to social, political, esthetic, moral, and other ideas and experiences which is crucial here. That right may not constitutionally be abridged either by Congress or by the FCC.2 This vision of the First Amendment does not stress the autonomy of broadcasters with current ownership rights. Instead it emphasizes the need to promote democratic self-government by ensuring that people are presented with a broad diversity of views about public issues. A market system may compromise this goal. It is hardly clear that "the freedom of speech" is promoted by a regime in which people may speak if and only if other people are willing to pay enough to hear them. It was time to move away from thinking about broadcasters as trustees. It was time to treat them the way almost everyone else in society does-that is, as businesses ... [T]elevision is just another appliance. It's a toaster with pictures. state-created is not to disparage it. See text accompanying notes 28-31. A system of private property is an individual and collective good-in large part because it immunizes citizens from dependence on the state and in that way creates the preconditions for prosperity, democracy, and citizenship. This point is not in any way inconsistent with those suggested in the text. A core insight of the Red Lion case is that the interest in legally protected private autonomy from government is not always connected with the interest in democratic self-governance. To immunize broadcasters from government control may not be consistent with quality and diversity in broadcasting. If so, it is not consistent with the First Amendment's own commitments. We could generate, from the suggested First Amendment "New Deal," a large set of proposals for constitutional reform. I describe those proposals in summary fashion here. A more detailed discussion would be necessary in order fully to come to terms with any one of them. The Constitution forbids any "law abridging the freedom of speech." '5 8 But is the fairness doctrine such a law? Certainly we cannot establish the proposition merely by a reference to the constitutional text. To its defenders, the fairness doctrine promotes "the freedom of speech" by ensuring more access to the airwaves and more diversity of views than the market provides. The fact that the market responds to consumption choices does not solve the problem. 9 The FCC's attack on the fairness doctrine closely parallels pre-New Deal understandings. It asserts, without a full look at the real-world consequences of different regulatory strate 60 See Scanlon, Content Regulation Reconsidered at 350 (cited in note 21): The case for or against such powers must be made out on the basis of their consequences. Statutes requiring that opponents of newspaper or television editorials be given the opportunity to reply are not, on the face of it, inconsistent with the right of freedom of expression. Everything depends on what the consequences of such statutes would be as compared with the likely alternatives. Importantly, a market will make it unnecessary for government officials to oversee the content of material in order to assess its value. The fact that a market removes official oversight counts strongly in its favor. The restrictions of the market are contentneutral. The restrictions of the fairness doctrine, or any similar alternative, are content-based. In one respect our system is even worse, for programming content is affected not merely by consumer demand, but also by the desires of advertisers. Viewers are thus the product as well as the users of broadcasting, and this introduces some additional distortions. 5 In any case, the First Amendment issues must depend in large part on the details. 6' To be sure, there are many ways to present speech regardless of willingness to pay; for example, one can distribute leaflets. If those ways were sufficient to serve Madisonian ideals, there would be no reason to worry about the broadcast media. But in practice, it seems unlikely that there is sufficient attention to public affairs, and diversity of view, in other media to pick up the slack. During a half-hour of news programming, no more than eight to twelve minutes involves news. Each story that does involve news typically ranges from twenty to thirty seconds.6 9 Even the news stories tend to focus on fires, accidents, and crimes instead of issues of government and policy.70 Discussions of governmental policy are further de-emphasized during the more popular evening show.7 1 Coverage of government does not tend to describe the content of relevant policies, but instead focuses on sensational and often misleading "human impact" anecdotes. 2 In addition, there has been great emphasis on "features"-dealing with popular actors, or entertainment shows, or even stories focusing on the movie immediately preceding the news.7 s Economic pressures seem to be pushing local news in this direction even if reporters might prefer to deal with public issues more seriously. It is notable in this regard that for presidential candidates, the average block of uninterrupted speech fell from 42.3 seconds in 1968 to only 9.8 seconds in 1988."5 There is little sustained coverage of the substance of candidate speeches; instead attention is placed on how various candidates are doing. Citizenship is exceedingly unlikely to flourish in this environment. news; in the first half of 1990, the average was sixty-eight minutes per month. 6 According to one person involved in the industry, "by the necessity of shrinking ratings, the network news departments have had to, if not formally then informally, redefine what is news." 77 According to the Executive Producer of NBC's Nightly News, "A lot of what we used to do is report on the back and forth of how we stood against the Russians. But there is no back and forth anymore. I mean nobody is talking about the bomb, so you have to fill the time with the things people are talking about."'78 There is evidence as well of advertiser influence over programming content, though at the moment the evidence is largely anecdotal.7" No conspiracy theory appears plausible; but some recent events are quite disturbing. There are reports that advertisers have a large impact on local news programs, especially consumer reports. In Minneapolis, a local car dealer responded to a story about consumer problems with his company by pulling almost one million in advertisements. He said: "We vote with our dollars. If I'm out trying to tell a good story about what I'm doing and paying $3000 for 30 seconds, and someone's calling me names, I'm not going to be happy."8 Consumer reporters have increasingly pointed to a need for self-censorship. According to one, "we don't even bother with most auto-related stories anymore"; according to another, "I won't do the car-repair story, or the lemon story .... It's not worth the hassle."8 1 A revealing recent episode involved the effort by Turner Broadcasting Systems (TBS) and the Audubon Society to produce a program dealing with the "spotted owl" controversy between loggers and environmentalists in the Pacific Northwest. Believing that the program was biased, a group representing the logging community did not want TBS to air it. As a result, all of the eight advertisers (including Ford, Citicorp, Exxon, and Sears) pulled their sponsorship of the program. TBS aired the program, but lost the $100,000 spent on production.2 And NBC had severe difficulties J J. Max Robins, Nets' Newscasts Increase Coverage of Entertainment, Variety 3, 63 (Jul 18, 1990). 77 Id at 3. 78 Id at 63. 7 See the discussion of a forthcoming report from the Center for the Study of Commercialism in G. Pascal Zachary, All the News? Many Journalists See A Growing Reluctance to Criticize Advertisers, Wall St J Al (Feb 6, 1992). The report describes growing newspaper attentiveness to advertiser views on stories. Consider children's television. Educational programming for children simply cannot acquire sponsors; such programming can be found mostly on PBS.8 5 In the 1960s, the FCC issued recommendations and policy statements calling for "programming in the interest of the public" rather than "programming in the interest of salability."' In 1974, it concluded that "broadcasters have a special obligation to serve children," and thus pressured the industry to adopt codes calling for educational and informational programs.87 In 1981, the new FCC Chair, Mark Fowler, rejected this approach. For Fowler, "television is just another appliance. It's a toaster with pictures." 88 Shortly thereafter, network programming for children dramatically decreased," and programs based on products increased. According to one critic, by 1986 children's television had become "a listless by-product of an extraordinary explosion of entrepreneurial life forces taking place elsewhere-in the business of creating and marketing toys." 90 In 1983, cartoons based on licensed characters accounted for fourteen programs; by 1985, the number rose to over forty."' It continued to increase. Most of the resulting shows for children are quite violent, and the violence has increased since deregulation. Statistical measures will of course be inadequate, but it is at least revealing that before 1980, there were 18.6 violent acts per hour in children's programs, whereas after 1980, the number increased to 26.4 acts per hour.92 Children's daytime weekend programs have consistently been more violent than prime-time shows.93 Few of these shows have educational content. They are often full-length advertisements for products. Empirical studies show that news and entertainment programming sometimes discriminates on the basis of sex. A 1986 study of network news stories found that when women appear as "private individuals," they are most frequently depicted as falling in the category "family members; that is, they were the mothers or other relatives of hostages, gunmen, spies, afflicted children, and the like." 96 Next most frequent was the appearance of women as victims, including battered women, stabbing victims, and residents of areas affected by earthquakes and toxic waste sites.97 When women are used as speaking subjects on a public issue, it is often to speak against a position traditionally associated with women. Thus Christie Hefner was used as a prominent critic of an antipornography report, and a woman doctor was used to defend a company policy of transferring women out of jobs dealing with hazardous chemicals.98 One study of situation comedies and crime drama programs in 1975 found that women were often portrayed in subordinate roles. 99 "2 Sources for this discussion are George Gernber and Nancy Signorielli, Violence Pro Children's programming frequently consists exclusively of male characters, and when a female character is added "a group of male buddies will be accented by a lone female, stereotypically defined."' 10 0 On this pattern, "the female is usually a little-sister type," or "functions as a girl Friday to . . . male superheroes.'' 101 Thus "[g]irls exist only in relation to boys."'0 2 Of major dramatic characters in one survey, women made up only sixteen percent, and "females were portrayed as younger than males, more likely to be married, less active and with lower self-esteem.'1 0 3 b) Correctives and the First Amendment. Regulatory strategies cannot solve all of these problems, but they could help. At least some regulatory strategies should not be treated as abridgements of the freedom of speech. There are several answers. First, information about public affairs has many of the characteristics of a public good, like national defense or clean air. 04 It is well-known that if we rely entirely on markets, we will have insufficient national defense and excessively dirty air. The reason is that both defense and clean air cannot be feasibly provided to one person without simultaneously being provided to many or all. In these circumstances, each person has inadequate incentives to seek, or to pay for, the right level of national defense or clean air. Acting individually, each person will "free ride" on the efforts of others. No producer will have the appropri Amendment, 105 Harv L Rev 554, 558-62 (1991). Information is not a pure public good, for it is often feasible to provide it to those who pay for it, and copyright and patent laws can guarantee appropriate incentives for its production. But it does have much in common with pure public goods. ate incentive for production. The result will be unacceptably low levels of the relevant goods. The third problem with relying on decreasing scarcity is that it is important to be extremely cautious about the use, for constitutional and political purposes, of the notion of "consumer sovereignty." Consumer sovereignty is the conventional economic term for the virtues of a free market, in which commodities are allocated through consumer choices, as measured through the criterion of private willingness to pay. Those who invoke free choice in markets are really insisting on consumer sovereignty. But Madison's conception of "sovereignty" is the relevant one for First Amendment purposes, and that conception has an altogether different character. tal law, protection of endangered species, social security, and antidiscrimination law. Democratic aspirations should not be disparaged. Democratic liberty should not be identified with "consumer sovereignty." And in the context at hand, the people, acting through their elected representatives, might well decide that democratic liberty, calling for quality and diversity of view in the mass media, is more valuable than consumer sovereignty. wide range of high quality fare, owes its existence to governmental involvement. We have no basis for doubting that much ' larger improvements could be brought about in the future. Nor is there any reason grounded in evidence-as opposed to market theology-to think that a regulatory solution of this sort would inevitably be inferior to the current system. 108 Consider Meiklejohn, Free Speech and Its Relation to Self-Government at 16-17 [C]ongress is not debarred from all action upon freedom of speech. Legislation which abridges that freedom is forbidden, but not legislation to enlarge and enrich it. The freedom of mind which befits the members of a self-governing society is not a given and fixed part of human nature. It can be increased and established by learning, by teaching, by the unhindered flow of accurate information, by giving men health and vigor and security, by bringing them together in activities of communication and mutual understanding. And the federal legislature is not forbidden to engage in that positive enterprise of cultivating the general intelligence upon which the success of selfgovernment so obviously depends. On the contrary, in that positive field the Congress of the United States has a heavy and basic responsibility to promote the freedom of speech. Buckley reflects pre-New Deal understandings. We should view it as the modern-day analogue of Lochner v New York:" 2 a decision to take the market status quo as just and prepolitical, and to use that decision to invalidate democratic efforts at reform. Reliance on markets is governmental neutrality. Use of existing distributions for political expenditures marks out government inaction. Because it involves speech, Buckley is even more striking than Lochner. Efforts to redress economic inequalities, or to ensure that they do not translate into political inequalities, should not be seen as impermissible redistribution, or as the introduction of government regulation where it did not exist before. Instead we should evaluate campaign finance laws pragmatically in terms of their consequences for the system of free expression. There are some hard questions here. The case for controls on campaign expenditures is plausible but hardly clearcut. 113 An inquiry into these considerations would raise issues quite different from those invoked by the Buckley Court. 13 Consider John Rawls, The Basic Liberties and Their Priority, in Sterling M. The Court fails to recognize the essential point that the fair-value of the political liberties is required for a just political procedure, and that to insure their fair-value it is necessary to prevent those with greater property and wealth, and the greater skills of organization which accompany them, from controlling the electoral process to their advantage.... On this view, democracy is a kind of regulated rivalry between economic classes and interest groups in which the outcome should properly depend on the ability and willingness of each to use its financial resources and skills, admittedly very unequal, to make its desires felt. But such regulation might be objectionable on other grounds, for example, that it operates in purpose or effect as a kind of incumbent protection measure. This is of course a quite different point from that in Buckley. if other outlets are unavailable or are far less effective. Effectiveness is important because if speech involving public affairs or diverse views is not widely heard, the Madisonian system will be severely undermined. I do not mean to suggest that broadcasters should be regulable under the same standards applied to, say, employers. Broadcasters are engaged in speech, and this fundamentally alters the inquiry. But we should not disable a constitutional democracy from responding to the current situation. A constitutional amendment en ,,5 Compare John Dewey, The Public and its Problems 184"(Gateway, 1946): We have but touched lightly and in passing upon the conditions which must be fulfilled if the Great Society is to become a Great Community; a society in which the everexpanding and intricately ramifying consequences of associated activities shall be known in the full sense of that word, so that an organized, articulate Public comes into being. The highest and most difficult kind of inquiry and a subtle, delicate, vivid and responsive art of communication must take possession of the physical machinery of transmission and circulation and breathe life into it. When the machine age has thus perfected its machinery it will be a means of life and not its despotic master. Democracy will come into its own, for democracy is a name for a life of free and enriching communion .... It will have its consummation when free social inquiry is indissolubly wedded to the art of full and moving communication. 16 It is interesting to compare this phenomenon with the recent attention given to the phenomenon of "political correctness." In any culture there are ideas about what is politically correct, and in our culture these ideas reflect the conventional political morality of television and radio. Serious criticism of that political morality, from any point of view, sometimes counts as beyond the pale. acted in order to ensure democratic self-determination need not bar a democratic corrective. the thinking process of the community, and it is unlikely to reflect an impermissible governmental motivation. 12 3 There is a great deal to be said in favor of this conception of neutrality. 124 In certain respects, however, it reproduces the framework of the Lochner era. It takes the market status quo as natural and just insofar as it bears on speech. It sees partisanship in government decisions to alter that status quo, and neutrality in decisions that basically respect it. But there may be no neutrality in use of the market status quo when the available opportunities are heavily dependent on wealth, on the common law framework of entitlements, and on the sorts of outlets for speech that are made available, and to whom. In other words, the very notions "contentneutral" and "content-based" seem to depend on taking the status quo as if it were preregulatory and unobjectionable. Second, we should draw into question a familiar justification for skepticism about content-based regulation of speech. That justification the marketplace of ideas. ' This idea has two infirmities. First, we do not know what a well-functioning marketplace of ideas would look like. The preconditions of an economic marketplace can be specified by neoclassical economics; the same is not true for the preconditions of a system of free expression. 2 9 Second, the idea depends on taking the "marketplace" as unobjectionable in its current form. If it is already skewed, content-based regulation may be a corrective. It 123 Geoffrey R. Stone, Content Regulation and the First Amendment, 25 Wm & Mary is skewed that in In general, the existence of an unjust status quo is not a good reason to allow content regulation. For one thing, any inquiry into the speech status quo is probably beyond governmental capacity. There is a serious risk that judicial or legislative decisions about the relative power of various groups, and about to whom redistribution is owed, will be biased or unreliable. Judgments about who is powerful and who is not must refer to some highly controversial baseline. The resulting judgments are not easily subject to governmental administration. Indeed, government will inevitably be operating with its own biases, and those biases will affect any regulatory strategy. This risk seems unacceptable when speech is at stake. Finally, it would be necessary to reemphasize that there are limits on government's power to affect deliberative processes through the use of government funds. On this point, it is exceptionally hard to unpack the Court's cases. Some of these decisions suggest that when allocating funds, government cannot discriminate on the basis of point of view. It would follow that government could not allocate funds only to people who will speak in favor of a certain cause. Other cases draw a distinction between a "subsidy" and a "penalty," permitting government to refuse to subsidize speech, but prohibiting government from penalizing it. " See Catharine A. MacKinnon, Francis Biddle's Sister: Pornography, Civil Rights and Speech, in MacKinnon, Feminism Unmodified: Discourses on Life and Law 163-97 (Harvard, 1987). expression, it can channel its funds however it wishes. The problem in Rust v Sullivan"' arose when the Department of Health and Human Services issued regulations banning federally funded family planning services from engaging in (a) counseling concerning, (b) referrals for, and (c) activities advocating abortion as a method of family planning. The plaintiffs claimed that these regulations violated the First Amendment, arguing that the regulations discriminated on the basis of point of view. The Government can, without violating the Constitution, selectively fund a program to encourage certain activities it believes to be in the public interest, without at the same time funding an alternate program which seeks to deal with the problem in another way. In so doing, the Government has not discriminated on the basis of viewpoint; it has merely chosen to fund one activity to the exclusion of the other. 133 In response to the claim that the regulations conditioned the receipt of a benefit on the relinquishment of a right, the Court said that "here the government is not denying a benefit to anyone, but is instead simply insisting that public funds be spent for the purposes for which they were authorized.' ' 3 4 Rust seems to establish the important principle that government can allocate funds to private people to establish "a program" that accords with the government's preferred point of view. In fact the Court seems to make a sharp distinction between government coercion-entry into the private realm of markets and private interactions-and funding decisions. So made, this distinction replicates pre-New Deal understandings. But there is no fundamental distinction among the law that underlies markets, the law that represents disruption of markets, and the law that calls for funding To hold that the Government unconstitutionally discriminates on the basis of viewpoint when it chooses to fund a program dedicated to advancing certain permissible goals, because the program in advancing those goals necessarily discourages alternate goals, would render numerous government programs constitutionally suspect. When Congress established a National Endowment for Democracy to encourage other countries to adopt democratic principles ... it was not constitutionally required to fund a program to encourage competing lines of political philosophy such as Communism and Fascism. Notwithstanding the apparent implications of Rust, it would be intolerable to say that government can target funds, or jobs, or licenses, or anything else that it owns only for speech with which it agrees. Suppose, for example, that the government decides to fund only those projects that speak favorably of Democrats. However government is acting, the First Amendment constrains the purposes for which government may act, and the effects of its actions. The notion that the First Amendment is directed only at criminal punishment or civil fines depends on an outmoded notion of what government does, and on a pre-New Deal understanding of "interference" with constitutional rights. A government decision to sponsor speech favorable to one or another party platform would run afoul of a central commitment of the First Amendment. A reformulation of First Amendment doctrine of this general sort has much to be said in its favor. Above all, such a reformulation would reinvigorate processes of democratic deliberation, by 13 This is not to say that we should treat funding decisions the same as other decisions. From first principles, the development of constitutional limits on funding that affects speech raises exceedingly complex issues, and I restrict myself to a few observations here. A key feature of funding is that government must be selective in dispensing money, and the inevitability of selection means that certain judgments will be acceptable here that would not be acceptable elsewhere. With respect to the arts, for example, judgments involving esthetics and subject matter seem unavoidable. A more detailed discussion, of government funding of speech and the arts can be found in Cass R. Sunstein, Why the Unconstitutional Conditions Doctrine is An Anachronism, 70 B U L Rev 593, 610-15 (1990). speech"-counseling-rather than public or political speech. Private speech is subject to more deferential scrutiny. See Connick v Myers, 461 US 138 (1983). (2) It involves the abortion context, where the government has a legitimate interest in protecting fetal life. See Maher v Roe, 432 US 464 (1977). (3) The speech restriction in Rust might be seen as ancillary to the prohibition on government funding of abortion. For these reasons we may doubt whether Rust will extend to viewpoint discrimination with respect to public, political speech; instead, it involved a limitation on a governmentally funded private counseling program. ensuring greater attention to public issues and greater diversity of treatment of those issues. Some qualifications are necessary here. A system of markets in speech-surrounded by law of property, contract, and tort-has major advantages over other forms of regulation. Such systems are content-neutral, at least on their face. This is an important point, above all because in markets, no government official is authorized to decide, in particular cases, who will be allowed to speak. There is no need to emphasize the risk of bias when government decides that issue. "a There is no argument here that government may silence "the powerful" to protect "the powerless." Such a position would create a legitimate risk that judicial or legislative decisions about the relative power of various groups, and about who should receive redistribution, will be biased or unreliable. Judgments about who is powerful and who is not must refer to some baseline. That baseline will of course be politically contested. When the powerful are free to redistribute speech, it is likely they will distribute it in ways that advantage them. The resulting judgments are not easily subject to governmental administration. This risk seems unacceptable. Instead of or in addition to renovating the free speech tradition in this way, we might offer a more cautious proposal. The most fundamental step would involve an insistence on the original idea that the First Amendment is principally about political deliberation. '38 The fact that words or pictures are involved is not, standing by itself, a sufficient reason for full constitutional protection. Bribery, criminal solicitation, threats, conspiracies, perjury-all these are words, but they are not by virtue of that fact entitled to the highest level of constitutional protection. They may be regulated on the basis of a lesser showing. of harm than is required for political speech.1 39 They are not entirely without constitutional protection-they count as "speech"-but they do not lie within the core of the free speech guarantee.140 1. The two-tier First Amendment; and a note on autonomy. The guarantee given by the First Amendment is not ... assured to all speaking. It is assured only to speech which bears, directly or indirectly, upon issues with which voters have to deal-only, therefore, to the considerations of matters of public interest. Private speech, or private interest in speech, on the other hand, has no claim whatever to the protection of the First Amendment. 139 Alexander Meiklejohn, the greatest philosopher of the First Amendment, was emphatic on the point, distinguishing between "a private right of speech which may on occasion be denied or limited, though such limitations may not be imposed unnecessarily or unequally" and "the unlimited guarantee of the freedom of public discussion." Id at 39. "There are, then, in the theory of the Constitution, two radically different kinds of utterances. The constitutional status of a merchant advertising his wares, of a paid lobbyist fighting for the advantage of his client, is utterly different from that of a citizen who is planning for the general welfare." Id. For example, the Supreme Court accords less than complete protection to commercial speech.14' It excludes obscenity from First Amendment protection altogether.'4 2 It treats libel of private persons quite differently from libel of people who are public figures. 43 The fact that the First Amendment does not protect conspiracies, purely verbal workplace harassment of individuals on the basis of race and sex, bribery, and threats appears to owe something to a distinction between political and nonpolitical speech. Thus far, then, we see that the Supreme Court understands the First Amendment to have two tiers. But is a two-tier First Amendment inevitable, or desirable? It does indeed seem that any well-functioning system of free expression must ultimately distinguish between different kinds of speech by reference to their centrality to the First Amendment guarantee.'4 5 For example, courts should not test regulation of campaign speeches under the same standards applied to misleading commercial speech, child pornography, conspiracies, libel of private persons, and threats. 4 6 If the same standards were applied, one of two results would follow, and both are unacceptable. 4 7 The first possible result would be to lower the burden of justification for governmental regulation as a whole, so as to allow for restrictions on misleading commercial speech, private libel, and so forth. If this were the consequence, there would be an unaccept is tempting, and possible, to classify some speech as unprotected because it is "really" action. But this is unhelpful. Conspiracies and bribes are speech, not action. If they are to be treated as action-that is, if they are not to be protected-it is because of their distinctive features. This is what must be discussed. The word "action" is simply a placeholder for that unprovided discussion. Moreover, an approach rooted in a norm of autonomy makes it difficult to understand what is special about speech. 5 2 Many acts, like most speech, serve the goal of autonomy as it is usually understood by advocates of an autonomy-based conception of the First Amendment. 5 3 If autonomy in the abstract is the principle, there appears to be nothing distinctive about speech to explain why it has been singled out for constitutional protection. An approach to the First Amendment that does not account for the distinctiveness of speech would be untrue to constitutional text and structure. 5 This approach seems likely as well to accord with our initial or considered judgments about particular free speech problems. Any approach to the First Amendment will have to take substantial account of those judgments, and adjust itself accordingly. 6' It seems clear that such forms of speech as perjury, bribery, threats, misleading or false commercial advertising, criminal solicitation, and libel of private persons-or at least most of these-are not entitled to the highest degree of constitutional protection. No other approach unifies initial or preliminary judgments about these matters as well as a political conception of the First Amendment. 15 See Levy, Emergence of a Free Press at 266-70 (cited in note 3). Original understanding and the tradition of legal interpretation, however, are not decisive. The same support could be found for an unacceptably narrow view of the Equal Protection Clause, the history of which suggests validation of much discrimination on the basis of sex and even race. But a position is surely strengthened if it can draw on a good historical pedigree. The University of Chicago Law Review trust of government is strongest when politics are at issue.'5 7 It is far weaker when government is regulating (say) commercial speech, bribery, private libel, or obscenity. In such cases there is less reason to suppose that it is insulating itself from criticism. 15 8 Finally, this approach protects speech when regulation is most likely to be harmful. Restrictions on political speech have the distinctive feature of impairing the ordinary channels for political change; such restrictions are especially dangerous.' 5 9 If there are controls on commercial advertising, it always remains possible to argue that such controls should be lifted. If the government bans violent pornography, citizens can continue to argue against the ban. But if the government forecloses political argument, the democratic corrective is unavailable. Controls on nonpolitical speech do not have this uniquely damaging feature. where too. For example, restrictions on commercial advertising might be an effort by a wellorganized group to eliminate competition. But this does not distinguish regulation of speech from regulation of anything else, and so it provides no special reason to be suspicious of government regulation of speech. Regulation of political speech, by contrast, raises the specter of governmental efforts to suppress criticism of its own conduct and is therefore more likely to be biased. would carry considerable promise. But such an approach would make it hard to distinguish between scientific and political speech. It also might protect such things as child pornography. If the First Amendment offers special protection to political speech, we must of course reject the proposition that all forms of speech stand on the same ground. It would be necessary to draw distinctions between obscenity and political protest, or misleading commercial speech and misleading campaign statements, or proxy statements and party platforms. We must resort far less readily to the view that a restriction on one form of speech necessarily will lead to restriction on another. Is it so clear that speech that has nothing to do with politics is not entitled to First Amendment protection? Must we exclude music or art or science?' 6 2 Surely it is philistine'6 3 or worse to say that Martha Nussbaum, Aristotelian Social Democracy, in R. Bruce Douglass, Gerald M. Mara, and Henry S. Richardson, eds, Liberalism and the Good 203 (Routledge, 1990). The idea has no clear defenders in current legal writing. 1"2 See Meiklejohn, Free Speech and Its Relation to Self-Government at 99-100 (cited We have assumed that the studies of the "scholar" must have, in all respects, the absolute protection of the First Amendment. But with the devising of "atomic" and "bacteriological" knowledge for the use of, and under the direction of, military forces, we can now see how loose and inaccurate, at this point, our thinking has been.... It may be, The University of Chicago Law Review the First Amendment protects only political platforms. Often the deepest political challenges to the existing order can be found in art, literature, music, or sexual expression."' Sometimes government attempts to regulate these things for precisely this reason. therefore, that the time has come when the guarding of human welfare requires that we shall abridge the private desire of the scholar-or of those who subsidize him-to study whatever he may please .... As I write these words, I am not taking a final stand on the issue which is here suggested. But I am sure that the issue is coming upon us and cannot be evaded. In a rapidly changing world, another of our ancient sanctities-the holiness of research-has been brought under question. "I' See Richard A. Posner, Sex and Reason (Harvard, 1992). 1' Sex is familiarly a metaphor for social rebellion. See, for example, George Orwell, " This is a harder question if it is not personal. It could, however, still count as harassment under current law. See Balkin, 1990 Duke L J at 414-28 (cited in note 21), on "captive audience" ideas in this setting. and should be applied to low-value expression. Thus, for example, commercial speech occupies an intermediate category, regulable when government can show a good reason and a solid connection between the means of regulation and the reason in question. The same should be true for scientific speech and private libel. This approach would not entail substantial change in existing law. It would help us deal with the new controversies, but generally would not unsettle resolution of the old ones. The Court has already created categories of speech that are less protected or unprotected. But the Court has not given a sense of the unifying factors that justify the creation of these categories. It is highly revealing that political speech never falls within them, and that all speech that does so is usually not political in the sense that I understand the term. The principal difference between the approach I suggest 167 It is sometimes said that the goal of anti-pornography laws is to suppress pornography's message about women. If this were the reason for such laws, they would indeed be unconstitutional. I do not enter that debate here. See Cass Sunstein, Neutrality in Constitutional Law (With Special Reference to Pornography, Abortion, and Surrogacy), 92 Colum L Rev 1, 18-29 for pornography regulations). and current law is the explicit statement that nonpolitical speech occupies a lower tier-a statement that the Court has yet to make. For reasons suggested below, it is unclear that even this would make much of a difference. The securities laws would raise no serious question. Indeed, many of the controversies with which I began would be resolved fairly automatically. The only real exception is hate speech, which plausibly has political content in that it is a self-conscious statement about how to resolve current political controversies. The analysis would depend on the extent to which something labelled as "hate speech" is actually intended or received as a contribution 186 Gertz v Robert Welch, Inc., 418 US 323, 342 (1974). 168 A possible response would be that many famous people have governmental associations of some sort, and the notion of "public figures" is designed to overcome the difficulties of case-by-case inquiries. Also, many people not involved in government are involved in activities in which the public is legitimately concerned on democratic grounds. Consider attempted bribery of public officials by corporate executives. Probably the best approach, suggested by Justice Marshall, would involve an inquiry into whether the issue is one of legitimate public interest or concern. See Rosenbloom v Metromedia, Inc., 403 US 29, 43-44 (1971) (Marshall concurring). tion of sexually explicit speech, illegitimate motives are likely to be at work. to thought about a public matter. This approach might deprive speech of protection if it amounts to simple epithets, showing visceral contempt. On an analogy to the obscene telephone call, a public university can prevent students and teachers from using words in a way that is not plausibly part of social deliberation about an issue. But racist, homophobic, or sexist speech, even if offensive and harmful, would not be regulable so long as it is plausibly part of the exchange of ideas. It follows that the speech codes of public universities are generally unconstitutional, except insofar as they apply to the narrow category of epithets.17 2 This approach would also suggest that government may regulate some forms of scientific speech. For example, the government could regulate the export of technology with military applications. This is so even though the showing of harm is in such cases insufficient under the standards properly applied to political speech. 173 What of art and literature? The fact that they are frequently political-combined with the severe difficulty of evaluating their political quality on an ad hoc basis-argues powerfully in favor of the view that generally art and literature should be taken as "core" speech. When government seeks to censor art or literature, it is Salmost always because of the political content, making the censorship impermissible. Even when art or literature stands outside the core, government cannot attempt to regulate speech because it disagrees with the message. The First Amendment requires a legitiis almost always mate justification. A legitimate justification lacking. Thus far I have not said anything general about the functions of the free speech guarantee or about the conception of democracy M Joseph M. Bessette, Deliberative Democracy: The Majority Principle in Republican Government, in Robert A. Goldwin and William A. Schambra, eds, How Democratic is the Constitution? 102, 112-16 (American Enterprise Institute, 1980); Cass R. Sunstein, Interest Groups in American Public Law, 38 Stan L Rev 29, 45-48 (1985). view. Its overriding goal is to allow judgments to emerge through general discussion and debate. to reform all of the commitments that, with respect to speech, have come to represent the conventional wisdom in many circles. Over the last forty years, the American law of freedom of speech has experienced a revolution. The revolution has accomplished enormous good. A return to the pre-1950 law of free speech certainly would not provide a better understanding of the free speech principle, or sufficiently serve other valuable social goals to justify abandonment of the current approach. In the bicentennial year of the Bill of Rights-a period in which appreciation for freedom of speech is exploding throughout the world-it is more than appropriate to celebrate our tradition of liberty, and to recognize the extent is an extraordinary and precious achievement. it At the same time, a crucial part of that achievement involves the dynamic and self-revising character of the free speech tradition. Our existing liberty of expression owes much of its content to the capacity of each generation to rethink and to revise the understandings that were left to it. To the economists' plea that "the perfect is the enemy of the good," we might oppose Dewey's suggestion that "the better is too often the enemy of the still better.' 1 79 The conception of free speech in any decade of American history is often quite different from the conception twenty years before or after. In this Article I have suggested two changes in existing understandings; both of them derive from the American contribution to the theory of sovereignty. First, some forms of apparent government intervention into free speech processes can actually improve those processes. We should not understand these as an objectionable intrusion into an otherwise law-free social sphere. In these ways, such intervention should not always be taken as an impermissible "abridgement" of the free speech right. Efforts of this sort do not represent "positive" government action intruding on constitutionally protected "negative" liberty. s0 Instead these proposals entail a democratic recognition of the dangers to free speech posed by content-neutral restrictions that limit access to arenas in which expression should occur. Current doctrine generally recognizes the risks posed by content-neutral restrictions. The gap lies in the unwillingness to see that the speech "market" is a product of law subject to legislative improvements and to First Amendment constraints. A salutary recognition that decentralized markets generally are indispensable to promote liberty-for products and for speech-is not inconsistent with the basic claim. Nor is that recognition inconsistent with the view that the creation of markets might, on some occasions and in some settings, itself be an abridgement of free speech. off the mark.