 Hans Cass R. Sunsteint My first real glimpse into Hans Zeisel's spirit came about eleven years ago, during my initial weeks of teaching. The faculty had finished its Monday lunch at the Quadrangle Club, and it was time to go back to the law school. But a torrential rain was in progress. Hans and I-the oldest and the youngest-were the only faculty members left without cars or umbrellas. I turned to Hans and asked, "What shall we do?" Hans looked at me with a combination of bemusement, mischief, and resolve. He answered in his mild Austrian accent: "Only one thing to do. Run." I was in my twenties, Hans in his seventies, but we both ran, at an extremely rapid clip, all the way back to the law school. By the time we got there, I was winded. So far as I could tell, Hans was not. In an odd t Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, The University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. way, I think, the event inaugurated and even came to symbolize our friendship. for the particular lives of those he knew and loved. I recall so many scenes and impressions from my walks with Hans, as he stopped for emphasis: his irrepressible, infectious reverence for Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who "saved the country twice"; his fierce reaction to the view that poverty and racial injustice were inevitable or a product of "human nature"; his genuine distress with my interest in a social thinker that Hans thought faddish and superficial ("I dislike that this should come between us," said Hans gently at my office door; it never did, and a year later it was clear to me that on the merits he was right); his love for sports, especially tennis, his high hopes for my backhand, and his own agility and quickness on the court (continuing well into his eighties); his capacity for empathy, for really seeing his friends, for understanding so much after just a sentence or two; his refusal to flinch from confronting ideas or behavior that were wrong, selfish, or cruel (even-especially!-if these came from his colleagues); his unfailing curiosity about and interest in new developments and new ideas (also continuing to the end of his life). Above all, perhaps, I remember his tender concern during my wife's difficult pregnancy, concern that was unaffected by Hans's own health problems-and his great joy at our daughter's birth. Very little really fazed Hans. The day-to-day troubles of the law professor seemed to him trivial, almost nothing at all. Hans was truly concerned, I think, about only three things: getting the The University of Chicago Law Review facts straight, reducing social injustice and human suffering, and improving the welfare of the people he knew and loved. In my last visit with Hans, a week before he died, he wanted to talk not about his illness or future, -but about the law school he treasured, about Eastern Europe, and most of all about my daughter. Hans was a rare and great friend. He was a profound teacher. To him life was a joy and an adventure, made up of delights and challenges and surprises. His work will endure; it exerts a continuing pull on legal scholarship and the law. But Hans's friends and colleagues will remember above all his optimistic, joyous, determined, brave, and loving spirit.