 The Myth of the Unitary Executive* is Cass Sunstein, who is the Karl Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence at the University of Chicago School of Law and Department of Political Science. A prolific author and lecturer on administrative law issues, Professor Sunstein is Vice Chair of the Judicial Review Committee of the American Bar Association Section on Administrative Law and Regulatory Practice. He formerly served in the Office of Legal Counsel at the United States Department of Justice. * The following is an edited transcript of Professor Sunstein's presentation at an October 30, 1992 Colloquy, held at The American University's Washington College of Law, on the role of presidential oversight in the administrative process. The background research for this presentation was conducted in preparation for an upcoming publication in the Columbia Law Review. See generally Lawrence Lessig & Cass R. Sunstein, The President and the Administration, 94 COLUM. L. REv. 1 (1994) (developing in-depth notion of considerable legislative authority over administration of Federal Government). the University of Chicago School of Law and Department of Political Science. A.B., Harvard College, 1975; J.D., Harvard Law School, 1978. I am grateful to Lawrence Lessig, Assistant Professor of Law, University of Chicago Law School, for his assistance in developing these joint ideas. Notwithstanding what I have just said, I do have a major legal claim to offer you, and I offer it with regret. It has become a pervasive view within the executive branch, and to a large degree within the courts, that the original vision of the Constitution put the President on top of a pyramid, with the administration below him. This vision, set out in numerous documents by the Department of Justice's Office of Legal Counsel,' my former home, is not an accurate interpretation of the Constitution. It is basically a fabrication by people of good intentions who have spoken ahistorically. What I am about to say might seem a little bit historical and technical. It is both, I acknowledge; but it has considerable contemporary importance. that if Congress wants to regulate the Federal Communications Commission in certain ways, by insulating it from the President, and if Congress wants to allow the head of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to make decisions about the environment instead of the President, or the Council on Competitiveness, then Congress is fully entitled to do that. Would it be wonderful if Congress acted in this way? It is hardly clear, but this is something the Constitution does not forbid Congress from doing. It is alarming to people like me, who want to believe in the Unitary Executive, that the nineteenth-century writers thought this was self-evident, and attributed their belief to the Framers. I have not found any nineteenth-century source that has this hierarchical vision on which Presidents Reagan, Bush, and Carter all have relied. At the very least, the absence of nineteenth-century support for the twentieth-century view is alarming, partly because the nineteenth century, by my calendar, is closer to the eighteenth than is the twentieth. is delegated authority, he can re-delegate this authority and direct decisionmaking actions at his discretion; but if authority is delegated to agency, President has no discretionary power over decisionmaking process). control, it is prosecution via the Attorney General. 0 Yet the Framers actually did not put prosecution under the hierarchical control of the President. They created an Attorney General, but they also created District Attorneys who were not subject to the control of the Attorney General or the President." Right there, the defenders of the Unitary Executive theory have to hesitate. Prosecution of the laws by Federal Government employees was not under the arm of the President, and as far as I have been able to find, no one thought that violated the Constitution. (Scalia, J., dissenting) (arguing that because 1) prosecution is executive function, and 2) statute in question vests this function in branch other than executive, statute in question violates Article II of Constitution). Justice Scalia emphasized his belief that government prosecution of crimes is quintessentially an executive function. Id. that light of to be blended with the contained "too much of the Judicial capacity Executive" and subject to the President's plenary power. 4 Theodore the Sedgwick, another of the Framers, believed Comptroller's close connection to the raising of national revenues, he "seemed to bear a strong affinity" to Congress.' 5 Madison believed that this office was distinct from both the executive and judicial branches. 6 If Madison was speaking for many of the Framers, and it appears that he was, this has explosive consequences. The judicial function of the Comptroller was similar to what many administrative agencies now do in one way or another. This suggests that when administrative officials to what Congress do does-and the EPA its rulemaking capacity-the agency need not be, as a matter of constitutional compulsion, placed under the hierarchical control of the President. If the settlement of legal claims becomes judicial, and immunized from presidential control, then the defenders of the Unitary Executive idea have a strong historical burden to overcome. This is a real disappointment to any sitting President. is an example that seem things in In 1792, the Postmaster General, the person in charge of the mails, was treated similarly. 7 The office was reorganized, and he was given the authority to enter into contracts and to make appointments. It was said around the time of the Framing that this would "combine purse and sword" by giving the President direct power over revenues. As a result, Congress deleted the language putting the Postmaster General under the direction of the President. to surmount. Prosecution was not under Because of all this, there is a big historical burden for the Unitary Executive the President's control, the functions of the Comptroller were not under the President's control, and the functions of the Postmaster were not under the President's control. The notion that any of this was unconstitutional was barely discernable in this period. 21. For an example, see 1 Op. A.G. 624 (1823) (advising President Monroe that to review Treasury Department's settlement of Major Joseph he was powerless Wheaton's account). through delay. Time limits would respond to that fear. I regulations suggest that there is no constitutional problem with imposing time limits onto the reviewing process. I do not like this conclusion with respect to what I would like the Constitution to represent, or as a matter of sound constitutional policy. I the internal deliberative process that think should be protected from public oversight, is persuasive. I do not agree with the American Bar Association's recommendation that the deliberative process be opened in all respects. Congress would not like an effort to require its internal discussions with its own staff to be opened up. General Motors would not like a requirement that its internal policy discussions be opened up to the public. There is a terrible chilling effect on internal discussion when it is exposed to public scrutiny. Let me give you my basic conclusion. As an originalist matter, the notion of a strong Unitary Executive has been greatly oversold. We should not be looking at the Constitution, we should be discussing poli mendation with respect to presidential oversight of agency action).