 Cass R. Sunsteint Much of the law of free speech is based on half-truths. These are principles or understandings that have a good deal to offer, that have fully plausible origins in history and principle, and that have mostly salutary consequences. But they also have significant blind spots. The blind spots distort important issues and in the end disserve the system of free expression. As a description of current free speech law, the first half-truth has considerable merit: Upon first examination, there are very few counterexamples, and we can find a good deal of affirmative support for the prohibition on viewpoint discrimination. Whatever its descriptive force, the prohibition on viewpoint discrimination is not difficult to explain in principle. It can be defended by reference to two central constitutional concerns: the removal of impermissible reasons for government action; and the ban on skewing effects on the system of free expression. As another example, consider the area of labor law, where courts have held that government may ban employers from speaking unfavorably about the effects of unionization during the period before a union election if the unfavorable statements might be interpreted as a threat against workers.11 Regulation of such speech is plausibly viewpoint discriminatory, because government does not proscribe employer speech favorable to unionization. and radio advertising of cigarettes and cigars after January 1, 1971). One could respond that this reasoning is wrong because it permits a distinctively objectionable form of paternalism. Some people think that the First Amendment is undergirded by a principle of listener autonomy, one that forbids government to ban speech because listeners might be persuaded by it.'4 On this view, the ban on advertising for cigarettes, gambling, and alcohol consumption invades the autonomy of those who would listen to such speech. If we were serious about the principle of listener autonomy, perhaps we would rarely allow government to stop people from hearing messages. This is a reasonable position, but it is not relevant to my current claim, which is purely descriptive: laws that discriminate on in certain circumstances. indeed upheld It is here that the first proposition emerges as a half-truth. Viewpoint discrimination is indeed permitted, and the Court should not pretend that it is always banned.' 5 We might conclude from the cases that viewpoint discrimination is not always prohibited and that the Court instead undertakes a more differentiated inquiry into the nature and strength of government justifications in particular cases. What is the nature of that more differentiated inquiry? I suggest that it begins with the view that viewpoint discrimination creates a strong presumption of invalidity. In certain narrow circumstances, the presumption is overcome because (a) there is at most a small risk of illegitimate motivation, (b) low " See Robert E. Goodin, No Smoking: The Ethical Issues (University of Chicago Press, The second half-truth is a generalization of the first. It derives from the same basic framework. I think that it is even more misleading; in any case, it is the most important. The antipathy to content-based regulation thus derives great support from history. Moreover, it is not hard to see the basis for the antipathy. If we are fearful of illegitimate reasons for government regulation, or if we are concerned about skewing effects from regulation, then content-based regulation is especially dangerous. The basis for these judgments has been spelled out in great and often convincing detail.2 4 Throughout the twentieth century, the present danger of immediate evil or an intent to bring it about that warrants Congress in setting a limit to the expression of opinion where private rights are not concerned. Congress certainly cannot forbid all effort to change the mind of the country."); Whitney v California, 274 US 357, 373 (1927) (Brandeis concurring) (The state may not place restrictions on speech "unless [such] speech would produce, or is intended to produce, a clear and imminent danger of some substantive evil which the State constitutionally may seek to prevent[.]"). major dangers have come from government regulations designed to impose on the polity a uniformity of opinion, to stifle artistic or literary diversity, and to entrench the government's own self-interest. In an era in which many countries are emerging from communist rule, it is especially salutary to focus on the risks posed by content-based regulation of speech. Views of this sort are widespread. Moreover, it may even be right to say that the principal threats to free speech come from content-based restrictions; but the claim needs to be evaluated by reference to some sort of criteria. It should not be treated as an can Constitutional Law ch 12 (Foundation Press, 2d ed 1988); John Hart Ely, Flag Desecration: A Case Study in the Roles of Categorization and Balancing in First Amendment Analysis, 88 Harv L Rev 1482 (1975). " See, generally, Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech (cited in note so Alexander Meiklejohn, Free Speech and its Relation to Self-Government 27 (Harper & Brothers Publishers, 1948) ("The principle of the freedom of speech springs from the necessities of the program of self-government. It is not a Law of Nature or of Reason in the abstract. It is a deduction from the basic American agreement that public issues shall be decided by universal suffrage."). See also Robert H. Bork, Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment Problems, 47 Ind L J 1 (1971); Owen M. Fiss, Free Speech and Social Structure, 71 Iowa L Rev .1405, 1409-10 (1986). If our current system of free expression is functioning poorly, it is because of the content-neutral law that underlies current markets. I believe that many important problems for the current system of free speech in America lie not in content-based regulation-which generally involves peripheral issues and almost never strikes at what I am taking to be the core of the free speech guarantee-but instead in the operation of the free market and in the legal rules that constitute it. In these circumstances, it is worse than ironic that people interested in the theory and practice of free speech focus on such comparatively trivial issues as commercial speech, disclosure of the names of rape victims, and controls on Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech (cited in note 3). In the next generation, some of the most important free speech issues will arise from selective funding of speech. What if government funds some artists but not others, imposes conditions on what libraries may obtain, or regulates political expression by refusing to pay for the literature of certain causes? On the constitutional question, the Supreme Court's cases are exceptionally hard to unpack. We might distinguish five different propositions, which in concert seem to reflect the current law.3a Once we have them in place, we will be able to see the key role of the third halftruth. The Government can, without violating the Constitution, selectively fund a program to encourage certain activities it believes to be in the public interest, without at the same time funding an alternate program which seeks to deal with the problem in another way. In so doing, the Government has not discriminated on the basis of viewpoint; it has merely chosen to fund one activity to the exclusion of the other. 42 In response to the claim that the regulations conditioned the receipt of a benefit on the relinquishment of a right, the Court held that "here the government is not denying a benefit to anyone, but is instead simply insisting that public funds be spent for the purposes for which they were authorized. '43 Rust seems to establish the important principle that government can allocate funds to private people to establish "a program" that accords with government's preferred point of view. In this area, even viewpoint discrimination is permitted. In fact, the Court seems to make a sharp distinction between government "coercion"-entry into the private realm of markets and private interactions-on the one hand and funding decisions on the other. Hence we arrive at our third half-truth: Government may not "penalize" speech (propositions (C) and (D)), but it may fund speech selectively however it chooses, by allocating its funds to preferred causes (propositions (A) and (E)). "' Id at 1772. The Court added: To hold that the Government unconstitutionally discriminates on the basis of viewpoint when it chooses to fund a program dedicated to advance certain permissible goals, because the program in advancing those goals necessarily discourages alternate goals, would render numerous government programs constitutionally suspect. When Congress established a National Endowment for Democracy to encourage other countries to adopt democratic principles, 22 USC ยง 4411(b), it was not constitutionally required to fund a program to encourage competing lines of political philosophy such as Communism and Fascism. " This has no normative implications. By saying that property rights are a creation of law, I do not mean in any way to disparage the institution of private property, which is crucially important to, among other things, individual liberty, economic prosperity, and democratic self-government. I mean only to suggest that to have a system of private property, government controls are necessary, as people in Eastern Europe have recently learned very well. We arrive finally at the last and most general half-truth. From what has been said thus far, it should be clear that the Supreme Court is especially skeptical of content-based restrictions and especially hospitable, toward content-neutral restrictions. 7 Contentbased -restrictions are presumed invalid. Outside the relatively narrow categories of unprotected or less protected speech-libel, commercial speech, fighting words, and so on-the Court rarely upholds content-based restrictions. By contrast, content-neutral restrictions are upheld so long as they can survive a form of balancing. In undertaking that balancing, the Court is often highly deferential to government judgments about the need for contentneutral restrictions. One of the most striking developments in recent law is the Court's increased hostility to content-based restrictions and its increased deference to content-neutral ones. Indeed, the distinction between the two kinds of restrictions seems to become sharper every term. Thus it is striking to compare the recent invalidation of a relatively narrow content-based restriction-the ban on cross-burning-with the recent validation of a broad content-neutral restriction-the ban on solicitation in airports.4 There is much to be said in favor of this fourth half-truth.4 9 As noted, it does tend to capture current law. Moreover, it makes considerable sense as a matter of principle. Generalizing only slightly from the previous discussion of viewpoint-based restrictions, we might conclude that content-based restrictions are pecu ful consequences and some content-based restrictions are founded on adequate justifications. The fourth half-truth is dangerous above all because in its rigidity, it operates as a substitute for close analysis of particular problems.5 0 With any well-elaborated body of legal doctrine, there is a pervasive danger that the doctrinal lines and distinctions will take on a life of their own. The purposes and goals that gave rise to those lines and distinctions sometimes become increasingly remote. This is, I believe, the source of the problem with all four half-truths. The larger goals of free speech doctrine have often been abandoned in favor of continued attention to particular doctrines that serve those goals in only partial and indirect ways. 50 Of course, it may sometimes be worthwhile to insist on rules that are crude but that reduce the costs of individualized inquiry. Some of the oversimplification in free speech law might be justified on this ground.