University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1993 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Changing Constitutional Powers of the American President 
Changing Constitutional Powers of the American President 

Feature: Forum: The Evolving Presidency in Eastern Europe 
Feature: Forum: The Evolving Presidency in Eastern Europe 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Changing Constitutional Powers of the American President Feature: Forum: The 
Evolving Presidency in Eastern Europe," 2 East European Constitutional Review 99 (1993). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

FALL 1993/  WirNE  1994

How  presidential powers  can legally expand  without constitutional amendment.

CHANGING  CONSTITUTIONAL  POWERS  OF THE AMERICAN  PRESIDENT
Cass Sunstein

In the  United  States,  the president  is  controlled  by the
Constitution and is in all respects  subordinate to it.  Inso-
far  as  it  deals  with  presidential  power,  however,  the
American  Constitution  has  proved  to  be  a  highly  mal-
leable document.  With very  few  exceptions, the consti-
tutional provisions relating to the president have not been
changed  at all  since  they  were  ratified  in  1787, but  in
1993  those provisions  do not mean what  they meant in
1787.  The  Constitution  is  a  legal  document,  and  it  is
enforced judicially, but its meaning was not fixed when it
was  ratified.  In particular,  the contemporary  president
has  far  broader  powers  than  the  original  Constitution
contemplated.  It is remarkable  but  true  that large-scale
changes  in  the  authority  of  the  president  have  been
brought about without changes  in the constitutional text
but, nevertheless, without illegality.

This is  a  paradox.  Is it not clear  that  constitutional
changes, if not textual, are illegal?  The paradox  has  con-
siderable  relevance  to  Eastern Europe.  The framers  of
the American Constitution feared legislative power most
of all, but from well-known events in  the twentieth cen-
tury it is possible to conclude that it is presidential power
that presents the greatest risks for liberty and democracy.
The president  is the  most visible leader  in  the nation  by
far;  he  is  often  the  only  person  in  government  with  a
national  constituency;  and  this  visibility  can  lead  to  a
kind of "cult" that threatens constitutionalism itself.  On
the other hand, a strong president is in a unique position
to accomplish enormous  good, and it is possible  to think
that in  Eastern  Europe  and the ex-USSR,  a  strong presi-
dent is a precondition  for necessary reforms.

How to produce  a  strong presidency  while  limiting
the relevant risks is a major  task for postcommunist con-
stitutionalism.  There  are of course significant complexi-
ties here.  With the exception of the nations of the former
Soviet Union, the pattern in Eastern European nations  is
basically  parliamentary,  and the president  is  largely  cer-

emonial  (at  least  in  comparison  to  the  American  presi-
dent).  In  the  nations  of what  used  to  be  the  USSR,  a
president-part  of a  division  between  the  executive  and
the  legislature-has  a  more  important  role.  But  even
where  the president  is largely  ceremonial,  there will be
opportunities  for  accretions  of power  over  time.  Any
particular  constitutional  arrangement  is  unlikely  to  be
fixed over time.

There is some dispute about whether the task of pro-
ducing  a  strong  president  without  endangering  liberty
has been  successfully accomplished  in the United States.
Some people think that the American  president is much
too powerful; others think that America has a weak presi-
dent who is unable to accomplish  the tasks for which he is
elected.  This debate  raises  complex questions  that I can-
not  discuss  here.  However  those  questions  may be  re-
solved,  it  is clear  that the  original  understanding  of the
presidency called for much less presidential authority than
is  taken  for  granted  today.  Although  the  prominent
American  founder, Alexander  Hamilton,  sought  a pow-
erful presidency, and although the new Constitution cre-
ated  an  executive  where  the  Articles  of Confederation
had not, the original American president  was exception-
ally  weak by contemporary  standards.  Consider  the fol-
lowing  points,  showing  the  contrast  between  the  eigh-
teenth  and twentieth-century  American presidencies.

1.  In  the  founding  period,  the  president  was  sup-
posed  to  have  sharply  limited  authority  in  domestic  af-
fairs, partly  because  the federal  government  as  a  whole
had sharply limited authority  in the domestic arena.  Ba-
sic  regulation  of the  economy  was  to  come  from  state
governments, especially from state courts elaborating  the
common  law  of tort, contract, and property.  Today, by
contrast, the president is a principal national lawmaker-
simply because  of a shift in power toward the nation.  In
implementing  national  law, the executive  branch  issues
an  extraordinary  range  of regulations  affecting  the  na-

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 99 1993

tional economy-in  large  part because  of the economic
interdependence  among  various  regions,  which  is now
generally  acknowledged. 
It is a simple  truth  that  the
national  government  has  far  more  authority  than  the
framers  of the  Constitution  originally  envisaged.  It  is
equally, if less simply, true that as a result of this shift, the
president  himself  has  assumed  an  array  of duties  and
powers  not  within  the  original  contemplation  of  the
Constitution's authors.

2. In issuing regulations and indeed in all his official
acts, the president needs congressional  (or constitutional)
authorization.  He  cannot  exceed  any  limits  that Con-
gress has laid down. But often Congress offers very vague
guidance.  The  president  therefore  has  a  great  deal  of
discretion.  Particularly in the latter half of the twentieth
century, courts have been  reluctant to strike  down laws
on  the basis  of the "nondelegation  doctrine,"  which  re-
quired  clear standards  from  the legislature.  The  down-
fall of the nondelegation  doctrine has meant that the presi-
dent  can  exercise  tremendous  policy-making  discretion
in the domestic  sphere.  This sphere  includes regulation
of the  environment,  energy,  occupational  safety  and
health, communications, and much else.

3. The framers of the Constitution probably wanted
to allow Congress to limit the president's authority  over
the  many  high-level  officials  who  implement  the  laws
enacted by Congress.  This might seem  to be a technical
matter, but it has enormous importance.  If the Secretary
of the Treasury can be controlled by the Congress but not
by the president, the allocation of national powers is much
changed.  It is now  generally  agreed,  however,  that the
president has broad power over all high-level oficials who imple-
ment the law. The heads of the cabinet, and of most execu-
tive agencies,  can be  discharged  by the president  when-
ever  the president  chooses.  Moreover,  Congress has  no
authority  to discharge  them or to  prevent  the president
from  doing  so.  (Of course  both  the  president  and  all
implementing  officials  must  obey  the  instructions  laid
down by  Congress.)  The result  is that  most administra-
tion of the  laws-an extremely  large and  important  cat-
egory-is subject to the will of the president.

4.  It is now generally understood  that the president
will submit to  Congress both (a) a proposed budget  and
(b) a  great deal of proposed  legislation.  As  a result, the
president now has a formidable  role in the enactment  of
national  legislation.  The  Constitution  contains  no  ex-

EAs  EUROPEAN  CONSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW

plicit provisions  on these points, but it was not originally
believed  that  the  president  would  submit  a  budget  or
propose legislation.  It was hardly believed that the presi-
dent would have these powers of initiative, granting him
considerable power over the content of national law. The
president's current power of initiative, with respect to the
budget and lawmaking, is quite fundamental.  (Of course
much  legislation  is  initiated  by  people  other  than  the
president.)

5.  The president's power to veto legislation has turned
out to allow him a surprisingly  large  role in determining
the content  of national legislation.  The founders  of the
Constitution  deliberately  and  explicitly  gave  the  presi-
dent the veto  power.  But  they  did not contemplate  its
current  importance,  and  they  might  well  have  been
alarmed  if they  had  been  forewarned.  Their  principal
goal was to  allow the president  to veto laws  on constitu-
tional rather  than policy grounds, particularly in order to
permit him  to prevent  Congress  from intruding on  the
president's constitutional  powers.  This goal was narrow
indeed; it did not anticipate a situation in which the power
to veto would entail a significant  role in lawmaking.

It is not entirely clear that the framers  sought to allow
the president to veto legislation solely on the ground that
he  disagreed  with  the  policy judgments  embodied  in  it
(though probably  the  best reading  of the  history  is that
the founders believed  that the president could veto legis-
lation  on  policy  grounds).  But  they  thought  that  this
power  would  be  exercised  rarely  and  only  in  the  most
extreme  cases.  The founders  certainly did not anticipate
the current situation, in  which the veto power  is a well-
understood part of all lawmaking and implies a large and
continuous presidential role in lawmaking itself. In short,
the  president's  authority  is  greatly  augmented  by Con-
gress'  knowledge that the president can veto legislation of
which he disapproves.

6.  With  the  emergence  of the  United  States  as  a
world power, the president's  foreign affairs authority has
become  far  more  capacious  than  was  originally  antici-
pated.  For the most part this is because  the powers origi-
nally conferred on the president have turned out-in light
of the  unanticipated  place  of the  United  States  in  the
world-to  mean  much  more  than  anyone  would  have
thought.  In  addition, however,  the  president  has been
permitted to initiate military activity  in circumstances in
which  the original  understanding  would  have  required

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 100 1993

FALL  1993/  WiNTER  1994

congressional  authorization.  On  the  founding  view,  a
congressional declaration of war was a precondition for war; the
only  exception  was  that  the  president  could  act  on his
own  in  order  to  repel  a sudden  attack  on  the  United
States.  But in  the twentieth  century, a large amount of
presidential  war-making  has been allowed  without con-
gressional declaration of war.

From  all  these  points  we  might  conclude  that  the
Constitution, at least in the area of presidential authority,
is no mere lawyer's document.  The original understand-
ing  has  not  controlled  the  future.  The  Constitution's
meaning  is not  fixed.  It  is in  large  part  a function  of
historical practices  and needs, and of shared  understand-
ings over time. Often the power of the president is under-
stood to be quite different from what it was, say, twenty-
five years earlier.

Yet  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  conclude  that  the
president's constitutional power is simply a matter of what
seems to him appropriate or necessary, and not a matter
of law  at all.  Often  the  president  loses  in the Supreme
Court, and  in  nearly  every  important  case,  he  has  gra-
ciously accepted  his defeat.  To take just a few examples
from the twentieth century:  President Nixon was forced
to hand over his own tape-recorded  conversations during
the  Watergate controversy;  President Truman was pre-
vented  from  seizing  the  steel  mills  during  the  Korean
War;  President Eisenhower  was  banned  from  stopping
communists  from  traveling  abroad.  These  defeats  are
important in themselves,  but they are even more impor-
tant for the general  tone that  they set.  Every American
president  knows  that  his  actions  are  subject  to judicial
review, and this is a large deterrent to illegal conduct.

For purposes ofjudicial review, the president's most
important  constitutional  duty  is "to  take  care  that  the
laws be faithfully executed." This provision subordinates
the president to the law.  It also requires him to adhere to
the law, both constitutional and statutory.

I have suggested that the changing understandings of
the president's  power have occurred  without either tex-
tual change  or flagrant presidential  violations of constitu-
tional requirements.  I have also suggested  that this pre-
sents  a genuine paradox.  We  have  a president  who  is
much stronger  than  the framers  of the Constitution  an-
ticipated; but at least in general, the current presidency  is
not thought, and should not be thought, unconstitutional.
How, then, have the president's  powers changed?  There

are  several  possibilities.  I outline  them here  because  of
their potential  importance  to  current dilemmas  in  East-
ern Europe.  Flexible  provisions  and  silences,  allowing
flexible (but not open-ended)  interpretation

Many  of the  changes  have occurred  because  the rel-
evant  constitutional  provisions are  ambiguous, and they
allow adaptation to changing circumstances.  For example,
the  grant  of "executive  power"  to  the president  leaves
much uncertainty.

The Constitution  also  contains  important  silences.
For  example, the Constitution does not discuss  whether
the president shall submit a budget.  But the document is
not a  blank slate.  It is clear that the president  must obey
the law; it is equally clear that he cannot make law on his
own.  It is clear  that he cannot (for example)  dissolve the
legislature  or  the Supreme  Court  when  (as  is  often  the
case) they displease him. We should conclude, then, that
constitutional change has occurred in part because of con-
stitutional ambiguities and silences.  A constitution that is
not rigid will  allow for adaptation  without amendment
or illegality.

Emergencies
Many constitutions, including  all of those in Eastern Eu-
rope,  contain  emergency  provisions,  allowing  the  gov-
ernment to have special powers under conditions of emer-
gency.  The  American  Constitution  contains  no  emer-
gency  provisions  (although  the  president  is  allowed  to
suspend the writ of habeas  corpus during war).  It might
seem  natural to  think  that in  spite  of the absence  of ex-
plicit  emergency powers, many increases  in presidential
authority  have occurred  as  a  result  of emergencies. 
In
general,  however,  the  president  has  not been  found  to
have  special  authority to act during emergencies.  A do-
mestic crisis-widespread  unemployment,  social unrest-
does not give the president any new power.  There is  no
judicial  understanding  that the president  has greater au-
thority if he can point to an emergency situation, or claim
that unusual presidential action is crucial.

Of course, Congress might well decide to confer statu-
tory authority  on the  president in order to enable  him to
respond to a crisis.  And Congress has made this decision
in emergencies.  In  the  New Deal  period, for  example,
Congress  gave  the president  a  range  of new authorities
because of the perceived need for special  responses to the
Great  Depression.  But  the  president  has  not  been  al-

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 101 1993

lowed to act on his own.  An emergency does not give the
president  any unilateral powers.  A possible lesson is that
constitutionally-granted  emergency  powers  are  not nec-
essary and may even be harmful.

Development  of the Constitution through case-
by-case  decisions  over time

Some  distinguished  academic  observers  (most  notably
Harry Wellington  and David Strauss) believe  that inter-
pretation  of the U.S. Constitution depends on particular
judicial decisions, allowing the meaning of the document
to  change over  time.  Indeed, constitutional law in America
(and in many  other nations as well) has  many features  of the
common law process.

In that  process, a  hallmark  of Anglo-American  legal
systems,  no one  sets down  broad legal  rules  in  advance.
Instead  the rules emerge narrowly, as judges decide  indi-
vidual  cases.  Governing  principles  come from  the  pro-
cess of case-by-case  adjudication, and sometimes they can-
not be known in advance.  Much of constitutional law in
the United  States comes not from the constitutional  text
itself, but from judge-made  constitutional law, interpret-
ing constitutional  provisions.  For this reason, the mean-
ing of the document is  not rigidly fixed  when  the docu-
ment is written and ratified.

Something along  these lines  is certainly true  for the
powers  of the president, and the  system of common law
constitutionalism  helps explain  the  shifting  understand-
ing  of presidential  power.  Consider,  for  example,  the
complex  question of whether Congress  or the  president
may discharge high-level  public officials (the secretary of
state, the attorney general,  the  secretary  of the  interior).
The  text of the Constitution  does  not  speak  clearly  on
this issue;  instead, the governing constitutional  principles
have been worked out in the process  of case-by-case  adju-
dication.

It might  be  added  that  much of the  president's  au-
thority turns not onjudicial decisions  at all, but on tradi-
tional practices  and  shared  understandings  between  the
president  and Congress.  The development of these prac-
tices  and  understandings  resembles  the  process  of com-
mon  law  development.  It  is  recognized  that  a  certain
practice "works." Congress and the president endorse the
practice, and the practice therefore operates as a guide for
the future.  Of course  no such  practices may  violate the
Constitution where  that document speaks with clarity.

EAST  EuRoPEAN  CONSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW

Translation
Some  people  (most notably  Lawrence  Lessig)  have  ar-
gued  that, when  circumstances  have  changed,  the  Su-
preme Court must "translate" the original  constitutional
text in  order to  adapt it to the new conditions. Suppose,
for example, that the  founders of the Constitution  origi-
nally sought  to  allow the  president  to  make war  on his
own only for defensive  purposes  to repel sudden attacks
on the United States. Suppose, too, that in modern condi-
tions, threats to (say) Canada and Mexico  are extremely
threatening to the United  States because  of the strategic
importance of these nations. Or suppose (as many people
believe) that under  current conditions, the line between
"offensive" and  "defensive"  use  of the military becomes
extremely thin.

if this is true, perhaps the original constitutional pro-
vision, translated  into a new context, gives  the president
new and broader  authority.  If we want to adhere  to the
original constitutional goal (i.e.,  to allow the president to
act unilaterally when this is necessary), perhaps the presi-
dent  may  act  unilaterally,  not  simply  to  repel  sudden
attacks  on  the  United  States,  but in  any case  in  which
American  interests are at serious risk.  Perhaps this view
accounts for many of the changes I have described.  Thus,
for example, we might think that the president's  author-
ity over  the cabinet must expand in an area in which the
cabinet is  exercising  such extraordinary  power  over the
nation.  Perhaps  the expansion  isjustified if we are to be
faithful to the founding commitment to political account-
ability.  The  "translation" argument  raises  many  com-
plexities,  but it has  appeared  in  several  Supreme  Court
opinions as a way of making sense of the practice of inter-
pretation in changed circumstances.

Several constitutional regimes?
Some people think America has had more than one  con-
stitutional regime, that at crucial moments in our history,
the  people  have  inaugurated  large-scale  changes  in  the
Constitution.  The Civil War, for example, is said to have
inaugurated  a Second American  Republic, with new un-
derstandings  of the allocation  of power  between the  na-
tion  and the states and  with new understandings  of indi-
vidual  rights.  Some  people  think  that  President
Roosevelt's  New  Deal  also  produced  constitutional
change.  In his influential book, We the People: Foundations,
for  example,  Bruce  Ackerman  argues  that  the  United

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 102 1993

FALL  1993/  WIN  m  1994

States  has  had  three  constitutional  regimes,  not simply
one.

If America  has  had more  than one  constitutional  re-
gime, we might think about presidential  power in a some-
what  different  way.  In  the  New  Deal  period,  for  ex-
ample, the national government  appeared  to acquire  sig-
nificant new constitutional authority. The president was
a  principal beneficiary  of this  shift,  especially  insofar  as
the Supreme Court refused to enforce  the nondelegation
doctrine, which, as noted above, required  any legislative
delegations of power to  the  executive  to  be narrow  and
clear.  Some  people think that  the New Deal  effectively
amended  the Constitution, giving the  president  a range
of new powers.

Conclusion
There are some diverse explanations of the changing na-
ture  of constitutional  power in the  hands  of the Ameri-
can president.  I think  that the  most promising  explana-
tions stress the flexibility of the original text and the pro-
cess  of common  law  adjudication.  If these  are  the best
explanations, it seems clear that a special advantage of the
original constitutional provisions governing the president
is  that  they  allow  adaptation  over  time.  Moreover,  it
emerges that one of the virtues of the American constitu-
tional experience  is  the process  of case-by-case  adjudica-
tion,  giving  the  meaning  of  constitutional  provisions
through close  encounter with particular cases.

What lessons can be drawn  from this experience for
Eastern  Europe? It is hazardous to  think that the experi-
ence of one nation has any lessons at all for another; there

are  many  distinctive  features  to  the  American  experi-
ment  in  constitutionalism,  and it  is  reasonable  to think
that  few  general  lessons  can  be  drawn  from  what  has
happened  in  the  United States.  But  if we  are  to  draw
lessons, perhaps two are of special importance.  The first
involves  the limited effects  of constitutional text,  at least  over
time.  Constitutional  meaning  depends, in large part, on
shared  understandings  and  practices,  and  most of these
will not be in the constitution itself. Although the Consti-
tution  is a  legal document,  there  will be  a  great  deal  of
opportunity  to adapt  constitutional  meaning  to changes
in understanding and practice over time.

A second  (and somewhat conflicting) lesson involves
the importance of a culture of constitutionalism-to which judi-
cial review is an important contributor-to ensure against
the most egregious abuses of legal authority.  In America,
judicial  review  has been  important  as a  check  after  the
fact  and,  perhaps  even  more, as  a  before-the-fact  deter-
rent to presidential illegality.  A culture of constitutional-
ism  and the rule  of law,  spurred  by judicial review,  has
helped  deter  presidential  lawlessness  in cases  in  which
the need for action seemed great to the president, and the
legal  technicalities  seemed  like  an irrelevance.  In  some
such considerations, lies the solution to a remarkable and
insufficiently analyzed paradox of American constitution-
alism:  a  dramatically  changed  and  strengthened  presi-
dency brought about without constitutional amendment
and nonetheless without  significant illegalities.

Cass Sunstein is  the Karl N.  Llewellyn  Professor ofJurispru-
dence at the University of Chicago, the Law School

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 103 1993

