 New constitutions could require governments to keep track of what counts. Many Eastern European constitution-makers are exploring intriguing innovations in the theory and practice of constitutionalism. In keeping with this spirit of experimentation, it might well make sense for Eastern Europeans to consider an entirely new constitutional provision, one that would require their governments to compile and publicize an annual Human Development Index (HDI). The HDI might be based on an understanding of what matters most to human lives, including longevity, educational achievement, and average income. An annual HDI could be a substantial step toward promoting greater political accountability, toward improving inadequate information-gathering capacities, and toward concentrating governmental attention on what matters most. If the HDI requirement is not included in the constitution, it should probably be required by another form of law, one that is understood to be both fundamental and enduring. inform their citizens, and the international community, of how current policies have actually affected human lives. Such a provision would also fit extremely well with the right, generally recognized in the new constitutions, to receive information. The HDI is a simple concept. The current United Nations approach grows out of attention to the (a) longevity, (b) knowledge, and (c) income of individuals. Thus understood, the HDI is superior to many other possible indicators of human welfare, such as gross national product or average income, standing alone. Even if average income is high, a nation is doing poorly when too many of its people are dying young. Similarly, the gross national product-though a popular measure of national performance-is only crudely correlated with things that are important. Even if we wanted to, we could not measure "utility" directly; and such economic notions as "mnaxi mized wealth" seem an inadequate measure of what matters most. situation. Compared to the UN approach, a particular advantage of the Swedish approach is that it is relatively robust; the disadvantage is its complexity. The 1993 United Nations report shows some intriguing results. The report ranks 173 countries. The first six are Japan, Canada, Norway, Switzerland, Sweden, and the United States; the last six are Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso, Afghanistan, Sierra Leone, and Guinea. countries have compiled relatively little information about quality of life for their citizens, so comparative data over time are unavailable. On the other hand, the report indicates that previously Communist countries have a good deal of available human capital for the current transition, especially because of significant recent investments in education and health. The case for constitutionalizing HDI At the present time, few constitutions require the compilation of reports and information. I think this is an unfortunate gap in the theory and practice of constitutionalism. It would be most valuable to add to Eastern European constitutions a provision of the following sort: "Each year, the government shall compile and make available a human development index. This index shall be designed to reflect the quality of life in the nation in the previous year. It shall contain information about longevity, educational attainments, per capita income, and other relevant variables." The particular wording of the provision is not critical; what is important is the general idea. on what matters most; it gives a shorthand but informative formula for measuring whether things are getting better or worse. There are several reasons, moreover, for constitutionalizing an HDI requirement. tween men and women and among relevant groups and regions-the relevant information can spur valuable initiatives. We already have a good deal of empirical knowledge about the potential effects of such techniques. Public disclosure of information about hunger and famines is a principal motivating force for remedial and preventive action by government, as Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen showed in their 1989 book Hunger and Public Action. So too, exposure of environmentally degrading activity within the United States has been a powerful catalyst to public and private remedies. Competition can of course provide incentives for improvement. International competition over maximizing the current HDI-together with the prospect for national and international embarrassment-may well yield improvements in many nations. To say all this is hardly to claim that a constitutonally mandated HDI would be a panacea, or to deny that it brings potential problems. By themselves, compilation and publication of information are only that. The effect of information depends on what people do with it. Moreover, reasonable people disagree about what ought to be counted in an HDI, and here there is room for errors. It is surely possible that many HDI's will be based on unreasonable judgments about what matters, or on large mistakes about the facts. now popular in Eastern Europe, to receive information from government.) I also suggest that there should be judicial review to ensure minimal adequacy of the HDI, including professional objectivity. The Court should defer to reasonable judgments on what is to be included. But it should be available as a backstop. tee good results for citizens. The danger of creating unhelpful "paper rights" is especially severe when constitutions require positive governmental action, by such means as the ever-popular rights to free medical care, environmental quality, and recreation and leisure time. By contrast, constitutionally mandating the HDIan objective statistical report that raises implications for, but places no overt obligations on, policymakers-might well count as a substantial step toward improved democracy and better lives for the people of Eastern Europe. Not incidentally, it could also count as an important development in the theory and practice of constitutionalism.