Liberalism, Speech Codes, and Related Problems
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein
Source: Academe, Vol. 79, No. 4 (Jul. - Aug., 1993), pp. 14-25
Published by: American Association of University Professors
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/40250506 .
Accessed: 17/06/2014 08:16

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

American Association of University Professors is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to Academe.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

ACADEMIC  FREEDOM  AND  THE  FUTURE  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY 

Speech Codes, 
Liberalism, 
and  Related Problems 

One of my purposes 
is to defend the 
constitutionality of 
narrowly drawn 
restrictions on hate 

speech. 

By Cass R. Sunstein 

LAW HAS RARELY BEEN 
at odds with  academic free- 
dom.1 In recent years, how- 
ever, the development  of 
campus "speech codes" has 
created a range of new con- 

troversies. In these remarks, one of my pur- 
poses is to defend the constitutionality of nar- 
rowly drawn restrictions on hate speech, 
arguing in the process against the broader ver- 
sions that have become popular in some insti- 
tutions. My most general goal is to set the dis- 
pute over speech codes in the broader context 
of the liberal commitment  to freedom of 
speech and academic pluralism. Through this 
approach it may be possible to overcome the 
"all or nothing" tone that has dominated much 
of public and even academic discussion. In the 
process of defending some narrow 
restrictions on hate speech, it will be 
necessary to say a good deal about 
the principle of neutrality in consti- 
tutional law, academic life, and per- 
haps elsewhere. 

The discussion will obviously 
bear on the subject of academic 
freedom. The subject is complex in 
part because no academic institu- 
tion can avoid making certain con- 
troversial substantive judgments; 
because those judgments will in- 
trude on some forms of freedom; 
and because those intrusions will 
interfere with speech. If we understand the 
hate speech controversy in this light, we will 
be pushed away from an attractive and com- 

Cass R  Sunstein is KarlN.  Llewellyn Professor of 
Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and 
Department of Political Science. The author writes: "I 
draw here on some work published elsewhere: Cass R 
Sunstein, The  Partial Constitution  (Harvard Uni- 
versity Press, 1993);  Cass R. Sunstein, Democracy 
and the Problem of Free Speech (forthcoming, The 
Free Press, September 1993). 

monly held vision of academic freedom - 
what might be called a neutral or skeptical vi- 
sion in which all comers are accepted. We 
might be led to endorse instead a nonneutral, 
substantive view that embodies three defining 
commitments: political equality; a mild ver- 
sion of liberal perfectionism; and an insistence 
on exposure to a wide range of conceptions of 
the good and the right, so long as all of these 
are supported by reasons. I will offer some 
preliminary remarks on the relationship be- 
tween the "speech code" controversy and 
these commitments. 

I. Low-Value and 
High- Value Speech 
It is almost certainly necessary to distinguish 
between different forms of speech 
in terms of their relationship to 
Constitutional  ideals. Current con- 
stitutional law does indeed make 
such distinctions,  asking whether 
speech qualifies as "low-value" or 
"high-value." Some speech lies at 
the free speech "core." Such speech 
may be regulated, if at all, only on 
the strongest showing of harm. 
Other speech lies at the periphery 
or outside of the Constitution  alto- 
gether. This  "low-value" speech 
may be regulated if the govern- 
ment  can show a legitimate, plausi- 

ble justification. 

Ordinary political speech, dealing with gov- 
ernmental matters, unquestionably belongs at 
the core. Such speech may not be regulated 
unless there is a clear and present danger, or, 
in the Supreme Court's words, unless it is "di- 
rected to inciting or producing imminent law- 
less action and is likely to incite or produce 
such action."2 Under this standard, a speech 
containing  racial hatred, offered by a member 
of the Ku Klux Klan, is usually protected; so 
too with  a speech by a member of the Black 

ACADEMIC  FREEDOM 
AND  THE  FUTURE OF 
THE  UNIVERSITY 
Second  in  a  series 

Cass Sunstein delivers his address 
at AAUFs annual meeting in 
Chapel Hill, N.C. 

14  ACADEME  July-August 1993 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

In the system of 
"government by 
discussion, "private 
preferences and beliefs 
are not taken as fixed 
and static. 

ACADEME  July-August 1993  15 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Panthers, or by neo Nazis during a march in 
Skokie, Illinois, the home  of many survivors 
of concentration camps. 

But much speech falls into the periphery of 
constitutional concern. Commercial speech, 
for example, receives some constitutional pro- 
tection, in the sense that it qualifies as 
"speech" within  the meaning of the first 
amendment. Truthful, nondeceptive advertis- 
ing is generally protected from regulation. But 
government may regulate commercial advertis- 
ing it if it is false or misleading. There are 
many other kinds of "low-value" speech. 
Consider threats, attempted bribes, perjury, 
criminal conspiracy, price-fixing, criminal so- 
licitation, private libel, unlicensed medical and 
legal advice, sexual and racial harassment. All 
these can be regulated without  meeting the or- 
dinary, highly speech-protective standards. 
The  Supreme Court has not set out any- 
thing like a clear theory to explain why and 
when speech qualifies for the top tier. At 
times the Court has indicated that speech be- 
longs in the top tier if it is part of the ex- 
change of ideas, or if it bears on the political 
process.3 But apart from these ambiguous 
hints, it has failed to tell us much about its 
basis for deciding that some forms of expres- 
sion are different from others. 

Is a two-tier First Amendment  inevitable or 
desirable? Some people claim to be free speech 
absolutists -  they think they believe that all 
speech is protected, or that speech can be reg- 
ulated only if the government can show over- 
whelming  harm. But it does seem that any 
well-functioning  system of free expression 
must ultimately distinguish between different 
kinds of speech by reference to their centrality 
to the First Amendment  guarantee. 

Begin with  a truly absolutist position: Any- 

one may say anything at all at any time. A 
moment's  reflection should show that this po- 
sition could not be seriously maintained. It 
would  not make sense to forbid government 
from regulating perjury, bribes, threats, fraud- 
ulent real estate deals, unlicensed medical and 
legal advice, willfully false advertising, and 
many other forms of expression. Realistically 
speaking, our choices are a range of nonabso- 
lutionist approaches. 

It is tempting  to resist this conclusion  by 
proposing that the speech that is unprotected 
is "really" not speech at all, but merely action. 
When  someone  attempts to bribe a govern- 
ment official, perhaps he is "acting," or per- 
haps the regulation of criminal solicitation is 
"ancillary" or "incidental" to the regulation of 
conduct.  But as stated, I think that this sug- 
gestion is unhelpful. Criminal solicitation and 

attempted bribes are speech, not action. They 
may lead to action; but by themselves they are 
simply words. If I tell you  that I want you to 
help me to commit  an assault, I have spoken 
words; if I say that I will give you  $10,000  if 
you vote for me, I have merely talked; if I say 
"Kill!" to a trained attack dog,  I have done 
something  regulable, but I have still just spo- 
ken. If these things are to be treated as ac- 
tion -  that is, if they are not to be protected as 
speech -  it is because of their distinctive fea- 
tures. This  is what must be discussed. The 
word "action" is simply a placeholder for that 
unprovided discussion. 

So much for the speech-conduct distinction. 

The  only nonabsolutist alternative to an ap- 
proach that looks at free speech "value" would 
be this: All speech stands on basically the same 
footing. We will not look at value at all. The 
only relevant issue is one of harm. Speech may 
be regulated if government can make a dem- 
onstration that the speech at issue will produce 
sufficiendy bad consequences. Would  it not be 
possible, and desirable, to have a "single tier" 
first amendment, in the sense that all speech is 
presumed protected, but we allow government 
to regulate speech in those rare cases where the 
harm is very great? 

The  answer is that it would  not be plausible 
to say that all speech stands on the same foot- 
ing. For example, courts should not test regu- 
lation of campaign speeches under the same 
standards applied to misleading commercial 
speech, child pornography, conspiracies, libel 
of private persons, and threats. If the same 
standards were applied, one of two results 
would  follow,  and both are unacceptable. 

The first possible result would be to lower 
the burden of justification for governmental 
regulation as a whole, so as to allow for restric- 
tions on misleading commercial speech, pri- 
vate libel, and so forth. If this were the conse- 
quence, there would be an unacceptably high 
threat to political expression. Upon  a reason- 
ably persuasive showing of harm, government 
could regulate misleading campaign state- 
ments, just like it can now regulate misleading 
proxy statements. A generally lowered burden 
of justification would therefore be intolerable. 
The  second possible result is that courts 
would  apply the properly stringent standards 
for regulation of political speech to  (for exam- 
ple) conspiracies, criminal solicitation, com- 
mercial speech, private libel, and child 
pornography. The  central problem with this 
approach is that it would  ensure that govern- 
ment could not control speech that should be 
regulated. A system in which  the most strin- 
gent standards were applied across the board 

It does seem that any 
well-functioning system 
of free expression must 
ultimately distinguish 
between different kinds 
of speech. 

16  ACADEME  July-August 1993 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

would  ensure that government could not  reg- 
ulate criminal solicitation,  child pornography, 
private libel, and false or misleading commer- 
cial speech, among others. The  harms that 
justify such regulation are real, but they are 
insufficient to permit government controls 
under the extremely high standards applied to 
regulation of political speech. 

If courts are to be honest about the matter, 
an insistence that "all speech is speech" would 
mean that they must eliminate many cur- 
rently unobjectionable and even necessary 
controls -  or more likely that judgments 
about value, because unavoidable, would  con- 
tinue to be made, but covertly. We will soon 
see that this claim bears directly on  the ques- 
tions raised by speech codes and by academic 
freedom generally. 

Thus  far I have suggested that a workable 
system of free expression ought  to make dis- 
tinctions  between different sorts of speech; 
but it remains to decide by what standard 
courts might accomplish this task. To  support 
an emphasis on politics, we need to define the 
category of political speech. For present pur- 
poses I will treat speech as political  when it is 
both intended and received as a contribution to 
public deliberation about some issue. By requir- 
ing intent,  I do not mean to require a trial on 
the question of subjective motivation.  Gen- 
erally this issue can be resolved simply on the 
basis of the nature of the speech at issue. By 
requiring that the speech be received as a con- 
tribution to public deliberation, I do not 
mean that all listeners or readers must see the 
substantive content.  It is sufficient if some do. 
An approach that affords special protection 

to political speech, thus defined, is justified 
on numerous grounds. Such an approach re- 
ceives firm support from history -  not only 
from the constitutional  framers' theory of free 
expression, but also from the development of 
that principle through the history of Amer- 
ican law. There can be little doubt  that sup- 
pression by the government of political ideas 
that it disapproved, or found  threatening, was 
the central motivation  for the clause. The 
worst examples of unacceptable censorship in- 
volve efforts by government to insulate itself 
from criticism. Judicial interpretations over 
the course of time also support a political con- 
ception of the First Amendment. 

This approach also seems likely to accord 
fairly well with  our initial or considered judg- 
ments about particular free speech problems. 
Any approach to the First Amendment  will 
have to take substantial account of those judg- 
ments, and adjust itself accordingly. Of  course 
we are not unanimous in our considered judg- 

An insistence that 
"all speech is speech" 
would mean that the 
courts must eliminate 
many currently 
unobjectionable and 
even necessary 
controls. 

ments.  But it seems dear that such forms of 
speech as perjury, bribery, threats, misleading 
or false commercial advertising, criminal solic- 
itation, and libel of private persons -  or at 
least most of these -  are not entitled to the 
highest degree of constitutional  protection. 
No  other general approach unifies initial or 
preliminary judgments about these matters as 
well as a political conception  of the First 
Amendment. 

In addition,  an insistence that government's 

burden is greatest when  political speech is at 
issue responds well to the fact that here gov- 
ernment is most likely to be biased. The 
premise of distrust of government is strongest 
when  politics are at issue. It is far weaker 
when government is regulating (say) commer- 
cial speech, bribery, private libel, or obscenity. 
In such cases there is less reason to suppose 
that it is insulating itself from criticism. 

Finally, this approach protects speech when 

regulation is most likely to be harmful. 
Restrictions on political speech have the dis- 
tinctive feature of impairing the ordinary 
channels for political change; such restrictions 
are especially dangerous. If there are controls 
on commercial advertising, it always remains 
possible to argue that such controls should be 
lifted. If the government bans violent  pornog- 
raphy, citizens can continue  to argue against 
the ban. But if the government forecloses po- 

ACADEME  July-August 1993  17 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

litical argument, the democratic corrective is 
unavailable. Controls on nonpolitical speech 
do not have this uniquely damaging feature. 
Taken in concert, these considerations sug- 
gest that, in a liberal democracy, government 
should be under a special burden of justifica- 
tion when it seeks to control speech intended 
and received as a contribution to public delib- 
eration. This does not mean that government 
is unconstrained when it attempts to regulate 
other speech. Recall that government cannot 
regulate speech because it is persuasive; recall 
too that offense at ideas is an illegitimate 
ground for legal controls. Always the govern- 
ment must be able to make a strong showing 
of harm. For this reason art, literature, and 
scientific speech will generally be protected 
from government controls even if some of 
these fall within the second tier. Of course 
these statements will leave ambiguities in hard 
intermediate cases. 

IL Liberalism and Speech on 
Campus 
I have tried thus far to set out some of the fea- 
tures of a well-functioning system of free ex- 
pression. In that system, political speech be- 
longs in the top tier; more speech, not 
censorship, is the remedy for speech that 
threatens harm; only an emergency can support 
suppression. Nonpolitical speech is also pro- 
tected, but it can be regulated on the basis of a 
lesser showing of harm. Here too the govern- 
ment must point to something other than per- 
suasiveness or offense at the content of ideas. 
We can use this discussion as a basis for ex- 
ploring the complex problems resulting from 
recent efforts to regulate hate speech on cam- 
pus. Some regulations are often associated 
with alleged efforts to impose an ideological 
orthodoxy on students and faculty, under the 
rubric of "political correctness." Perhaps radi- 
cal left-wing campuses, under pressure from 
well-organized groups, are silencing people 
who disagree. Are the campus speech codes 
constitutional? 

To the extent that we are dealing with pri- 
vate universities, the Constitution is not impli- 
cated at all, and hence all such restrictions are 
permissible. This is an exceptionally important 
point. Private universities can do whatever 
they like. They can ban all speech by 
Republicans, by Democrats, or by anyone they 
want to silence. But many private universities 
like to follow the Constitution even if they are 
not required to do so. In any case, public uni- 
versities are subject to the Constitution, and so 
it is important to try to establish what the first 

amendment means for them. 

A. A Provisional Thesis 

On the approach provided thus far, we can 
offer an important provisional conclusion: If 
campus speech restrictions at public universi- 
ties cover not merely epithets, but speech that 
is part of social deliberation, they might well be 
seen as unconstitutional for that very reason.4 
At least as a presumption, speech that is in- 
tended and received as a contribution to social 
deliberation is constitutionally protected even 
if it amounts to what is sometimes classified as 
hate speech -  even if it is racist and sexist. 
Consider, for example, the University of 

Michigan's judicially invalidated ban on 
"[a]ny behavior, verbal or physical, that stig- 
matizes or victimizes an individual on the 
basis of race, ethnicity, religion, sex, sexual 
orientation, creed, national origin, ancestry, 
age, marital status, handicap, or Vietnam-era 
veteran status, and that... creates an intimidat- 
ing, hostile, or demeaning environment for 
educational pursuits.. . ." This broad ban for- 
bids a wide range of statements that are part 
of the exchange of ideas. It also fails to give 
people sufficient notice of what statements are 
allowed. For both reasons, it seems invalid. 
In a famous case, Justice Frankfurter, 
speaking for a 5-4  majority of the Supreme 
Court, rejected this view. Beauharnais v. 
Illinois^ upheld an Illinois law making it un- 
lawful to publish or exhibit any publication 
which "portrays depravity, criminality, un- 
chastity, or lack of virtue of a class of citizens, 
which [publication] exposes the citizens of 
any race, color, creed or religion to contempt, 
derision, or obloquy or which is productive of 
breach of the peace or riots." The law was ap- 
plied to ban circulation of a petition urging 
"the need to prevent the white race from be- 
coming mongrelized by the negro," and com- 
plaining of the "aggressions, rapes, robberies, 
knives, guns, and marijuana of the negro." 

In upholding the law, Justice Frankfurter 

referred to a range of factors. He pointed to 
the historical exclusion of libel from free 
speech protection; to the risks to social cohe- 
sion created by racial hate speech; and to the 
need for judicial deference to legislative judg- 
ments on these complex matters. Many coun- 
tries in Europe accept the same analysis and 
do not afford protection to racial and ethnic 
hate speech. But most people think that after 
New York Times v. Sullivan? Beauharnais is 
no longer the law. In New York Times, the 
Court indicated that the law of libel must be 
evaluated in accordance with the constitu- 

If campus speech 
restrictions at public 
universities cover 
speech that is part of 
social deliberation they 
might well be seen as 
unconstitutional 

18  ACADEME July-August 1993 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

tional commitment to robust debate on pub- 
lic issues. The conventional view -  which the 
Supreme Court has not directly addressed -  is 
that racial hate speech contains highly politi- 
cal ideas, that it belongs in the free speech 
"core," and that it may not be suppressed 
merely because it is offensive or otherwise 
harmful. 

There are real complexities here. In its 
strongest form, the defense of Beauharnais 
would point toward the contribution of hate 
speech to the maintenance of a caste system 
based on race and gender. A principal point 
here would be the effect of such speech on the 
self-respect of its victims and also the relation- 
ship between such speech and fears of racially- 
motivated violence.7 I cannot fully discuss 
this issue here; but I think that Beauharnais 
was incorrect. No one should deny that dis- 
tinctive harms are produced by racial hate 
speech, especially when it is directed against 
members of minority groups. It is only ob- 
tuseness -  a failure of perception or empa- 
thetic identification -  that would enable 
someone to say that the word "fascist" or 
"pig" or "communist," or even "honky," pro- 
duces the same feelings as the word "nigger." 
In view of our history, invective directed 
against minority groups, and racist speech in 
general, create fears of violence and subordi- 
nation -  of second-class citizenship -  that are 
not plausibly described as mere offense. As I 
have noted, most European countries, includ- 
ing flourishing democracies committed to free 
speech, make exceptions for such expression. 
In many countries, including our own, it is 
possible to think that racial and ethnic hate 
speech is really sui generis, and that it is prop- 
erly treated differently. 

But there are strong counter-arguments. If 
we were to excise all of what is described as 
hate speech from political debate, we would 
severely truncate our discussion of such im- 
portant matters as civil rights, foreign policy, 
crime, conscription, abortion, and social wel- 
fare policy. Even if speech produces anger or 
resentment on the basis of race, it might well 
be thought a legitimate part of the delibera- 
tive process, and it bears directly on politics. 
Foreclosure of such speech would probably 
accomplish little good, and by stopping peo- 
ple from hearing certain ideas, it could bring 
about a great deal of harm. These are the 
most conventional Millian arguments for the 
protection of speech. 

From all this it seems that the University of 
Michigan ban was far too broad. On the other 
hand, it should be permissible for colleges and 
universities to build on the basic case of the ep- 

Standing by 
themselves, epithets 
are not intended as 
contributions to 
social deliberation 
about anything. 

ithet in order to regulate certain narrowly de- 
fined categories of hate speech. Standing by 
themselves, or accompanied by litde else, epi- 
thets are not intended and received as contri- 
butions to social deliberation about anything. 
We are therefore dealing with lower tier 
speech. The injury to dignity and self-respect is 
a sufficient harm to allow regulation. (See my 
discussion below of the Stanford regulation.) 
It is now possible to offer a provisional con- 
clusion. A public university should be allowed 
to regulate hate speech in the form of epi- 
thets. But it should be prohibited from reach- 
ing very far beyond epithets to forbid the ex- 
pression of views on public issues, whatever 
those views may be. I will qualify this conclu- 
sion shortly, but it seems like a good place to 
start. 

B. The Question of Neutrality 

But are restrictions on hate speech impermis- 
sibly selective? In R.A. V. v. St. Paul, the Court 
invalidated a law directed against a certain 
kind of hate speech, principally on the ground 
that it discriminated on the basis of subject 
matter. The case involved an act of cross- 
burning on a private yard. All the justices 
agreed that the content-neutral trespass law 
could be applied against that act; the question 
was whether a special "hate speech" law was 

ACADEME July-August 1993  19 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Controlling speech is, 
in one sense, a defining 
characteristic of the 
university. 

constitutional as applied to that act. 

As interpreted by the Minnesota Supreme 
Court, the relevant law banned any so-called 
"fighting words" that produced anger or re- 
sentment on the basis of race, religion, or gen- 
der. In invalidating the act, the RA. V. Court 
emphasized that the law at issue was not a 
broad or general proscription of fighting 
words. It reflects a decision to single out a cer- 
tain category of "fighting words," defined in 
terms of audience reactions to speech about cer- 
tain topics. Is this illegitimate? The point bears 
on almost all efforts to regulate hate speech, 
on campus and elsewhere. 

The Supreme Court's basic idea is this: 
Whether or not we are dealing with high 
value speech, government cannot draw lines 
on a partisan basis. It cannot say, for example, 
that libel of Democrats will be punished more 
severely than libel of Republicans, or that ob- 
scenity will be regulated only if it makes fun 
of the president. A law of this sort would be 
"viewpoint-based," that is, it makes the view- 
point of the speaker the basis for regulation. To 
that extent it is invalid. Moreover, the govern- 
ment is sharply constrained in its ability to 
limit speech on certain subjects. It could not, 
for example, ban speech about AIDS. "Sub- 
ject-matter" restrictions are more neutral than 
viewpoint-based restrictions. They are not per 
se invalid, but they are treated with consider- 
able skepticism. For the Supreme Court, the 
major problem with the Minnesota law was 
that it was an impermissible subject-matter 
restriction. 

To the distinction between low-value and 
high-value speech, then, we must add that the 
First Amendment limits the government's 
line-drawing power. The government must 
not be impermissibly selective, even if it is 
regulating low-value speech. Hence in the 
RA. Kcase, the Court concluded that St. Paul 
had violated the First Amendment, not be- 
cause it had regulated constitutionally pro- 
tected speech, but because it had chosen to 
regulate only "fighting words" of a certain, 
governmentally disapproved sort, and allowed 
the rest to flourish. 

In his dissenting opinion, Justice Stevens 
argued that St. Paul had not made an imper- 
missible distinction, since the harms underly- 
ing the regulated speech were sufficiently dis- 
tinctive. He wrote that "race-based threats 
may cause more harm to society and to indi- 
viduals than other threats. Just as the statute 
prohibiting threats against the president is jus- 
tifiable because of the place of the president in 
our social and political order, so a statute pro- 
hibiting race-based threats is justifiable be- 

cause of the place of race in our social and po- 
litical order." In his view, "[threatening 
someone because of her race or religious be- 
liefs may cause particularly severe trauma or 
touch off a riot. . .; such threats may be pun- 
ished more severely than threats against some- 
one based on, for example, his support of a 
particular athletic team." Thus there were "le- 
gitimate, reasonable, and neutral justifica- 
tions" for the special rule. But Justice Stevens 
spoke only for himself, and his view was 
firmly rejected by the majority. 

The question then becomes whether uni- 
versity restrictions on hate speech are imper- 
missibly selective. A university might well, 
post- RA. V.y be forbidden from singling out 
for punishment speech that many universities 
want to control, such as (a) a narrowly de- 
fined category of insults toward such specifi- 
cally enumerated groups as blacks, women, 
and homosexuals, or (b) a narrowly defined 
category of insults directed at individuals in- 
volving race, sex, and sexual orientation. How 
would restrictions of this kind be treated? 
Under current law, a restriction that in- 
volves (a) is viewpoint-based, and to that ex- 
tent even worse than the restriction in R.A. V. 
itself. On the analysis of the R.A. V. Court, re- 
striction (a) tries to silence one side in a de- 
bate. A restriction that involves (b) is a subject 
matter restriction, not based on viewpoint. 
But it too is impermissibly selective in exactly 
the same sense as the restriction invalidated in 
the RA.V. case. 

It is possible to say that the conclusions in 

R.A. V. are incorrect in principle, because 
there are sufficiently neutral grounds for re- 
strictions (a) and (b).8 Perhaps a university 
could neutrally decide that epithets directed 
against blacks, women, and homosexuals 
cause distinctive harms. But this conclusion is 
hard to reconcile with the RA. V. decision. 

C. The Special Place of the University 

Colleges and universities do, however, have 
some arguments that were unavailable to St. 
Paul, Minnesota. In order to make the con- 
clusions thus far more than provisional, we 
have to address those arguments. If RA. V. 
does not apply to the campus, it might be be- 
cause public universities can claim a large de- 
gree of insulation from judicial supervision. 
That claim to insulation is closely connected 
to the idea of academic freedom. 

1. In general. The largest point here is that 
colleges and universities are often in the busi- 
ness of controlling speech, and their controls 
are hardly ever thought to raise free speech 

20  ACADEME July-August 1993 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

problems. Indeed, controlling speech is, in 
one sense, a defining characteristic of the uni- 
versity. There are at least four different ways 
in which such controls occur. 

First, universities impose major limits on 
the topics that can be discussed in the class- 
room. Subject matter restrictions are part of 
education. Irrelevant discussion is banned. 
Students cannot discuss the presidential elec- 
tion,  or Marx and Mill,  if the subject is math. 
Schools are allowed to impose subject matter 
restrictions that would  be plainly unaccept- 
able if enacted by states or localities. 

Second, a teacher can require students to 
treat each other with  at least a minimum  of 
basic respect. It would  certainly be legitimate 
to suspend a student for using consistently 
abusive or profane language in the classroom. 
This is so even if that language would  receive 
firm constitutional  protection on  the street 
corner. The  educational process requires at 
least a measure of civility. Perhaps it would  be 
unacceptable for universities to ban expres- 
sions of anger or intense feeling; the notion  of 
civility should not be a disguise for forbidding 
irreverence or disagreement. But so long as re- 
quirements of civility are both  reasonable and 
neutral with  respect to viewpoint,  a university 
may limit abusive or profane comments 
within  the classroom. 

The  problem goes deeper, for -  and this is 

the third kind of academic control on 
speech -  judgments about quality are perva- 
sive. Such judgments affect admissions, evalu- 
ation of students in class and on paper, and 
evaluation of prospective and actual faculty as 
well. Academic decisions about quality will of 
course be based on a conception  of appropri- 
ate standards of argument and justification. 
These standards involve judgments about 
merit or excellence that would  of course be 
unacceptable in the setting of criminal pun- 
ishment or civil fine, but that are a perfectly 
and nearly inescapable legitimate part of the 
educational function. At least this is so if there 
is no discrimination on  the basis of viewpoint, 
that is, if the person involved in making the 
assessment offers judgments on  the basis of 
standards of quality that are applied neutrally 
to everyone (an ambitious aspiration, and one 
that is conceptually complex). 

But there is a fourth and more troublesome 
way in which  universities control speech, and 
this involves the fact that many academic 
judgments are viewpoint-based, certainly in 
practice. In many places, a student who  de- 
fends fascism or communism  is unlikely to re- 
ceive a good grade. In many economics  de- 
partments, sharp deviation from the views of 

The job performance 
of teachers consists 
mostly of speech. 
When that 
performance is found 
wanting, it is almost 
always because of 
content. 

Adam Smith may well be punished.  History 
and literature departments have their own 
conceptions  of what sorts of arguments are 
retrograde or beyond the pale. Viewpoint  dis- 
crimination is undoubtedly  present in prac- 
tice, and even if we object to it in principle, it 
is impossible and perhaps undesirable for out- 
siders to attempt to police  it. 

Thus  far I have mostly been discussing stu- 

dents; but much the same is true for faculty 
members. Universities can impose on  their 
faculty restrictive rules of decorum and civic 
participation. A teacher who  refuses to teach 
the subject, fails to allow counter-arguments, 
treats students contemptuously,  or vilifies 
them in class, can be penalized without  of- 
fense to the Constitution.  The job perfor- 
mance of teachers consists mostly of speech. 
When  that performance is found wanting,  it 
is almost always because of content,  including 
judgments about subject matter and quality, 
and sometimes  because of viewpoint. 

It is worthwhile pausing over this point. 
Initial hirings, tenure, and promotion  all in- 
volve subject matter restrictions, and some- 
times viewpoint  discrimination in practice. 
All this suggests that universities are engaged 
in regulating speech through content  discrim- 
ination and at least implicit viewpoint  dis- 
crimination. The  evaluation of students and 
colleagues cannot occur without  resort to con- 

ACADEME  July-August 1993  21 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

tent, and it would  be most surprising if view- 
point  discrimination did not affect many 
evaluations. 

These examples do not by any means com- 
pel the conclusion  that any and all censorship 
is acceptable in an academic setting. A univer- 
sity can have a good  deal of power over what 
happens in the classroom, so as to promote 
the educational enterprise, without  also being 
allowed to decree a political orthodoxy by dis- 
criminating on the basis of viewpoint.  If a 
public university were to ban students from 
defending  (say) conservative or liberal causes 
in political science classes, a serious free 
speech issue would  be raised. There are there- 
fore real limits to permissible viewpoint  dis- 
crimination within  the classroom, even if it is 
hard to police the relevant boundaries. 
Certainly the university's permissible limits 
over the classroom do not extend to the cam- 
pus in general. We  could not allow major re- 
strictions on what students and faculty may 
say when  they are not in class. A university 
could not say that outside of class, students 
can talk only about subjects of the university's 
choice. 

From these various propositions, we might 
adopt a principle:  The university can impose 
subject matter or other restrictions on speech only 
to the extent that the restrictions are closely re- 
lated to its educational mission. This  proposi- 
tion contains both an authorization to the 
university and sharp limitations on what it 
may do. There is a close parallel here with  de- 
cisions about what to include or exclude from 
libraries and about how to fund the arts; in all 
these contexts, certain forms of content  dis- 
crimination are inescapable. But in cases in 
which  the educational mission is not  reason- 
ably at stake, restrictions on speech should be 
invalidated. Certainly this would  be true in 
cases in which  a university attempts to impose 
a political orthodoxy, whether inside or out- 
side the classroom. We  might react to the exis- 
tence of implicit viewpoint discrimination by 
saying that it is hard for courts to police, but 
nonetheless a real offense to both academic as- 
pirations and free speech principles. 

2.  Educational requirements and hate speech. 

How  does this proposition bear on  the hate 
speech issue? Perhaps a university could use its 
frequently exercised power over speech in 
order to argue for certain kinds of hate speech 
codes. Perhaps it could say that when  it legiti- 
mately controls speech, it does so in order to 
promote its educational mission, which  in- 
evitably entails limits on who  may say what. 
Perhaps a university could be allowed to con- 
clude that its educational mission requires un- 

usually firm controls on hate speech, so as not 
to compromise the values of education itself. 
The  university might emphasize in this re- 
gard that it has a special obligation to protect 
all of its students as equal members of the 
community.  This obligation calls for restric- 
tions on what faculty members may say. The 
university might believe that certain narrowly 
defined forms of hate speech are highly de- 
structive to the students' chance to learn. It 
might think that black students and women 
can be effectively excluded by certain forms of 
hate speech. Probably a university should be 
given more leeway to restrict hate speech than 
a state or locality, precisely because it ought to 
receive the beriefit of the doubt when  it in- 
vokes concerns of this kind. Surely the educa- 
tional mission ought to grant the university 
somewhat greater room to maneuver, espe- 
cially in light of the complexity and delicacy 
of the relevant policy questions. Courts might 
also hesitate before finding viewpoint  discrim- 
ination or impermissible selectivity. Perhaps 
there should be a presumption in favor of a 
university's judgment that narrowly defined 
hate speech directed at blacks or women  pro- 
duces harm that is especially threatening to 
the educational enterprise. 

CONCLUSION IS BUTTRESSED BY 

two additional factors. First, there are 
numerous colleges and universities. 
Many students can choose among a range of 
alternatives, and a restriction in one,  two, or 
more imposes an extremely small incursion 
into the system of free expression. Colleges 
that restrict a large amount of speech may 
find themselves with few students, and in any 
case other institutions will be available. 
Second,  the Constitution  is itself committed 
to the elimination  of second-class citizenship, 
and this commitment  makes it hard to say 
that an educational judgment opposed to cer- 
tain forms of hate speech is impermissibly 
partisan. 

3.  Details. I think that an analysis of this 
kind would justify two different sorts of ap- 
proaches to the issue of hate speech on cam- 
pus. First, a university might regulate hate 
speech, narrowly defined, as simply a part of 
its general class of restrictions on speech that 
is incompatible with  the educational mission. 
On  this approach, there would  be no restric- 
tion specifically directed against hate 
speech -  no campus "speech code" -  but a 
general, suitably defined requirement of de- 
cency and civility, and this requirement 
would  regulate hate speech as well as other 
forms of abuse. Just as a university might ban 

Just as a university 
might ban the use of 
profanity in class, so it 
might stop racial 
epithets and similar 
expressions of hatred or 
contempt. 

22  ACADEME  July-August 1993 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

the use of profanity in class, or personally 
abusive behavior on campus, so it might stop 
racial epithets and similar expressions of ha- 
tred or contempt.  This  is not to say that stu- 
dents and teachers who violate this ban must 
be expelled or suspended. Generally informal 
sanctions, involving conversations rather than 
punishment,  are much to be preferred. But 
the Constitution  should not stand as a barrier 
to approaches of this sort, so long as the uni- 
versity is neutral in this way. 

Second, courts should allow narrowly de- 
fined hate speech restrictions even if those re- 
strictions are not part of general proscriptions 
on indecent or uncivil behavior. For example, 
Stanford University now  forbids speech that 
amounts to "harassment by personal vilifica- 
tion." (Stanford is a private university, free 
from constitutional  restraint, but it has cho- 
sen to comply with  its understanding of what 
the First Amendment  means as applied to 
public universities.) Under the Stanford rule, 
speech qualifies as regulable "harassment" if it 
(1) is intended to insult or stigmatize an indi- 
vidual or a small number of individuals on  the 
basis of their sex, race, color, handicap, reli- 
gion,  sexual orientation, or national and eth- 
nic origin, (2) is addressed directly to the in- 
dividual or individuals whom  it insults or 
stigmatizes, and (3)  makes use of insulting or 
"fighting" words or nonverbal symbols. To 
qualify under (3),  the speech must by its "very 
utterance inflict injury or tend to incite to an 
immediate breach of the peace," and must be 
"commonly understood to convey direct and 
visceral hatred and contempt  for human be- 
ings on  the basis oP  one of the grounds enu- 
merated in  (2). 

The  Stanford regulation should not be 
faulted for excessive breadth. It is quite nar- 
rowly defined. If a public  university adopted 
it, the major constitutional  problem, fueled 
by the outcome  in R.A. K, would  not be 
breadth but unacceptable selectivity. Why  has 
the university not controlled other forms of 
"fighting words," like the word "fascist," or 
"commie," or "bastard"? Does  its selectivity 
show an impermissible motivation? Shouldn't 
we find its selectivity to be impermissibly par- 
tisan? I do not think that we should. A uni- 
versity could  reasonably and neutrally decide 
that the harms caused by the regulated fight- 
ing words are, at least in the university setting, 
more severe than the harms caused by other 
kinds of fighting words. I conclude  that pub- 
lic universities may regulate speech of the sort 
controlled by the Stanford regulation and 
probably go somewhat further, and that such 
restrictions should not be invalidated as im- 

We can imagine a 
range of statements 
that might make job 
performance quite 
difficult. 

permissibly selective. 

We  can also use this discussion as a basis for 

exploring the question of the university's 
power over employees, arising out of the 
highly publicized decision of the City Uni- 
versity of New  York to remove Dr.  Leonard 
Jeffries as chair of the black studies depart- 
ment at City College. Jeffries had reportedly 
made a range of apparently anti-Semitic  re- 
marks, blaming rich Jews for the black slave 
trade, complaining  that Russian Jews and 
"their financial partners, the Mafia, put to- 
gether a financial system of destruction of 
black people," and claiming that Jews and 
Italians had "planned, plotted,  and program- 
med out of Hollywood"  to denigrate blacks in 
films. Could  the City University take these re- 
marks as a reason to remove Jeffries from his 
position  as department chair? (We should 
agree that removal could be justified if, as 
some say, it was a response to an inadequate 
record of publication,  to poor research, or to 
low-quality work.) 

ANSWER DEPENDS ON WHETHER 

the removal was based on an effort 
neutrally to promote educational 

goals, or whether it was instead an effort to 
punish the expression of a controversial point 
of view. In the abstract this question is hard 
to answer, but it can be clarified through ex- 

ACADEME  July-August 1993  23 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

amples. Under the First Amendment,  a public 
university could not fire a mathematics pro- 
fessor because he is a Republican, extremely 
conservative, or a sharp critic of the Supreme 
Court; such a discharge could not plausibly be 
connected with  legitimate concerns about job 
performance. Even if the mathematics profes- 
sor was a department chair, these political 
convictions  are unrelated to job performance. 

On  the other hand, a university could 
surely fire the head of an admissions commit- 
tee who  persisted in making invidiously 
derogatory comments  about blacks, women, 
and Jews. It would  be reasonable for the uni- 
versity to say that someone who  makes such 
comments  cannot perform his job, which  in- 
cludes attracting good  students, male and fe- 
male, and of various races and religions. The 
discharge of the admissions head would  not 
really be based on viewpoint; it would  be part 
of a viewpoint-neutral effort to ensure that 
the head can do what he is supposed to do. 
Much  the same could be said of a university 
president or many other high-visibility public 
employees. Consider the fact that the presi- 
dent, or a governor, is freely permitted to fire 
high-level officials who  make statements that 
compromise job performance, even if those 
statements are political in nature; if the 
Secretary of State says publicly that the presi- 
dent is a fool,  or even that the president's pol- 
icy toward Russia is senseless, the president 
can tell the Secretary to seek employment 
elsewhere. 

It seems to follow that a university could re- 

move a department chair if his comments 
make him unable successfully to undertake his 
ordinary duties as chair. The  governing prin- 
ciple seems to be this: A university can penalize 
speech if and only if it can show that the relevant 
speech makes it very difficult or impossible for 
the employee adequately to perform his job. 
Whenever a university seeks to punish speech, 
it should face a large burden to show that it is 
behaving neutrally, and not trying to punish a 
disfavored point  of view. On  this approach, 
teachers and researchers will almost always be 
protected. Controversial political statements 
will not be a sufficient basis for punishment 
or discharge. A political science professor may 
criticize (or endorse) the president without 
becoming  less able to perform the job, and 
most teachers will be able to say whatever they 
like without  subjecting themselves to the pos- 
sibility of discipline. It follows that the City 
College could not punish  (as it apparently 
tried to do) a philosophy professor for pub- 
lishing the view that blacks are, on average, 
intellectually inferior to whites. It also follows 

that the City College could not remove 
Professor Jeffries from his tenured position 
merely because of actually or apparently anti- 
Semitic statements. 

But we can imagine a range of statements 
that might make job performance quite diffi- 
cult, at least for someone  in a high-level ad- 
ministrative position -  statements, for exam- 
ple, expressing general contempt  for students 
and colleagues, a refusal to participate in the 
academic enterprise, or hatred directed against 
people who  are part of the university commu- 
nity. Perhaps such statements would  not be 
sufficient to allow discharge from a faculty 
position; but they could make it hard for the 
relevant speakers to perform as deans, as ad- 
missions officers, or as chairs of departments. 
In the Jeffries case, the best argument in favor 
of the City University of New  York would be 
that it is difficult for someone  to succeed as 
chair of a prominent black studies department 
if he has made sharply derogatory statements 
about members of other groups defined in 
racial, religious, or ethnic terms. This argu- 
ment would  not allow Jeffries to be dis- 
charged from his position  as professor, but it 
should allow him to be removed from the po- 
sition as department chair, which  involves a 
range of distinctive tasks. It follows that on 
the facts I have assumed, the City College did 
not violate Jeffries's First Amendment  rights. 
Of  course the case would  be different if 
Jeffries could prove that the City College was 
reacting not to impaired job performance, but 
to its own disapproval of Jeffries's point of 
view. 

An opposing principle would take the fol- 
lowing form. A university should not be permit- 
ted to burden or to deny benefits to an employee 
on the basis of the employee s point of view, even 
if the point of view does damage job performance. 
On  this view, people who  disapprove of the 
point of view -  students, other faculty, poten- 
tial contributors -  should not be permitted to 
enshrine their own views by affecting the uni- 
versity's decisions about employees. We might 
argue for this principle on the ground that 
there should no "heckler's veto" against un- 
popular opinions. We should not have a sys- 
tem in which people who dislike a certain 
point of view can stop dissenters from assum- 
ing prominent positions in the university. 

This  argument is not without  force, but I 

do not think that it should be adopted. 
Everyone seems to agree that the president 
and the governor may make hiring decisions 
on  the basis of viewpoint; it would  not make 
sense to disable the president from ensuring 
that high-level employees do not try, through 

There will be no 
substantial interference 
with the system of free 
expression if 
universities are given 
the narrow authority 
for which I have 
argued. 

24  ACADEME  July-August 1993 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

speech, to undermine the president's pro- 
gram. Any resulting interference with  the sys- 
tem of free expression seems minimal,  and the 
president has a strong need for a loyal staff. 
Similarly, universities have powerful and legit- 
imate reasons to expect their employees to 
perform their jobs, especially if those employ- 
ees are engaged in highly public administra- 
tive tasks, and especially if professors who  are 
not performing administrative tasks are realis- 
tically not threatened. At least under ordinary 
circumstances, there will be no substantial in- 
terference with the system of free expression if 
universities are given the narrow authority for 
which  I have argued. I conclude that outside 
of legitimate judgments about quality and 
subject matter, universities may punish em- 
ployees for their speech only in a narrow set 
of circumstances -  almost always involving 
highly public,  administrative positions - 
in 
which  the relevant speech makes it difficult or 
impossible for employees to perform their 
jobs. 

It follows from all this that the national 
government should abandon its efforts to sub- 
ject private universities to the constraints of 
the First Amendment.  This  is an area in 
which  national authorities should proceed 
with  caution. Of  course we could  imagine ex- 
periments that we might deplore. But there is 
no reason for the federal government to re- 
quire uniformity on this complex matter. 

Conclusion 

A system of free expression should be de- 
signed to safeguard the exchange of ideas. 
This  understanding calls for protection of 
much of what might  be considered "hate 
speech"; but it also allows restrictions on 
speech that amounts  to epithets. There are 
some additional complexities  in the academic 
setting. Universities are pervasively and neces- 
sarily engaged in regulation of speech, and 
this fact complicates many existing claims 
about hate speech codes. In the end I suggest 
that the test is whether the restriction on 
speech is a legitimate part of the institution's 
educational mission, understanding that ideal 
by reference to the commitment  to liberal ed- 
ucation. This  mission is not neutral among 
different conceptions  of the good.  It embodies 
a substantive project (though  the project is 
one that allows exposure to a wide range of 
competing conceptions).  This  understanding 
would not permit speech codes to endanger 
the exchange of ideas, but it would  allow for 
mildly broader restrictions than would  be ac- 
ceptable for states and localities.  & 

Both freedom and 
lack of freedom are 
socially constructed; 
they are an outcome 
of human practices. 

NOTES 

1 . 1 do  not  discuss here the issues raised by the 
claim that academic freedom forbids certain gov- 
ernmental intrusions into  the affairs of the univer- 
sity, though  some  of what I say does bear on  those 
issues. 
2.  Brandenburg v. Ohio,  395  U.S.  444  (1969). 
3.  New  York Times  v. Sullivan, 376  U.S.  254 
(1964)  (invoking  democratic goals); Chaplinsky v. 
New  Hampshire,  315  U.S.  568  (1942)  (invoking 
exchange of  ideas). 
4.  See Doe  v. University of Michigan,  721  F. 
Supp.  852  (E.D.  Mich.  1989);  UWM  Post, Inc. v. 
Bd. of Regents, 774  F. Supp.  1 163  (E.D.  Wis. 
1991). 

5. 343  U.S.  250  (1952). 

6.  376  US  254  (1964). 
7.  See Charles R. Lawrence, "If He  Hollers  Let 
Him  Go,"  1990  Duke  LJ.  431;  Mari Matsuda, 
"Public Response to  Racist Speech," 87  Mich.  L. 
Rev. 2320  (1989);  Richard Delgado,  "Words That 
Wound,"  17 Harv. C.R.-CL.  L. Rev.  133  (1982). 
8.  1 try to offer an argument to this effect in Cass 
R. Sunstein,  Democracy and the Problem of Free 
Speech (forthcoming  from The  Free Press, 
September  1993). 

ACADEME 

July-August  1993 

25 

This content downloaded from 195.34.79.79 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 08:16:38 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

