University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1993 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Against Positive Rights Feature 
Against Positive Rights Feature 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Against Positive Rights Feature," 2 East European Constitutional Review 35 (1993). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

WiNrm  1993

lature in times of emergency  and when the Parliament is
incapable of forming a cabinet.  Some provisions indicate
that dissolution  is  considered  a  solution  of last  resort  to
conflicts between  the executive  and  legislative  branches,
one  which  is  to  be  avoided  by  all  means.  In  fact,  the
detailed preconditions in the Hungarian and  Slovak con-
stitutions seem to make dissolution almost impossible.  In
Hungary,  Parliament  must  vote  no  confidence  at  least
four times during a twelve-month period, and in Slovakia
the cabinet policy statement must be rejected at least three
times  in  six  months  for  the  Assembly  to  be  dissolved.
These prerequisites  coexist  with other  limitations.  The
Romanian  and  Yugoslav  constitutions  prohibit dissolu-
tion in the last months of the terms of President and  the
parliament.  The  Hungarian  President  can  dissolve  the
Assembly  only twice  during  his term, while Romanian
President  can  use  it  only  once  a  year.  Almost  all  the
constitutions of the emerging  democracies  stipulate  that
the  President  must consult  with other high  officials and
politicians before  opting for dissolution.  While  the typi-
cal  procedure  is  to consult the Speaker  of the House, in
Hungary the President must confer with the Prime Min-
ister, the Speaker  and the leaders  of all the parliamentary

factions.  Some of the constitutions prohibit dissolution in
time of presidential  succession.  Even  if all the necessary
preconditions are satisfied, an interim  President does  not
possess  this  power.  The  1992  Interim  Constitution  in
Poland,  among  other  novelties,  contains  a  provision  of
crucial  importance-the  President  is under  obligation  to
dissolve the Parliament  if the Legislature  fails to  adopt a
budget  bill  in  the three  months  following  its  introduc-
tion.

Due to lack of space, this brief survey of the features
of rationalized parliamentarism  is by  no means  exhaus-
tive.  Two conclusions,  however, seem clear.  First, ratio-
nalized  parliamentarism  requires  great  political  skill  of
the principals  in  the  difficult  process  of transition  from
totalitarianism  to  democracy.  Second,  the  new
parliamentarism  strengthens  cabinets and  prevents easy
no-confidence  motions  that can  threaten  political  stabil-
ity and when  used improperly might even invite govern-
ment paralysis, if unpopular officials use these techniques
to prevent the necessary changes that are underway.

Evgeni Tanchev is a visiting scholar at the University of Virginia
Law School

Why  social and  economic  rights don't belong in the new  constitutions of  post-Communist  Europe.

AGAINST  POSITIVE  RIGHTS

By Cass Sunstein

If we  look  at  the  actual  and  proposed  constitutions  for
Eastern  Europe,  we  will  find  a  truly  dazzling  array  of
social and economic rights.  The Hungarian constitution,
for  example,  protects not merely  the right  to equal  pay
for equal  work, but also the right to an  income conform-
ing with  the  quantity  and  quality  of work  performed.
The Slovak  constitution guarantees the  right to a "favor-
able  living  environment."  Almost  all  of the  actual  and
proposed  drafts include  the  rights to  recreation,  to  paid
holidays, to food and shelter, to a minimum wage, and to
much more.  A chaotic catalogue of abstractions from the

social welfare  state coexists  with the traditional  rights to
religious liberty, free speech,  and  so on.  (For details,  see
my "Something  Old,  Something  New," EECR, Spring
1992, page  18.)

I think that this is a large mistake, possibly a disaster.
It seems clear that Eastern European countries should use
their constitutions  to produce two things: (a)  firm liberal
rights-free speech, voting rights, protection against abuse
of the criminaljustice system, religious liberty, barriers to
invidious  discrimination,  property  and  contract  rights;
and  (b)  the  preconditions  for  some  kind  of  market

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 35 1993

economy.  The endless catalogue of what I will be calling
"positive  rights,"  many of them absurd,  threatens  to un-
dermine both of these important tasks.

Three qualifications are necessary at the outset.  First,
the argument against these rights applies with distinctive
force  to  countries  in  the  unique  position  of transition
.from  Communism  to  a  market economy.  Other  coun-
tries, especially  in the West, are in a much different situa-
tion,  and  here  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that  social  and
economic  rights  would  be  harmful.  We  may  draw  an
important and  general  conclusion  from  this  suggestion.
It is often said  that constitutions, as a form of higher law,
must be compatible  with the culture and  mores  of those
whom  they  regulate.  But  in one  sense,  the  opposite  is
true.  Constitutions  can  be understood  as precommitment
strategies, in  which  nations  use a  founding  document  to
protect against the most common problems in their usual
political processes.  Constitutions should  therefore work
against  a  nation's most  threatening  tendencies.  If this  is
so, there may be a good case for subsistence rights in (say)
the  United States,  but not in  Poland  or Russia.  On  this
view, it is irrelevant, even if true, that many international
human rights documents  contain positive  rights.  While
it is unclear whether these rights have done much good, it
is also  hard  to  argue  that  they  have  produced  any  real
harm; but they may do exactly  this for countries making
the transition  from Communist rule.

Constitutions as legal  documents

Second,  there  is a  big difference between  what  a decent
society  should  provide  and  what  a  good  constitution
should  guarantee.  A decent  society  ensures  that its  citi-
zens  have  food  and  shelter; it  tries  to guarantee  medical
care;  it  is  concerned  to  offer  good  education,  good jobs,
and a clean environment.  It undoubtedly makes sense for
nations  in  Eastern  Europe  to  experiment  with  diverse
kinds  of market  arrangements  and  with  various  strate-
gies  for redistribution  (see John Roemer  and Jon Elster's
article  on page  38).  But  a  constitution  is in  large part a
legal document, with concrete tasks.  If the Constitution
tries to specify everything  to which a decent society  com-
mits itself, it  threatens  to become  a  mere  piece  of paper,
worth  nothing  in  the  real  world.  (Hence  I think  that
Herman Schwartz  is  incorrect to suggest that the opposi-
tion to positive rights in the constitution actually amounts
to  opposition  to  programs  creating  such  rights;  see  "In

EAST  EUROPEAN  CONsTrruTIoNAL  REVIEW

Defense of Aiming  High," EECR, Fall  1992, page  25.)
Opposition to social and economic rights in the Constitu-
tion does not entail a belief that nations in Eastern Europe
should eliminate social and economic programs that pro-
vide crucial  protection  against the vicissitudes of the free
market.

Third, not all positive rights are the  same.  The right
to education, for example, is more readily subject tojudi-
cial  enforcement  than  the right to a  clean  environment.
Some  of the  relevant  rights  pose  especially  severe  risks;
others  are  relatively  harmless.  But  I believe  that few of
them belong  in Eastern  European  constitutions.  Here's
why:

Governments should not be compelled to  interfere with free
markets. Some positive rights establish government inter-
ference  with  free  markets  as a  constitutional  obligation.
For countries that are trying to create market economies,
this  is perverse.  A  constitution  that  prevents the  opera-
tion of free labor markets  may defeat current aspirations
in Eastern  Europe.  Recall  that the  Hungarian Constitu-
tion protects  not merely  the right to  equal pay for equal
work, but also  the right  to an  income  conforming with
the quantity and quality of work performed.  This provi-
sion will have one  of two consequences.  (a)  If the provi-
sion  is  to  mean  something, courts  will  have  to  oversee
labor  markets  very closely,  to  make  sure that every bar-
gain produces the right wage.  We know enough to know
that  government  is ill-equipped  to  undertake  this task.
Courts are in an even worse position to do so.  If courts are
going to oversee the labor market, it will be impossible to
have  a labor market.  (b) The relevant provisions will be
ignored-treated  as goals or aspirations not subject to legal
enforcement.  This is a better outcome than (a), and courts
in  Eastern  Europe  should  be  encouraged  to  reach  this
conclusion.  But it  is far  from  ideal  to  have  a  system  in
which  many constitutional  rights are ignored.

The Hungarian provision is an extreme example, but
similar problems are raised by provisions calling for speci-
fied  maximum  hours,  for  paid  parental  leave,  for  paid
holidays,  and much  else.  Many  of these provisions  may
make sense if they are placed in ordinary legislation.  But
this  is  where they  belong-not  in  the constitution.  The
constitution  should  not  undertake  close  control  of the
private sphere, of civil society  and economic  markets.  In
the West, the constitution generally does not apply to the
private sphere  at all;  it only  regulates  government.  (The

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 36 1993

WiNTRr 

1993

emphasis on positive rights in the Eastern European docu-
ments suggests the remarkable  and quite general absence
of any distinction between  the private and public spheres.)
Perhaps  some  small  companies  in  the  East  should  be  al-
lowed to get ahead by paying their workers a great deal in
return  for  long  hours,  or  for  less  in  the  way  of leave;
perhaps  not.  Perhaps  medical  care  should not  be  free-
especially for  people  who have the  money to  pay  for it.
These  issues should be  subject to democratic  debate, not
constitutional foreclosure.

Many positive rights are unenforceable by courts.  Courts
lack  the tools of a  bureaucracy.  They cannot create  gov-
ernment programs.  They do not have a  systematic over-
view of government policy.  In these circumstances,  it is
unrealistic to expect courts to enforce many positive rights.
Consider, for example, another provision in the Hungar-
ian  Constitution:  "People  living  within  the  territory  of
the  Republic  of Hungary  have  the  right  to  the highest
possible  level of physical  health."  How  could courts en-
force  this  right?  The  same  problem  appears  for  many
(not all) of the positive rights, including the right to work,
the right to a clean environment, and the right to training
for the disabled.

To  be  sure,  constitutions  are  not  only  legal  docu-
ments, as  Schwartz points out.  In the  United States,  the
identification  of the  Constitution  with  the  decisions  of
courts  has  been  damaging  to  democratic  deliberation.
Constitutions can be a  catalyst for public discussion.  But
in Eastern Europe, it is  crucial to establish very soon that
whatever else they are, constitutions are indeed legal docu-
ments-in the sense that an individual citizen may count
on the  constitution  to  protect  rights, whatever  a  police
officer,  a  legislature,  or even  a  prime  minister  or Presi-
dent may say.  One of the enduring  legacies  of Commu-
nism is a  large degree of cynicism  about constitutions-a
belief that constitutions may  be pretty,  but that they  do
not have  meaning  in  the real world.  If the right to  "the
highest possible level of physical health" is not subject to
judicial enforcement, perhaps  the same will become true
of the right to free speech  and to due process of law.

Undoing  the culture of dependency

The inclusion of many positive rights could work against general
current effort to  diminish sense of entitlement to  state protection
and to encourage individual initiative. I have said that a decent
society provides its citizens  with food, shelter, and much

more.  But if positive dispensations from the state are seen
as a matter of individual entitlement, there can be corro-
sive  effects on  individual  enterprise  and  initiative.  This
effect can be seen in both the West and the East.  The risk
of corrosion  is  no reason to eliminate  programs  that pro-
vide  for subsistence.  But in today's Eastern  Europe, it is
important  to  undertake  a  cultural  shift  through which
people  will  look  less  to  the state  for  their  support,  and
more  to  their  own  efforts  and  enterprise.  One  way  to
help do this is to provide social welfare guarantees through
ordinary  legislation,  and  to  reserve  the  constitution  for
other matters.  In this cultural shift, it will be understood
that the state  furnishes, among other things, a  safety net
for  those  who  are  unable  to  make  provision  for  them-
selves.  A constitution that indiscriminately  merges guar-
antees  of "just pay" and "recreation"  with traditional lib-
eral rights is likely to  sendjust the wrong signals.

Many positive rights would do no afirmative good,  and this
is a serious problemfor incipient constitutionalism. Even if all of
the  foregoing  is  overstated,  most  of the  positive  rights
would not make things better for anyone.  To be sure, it is
possible  that such rights would affect legislative delibera-
tions, quite apart from judicial action.  Perhaps  the exist-
ence of a right to a safe environment would prompt legis-
latures  to attend to environmental  issues when  they oth-
erwise might not.  It is  also possible  that the  existence of
positive  rights or social aspirations  will affectjudicial  in-
terpretation of existing statutory  provisions.  We cannot
rule out the prospect of some beneficial effects.  But if the
likelihood  is  small,  there  is  an  independent  argument
against  social  and economic  rights: If they will probably
not  make  things  better,  they  are  mere  surplusage,  and
constitutional surplusage  is itself bad  for nations  that are
trying to create a culture of constitutionalism.

It is  true  that  some  of these  arguments  depend  on
somewhat speculative assumptions.  Analysis of what be-
longs  in  a constitution  is not like mathematics.  Perhaps
the  positive  rights  would  have  little  adverse  affect  on
individual  initiative;  perhaps  their existence  would  not
affectjudicial  attitudes toward  more readily enforceable
rights, like the  right to free  speech.  In  the end these are
empirical  questions on which  we have no hard evidence.
The ultimate question is how to proceed in the absence of
such  evidence.  Here  the most we can  do is to assess  the
magnitude  of therelevant  risks.  If what  I have  said  is
correct, it seems hard to believe that positive rights would

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 37 1993

actually help the lives of citizens in Eastern Europe, and it
seems  very  possible  that  such  rights  would  undermine
the  prospects  for  a  form of constitutionalism  that  offers
firm protection  to basic rights and that furnishes the pre-
conditions for  the transition to a  market economy.

In these circumstances, what ought to be done? I sug-
gest  three  routes  for the  future.  First, people  now draft-
ing constitutions for Eastern Europe should delete or mini-
mize provisions that call for positive rights.  At least, they
should  eliminate  those  rights  that  fare  worst  under  the
criteria  I have  set  out  here,  and  restrict  such  rights  to
those that fare best (perhaps the right to social  security).
Second, those now drafting constitutions for Eastern
Europe might put the positive rights in a separate section,
as  President Walesa's  draft  bill of rights  has  done in  Po-
land,  making  clear  that  such  rights  are  not  for judicial
enforcement, that they occupy a  separate status, and that
they are intended to set out general aspirations for public
officials and for  the citizenry at large.

Third, judges and lawyers in Eastern Europe should
now  be  at  work  developing  a jurisprudence  that  mini-
mizes  the  potential  risks  and  maximizes  the  potential
benefits of positive  rights.  As a key part of this task, they
might  adopt the notion that rights  are "nonjusticiable"-
not subject  to judicial  enforcement-when  they  call  for
large-scale  interference  with  the  operation  of free  mar-
kets, or  when  they  call  for  managerial  tasks not within
judicial  competence.  Any  such  notion  must, however,
make it clear that courts will vigorously enforce the basic
political and civil rights whose violation was a daily affair
under  Communist  rule-rights  such  as  free  speech,  reli-
gious  liberty,  freedom  from  police  abuse,  due  process,
and nondiscrimination  on grounds of ethnicity, race, reli-
gion, and sex.

With  constitutional  rights,  as  with  much  else,  less
may be more.  A constitution that purports to guarantee a
decent society  may, in the process,  guarantee  nothing at
all.  This was a central problem with Communist consti-
tutionalism.  It  would  be  a  cruel  irony  if the  problem
were  to  be  duplicated  in  the  emerging  democracies  of
Eastern Europe.

EAST  EUROPEAN  CONSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW

Constitutional issues in market  socialism.

A THIR  WAY?

By John Roemer andJon Elster

The  separation  of powers  is a central  issue  in constitu-
tional  thought.  The separation  of executive  and legisla-
tive powers, discussed elsewhere in this issue,  is a promi-
nent  case.  An  independent judiciary  is another.  In  a
broader sense, the independence  of the central bank and
of the state-owned  media can also be seen in this perspec-
tive.  The  argument for  separation  of powers  rests both
on positive and negative considerations.  On the one hand,
the separation of powers is a form of division of labor that
enhances  the efficiency  of the political  system.  On  the
other, it serves  to  prevent  total  usurpation  of power  by
any one state agency.

One  special problem  with separation  of powers-or
lack of separation-plagues  a number  of political systems.
It may be briefly characterized as the need to separate  the
instruments  of economic  policy  from  the tools  of social
policy.  In theory, and in the long run, both economy and
society  will benefit  if policies  are  oriented  towards  eco-
nomic efficiency, thus maximizing the revenues that can
be used to alleviate problems of unemployment and pov-
erty.  In practice,  because  policy-makers  are  often  influ-
enced by short-term considerations, there is a temptation
to make economic choices on the basis of their immediate
social consequences.  To maintain employment, govern-
ments all over the world support declining industries and
inefficient  firms, blunting the edge of competition.  The
bailout of Chrysler in United States and the subsidization
of the mining industry in Britain are two prominent ex-
amples from the West. With regard to the planned Com-
munist  economies, Janos Kornai  coined the phrase  "soft
budget constraint"  to  describe  the position  of managers
who know that banks or local governments have a strong
vested interest in keeping their  firms afloat-and the po-
litical clout to do so.  The results in Eastern Europe, as we
know, were disastrous.

To be more precise,  the economic crisis of the Com-
munist countries  was due largely to their failure  to solve
various principal-agent problems. A principal-agent  problem
arises when one actor or group relies on another to carry
out  orders  or  provide  informatioh,  but where  the two

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 38 1993

