 Against Interest-Group Theory: A Comment on Peltzman, "The Political Economy of the Decline of American Public Education" Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein Source: Conference in Law and Economics at the University of Chicago (Apr., 1993), pp. 379-383 Published by: for and Stable URL: Accessed: 25-01-2016 20:57 UTC Booth School of Business, University of Chicago University of Chicago Law School University of Chicago Press REFERENCES Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: http://www.jstor.org/stable/725481?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references. JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. M ANY people think that political outcomes can be "explained" as products of the influence of self-interested, well-organized groups with high stakes in the outcome. Undoubtedly this is often true. But causation in politics is a complex matter. If we find that a group has benefited from a public policy, we know something important, but one thing we do not know is that the policy exists because it benefits that group. If controls on automobile emissions are enacted in a period in which the labor movement is weakening, we know something, but we do not know that the controls are caused by the weakening of the labor movement. These are prosaic claims, but I think they have large implications for many of the arguments of interest-group theory. in this issue. I want to support this general point with six particular questions. 1. Did School Performance Really Deteriorate? Peltzman makes strong arguments for the view that school performance deteriorated from 1960 to 1980, but the proposition remains a bit blurred.4 We do know that Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores went down, but the SAT is taken by a college-bound elite. Decreases in SAT scores do not necessarily mean decreases in overall school performance. And there is indeed some contrary evidence for high school students as a whole. For example, national norm studies-taken from 1955 to 1983 and including a nationally representative sample of high school juniors-suggest a much steadier set of scores. These studies do not reveal the same kind of decline as is shown by the SAT trends. Other tests suggest similar results. Indeed, a federal study, Project TALENT, actually found a slight gain in scores by 1970 eleventh graders over those by 1960 eleventh graders. 4 See Charles Murray & R. J. Herrnstein, What's Really behind the SAT-Score Decline, responsibility from local to state government. But if we look at the aggregate data, we will find some general oddities. Between 1946 and 1972, the financing ratios between local and state government remained about the same. From 1946 to 1950, the state funded about 39 percent, whereas local government funded about 58 percent. By 1972, the state was still funding 39 percent, and local government was funding over 52 percenthardly a significant shift. And yet it was in the period from 1961 to 1972 that SAT scores were significantly declining. The aggregate data thus suggest a puzzle. The supposedly causal shift in financial responsibility did not occur at all during a significant part of the crucial period. But there is no correlation at all between the later shifts to state fundingthose in the 1980s-and SAT performance. For this reason Peltzman concludes, consistently with the data, that the shift "is a symptom rather than a cause."9 I am not certain what he means by this. But at least we can agree that the data do not establish, or even strongly suggest, that the shift in financing produced a decline in performance. Thus far, then, the claim of causation seems unproved with respect to both union density and financing practices. Economists and economically inclined lawyers have become extremely sophisticated in revealing the effects of legal regulation. We might be able to demonstrate, for example, that occupational safety and health regulation is in the interest of large firms, or that regulation of new risks (and exemption of old ones) helps to cartelize existing industry. But from this it is often said to follow that regulation exists because of its beneficial effects on large firms or existing industry. I hope that I have said enough to show that this does not follow. Often it is more than enough to be able to demonstrate the social consequences of legal rules, without also claiming to have shown causation.'2 12 Of course, a demonstration of effects may be relevant to the issue of causation; from effects we can generate plausible stories about contributing factors. But there is a large difference between plausibility and truth. To assess the matter of truth about the causes of regulation, we need to know a good deal more than interest-group and public choice theory typically provide.