 Cass R. Sunstein In my law school classes in my first year, the shortest measurement of time was the interval between the teacher's asking another student a question and my hand going in the air-just in case the student called on was not ready with an answer. At the end of that first year, in an act of retaliatory affection, the class placed a caption under my picture in the yearbook that read: "Derrick Bell. He knows everything and he wants everybody to know that he knows everything." I wonder what my classmates would say about Cass Sunsteins steady stream of impressive publications over the last several years, publications covering every aspect of the law and, to his great credit, perusing with seriousness and respect the new and controversialforms of legal scholarship as they appeared. We have asked him here today to share what he obviously has learned: that recognition of the new does not demand belief that belief in the traditional need not deter examination of the new. Let me begin with my conclusions. We should reject the traditionalist defense of traditional canons, in law and elsewhere. We should also reject what I will be calling the postmodern attack on canonicity, of which parts of Stanley Fish's essay seem to me a possible example. The two positions appear sharply opposed, but actually they have a lot in common. They share the view that if we do not have transcendental or external grounding for our judgments, many things go out the window, including (for example) freedom, and reason, and respect for authoritative texts. I'm going to make instead an oldstyle liberal case for a form of multiculturalism and for revisiting the legal canon-and just to the extent that these steps help educate our students better, and help make them better lawyers and citizens. Cass R. Sunstein is Karl N. Liewellyn Professor ofJurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. examples, it seems clear that to have a claim on lawyers' attention, any serious theory of constitutional interpretation must be able to explain why Brown was right. In this sense, Brown is part of the canon of constitutional law. It operates just like The Merchant of Venice in Fish's account of the Skokie case. situation in two very different ways. Now here is a second, very different response to what has happened with Judge Bork and Brown: Lawyers take Brown as correct for good reasons. Lawyers think that a constitutional order that allowed apartheid would not be worthy of respect. Lawyers think that any system of constitutional interpretation must ensure that our constitutional order is worthy of respect. They have reasons for their conclusion; these reasons have to do with the purposes and effects of racial caste systems for the people subject to those systems. What-it might be asked-shall we consult when we do this? Perhaps something called "politics"; perhaps "interest"; perhaps nothing at all. In Defense of Liberal Education intellectual life has to offer, we should say that the virtues of wisdom, clarity, and good argumentation are not limited to particular periods, genders, races, and countries. And this fact means that some current canons are in for revisiting. 3. I draw in this and the following paragraph from the valuable discussion in Amy Gutmann, Introduction, in Charles Taylor et al., Multiculturalism and 'The Politics of Recognition" 3 (Princeton, 1992). present exhaust the contours of appropriate legal argument. It would be very good for legal education to be both more comparative and more historical. Let me offer just two examples. In the sodomy case, Bowers v. Hardwick,4 both the lawyers and the justices struggled hard to think about the history and nature of homosexuality. In the abortion case, Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey,- the Supreme Court grappled with the causes and consequences of laws restricting abortion. Part of the problem in both these cases was simple ignorance. Compare, for example, the extraordinary historical and comparative material in Judge Posner's book Sex and Reason6 and in Mary Ann Glendon's Abortion and Divorce in Western Law.' We can quarrel with a lot in both books; but surely it is a huge advance to place, squarely within the legal canon, some works that attend to the extraordinary diversity of attitudes toward gender, reproduction; and sexual orientation. Surely it is important for lawyers to know what Posner and Glendon have told us; this information would have added an enormous amount to an understanding of the issues in both Bowers and Casey.