You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
This content downloaded from 209.175.73.10 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 20:57:23 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions CASS R. SUNSTEIN 
University of Chicago M ANYpeople think that political outcomes can be "explained" as productsof the influence of self-interested,well-organizedgroups with highstakes in the outcome. Undoubtedlythis is often true. But causation in politics is a complex matter.If we findthat a grouphas benefitedfrom a publicpolicy, we know somethingimportant,but one thingwe do not know is that the policy exists because it benefitsthat group. If controls on automobileemissions are enactedin a periodin whichthe labormovement is weakening, we know something, but we do not know that the controlsare caused by the weakeningof the labormovement.These are prosaic claims, but I think they have large implicationsfor many of the argumentsof interest-grouptheory. 
Peltzman's intriguingarticle' is generally cautious. But in several places, it becomes rather bold. In explainingthe decline of American educationfrom 1960to 1980, Peltzmanclaims, "[T]he plausiblerule of politicsis substantial."2Laterin the article, he says, "Industrypressure does have a substantialeffect on performance."3These claimsarereasonable, but we do not know that they are true. Both of them seem to me inadequatelysupported. I conclude that Peltzman has generated extremelyinterestingdata and shown some suggestivecorrelations.But he has not yet made any real demonstrationof causation. 
* Presented at the John M. Olin Centennial Conference in Law and Economics at the University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, April 7-9, 1992. The author is a Karl N. Llewellyn Professor at the Law School and Department of Political Science at the University of Chicago. 
I Sam Peltzman, The Political Economy of the Decline of American Public Education, in this issue. 
2 Id. at 322. 
3 Id. at 359. [Journal of Law & Economics, vol. XXXVI (April 1993)] ? 1993 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0022-2186/93/3601-0016$01.50 379 I want to supportthis generalpoint with six particularquestions. strongargumentsfor the view that school performancedeterioratedfrom 1960to 1980,but the propositionremainsa bit blurred.4We do know that ScholasticAptitudeTest (SAT) scores went down, but the SAT is taken by a college-boundelite. Decreases in SAT scores do not necessarily meandecreases in overall school performance.And thereis indeedsome contrary evidence for high school students as a whole. For example, nationalnormstudies-taken from 1955to 1983andincludinga nationally representativesample of high school juniors-suggest a much steadier set of scores. These studies do not reveal the same kindof decline as is shown by the SAT trends. Othertests suggest similarresults. Indeed, a federalstudy, ProjectTALENT, actuallyfounda slightgainin scores by 1970eleventh gradersover those by 1960eleventh graders. 
None of this demonstrates that Peltzman is wrong in claiming that school performancedeteriorated.But it does suggestthe possibilitythat the SAT decline shows a decline in performancefor elites, not for high schoolers as a whole.5If this is so, the causal picturegets more complicated. It may also be true that in 1960-80 the schools emphasizedskills not pickedup by the SAT, a possibilitythatwouldintroduceeven greater difficultiesinto the picture. 
performanceis almostcertainlya functionof family structureandfamilybackground.6Childrenin two-parenthouseholdsappearto do betterthanchildren with only one parent in the home.7We can speculate that school childrendo less well if their parentsare in the midst of a divorce. It is thus possible that the decline in SAT scores was attributableto factors unrelatedto the educationalenvironment,narrowlydefined. 
Peltzmanwould do well to attemptto controlfor this possibility,measuring his educational factors against noneducationalcauses. The absence of such an effort makes it especially difficultto make confident claims about causation. 
and sometimes seems to endorse the view that schools deterioratedin partbecause of (a) the growth in labor unions and (b) shifts in financial 4 See Charles Murray & R. J. Herrnstein, What's Really behind the SAT-Score Decline, 106 Pub. Interest 32 (1992), on which I draw here. 
5 Id. 
6 See John Chubb & Terry Moe, Politics, Markets, and America's Schools, at ch. 4 (1990). 
7 Id. responsibilityfromlocal to state government.But if we look at the aggregate data, we will find some general oddities. Between 1946and 1972, the financingratios between local and state governmentremainedabout the same. From 1946to 1950,the state fundedabout39 percent,whereas local governmentfunded about 58 percent. By 1972, the state was still funding39 percent, and local governmentwas fundingover 52 percenthardlya significantshift. And yet it was in the periodfrom 1961to 1972 that SAT scores were significantlydeclining. The aggregatedata thus suggest a puzzle. The supposedly causal shift in financialresponsibility did not occur at all duringa significantpartof the crucialperiod. 
The data for labor unions raise a similarissue. From 1961 to 1962, there was a hugejump in National EducationAssociation (NEA) membership-from less than 4 percent to 54 percent. But from 1962to 1971, teacherunion density remainedroughlyconstant, risingto a statistically insignificantlyincreasedlevel of 56.9 percent in 1971.Note againthat it was in this very period-from the early 1960sto 1971-that SAT scores were declining.The laborunion datapose an additionalpuzzle for Peltzman since they suggest that teacher union density stayed roughlyconstantwhile educational"output" declined. 
Perhapsthe disaggregateddata take care of the problem.Perhapswe can thinkabout differencesin the natureof the NEA over time or about the rise of the "badunion," the AmericanFederationof Teachers(AFT). Buteven if this is so, Peltzman'sown, moreparticularfindingsundermine the view that the data show a causal effect from unionizationand shifts in financing. 
is mixed, because of matters of timing and detail.8 The disclaimer seems necessary. School performanceactually seems to have improved with the success of the NEA in the 1960sand 1970s.There is therefore no evidence that the NEA contributedto a decline in education.There appearsto be some correlationbetween such decline and success by the AFT, but the data here are merelyfragmentary.The AFT has never had a large percentageof teachers-somewhere between a tenth and a fifth of teachers during the period of national SAT decline. Moreover, we appear to have incomplete informationon AFT membershipbetween 1960and 1971. Surely there is too little evidence to claimcausationas a resultof AFT membership,let aloneunionmembership.At the very best, I thinkthat we have a mildly suggestive correlation. 
the early shifts to state fundingand early declines in SAT performance. 8 Peltzman, supra note 1, at 352-56. Butthereis no correlationat all betweenthe latershiftsto statefundingthose in the 1980s-and SAT performance.For this reason Peltzman concludes, consistentlywith the data, thatthe shift "is a symptomrather than a cause."9 I am not certainwhat he means by this. But at least we can agree that the data do not establish, or even stronglysuggest, that the shift in financingproduceda decline in performance.Thus far, then, the claimof causationseems unprovedwith respectto bothuniondensity and financingpractices. 
performancedeclined in areas in which the use of educatedlaborby politically importantemployees grew the most, and in which newly important industriesused the most educated labor. As Peltzmanemphasizes, the findingis stronglycounterintuitive.If industrypressurewas to have any effect, one would expect school performanceto increase in precisely those areas. 
Without more, we might think that this counterintuitivecorrelation says absolutely nothing about causation. We might see this findingas resemblinga demonstrationthat the performanceof a sportsteam, or the economy of a foreigncountry, was correlatedwith shifts in SAT scores. (Both of these are likely true.) Now it is possible to come up with a plausiblestory to explain the anomaly-as Peltzmanhas in fact done.?1 But it is almost always possible for inventive people to come up with a plausiblestory. The question is whetherwith respect to the causal role of industrypressure, we have anythingmore than that. I think that on the presentevidence, we do not. 
I conclude with a more generalremark,one that extends well beyond Peltzman'sarticleto theoriesof regulationin general."Functionalanalysis" involves the attributionof causalityto a practiceaftera showingof its effects.l1A key partof pseudoscience, it is prominentin Marxism(X is in the interest of capitalists; therefore, it exists because it is in the interestof capitalist)and feminism(X is in the interestof men, therefore it exists because it is in the interest of men). It is also prominentin economics, includinginterest-grouptheory. Havingshownthata practice is efficient,some people thinkthatthey have shownthatit exists because it is efficient;having shown that a practice serves identifiableinterests, some people think they have shown that it exists for that very reason. 9 Id. at 366. 10 Id. at 367-68. 
1 It is well discussed in Jon Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens: Studies in Rationality and Irrationality 28-35 (1979); Jon Elster, Explaining Technical Change, at ch. 2 (1983): Jon Elster, Sour Grapes 101-8 (1983). 
Economistsand economicallyinclinedlawyershave become extremely sophisticatedin revealing the effects of legal regulation.We might be able to demonstrate, for example, that occupational safety and health regulationis in the interest of large firms,or that regulationof new risks (andexemptionof old ones) helps to cartelizeexistingindustry.But from this it is often said to follow thatregulationexists because of its beneficial effects on largefirmsor existing industry.I hope that I have said enough to show that this does not follow. Often it is more than enough to be able to demonstratethe social consequences of legal rules, withoutalso claimingto have shown causation.'2 
12Of course, a demonstrationof effects may be relevantto the issue of causation;from effects we can generateplausiblestories about contributingfactors. But there is a large differencebetweenplausibilityandtruth.To assess the matterof truthaboutthe causes of regulation,we need to knowa good deal morethaninterest-groupandpublicchoice theory typicallyprovide. 
A relatedpoint:Sometimeseconomictheoriesof regulationappearinsufficientlyto investigatethe possibilitythat the system precedingthe specificregulationat issue is itself the productof self-interestedactionandthatthatspecificregulationis in some sense a counter or a correctiveto an interest-drivenstatusquo. The lack of investigationhere has led to a significantgap in the literature.It wouldbe exceptionallyinterestingto see whetherfailure to regulateis sometimesattributableto interest-grouppower,or (less ambitiously)to show thatthe absenceof regulationproducespredictablewinnersandlosers. See EinerElhague, Does InterestGroupTheory Justify More IntrusiveJudicialReview? 101 Yale L. J. 31 (1991);Cass Sunstein,After the RightsRevolution2-3 (1990).The issue is not raisedby Peltzman'sarticlehere, however, and hence I do not discuss it. 
