University of Chicago Law School ersity
Cass R. Sunstein
New constitutions could require governments to keep track of what counts.
By Cass R. Sunstein Many Eastern European constitution-makers are exploring intriguing innovations in the theory and practice of constitutionalism. In keeping with this spirit of experimentation, it might well make sense for Eastern Europeans to consider an entirely new constitutional provision, one that would require their governments to compile and publicize an annual Human Development Index (HDI). The HDI might be based on an understanding of what matters most to human lives, including longevity, educational achievement, and average income. An annual HDI could be a substantial step toward promoting greater political accountability, toward improving inadequate information-gathering capacities, and toward concentrating governmental attention on what matters most. If the HDI requirement is not included in the constitution, it should probably be required by another form of law, one that is understood to be both fundamental and enduring.
Thus far, the new Eastern European constitutions have focused on human development through vague aspirations requiring the government to provide medical care, environmental quality, leisure time, just pay, and much more (see "Something Old, Something New," EECR, Winter 1993). Aspirations of this kind might well prove unenforceable, and in any case there is reason to doubt whether they will do much good. By contrast, a constitutionally-compelled HDI might well serve as an important spur to public and private efforts-both national and international-to counteract existing social problems in Eastern Europe. Rather than offering an endless catalogue of broad and probably meaningless positive rights, Eastern European nations would do well to impose on their governments a continuing obligation to
inform their citizens, and the international community,
of how current policies have actually affected human
lives. Such a provision would also fit extremely well with
the right, generally recognized in the new constitutions,
to receive information.
The idea of a "human development index" comes
out of the United Nations Development Program, which
has published annual Human Development Reports since
1990. The purpose of the HDI is to furnish a comprehensible measure of the nature of people's lives in different
nations and, by allowing comparative assessments, to get
a sense of progress over time and of what sorts of government strategies work best. The precise ingredients of the
HDI are of course a matter for discussion and debateitself a potentially beneficial process-and there is no
reason to insist that any nation should limit itself to any
specific set of guidelines. The key point is to ensure that
nations focus on what matters most, that is, the nature of
human lives under the existing political regime.
What is HDI?
The HDI is a simple concept. The current United Nations
approach grows out of attention to the (a) longevity, (b)
knowledge, and (c) income of individuals. Thus understood, the HDI is superior to many other possible
indicators of human welfare, such as gross national product or average income, standing alone. Even if average
income is high, a nation is doing poorly when too many
of its people are dying young. Similarly, the gross national product-though a popular measure of national
performance-is only crudely correlated with things that
are important. Even if we wanted to, we could not measure "utility" directly and such economic notions as "mnaxi-
mized wealth" seem an inadequate measure of what matters most.
Under the UN approach, "longevity" is calculated on the basis of life expectancy at birth. "Knowledge" is determined by a formula based on adult literacy and mean years of schooling, with literacy counting for two-thirds of the measurement. The "income" ingredient, growing
of per capita gross national product, is calculated from a formula that adjusts this figure to take account of the particular nation's poverty level, purchasing capacities, and distribution of wealth. Unlike long life and literacy, income of course has purely instrumental (rather than intrinsic) importance. Income matters only because of what it allows people to do or to be. Nonetheless, income
countries have compiled relatively little information about quality of life for their citizens, so comparative data over time are unavailable. On the other hand, the report indicates that previously Communist countries have a good deal of available human capital for the current transition, especially because of significant recent investments in education and health.
There are interesting relationships among the three variables of longevity, knowledge, and income. Some countries with relatively high income ranks (including Algeria, Namibia, and South Africa) have relatively low HDI ranks. Some countries have HDI ranks that are well above their income ranks (including China, Colombia, and Uruguay).
There are also important variations among groups within a single country. In America, for example, whites, standing alone, rank above Japan in HDI, whereas blacks rank around 31st, and Hispanics around 35 (next to Estonia). In addition, and significantly, women fare much worse than men in terms of HDI. Unfortunately, existing information from Eastern Europe appears extremely sketchy, and does not allow full comparisons between men and women, among ethnic groups, or among geographic regions within countries. As we will see, the absence of adequate information from Eastern Europe itself provides an argument in favor of a new constitutional requirement, The case for constitutionalizing HDI At the present time, few constitutions require the compilation of reports and information. I think this is an unfortunate gap in the theory and practice of constitutionalism. It would be most valuable to add to Eastern European constitutions a provision of the following sort: "Each year, the government shall compile and make available a human development index. This index shall be designed to reflect the quality of life in the nation in the previous year. It shall contain information about longevity, educational attainments, per capita income, and other relevant variables." The particular wording of the provision is not critical what is important is the general idea.
An HDI should be a powerful educative force, promoting democratic processes and at the same time counteracting the very problems that the HDI measures, such as premature death, lack of education, and poverty. A special advantage of an HDI is that it focuses attention
on what matters most it gives a shorthand but informative formula for measuring whether things are getting
better or worse. There are several reasons, moreover, for
constitutionalizing an HDI requirement.
First, a constitutional requirement of compilation and
disclosure of an HDI could do a great deal to promote
political accountability. It could do this by ensuring that
the public is aware of what governmental policies have
done for those subject to them. This awareness might
well be a large aid to democratic processes. In this respect,
the HDI can be seen as a structural part of the constitution,
one that is designed to provide some of the preconditions
for a well-functioning democratic system. The point is
especially important for Eastern Europe, where the key
question for the next generation has to do with the realworld effects of various initiatives, many of which will be
highly experimental in character. A constitutional
commitment to cataloguing the effects of those initiatives
would be an important and salutary step.
Second, the use of an HDI should help focus governmental and public attention on the right questions. Many
nations already recognize this general point at the
subconstitutional level. Thus they require annual reports
about unemployment, poverty, economic trends, and the
gross national product. The existence of relatively objective information on these issues helps hold government
accountable for what matters. it also helps inform democratic debate, day-to-day policymaking, and the electoral
process itself.
Third, an HDI could help counteract the feeling, now
apparently widespread among many citizens in Eastern
Europe, that the new order is treating free markets as an
inherent or independent good, quite apart from what
markets are doing for people subject to them. In defending social and economic rights, Wiktor Osiatynski has
powerfully invoked this concern about the relationship
between political legitimacy and explicit governmental
focus, at the constitutional level, on social and economic
difficulties. Perhaps the concern is best met through an
HDI, putting private and public attention on what markets are accomplishing, rather than by enshrining social
and economic rights.
Fourth, the HDI should help private and public forces
to redress the very problems that it catalogues. By drawing national and international attention to such issues as
longevity, education, and incomes-and to variations be-
tween men and women and among relevant groups and regions-the relevant information can spur valuable initiatives. We already have a good deal of empirical knowledge about the potential effects of such techniques. Public disclosure of information about hunger and famines is a principal motivating force for remedial and preventive action by government, as Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen showed in their 1989 book Hunger and Public Action. So too, exposure of environmentally degrading activity within the United States has been a powerful catalyst to public and private remedies. Competition can of course provide incentives for improvement. International competition over maximizing the current HDI-together with the prospect for national and international embarrassment-may well yield improvements in many nations.
There is a final point. The HDI could help counteract two mutually reinforcing problems in Eastern Europe. These are (a) inadequate information-gathering capacities and (b) a conspicuous pathology of many democracies, which is to direct public and governmental attention toward issues that are often only indirectly connected with real improvements in human lives. In the aftermath of Communism, it is clear that many East European countries need to assemble much more objective information on how people are actually doing. Ironically, a democratic system can be an obstacle to this goal insofar as it tends to direct attention to alleged scandals in the high levels of government, or gossip about their activities, rather than the question whether policy initiatives are having beneficial effects for the citizenry. A large advantage of the HDI-especially if it receives media attentionis that it tends to place public attention in the right place. There is evidence that this beneficial result has already occurred from the publication of the annual UN reports. Pitfalls and enforcement issues To say all this is hardly to claim that a constitutonally mandated HDI would be a panacea, or to deny that it brings potential problems. By themselves, compilation and publication of information are only that. The effect of information depends on what people do with it. Moreover, reasonable people disagree about what ought to be counted in an HDI, and here there is room for errors. It is surely possible that many HDI's will be based on unreasonable judgments about what matters, or on
large mistakes about the facts.
