University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1993 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Myth of the Unitary Executive, The Docket: Proceedings from the 
Myth of the Unitary Executive, The Docket: Proceedings from the 

Administrative Conference of the United States 
Administrative Conference of the United States 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Myth of the Unitary Executive, The Docket: Proceedings from the Administrative 
Conference of the United States," 7 Administrative Law Review 299 (1993). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

1993]  EXECUTIVE OVERSIGHT OF AGENCY RULEMAKING

The  Myth  of  the  Unitary  Executive*

CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN**

MR.  ROSS:  Our  first  speaker 

is  Cass  Sunstein,  who  is  the  Karl
Llewellyn  Professor  of  Jurisprudence  at  the  University  of  Chicago
School  of  Law  and  Department  of  Political  Science.  A  prolific  author
and  lecturer  on  administrative  law  issues,  Professor  Sunstein  is  Vice
Chair  of  the  Judicial  Review  Committee  of  the  American  Bar  Associa-
tion  Section  on  Administrative  Law  and  Regulatory  Practice.  He  former-
ly  served  in  the  Office  of  Legal  Counsel  at  the  United  States  Depart-
ment  of  Justice.

PROFESSOR  SUNSTEIN:  The  Council  on  Competitiveness  (Council)
certainly  has  become  a  very  important  and  controversial  entity  in  a
relatively  short  time.  Even  though  the  Council  is  fairly  new, 
it  is  a
continuation  of  the  1980's  trend  toward  presidential  oversight  of  the
regulatory  process,  with  a  view  toward  reducing  costs,  introducing  a
degree  of  uniformity  and  centralization,  and  promoting  political  account-
ability  in  the  administrative  process.  I  think  that  the  role  of  the  Council
has  developed  naturally  out  of mostly  excellent  innovations  by  President
Reagan  with  respect  to  the  administrative  process.  I  believe  that  the
Council,  or  a  similar  body,  is  necessary  because  there  should  be  presi-
dential  oversight  of the  regulatory  process,  with  a  particular  view  toward
reducing  regulatory  costs.

I  think  it  is  probably  good  to  say  that  we  start  from  that  significant
common  ground.  It  is  my  hope  that  the  prospective  Clinton  Administra-

*  The  following 

is  an  edited  transcript  of  Professor  Sunstein's  presentation  at

an  October  30,  1992  Colloquy,  held  at  The  American  University's  Washington  Col-
lege  of  Law,  on  the  role  of  presidential  oversight  in  the  administrative  process.  The
background  research  for  this  presentation  was  conducted  in  preparation  for  an  upcom-
ing  publication  in  the  Columbia  Law  Review.  See  generally  Lawrence  Lessig  &  Cass
R.  Sunstein,  The  President  and  the  Administration,  94  COLUM.  L.  REv.  1  (1994)
(developing  in-depth  notion  of  considerable  legislative  authority  over  administration  of
Federal  Government).

**  Karl  Llewellyn  Professor  of  Jurisprudence  at 

the  University  of  Chicago
School  of  Law  and  Department  of  Political  Science.  A.B.,  Harvard  College,  1975;
J.D.,  Harvard  Law  School,  1978.  I  am  grateful  to  Lawrence  Lessig,  Assistant  Profes-
sor  of  Law,  University  of  Chicago  Law  School,  for  his  assistance  in  developing  these
joint  ideas.

HeinOnline  -- 7 Admin. L.J. Am. U. 299 1993-1994

THE ADMINISTRATIVE  LAW  JOURNAL

[VOL.  7:297

tion  would  continue  the  concern  toward  decreasing  regulatory  costs  and
the
ensuring  a  degree  of  uniformity  and  centralization.'  Whoever 
President  for  the  next  four,  eight,  twelve,  or  thirty  years  should  build  on
these  precedents.

is 

Notwithstanding  what  I  have  just  said,  I  do  have  a  major  legal  claim
to  offer  you,  and  I  offer  it  with  regret.  It  has  become  a  pervasive  view
within  the  executive  branch,  and  to  a  large  degree  within  the  courts,  that
the  original  vision  of  the  Constitution  put  the  President  on  top  of  a
pyramid,  with  the  administration  below  him.  This  vision,  set  out  in
numerous  documents  by  the  Department  of  Justice's  Office  of  Legal
Counsel,'  my  former  home,  is  not  an  accurate  interpretation  of  the  Con-
stitution.  It  is  basically  a  fabrication  by  people  of  good  intentions  who
have  spoken  ahistorically.

3.  One  of  President  Clinton's  first  acts  was  to  abolish  the  Council  on  Competi-
tiveness,  but  he  vowed  to  create  a  more  open  and  accountable  system  of  agency
regulatory  review.  Clinton  Administration  Orders  Pullback  of  More  Than  50  Last-
Minute  Regulations, DAILY  EXEC.  REP.  No.  14  (BNA),  Jan.  25,  1993,  at  d15.  To  this
end,  President  Clinton  issued  Executive  Order  12,866  on  September  30,  1993,  in  an
attempt  to  streamline  the  administrative  process  and  to  eliminate  the  improper  influ-
in  agency  rulemakings.  Exec.  Order  No.  12,866,  58  Fed.
ence  of  parties  interested 
Reg.  51,735  (1993).

4.  For  example,  a  February  12,  1981  memorandum  written  by  the  Office  of  Le-
gal  Counsel  (OLC)  set  out  the  constitutional  basis  for  Exec.  Order  No.  12,291,  3
[hereinafter
C.F.R.  §  127  (1981),  reprinted in  5  U.S.C.  §  601  app.  at  473  (1988) 
the
Executive  Order  12,291].  See  Role  of  OMB  In  Regulation:  Hearing  Before 
Subcomm.  on  Oversight  and  Investigations of  the  House  Comm.  on  Energy and  Com-
(reprinting  as  part  of  Hearing  Record,
merce,  97th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.  152-69  (1981) 
OLC's  Memorandum  for  Honorable  David  Stockman,  Director,  Office  of  Management
and  Budget,  Regarding  Proposed  Executive  Order  on  Federal  Regulation)  [hereinafter
Department  of  Justice  Memorandum].  Executive  Order  12,291  requires  federal  agencies
to  incorporate,  to  the  extent  allowed  by  statute,  cost-benefit  analyses  when  promulgat-
ing  regulations.  Executive  Order  12,291,  §  2.  To  this  end,  an  agency  must  prepare  a
it  to  the  Office  of  Management  and
Regulatory  Impact  Analysis  (RIA)  and  submit 
Budget  when  it  promulgates  a  major  rule,  as  defined  by  Executive  Order  12,291,  §
l(b).  Executive  Order  12,291,  §  3(a).  Among  other  requirements,  an  RIA  must  in-
clude:  1)  a  description  of  the  potential  benefits  of  a  rule,  and  identification  of  the
likely  beneficiaries;  2)  a  description  of  the  potential  costs  of  the  rule,  and  those  likely
to  bear  those  costs;  3)  a  determination  of  the  potential  net  benefits  of  the  rule;  and
4)  a  description  of  any  potentially  less  costly  alternatives,  and  the  legal  reasons  that
these  alternatives  were  not  chosen.  Executive  Order  12,291,  §  3(d)(1-4).  The  Depart-
ment  of  Justice  Memorandum  justified  these  requirements  under  the  Take  Care  Clause
of  the  Constitution,  U.S.  CONST.  art.  II,  §  3,  and  under  the  dicta  in  Myers  v.  United
States,  272  U.S.  52,  135  (1926).  See  infra  note  22  (quoting  Myers  dicta  setting,  sub-
ject  to  interpretation,  limits  of  presidential  review  of  agency  action).

HeinOnline  -- 7 Admin. L.J. Am. U. 300 1993-1994

1993]  EXECUTIVE OVERSIGHT  OF AGENCY  RULEMAKING 

301

Given  that  the  strong  version  of  the  Unitary  Executive  idea  is  an
ahistorical  myth,  the  questions  that  we  will  be  discussing  should  be
mostly  ones  of  policy,  not  constitutional  law.  The  issue  is  what  policy
does  it  make  sense  for  the  Council  to  implement,  not  what  policy  does
the  Constitution  require  the  Council  to  follow.

With  respect  to  this  policy,  I  generally  agree  with  the  Council  on
Competitiveness,  with  one  possible  exception.  I  am  not  sure  whether
there  is  a  disagreement  on  this  point.  I  believe  that  there  ought  to  be
full  disclosure  of  private  communications  with  the  Council.  When  mem-
bers  of  the  Council  communicate  with  private  people  about  the  content
of  rules  in  a  Notice  of  Proposed  Rulemaking,  the  public  should  know.
There  ought  to  be  full  disclosure  of  communications  with  the  private
sector  to  assure  the  American  people  that  nothing  scandalous  is  happen-
ing,  and  to  give  them  a  sense  of  the  actual  process.  That  is  my  princi-
pal  policy  recommendation.

My  beliefs  with  regard  to  the  constitutional  structure  come  with  con-
siderable  regret.  I  wish  it  were  not  the  case.  The  executive  branch's
vision  of  the  Constitution,  with  the  President  on  top  and  the  administra-
tion  below,  has  elegance,  simplicity,  and  tremendous  appeal.  In  the
modem  climate,  I  submit  that  this  structure  would  make  much  sense.
That,  however,  was  not  the  Framers'  original  conception.  The  Constitu-
tion  does  not  speak  in  those  terms.  It  is  commonly  believed  that  the
Vesting  Clause  of  the  Constitution5  resolves  these  issues,  but  this  is  not
the  case.  The  eighteenth-century  conception  of executive  power  was  very
different  from  our  present  views.  What  has  happened  is  that  twentieth-
century  categories  and  ideas  are  being  used  to  give  content  to  an  eigh-
teenth-century  document.

I  believe 

What  I  am  about  to  say  might  seem  a  little  bit  historical  and  techni-
cal.  It  is  both,  I  acknowledge;  but  it  has  considerable  contemporary
importance. 
that  if  Congress  wants  to  regulate  the  Federal
Communications  Commission  in  certain  ways,  by  insulating  it  from  the
President,  and  if  Congress  wants  to  allow  the  head  of  the  Environmental
Protection  Agency  (EPA) 
to  make  decisions  about  the  environment
instead  of  the  President,  or  the  Council  on  Competitiveness,  then  Con-
gress  is  fully  entitled  to  do  that.  Would  it  be  wonderful  if  Congress
acted  in  this  way?  It  is  hardly  clear,  but  this  is  something  the  Constitu-
tion  does  not  forbid  Congress  from  doing.

In  a  nutshell,  here  is  the  constitutional  argument.  It  first  came  to  my
attention  that  the  President  might  not  be  hierarchically  superior  to  every-

5.  U.S.  CONST.  art.  II,  §  1.

HeinOnline  -- 7 Admin. L.J. Am. U. 301 1993-1994

THE ADMINISTRATIVE  LAW  JOURNAL 

[VOL.  7:297

texts
thing  we  consider  "administration,"  by  reading  nineteenth-century 
on  administrative  law.  What  persists  in  the  nineteenth-century  texts  is  a
distinction  between  execution  and  administration.6  These  distinguished
mainstream  people  insisted  that  this  distinction  exists,  and  they  said  that
the  Founders  perfectly  well  understood  this  notion.7  The  nineteenth-cen-
tury  commentators,  basically  uncontradicted,  said  that  there  is  execution,
involving  foreign  affairs  issues  and  certain  core  executive  functions,  and
there  is  administration,  which  is  essentially  the  ordinary  policy  business
of  what  we  now  consider  the  executive  branch.  The  nineteenth-century
writers  also  believed  that  the  Framers  thought  Congress  could  control
the  relationship  between  the  President  and  the  administration.8  The  nine-
teenth-century  commentators 
thought  that  the  President  had  a  broad
sphere  of  control  over  what  they  called  "execution,"  but  that  the  Presi-
dent  did  not  necessarily  have  hierarchical  control  over  administration.9

It  is  alarming  to  people  like  me,  who  want  to  believe  in  the  Unitary
Executive,  that  the  nineteenth-century  writers  thought  this  was  self-evi-
dent,  and  attributed  their  belief  to  the  Framers.  I  have  not  found  any
nineteenth-century  source  that  has 
this  hierarchical  vision  on  which
Presidents  Reagan,  Bush,  and  Carter  all  have  relied.  At  the  very  least,
the  absence  of  nineteenth-century  support  for  the  twentieth-century  view
is  alarming,  partly  because  the  nineteenth  century,  by  my  calendar,  is
closer  to  the  eighteenth  than  is  the  twentieth.

Let  us  talk  now  a  little  bit  about  what  happened  in  the  eighteenth
century.  I  am  just  going  to  sketch  out  some  historical  facts.  As  Justice
Scalia  eloquently  argues,  if  anything  ought  to  be  under  the  President's

6.  See  Nathan  D.  Grundstein,  Presidential Power,  Administration, and Adminis-
trative  Law,  18  GEO.  WASH.  L.  REv.  285  (1950)  (surveying  historical  views  of  presi-
dential  authority  over  administrative  process).  See  also  Louis  FISHER,  THE  POLITICS
OF  SHARED  POWER:  CONGRESS  AND  THE  ExEcuTivE  73-74  (2d  ed.  1987)  [hereinafter
FISHER.  THE  POLITICS  OF  SHARED  POWER]  (discussing  Congress's  responsibilities  in
supervising  federal  agencies).

7.  See  Grundstein,  supra note  6,  at  285-300  (discussing  views  of  Founders).  See
generally FISHER.  THE  POLITICS  OF  SHARED  POWER,  supra  note  6  (discussing  constitu-
tional  basis  of  President's  ability  to  legislate  and  Congress's  ability  to  structure  ad-
ministrative  state).

8.  See  Grundstein,  supra  note  6,  at  300  Xarguing  that,  as  creator  and  potential
eliminator  of  administrative  state,  Congress  is  superior  to  agencies,  except  as  Congress
chooses  to  delegate  authority  to  President).

9.  See  Grundstein,  supra  note  6,  at  300  (restating  theory 

is
delegated  authority,  he  can  re-delegate  this  authority  and  direct  decisionmaking  actions
at  his  discretion;  but  if  authority  is  delegated  to  agency,  President  has  no  discretion-
ary  power  over  decisionmaking  process).

that  if  President 

HeinOnline  -- 7 Admin. L.J. Am. U. 302 1993-1994

1993]  EXECUTIVE  OVERSIGHT OF AGENCY RULEMAKING 

303

control,  it  is  prosecution  via  the  Attorney  General. 0  Yet  the  Framers
actually  did  not  put  prosecution  under  the  hierarchical  control  of  the
President.  They  created  an  Attorney  General,  but  they  also  created  Dis-
trict  Attorneys  who  were  not  subject  to  the  control  of  the  Attorney
General  or  the  President."  Right  there,  the  defenders  of  the  Unitary
Executive  theory  have  to  hesitate.  Prosecution  of  the  laws  by  Federal
Government  employees  was  not  under  the  arm  of  the  President,  and  as
far  as  I  have  been  able  to  find,  no  one  thought  that  violated  the  Consti-
tution.

There  are  also  the  Framers'  famous  decisions  of  1789  on  whether  and
how  to  put  the  heads  of  the  Foreign  Affairs  Department,  the  War  De-
partment,  and  the  Treasury  Department  under  the  President."  They  end-
ed  in  a  closely  divided  vote  that  many  of  the  leading  participants  said
was  a  policy  decision  not  made  under  constitutional  compulsion,  al-
though  some  of  the  decisions'  supporters  disagreed  with  this  view.  The
Framers  ultimately  did  put  Foreign  Affairs  and  War  under 
the
President's  hierarchical  control.  But  if  we  follow  up  on  history  a  little
bit,  things  become  much  more  complicated  very  quickly.

The  first  Congress  had  refused  to  put  the  Treasury  Department  for-
mally  within  the  executive  branch. 3  There  was  a  very  important  public
official  in  the  Treasury  Department  called  the  Comptroller  of  the  Cur-
rency.  James  Madison,  the  greatest  of  the  Framers,  believed  that  the
Comptroller  of  the  Currency  would  not  be  under  the  President's  hierar-
chical  control;  because  the  Comptroller  settled  legal  claims,  his  office

10.  See  Morrison  v.  Olson,  487  U.S.  654,  705-06  (1988) 

(Scalia,  J.,  dissenting)
(arguing  that  because  1)  prosecution  is  executive  function,  and  2)  statute  in  question
vests  this  function 
in  branch  other  than  executive,  statute  in  question  violates  Article
II  of  Constitution).  Justice  Scalia  emphasized  his  belief  that  government  prosecution  of
crimes  is  quintessentially  an  executive  function.  Id.

11. 

Judiciary  Act  of  1789,  ch.  20,  §  35,  1  Stat.  73,  92-93.  See  Lawrence  Lessig
&  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  The  President  and  The  Administration, 94  COLUM.  L.  REv.  1,
16-22  (1994)  (examining  federal  prosecution  practices  of  late  eighteenth  century,  and
how  they  shed  light  on  fallacy  of  Unitary  Executive  model).

12.  The  Decisions  of  1789  refer  to  the  First  Congress's  debates  over  presidential
removal  authority  of  agency  heads,  in  particular  of  the  Departments  of  War,  State,
and  Treasury.  See  Louis  FISHER,  CONSTITUTIONAL  CONFLICTS  BETWEEN  CONGRESS
AND  THE  PRESIDENT  60-66  (1985) 
(reciting  highlights  of  removal  debate  of  1789).
See  also  EDWARD  S.  CORWIN,  THE  PRESIDENT:  OFFICE  AND  POWERS,  1787-1957,  10-
19,  101-02  (Randall  W.  Bland  et  al.  eds.,  5th  ed.  1984)  (summarizing  various  execu-
tive  removal  authority  options  debated  by  First  Congress,  and  questioning  whether
result  supports  Chief  Justice  Taft's  argument  in  Myers).

13.  For  an  instructive  discussion  of  this  aspect  of  the  Decisions  of  1789,  see

FISHER,  THE  POLITICS  OF  SHARED  POWER,  supra note  6,  at  40-41.

HeinOnline  -- 7 Admin. L.J. Am. U. 303 1993-1994

THE ADMINISTRATIVE  LAW  JOURNAL 

[VOL.  7:297

in 

that 

light  of 

to  be  blended  with  the
contained  "too  much  of  the  Judicial  capacity 
Executive"  and  subject  to  the  President's  plenary  power. 4  Theodore
the
Sedgwick,  another  of  the  Framers,  believed 
Comptroller's  close  connection  to  the  raising  of  national  revenues,  he
"seemed  to  bear  a  strong  affinity"  to  Congress.' 5  Madison  believed  that
this  office  was  distinct  from  both  the  executive  and  judicial  branches. 6
If  Madison  was  speaking  for  many  of  the  Framers,  and  it  appears  that
he  was,  this  has  explosive  consequences.  The  judicial  function  of  the
Comptroller  was  similar  to  what  many  administrative  agencies  now  do
in  one  way  or  another.  This  suggests  that  when  administrative  officials
to  what  Congress
do 
does-and  the  EPA 
its  rulemaking  capacity-the
agency  need  not  be,  as  a  matter  of  constitutional  compulsion,  placed
under  the  hierarchical  control  of the  President.  If  the  settlement  of  legal
claims  becomes  judicial,  and  immunized  from  presidential  control,  then
the  defenders  of  the  Unitary  Executive  idea  have  a  strong  historical
burden  to  overcome.  This  is  a  real  disappointment  to  any  sitting  Presi-
dent.

to  bear  a  strong  affinity 

is  an  example 

that  seem 

things 

in 

In  1792,  the  Postmaster  General,  the  person  in  charge  of  the  mails,
was  treated  similarly. 7  The  office  was  reorganized,  and  he  was  given
the  authority  to  enter  into  contracts  and  to  make  appointments.  It  was
said  around  the  time  of  the  Framing  that  this  would  "combine  purse  and
sword"  by  giving  the  President  direct  power  over  revenues.  As  a  result,
Congress  deleted  the  language  putting  the  Postmaster  General  under  the
direction  of  the  President.

supporters 

to  surmount.  Prosecution  was  not  under 

Because  of  all  this,  there  is  a  big  historical  burden  for  the  Unitary
Executive 
the
President's  control,  the  functions  of  the  Comptroller  were  not  under  the
President's  control,  and  the  functions  of  the  Postmaster  were  not  under
the  President's  control.  The  notion  that  any  of  this  was  unconstitutional
was  barely  discernable  in  this  period.

What  about  the  text  of  the  Constitution?  There  is  strong  textual  sup-
port  for  the  view  I  have  just  suggested.  The  Opinions  Clause  of  the

14.  FISHER,  THE  POLITICS  OF  SHARED  POWER,  supra  note  6,  at  133  (quoting  1

ANNALS  OF  CONGRESS  613,  614  (1789)).

15.  FISHER,  THE  POLITICS  OF  SHARED  POWER,  supra  note  6,  at  133.
16.  FISHER,  THE  POLITICS  OF  SHARED  POWER,  supra  note  6,  at  133.
17.  See  Grundstein,  supra  note  6,  at  299  (arguing  that  Postmaster's  independence
from  presidential  control  is  evidence  of  administrative  state's  independence  from  presi-
dential  control).

HeinOnline  -- 7 Admin. L.J. Am. U. 304 1993-1994

1993]  EXECUTIVE  OVERSIGHT OF AGENCY  RULEMAKING 

305

Constitution"  gives  the  President  the  power  to  demand  the  opinions,  in
writing,  of the  heads  of  departments.  I  used  to  think  that  this  clause  was
an  indication  of  strong  support  for  the  Unitary  Executive  view.  But  if
we  think  about  it  a  moment,  this  interpretation  would  be  redundant.
Why  is  it  that  the  Framers  gave  the  President  the  power  to  demand,  in
writing,  the  opinions  of  department  heads  if  these  were  people  whom  he
could  hire  and  fire  at  his  will,  and  whose  actions  he  could  direct?  This
provision  would  make  no  sense  under  the  strong  Unitary  Executive
model.  The  notion  that  the  President  must  specifically  be  given  the
power  to  demand  opinions  in  writing  seems  to  me  very  strong  textual
evidence  against  the  Unitary  Executive  concept.  Furthermore,  the  Neces-
sary  and  Proper  Clause 9  gives  Congress  constitutional  authority  to  "en-
act  all  powers  necessary  and  proper"  to  carry  into  effect  not  only  the
powers  of  Congress,  but  all  other  powers  vested  in  the  Federal  Govern-
ment.  That  suggests,  at  a  minimum,  considerable  congressional  control
over  the  organization  of  the  judicial  and  executive  branches.

This  is  simply  the  sketch  of an  argument.  It  produces,  for  me,  the  sad
conclusion  that  the  strong  Unitary  Executive  conception  is  an  ahistorical,
policy-driven,  extremely  sensible  anachronism  that  uses  twentieth-century
ideas  on  an  eighteenth-century  document.  Because  the  conclusion  that  I
have  reached  seems  to  me  so  unfortunate,  I  am  trying  hard  to  figure  out
what  can  be  done  about  it.  Perhaps  we  should  not  really  be  originalists
the  views  of  Judge
about  the  meaning  of  the  Constitution.  Maybe 
Bork"  are  wrong,  in  that  the  Constitution  is  a  changing  and  living  doc-
ument,  with  a  high  degree  of  flexibility.

Under  such  an  approach  to  constitutional  interpretation,  perhaps  we
have  the  ingredients  of  a  new  Unitary  Executive  idea.  Maybe  we  can
say  that  "executive"  has  to  be  read  in  twentieth-century  ways  so  as  to
promote  eighteenth-century  goals.  This  seems  plausible  to  me,  given  the
vastly  changed  character  of  the  executive  branch.  This  idea  rests  heavily
on  notions  of  an  evolving  Constitution  and  the  need  to  pay  attention  to
changed  circumstances.  This  argument  may  be  able  to  bring  us  towards
the  Unitary  Executive  concept,  but  I  do  not  think  it  can  bring  us  all  the
way  there.

Let  me  now  talk  about  some  concrete  issues  that  are  very  important
in  Washington  now  and  will  be  regardless  of  the  outcome  of  the  elec-

18.  U.S.  CONST.  art.  II,  §  2.
19.  U.S.  CONST.  art.  I,  §  8,  cl.  18.
20.  See  ROBERT  BORK,  THE  TEMPTING  OF  AMERICA:  THE  POLITICAL  SEDUCTION

OF  THE  LAW  81-83  (1990)  (advocating  originalism).

HeinOnline  -- 7 Admin. L.J. Am. U. 305 1993-1994

THE ADMINISTRATIVE  LAW  JOURNAL

[VOL.  7:297

tion.  I  am  just  going  to  address  them  cursorily.  One  issue  is  whether  the
President,  or  any  reviewing  entity  headed  by  Vice  President  Quayle,
Gore,  or  Stockwell,  has  the  power  to  tell  an  agency  what  to  do.  As  I
said  earlier,  the  constitutional  answer  is  no.  He  cannot  dictate  to  an
agency  head.  The  proper  solution  for  the  White  House,  at  most,  is  to
discharge  the  agency  head.  The  early  opinions  of  the  Attorney  General
support  this  view."  The  history  that  I  have  traced  supports  this  view.
The  dicta  in  Myers  v.  United States,22  the  most  emphatic  affirmation  of
presidential  power  in  the  history  of  the  Supreme  Court,  supports  this
view.  I  assume  that  the  Council  on  Competitiveness  is  in  full  agreement
with  this  conclusion.  The  EPA  promulgates  the  regulations  under  the
Clean  Air  Act,  not  the  President  or  the  Council.

Incidentally,  I  should  add  that  it  is  not  clear  to  me,  unlike  many
critics  of  the  Council,  that  anything  the  Council  has  done  is  illegal.'I  do
not  know  enough  about  the  details  to  challenge  or  endorse  what  the
Council  has  done,  and  my  conclusions  are  no  reflection  on  the  Council
on  Competitiveness.

Let  us  address  the  issue  of  private  contacts  involving  the  Council  on
Competitiveness.  If  the  Council  is  influencing  an  agency's  decision  on
the  basis  of  communications  with  private  individuals,  it  not  only  has  a
duty  to  disclose,  but  Congress  can  require  disclosure.  In  fact,  I  actually
think  it  would  be  a  good  idea  to  disclose.  Even  if  it  would  not  make
things  fantastically  better  in  terms  of,  for  example,  environmental  protec-
tion,  it  would  increase  the  legitimacy  of  our  government  by  notifying
the  American  people  of exactly  when  high-level  people  are  meeting  with
members  of  the  private  sector  on  the  substance  of  proposed  rules.  It  is
part  of  a  very  simple  idea  of  open  government.

Another  issue  is  time  limits  for  reviewing  entities.  As  long  as  they
are  reasonable  and  give  the  entity  an  opportunity  to  have  its  say,  they
are  a  good  idea.  It  should  not  be  feared  that  a  reviewing  entity  is  killing

21.  For  an  example,  see  1  Op.  A.G.  624  (1823)  (advising  President  Monroe  that
to  review  Treasury  Department's  settlement  of  Major  Joseph

he  was  powerless 
Wheaton's  account).

22.  See  Myers,  272  U.S.  at  135  (stating  that:
[o]f  course  there  may  be  duties  so  peculiarly  and  specifically  committed  to  the
discretion  of  a  particular  officer  as  to  raise  a  question  whether  the  President
may  overrule  or  revise 
interpretation  of  his  statutory  duty  in  a
particular  instance.  Then  there  may  be  duties  of  a  quasi  judicial  character  im-
posed  on  executive  officers  and  members  of  executive  tribunals  whose  decisions
after  hearing  affect  interests  of  individuals,  the  discharge  of  which  the  President
cannot  in  a  particular  case  properly  influence  or  control.).

the  officer's 

HeinOnline  -- 7 Admin. L.J. Am. U. 306 1993-1994

1993]  EXECUTIVE OVERSIGHT OF AGENCY RULEMAKING 

307

through  delay.  Time  limits  would  respond  to  that  fear.  I
regulations 
suggest  that  there  is  no  constitutional  problem  with  imposing  time  limits
onto  the  reviewing  process.

For  me,  the  most  difficult  question  is  the  policy  issue  with  respect  to
internal  executive  branch  communications.  Suppose  the  Council  is  going
back  and  forth  with  the  EPA.  Should  Congress  require  disclosure  of
these  communications?  Is  there  a  legal  problem  if  Congress  requires
disclosure  in  these  instances?  If  the  President  or  the  Vice  President  is
involved,  there  might  be  a  constitutional  problem  with  requiring  disclo-
sure  of  all  relevant  contacts.  And,  certainly,  there  would  be  a  problem
with  requiring  disclosure  if  we  are  talking  about  core  executive  agencies,
such  as  the  State  Department,  the  Defense  Department,  and  possibly  the
Justice  Department.  But  I  think  it  is  almost  certainly  the  case  that,  other
than  in  these  instances,  Congress  can  constitutionally  require  disclosure
of  internal  executive  branch  communications  that  influence  rulemaking
proceedings.  Thus,  the  issue  becomes  one  of policy.

the  Council's  argument, 

I  do  not  like  this  conclusion  with  respect  to  what  I  would  like  the
Constitution  to  represent,  or  as  a  matter  of sound  constitutional  policy.  I
the  internal  deliberative  process
that 
think 
should  be  protected  from  public  oversight,  is  persuasive.  I  do  not  agree
with  the  American  Bar  Association's  recommendation  that  the  delibera-
tive  process  be  opened  in  all  respects.  Congress  would  not  like  an  effort
to  require  its  internal  discussions  with  its  own  staff  to  be  opened  up.
General  Motors  would  not  like  a  requirement  that  its  internal  policy
discussions  be  opened  up  to  the  public.  There  is  a  terrible  chilling  effect
on  internal  discussion  when  it  is  exposed  to  public  scrutiny.

Perhaps  drafts  that  are  submitted  to  the  Council  on  Competitiveness
should  be  disclosed.  I  understand  that  is  ACUS's  position.2"  But  requir-
ing  disclosure  of  this  kind  does  not  seem  to  be  Congress's  highest  prior-
ity.  I  think  their  time  is  better  spent  elsewhere.

To  summarize  on  the  issue  of  internal  executive  contacts,  I  think  that
there  is  not  a
if  the  President  or  Vice  President 
constitional  problem  with  requiring  disclosure.  In  some  rare  cases,  per-
haps,  there  is  something  of  a  constitutional  problem.  Usually  it  is  an
issue  of  policy.

is  not  involved, 

Let  me  give  you  my  basic  conclusion.  As  an  originalist  matter,  the
notion  of  a  strong  Unitary  Executive  has  been  greatly  oversold.  We
should  not  be  looking  at  the  Constitution,  we  should  be  discussing  poli-

23.  See  ACUS  Recommendation,  supra  note  2  (outlining  ACUS's  1988  recom-

mendation  with  respect  to  presidential  oversight  of  agency  action).

HeinOnline  -- 7 Admin. L.J. Am. U. 307 1993-1994

308 

THE ADMINISTRATIVE  LAW  JOURNAL 

[VOL.  7:297

cy.  The  notion  of  presidential  oversight  of  the  administrative  and  exec-
utive  process,  particularly  with  an  eye  toward  controlling  costs,  is  an
excellent  policy  innovation.  In  this  role,  however,  the  Council  on  Com-
petitiveness  may  not  dictate  rulemaking  outcomes.  It  could  be,  and
should  be,  required  to  disclose  private  contacts.  Time  limits  are  fine,  as
both  a  constitutional  and  policy  matter.  Finally,  Congress  should  not
require  that  internal  executive  deliberations  be  disclosed  to  the  public,
though  there  is  rarely  a  constitutional  obstacle  to  this  requirement.

Thank you.

HeinOnline  -- 7 Admin. L.J. Am. U. 308 1993-1994

