 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Cass R. Sunstein* Reasoning by analogy is the most familiar form of legal reasoning. It dominates the first year of law school; it is a characteristic part of brief-writing and opinion-writing as well. But exactly what is analogical reasoning, as it operates in law? The subject receives little attention in the most influential works in Anglo-American jurisprudence and legal theory.' Often lawyers themselves are unenthusiastic about analogical reasoning, urging that this wl.v of thinking about law is unconstrained or not a form of reasoning at all.2 As a result, the legal culture lacks a sympathetic depiction of its own most characteristic way of proceeding.3 * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. For helpful comments, I am very grateful to members of the audience at a lecture on this topic at Harvard University's Program in Ethics and the Professions; to participants in legal theory workshops at Stanford Law School and the University of Southern California Law Center; and to Bruce Ackerman, Scott Brewer, Daniel Brudney, Joshua Cohen, Jon Elster, Richard Fallon, Abner Greene, Dennis Hutchinson, Laurence Friedman, Elena Kagan, Larry Lessig, Frank Michelman, Michael McConnell, Jennifer Nedelsky, Martha Nussbaum, Richard Pildes, Richard Posner, Margaret Jane Radin, Frederick Schauer, Lawrence Solum, David A. Strauss, Mark Tushnet, Edna Ullmann-Margalit, and Lloyd Weinreb. collections, (David H. Helman [hereinafter & Andrew Ortony (Stella Vosniadou treatments, short, suggestive In the face of this odd combination of general indifference and critical attack, analogical reasoning maintains its status as an exceedingly prominent means by which both lawyers and nonlawyers think about legal and moral questions. The principal goals of this Commentary are to offer an account of analogical reasoning and to suggest that, at least for law, it has distinctive advantages over forms of thought that seem to be far superior. The discussion will bear on the role of analogical thinking in ethics and politics as well. and especially the virtues of analogical reasoning by contrasting it with some especially prominent approaches to legal reasoning, including those offered by Ronald Dworkin and economic analysts of law. In this section, I reject, as only part of a complex story, the view that analogical reasoning is a crude and incomplete version of the lawyer's search for "reflective equilibrium."6 I also claim that analogical reasoning has important advantages over general theories, because those who use analogies are especially attuned to the diverse and plural goods that are at stake in legal and ethical decisions. A. Analogical Reasoning in the Law Outside of law, analogical reasoning often helps to inform our judgments. I have a German shepherd dog who is gentle with children. When I see another German shepherd dog, I assume that he, too, will be gentle with children. I have a Toyota Camry that starts even on cold days in winter. I assume that my friend's Toyota Camry will start on cold winter days as well. This kind of thinking has a simple structure: (i) A has characteristic X; (2) B shares that characteristic; (3) A also has characteristic Y; (4) Because A and B share characteristic X, we conclude what is not yet known, that B shares characteristic Y as well.7 This is a usual form of reasoning in daily life,8 but it will readily appear that it does not guarantee truth. The existence of one or many 6 See JOHN RAWLS, A THEORY OF JUSTICE I9-22, 7 What I am describing in the text is a form of inductive analogy, in the sense that it depends on predictive conjectures about an unknown case that are based on but go beyond stated premises. See BARKER, supra note 3, at I9I-93; Theo A.F. Kuipers, Inductive Analogy by Similarity and Proximity, Inductive analogy is different from the usual case of induction, which occurs by enumeration. An example of nonanalogical inductive reasoning is: I have seen ioo German shepherds, and they are all gentle with children. From the large number of gentle German shepherds, I infer that the latest German shepherd is also gentle with children. It has long been obvious that the human problem solver does not generally think deductively or by exhaustive search of logical space. Propositional logic relies upon enumeration of premises, univocal symbolization, and exclusively deductive connections, and these cannot be either a good simulation of human thought or an efficient use of computers. shared characteristics does not mean that all characteristics are shared.9 Some German shepherd dogs are not gentle with children. Some Toyota Camrys do not start on cold days in winter. For analogical reasoning to work well, we have to say that the relevant, known similarities give us good reason to believe that there are further similarities and thus help to answer an open question. Of course this is not always so. At most, analogical thinking can give rise to a judgment about probabilities, and often these are of uncertain magnitude. In real human thinking, the meanings of concepts are constantly modified and extended by parallels, models and metaphors, and the rational steps from premises to conclusion are generally non-demonstrative, being carried out by inductive, hypothetical and analogical reasoning. that is, reasoning by similarity."). From a brief glance at these examples, we can get a sense of the characteristic form of analogical thought in law. The process appears to work in four simple steps: (i) Some fact pattern A has a certain characteristic X, or characteristics X, Y, and Z; (2) Fact pattern B differs from A in some respects but shares characteristics X, or characteristics X, Y, and Z; (3) The law treats A in a certain way; (4) Because B shares certain characteristics with A, the law should treat B the same way. For example, someone asking for protection against domestic violence is requesting affirmative government assistance, just like someone asking the government for medical care; it is said to "follow" from the medical care case that there is no constitutional right to protection against domestic violence. The major challenge facing analogical reasoners is to decide when differences are relevant. To make this decision, they must investigate cases with care in order to develop governing principles. The judgment that a distinction is not genuinely principled requires a substantive argument of some kind. For example, one difference between the Nazi march and the Klan speech is that the Nazi Party is associated with the Holocaust. This is indeed a difference, but American law currently deems it irrelevant. It appears unprincipled or exfor the states to ban prohibitions on political cessively ad hoc speech except when the speaker is associated with the Holocaust.20 we are dealing with non-inductive analogical reasoning. We are not making a prediction about likely facts in an unknown case, but are instead making claims about how an as-yet undecided case should be resolved in light of its similarity to a decided or clear case. See BARKER, supra note 3, at 225-29. guide to statistical probabilities, whereas the legal examples involve normative judgments. As we will see, analogical reasoning goes wrong when there is an inadequate inquiry into the matter of relevant differences and governing principles. But what are the defining characteristics of a competent lawyer's inquiry into analogies? In law, analogical reasoning has four different but overlapping features: principled consistency; a focus on particulars; incompletely theorized judgments; and principles operating at a low or intermediate level of abstraction. Taken in concert, these features produce both the virtues and the vices of analogical reasoning in law. Despite the focus on particulars, the analogizer's description of a particular holding inevitably has some general theoretical components. One cannot even characterize one's convictions about a case without using abstractions, and without taking a position on competing abstractions.24 We cannot fully describe the outcome in case X if we do I, at 38I-89, applied to particular disputes work in Ronald Dworkin, The Coming Battles over Free Speech, N.Y. REV. BOOKS, June ii, I992, at 55 [hereinafter Dworkin, The Coming Battles over Free Speech]. An interesting contrast is provided by Ronald Dworkin, The Original Position, in READING RAWLS i6, 28-37 (Norman Daniels ed., I989) [hereinafter Dworkin, The Original Position], in which the search for reflective equilibrium is described in a way that does not have this "top down" aspect. not know something about the reasons that count in its favor. We cannot say whether decided case X has anything to do with undecided case Y unless we are able to abstract, a bit, from the facts and holding of case X. The key point is that analogical reasoning involves a process in which principles are developed with constant reference to particular cases. also RAZ, supra note 3, at 203 ("By its very nature the justification of a rule is more abstract and more general than the rule it justifies"). an implicit or even necessary basis for decision, but the lawyer who engages in analogical reasoning is not self-conscious about them. We need to distinguish here between analogies that depend on a contestable substantive argument and analogies that are simply constitutive of the thinking of people in the relevant community. Some analogies, or perceptions of likeness, do not depend on arguments, but rest instead on the widely shared way that human beings order their world. We do not need an argument in order to say that one car is relevantly "like" other cars; we take the point for granted; it is part of our language. This form of categorization is different from the view, plausible but in need of an argument, that a ban on the work of Robert Mapplethorpe is "like" a ban on Ulysses. Of course the distinction between analogies that depend on contestable arguments and analogies that constitute how people arrange their world is only contingent and conventional a function of existing social judgments.27 Sometimes the two operate more like poles on a continuum than a sharp dichotomy, and there are important shifts over time from one category to another. Consider, for example, the current 26 A good deal of recent attention has been devoted to the relationship between analogy and metaphor. See generally ON METAPHOR (Sheldon Sacks ed., I979). In much of this work, metaphor is said to have epistemic value, in science and elsewhere. Here there is much room for further thought about both analogy and metaphor in law. I make one brief point here. Consider the statement: "Abortion is murder," a statement that in the abstract, could be intended and received as a literal truth, a metaphor, or an analogy. If it is a metaphor, we know that the speaker believes that abortion is not literally murder, but is seeking to cast some light on the subject precisely by departing from literal description. ("Holmes was a lion of the law." "Michael Jordan is God.") But if the statement is an analogy, the speaker is claiming, and should be understood to be claiming, that abortion really is murder in the relevant respects; there is no acknowledgement that the statement is literally untrue. I believe that this is a large difference between metaphor and analogy, though I must be tentative on this point. See Donald Davidson, What Metaphors Mean, in ON METAPHOR, (challenging this conception of metaphor); Dedre Gentner, Brian Falkenhainer & Janice Skorstad, Viewing Metaphor as Analogy, in ANALOGICAL REASONING, supra note 3, at I7I, I72 (claiming that metaphor is a kind of analogical process); Mark Johnson, Some Constraints on Embodied Analogical Understanding, in ANALOGICAL REASONING, 27 See also infra note 53 (discussing the analytic-synthetic distinction). consensus that Brown v. Board of Education28 is "like" Loving v. Virginia,29 to the point that the similarity between the two cases can almost be taken as constitutive of how lawyers arrange their world, rather than as a controversial proposition that requires a substantive argument. Much creativity in law consists of the effort to show that a judgment about likeness that seems constitutive of thought actually depends on contestable substantive arguments or vice-versa. i. Top-Down General Theories. - Legal problems are often discussed in terms of some general theory indeed, this method seems to be increasingly popular in law schools, if not in courts. By a general theory, I mean an approach to law that is simple and unitary, operates at a high level of abstraction, has a distinctive "top down" character, brings the general theory to bear on particular cases, and disregards the fact that people are disturbed by particular outcomes that seem counterintuitive but that have been compelled by the general theory. Utilitarianism and economic analysis of law are especially familiar examples of this form of reasoning. that are pervasive in the legal culture. haps be legalized if rapists would pay more to rape than victims would pay to avoid rape.31 These examples can make believers in general theories seem fanatical; indeed, we might understand fanaticism in law and politics to consist precisely in the insistence on applying general principles to particular cases in which they produce palpable absurdity or palpable injustice.32 The point is not that exponents of any of these views cannot avoid the seemingly bizarre counterexample.33 It is instead that general theories usually do not make existing convictions about particular cases a constituent part of the method through which principles are constructed. 2. The Search for Reflective Equilibrium. - Legal problems are also evaluated by comparing apparently plausible general theories with apparently plausible outcomes in particular cases. Drawing on Rawls' notion of reflective equilibrium,36 we might understand much reasoning, in law and elsewhere, to entail an effort to produce both general theories and judgments in individual cases by close engagement with a range of general theories and a range of considered judgments about particular disputes. Those considered judgments may serve as provisional "fixed points" for inquiry, in the sense that we have a high degree of confidence in them and cannot readily imagine that they could be shaken. In searching for reflective equilibrium, what we think tentatively to be the general theory is adjusted to conform to what we think to be our considered views about particular cases. In other words, the particular views are adjusted to conform to the general theory and vice-versa. Through this process, we hope finally to reach a form of equilibrium. Some versions of the search for reflective equilibrium play a large role in law. Thus, for example, the notion that only political speech receives special constitutional protection might be abandoned if and 38 There is thus a dispute about the real role, in the search for reflective equilibrium, of judgments about particular situations. See generally Daniels, supra note 37, at 258 n.3. Ronald Dworkin describes the search for reflective equilibrium in a way that relies heavily on particular judgments about particular situations, and this is closer to how I understand things in this essay. See Dworkin, The Original Position, supra note 22, at 28-30. It is interesting that the search for reflective equilibrium, if understood to require a great deal of attention to low-level judgments, plays little or no role in Rawls's book itself. The examples offered are "that religious intolerance and racial discrimination are unjust." RAWLS, sup-ra note 6, at I9. There is little reference to particular judgments, and little testing of the general principles against those judgments. See i BRIAN BARRY, A TREATISE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE: THEORIES OF JUSTICE 28082 (i989). We should understand the search for reflective equilibrium to be a general concept of which Rawls's own version is a particular conception. when it appears that that notion allows censorship of great art and literature. The goal of the resulting method would be to produce a full set of confident judgments about specific cases, accompanied by an abstract theory, or a set of principles, that is able to account for all of them. 39 Herbert Wechsler, Toward Neutral Principles of Constitutional Law, 73 HARV. L. REv. is the most notable example of such criticisms. The search for reflective I, I5-I7, equilibrium is criticized as unacceptably dependent on existing intuitions in, among other places: RICHARD B. BRANDT, A THEORY OF THE GOOD AND THE RIGHT (1979); R.M. Hare, Rawls' A Theory of Justice (1973); Joseph Raz, The Claims of Reflective Equilibrium, 25 Peter Singer, Sidgwick and Reflective Equilibrium, 58 MONIST 490, (defending the search for reflective equilibrium if it is sufficiently "wide"). A helpful treatment can IN ETHICS AND ECONOMICS ? 5.3 (forthcoming be found in ELIZABETH ANDERSON, VALUE 1993) (qualifying coherence theories by acknowledging and incorporating criticisms while maintaining many of the best features of coherentist accounts). Jon Elster makes the interesting suggestion that the "empirical foundations" of theories of justice should be not only "the intuitions of the philosopher," but also the results of (a) empirical studies of perceptions of justice and (b) investigations into the actual practices of institutions allocating scarce resources. JON ELSTER, LOCAL JUSTICE FROHLICH & JOE A. OPPENHEIMER, (providing such an empirical CHOOSING JUSTICE study). An approach of this kind would result in a quite different conception of reflective equilibrium than that presented by Rawls. In Rawls's conception, particular judgments are revisable; this would not be so under Elster's suggestion. See Scanlon, supra note 2I, at io (describing the connection between revisability of judgments and Rawls's method). 40 I am drawing in this paragraph on various discussions of coherence in moral and ethical thought. See, e.g., ELIZABETH ANDERSON, IN ECONOMICS ch. 5 VALUE (forthcoming I993); GILBERT HARMAN, CHANGE (I986); RAWLS, supra note 6, at I9-22, 46-5I; Rawls, supra note 36, at 5; John Rawls, Outline of A Decision Procedure For Ethics, 6o PHIL. REV. I77 (195I). To accept what I say here, it is not necessary to endorse all the details of these different and controversial accounts. Coherence accounts are criticized in Joseph Raz, The Relevance of Coherence, 72 B.U. L. REV. 273, each of us what morality requires, or what the law is in hard cases, we need to actually believe; there is no other explore what we place to look. For example, many people could not accept a system of free expression that would allow suppression of a relatively harmless political protest. The judgment in that case is indeed a fixed point for inquiry. For some people, any general theory about the Constitution must fail if it entails the incorrectness of Brown v. Board of Education,41 or the validation or overruling of Roe v. Wade,42 or a particular consequence for affirmative action. equilibrium, with the truncation starting at just the point when the relevant principles go beyond a low level of generality.44 3. Reasoning by Analogy Incompletely Theorized Practices. Ideas of this kind are built on a time-honored view of law.46 The product and the most celebrated locus of analogcommon law -the ical reasoning -has often been understood as a result of social custom rather than an imposition of judicial will. According to this view, the common law implements the customs of the people; it does not impose the judgment of any sovereign body.47 Judges need not theorize about or evaluate these customs to work from them.48 In some ways, reasoning by analogy to incompletely theorized social practices resembles reasoning from incompletely theorized judgments. The difference is that it builds on existing practices, not judgments. To that extent, it has a conspicuous Burkean caste.49 Reasoning from incompletely theorized practices is founded on the assumption that those practices have a kind of legitimacy and sense that ought to be brought to bear on current dilemmas.50 Here lies the source of its appeal but also of great controversy. Those who believe that existing practices are often a result of arbitrariness or force, rather than deep wisdom or rationality, will be quite skeptical. As I describe reasoning by analogy, it operates by reference to particular convictions or judicial holdings, rather than social practices. It 44 I deal below with the comparative virtues of the two forms of reasoning. See infra 47 A usual response is that customs are not prelegal or prepolitical; they are themselves a function of law, and not independent of it. But see ROBERT C. ELLICKSON, ORDER WITHOUT LAW I23-55 (providing a basis for thinking that something like customary law is indeed possible). 48 This view of the common law has played a large role in fending off codification movements in the United States. Moreover, these systems account for a prominent and influential academic response to the Benthamite attack on judge-made law. Intriguingly, they appear to retain considerable appeal today. may be true, however, that these convictions or holdings are also the product of arbitrariness or force, and this problem may push us in the direction of a preference for reflective equilibrium or general theories.51 4. Classification. - Legal reasoning relies heavily on classification. Classification plays a large role in both analogical reasoning and the application of general theories.52 In using the notion of classification here, I mean to refer to something far narrower and more mechanical the effort to resolve a case solely by reference to purely semantic principles. By semantic principles, I mean the basic rules of grammar and diction. When someone says that a cat is an animal, he is using purely semantic principles. Substantive principles, by contrast, require an argument rather than a language lesson.53 When people say that the term "liberty" includes the right to seek an abortion, they are resorting to substantive principles, not mere semantics. 51 I discuss this point in Part m. See infra pp. 770-7I. 52 Hence Samuel Beckett's response to critics of his friend James Joyce: 'The danger is in the neatness of identifications.... Must we wring the neck of a certain system in order to stuff it into a contemporary pigeon-hole, or modify the dimensions of that pigeon-hole for the satisfaction of the analogymongers? Literary criticism is not book-keeping." SAMUEL BECKETT, I07 (Richard W. DANTE. Seaver ed., I976). (I am grateful to Scott Brewer for providing this reference.) Law is not book-keeping, either; but this is an argument for analogical reasoning rather than against it. See iifra pp. 787-90. 53 I am oversimplifying here. W.V. Quine famously argues that a familiar version of this distinction tums out to be untenable. See W.V. Quine, Two Dogmas of Empiricism, 60 PHIL. REV. 20 (i95i). Adapted to the legal context, Quine's argument may be described in this rough way: There is no such thing as interpretation by reference to purely semantic principles (or purely analytic truths). Many substantive principles (or nonanalytic ideas) are at work in every case. In cases in which they are invisible, as they often are, and when we seem able to rely only on semantics, it is only because there is a consensus about the substantive principles (or nonanalytic ideas). See id. at 34. I believe that Quine's argument is related to the following point, stated very briefly: "The application of the concept of 'following a rule' presupposes a custom." LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN, REMARKS ON THE FOUNDATIONS OF MATHEMATICS 322 (G.H. von Wright, R. Rhees & G.E.M. Anscombe eds., G.E.M. Anscombe trans., rev. ed. 1983). The distinction I am drawing in the text should thus be understood as a matter of custom or convention. attempting to arrest a fleeing terrorist. To evaluate the guilt of a defendant found in either of these situations, classification in the purely semantic sense is inadequate. Both defendants may well have a legally sufficient excuse as a result of statute or judge-made law. If the speed limit statute is all the court invokes, we have what might be called spurious classification. It is spurious because to decide the cases, the court must actually be resorting to something other than the speed limit law. It must use an additional form of reasoning, or invoke some other cases or statutes. Spurious classification, or bad formalism, often masquerades as analogical reasoning. Sometimes people believe that case A is analogous to case B, and attribute the belief to pure deduction, when a supplemental judgment of some kind is necessary.57 They find similarities between the two cases, ignore possible differences, and then announce the outcome of the case. In doing so, they fail to identify and defend the requisite supplemental judgment. (footnote omitted). ideas that must be justified.58 The method of analogical reasoning that I am describing here is insistently antiformalist in the sense that it always stands ready to explain and justify the claim that one thing is analogous to another. -that principles that may also account for the analogous cases. 58 To the extent that analogical reasoning is not propositional but instead constitutive of our thinking, see supra note 7, however, we cannot make arguments, but must rest content with how it is that we think. For present purposes, I do not believe that this is an important qualification. ("We have seen more than once that the public welfare may call upon the best citizens for their lives. It would be strange if it could not call upon those who already sap the strength of the State for these lesser sacrifices, often not felt to be such by those concerned . . . The principle that sustains compulsory vaccination is broad enough to cover cutting the Fallopian tubes. Three generations of imbeciles are enough." (citation omitted)). 5. Means-Ends Rationality. - Sometimes legal reasoning is simply a form of instrumental rationality. Suppose, for example, that a court must decide whether to impose an implied warranty of habitability on landlords. The court should consider the effects of the warranty on the housing market. Will such warranties increase rents, decrease available housing, or otherwise have disproportionately severe consequences for the poor? Or suppose a court is asked to rule that the First Amendment forbids the use of the libel law in any case involving a public official. A relevant question is the extent of the "chilling effect" of libel law on public discussion. In cases of this sort, courts must look at the facts. Reasoning operates simply by figuring them out, or at least by speculating as best we can. Wittgenstein considered as a motto for his book, Philosophical Investigations. See RAY MoNK, LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN: THE DuTY OF GENIUS 451 (I99o). At its best, analogical reasoning is especially alert to this fact. See infra pp. 784-90 (comparing analogical reasoning to general theories). method has important limits, but it is admirably well-suited to a system in which certain judgments must be taken as relatively fixed, and in which participants must deal with political dissensus and moral flux. Thus far the discussion has been quite abstract, but analogical reasoning is best understood by reference to examples. The law of free speech is an especially good area for investigation, because most of the reasoning in that area is analogical in nature. It will be useful the legal response to to explore an issue of current controversy cross-burning and similar forms of expressive activity. I build the example from the recent case of R.A. V. v. City of St. Paul,64 in which analogies played an important role. change to receive the content which the community gives to them." Id. at 104. "The process is one in which the ideas of the community and of the social sciences, whether correct or not, as they win acceptance in the community, control legal decisions." Id. at 6. For Levi, reasoning by analogy therefore has a crucial democratic component, found through the use of public desires (and social science). Levi did not, however, specify the mechanism by which community wishes help settle the play of analogies. There may be an historical explanation for this seemingly odd suggestion. Levi's book can be understood as a response to the legal realist attack on the autonomy of legal reasoning and to the associated claim, prominent after the New Deal, that legal reasoning is fatally undemocratic. When Levi was writing, it seemed crucial to establish the relative autonomy of law and especially of the common law method to show that it had a logic and integrity of its own, but also to establish that it was not wholly independent of social desires. The enduring influence of Levi's account may stem from its apparent success in this endeavor. (I) Action is unprotected by the First Amendment. To claim constitutional protection, a person must be saying or writing words. that of trespass (II) Content-neutral restrictions on acts that qualify as speech are generally permissible. Suppose, however, that a locality believes that the law of trespass is inadequate. Suppose it believes that it is important to enact a special statute that explicitly forbids expressive conduct of a certain sort. The resulting law might make it a crime to "place on public or private property a symbol, including but not limited to a burning cross or a Nazi swastika, which one knows or has reason to know arouses anger or resentment in others on the basis of race, color, or creed."68 Such a law might be invoked to forbid a public demonstration of cross-burning. This leads to another proposition, quite different from (II): (III) Acts that qualify as speech can be regulated if they produce anger or resentment. ular properties that take it out of the realm of constitutional protection. That is, they would be required to demonstrate a relevant difference between the ordinary anger or resentment that many expressive acts produce and the "anger or resentment on the basis of race, color, or creed." Thus, we have a new proposition: (lIIa) Acts that qualify as speech can be regulated if they produce anger or resentment on the basis of race, color, or creed. We might, then, imagine that the locality proceeds to narrow the reach of its ordinance to encompass only expressive acts outside of the scope of First Amendment protection.72 The locality prohibits cross-burning that produces anger or resentment if and only if the speech in question is regulable under existing doctrines as "incitement" or "fighting words." The prohibition will not be triggered unless the circumstances of the expressive conduct fit within an already-established exception to First Amendment protection. How does this affect the analysis? At first glance, it seems to dispose of the issue.73 By hypothesis, the law now covers only speech unprotected by the First Amendment. Thus, we have a new proposition: 70 See Terminiello, 337 U.S. at 4-5. 71 Critics of this view should see the later discussion of reflective equilibrium and the need (IV) Unprotected acts of expression may be regulated by the state as But we can prove by analogy that (IV) is wrong. Imagine that the state attempted to regulate only those "fighting words" directed at Republicans or at whites. Or imagine that the state made it a felony to engage in "incitement" if and only if the incitement was directed against people of a certain political view. Surely such regulations would be impermissible. (V) Unprotected acts of expression may not be regulated on the basis of viewpoint. (arguing that such a narrowed statute is constitutional). & MARY L. REV. I89, content-neutral First Amendment restrictions). words." It has regulated on the basis of subjects for discussion, not on the basis of viewpoint.78 The final proposition to be evaluated is thus: (VI) If government singles out unprotected acts of expression for regulation when they cause "anger or resentment on the basis of race, color, or creed," it does not discriminate on any impermissible ground. 78 The Court offers a tempting and clever response: In its practical operation, moreover, the ordinance goes even beyond mere content discrimination, to actual viewpoint discrimination. Displays containing some words odious racial epithets, for example - would be prohibited to proponents of all views. But "fighting words" that do not themselves invoke race, color, creed, religion, or gender aspersions upon a person's mother, for example - would seemingly be usable ad libitum in the placards of those arguing in favor of racial, color, etc. tolerance and equality, but could not be used by that speaker's opponents. . . . St. Paul has no such authority to license one side of a debate to fight freestyle, while requiring the other to follow Marquis of Queensbury Rules. tween viewpoint-based restrictions and content-neutral ones.80 Here too analogies are revealing. Sometimes courts uphold subject matter restrictions as a form of permissible content regulation. For example, the Court has permitted bans on political advertising on buses,81 and on partisan political speech at army bases.82 When the Court upholds subject matter restrictions, it is because the line drawn by government gives no real reason for fear about viewpoint discrimination, and - what is close to the same thing because government is able to invoke neutral, harm-based justifications for treating certain subjects differently from others. Thus, for example, the restriction on political advertising in the buses was justified as a means of preventing what would inevitably be a kind of governmental selectivity in choosing among political advertisements.83 The restriction in the army base was said to be a plausibly neutral effort to prevent political partisanship in the military.84 If the court is to accept the subject matter restriction in the crossburning case, it must be persuaded that the state is not discriminating against particular viewpoints but is genuinely concerned about severe and distinctive harms. In his concurring opinion in R.A.V., Justice Stevens wrote that "[t]hreatening someone because of her race or religious beliefs may cause particularly severe trauma or touch off a riot . . . ; such threats may be punished more severely than threats against someone based on, for example, his support of a particular athletic team."85 Thus, there were "legitimate, reasonable, and neutral justifications"86 for the special rule. In its response, the Court called this argument "word-play."187 The reason that race-based threats are different "is nothing other than the fact that it is caused by a distinctive idea, conveyed by a distinctive message. The First Amendment cannot be evaded that easily."88 Might analogies be helpful here? An initial response to the Court, building on analogies, is that the fighting words doctrine itself shows that the state can ban speech even if the relevant harms are "caused by a distinctive idea, conveyed by a distinctive message." But this response is surely not enough, for 80 See generally Geoffrey R. Stone, Restrictions of Speech Because of its Content: The Peculiar Case of Subject-Matter Restrictions, 46 U. CHI. L. REV. 8i, (arguing that subject-matter restrictions share characteristics with both viewpoint-based and contentneutral restrictions). many harms are caused by ideas, and this cannot mean that we can therefore ban the ideas. Perhaps an additional analogy helps - Justice Stevens's reference to the especially severe ban on threats against the President.89 If the government can single out one category of threats for special sanction because of the harm produced by those threats, why is the same not true for the fighting words at issue here? Justice Scalia's response is perhaps the best that can be offered: "[T]he reasons why threats of violence are outside the First Amendment (protecting individuals from fear of violence, from the disruption that fear engenders, and from the possibility that the threatened violence will occur) have special force when applied to the President."90 But the very same claim could be made about the hate-speech ordinance under discussion.91 Here, as in cases involving threats against the President, we are dealing with a subcategory of unprotected speech challenged as involving impermissible selectivity, and the justification for the selectivity plausibly invokes the particular harms produced by the unprotected speech at issue. part of current law; indeed, many states have enacted some form of hate crime legislation that enhances penalties for acts motivated by racial hatred.92 The governmental motivation for the additional penalty the harm produced by these crimes, in part because of their symbolic or expressive nature is the same as in the cross-burning case. So long as we are dealing with otherwise unprotected speech, that motivation should probably not be fatal to the cross-burning enactment if it is not fatal to the "hate crimes" measures. 26 (i99i). (invalidating a "hate crimes" statute on First Amendment grounds); Susan Gellman, Sticks and Stones Can Put You In Jail, But Can Words Increase Your Sentence? Constitutional and Policy Dilemmas of Ethnic Intimidation Laws, 39 UCLA L. REv. 333, 354-80 (discussing the potential constitutional infirmities of ethnic intimidation statutes). A valuable discussion of the neutrality issue in R.A.V., focusing on the Civil War Amend and laws against it. Alternatively, we could try to explain in great depth and detail the basis for the particular holdings and convictions at work here; analogical reasoning avoids these important tasks. This effort to compare cases with one another usually operates when no unitary general theory (say, utility maximization) is available against which individual instances can be simply measured. Eventually it yields something like a system - a complex range of results, all of them rationalized with one another but one that falls far short of what social science and ethical theory are usually expected to provide. The method of reasoning by analogy has recently come under considerable attack. Critics claim that the method is far inferior to social science, that it is entirely indeterminate, and even that it is not a method at all.94 In this section, I respond to these claims by exploring both the virtues and vices of analogical thinking. I first deal with general objections to this way of thinking and then examine some familiar alternative conceptions of legal reasoning. It will be useful to examine the three principal objections in what seems to me to be ascending order of persuasiveness. The first objection emphasizes the analogizer's lack of a sufficiently scientific, external, or critical perspective. The second objection is that analogical reasoning is either indeterminate or dependent on a consensus that it cannot justify. The third and most powerful objection, is that analogical reasoning rests on principles that tell us what makes one thing similar to or different from another, and that to discover such principles, we need something other than analogies. 93 It seems obvious that reasoning frequently works through this sort of testing. See QUINE analogy is insufficiently scientific, unduly tied to current intuitions, and, partly for these reasons, static or celebratory of existing social practice.95 On this view, analogical reasoning works too modestly from existing holdings and convictions, to which it is unduly attached. It needs to be replaced by something like a general theory in short, by something like science. On the other hand, analogical reasoning does start from existing convictions or holdings, and judgments of sameness or difference receive their content from current thinking. In this way, analogical reasoning usually does have a backward-looking, conservative, incremental character. To what extent this is a virtue or a vice is a large question that I will not attempt to answer here. But it should be acknowledged that insofar as analogical reasoning takes current legal materials as the basis for reasoning, it can indeed be an obstacle to justified change through law.97 The most important lesson to draw from this objection is that a full theory of legal reasoning would have to contain a theory of mistake. Such a theory should make it possible to identify those holdings and convictions that are wrong. Analogical reasoning, at 95 This sort of attack on analogy is traceable to Plato and to ancient attacks on "casuistry." See JONSEN & TOULMIN, supra note 3, at 58-63; see also Bruce Ackerman, The Common Law Constitution of John Marshall Harlan, N.Y.L. SCH. L. REV. I, 7-8 (criticizing Harlan for his sympathy for common law adjudication and his failure to seek external perspective on traditions). 96 Discrimination on the basis of sex and sexual orientation have thus been found objectionable because they have been seen as analogous to discrimination on the basis of race. See, e.g., Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. I90, I97-99 (1976); Jantz v. Muci, 759 F. Supp. I543, 546-5I (D.Kan. i99i), rev'd, 976 F.2d 623 (ioth Cir. I992); see also JUDITH J. THOMSON, A Defense of Abortion, in RIGHTS, RESTITUTION, AND RISK, supra note i, at 2-3 (arguing that prohibiting abortion is analogous to coopting someone's body to save a stranger). Consider also the view that if miscegenation laws are unconstitutional under the Equal Protection Clause, it follows by analogy that the ban on same-sex marriages is unconstitutional too. See Sylvia A. Law, Homosexuality and the Social Meaning of Gender, I988 Wis. L. REV. I87, 223-24; Andrew Koppelman, Note, The Miscegenation Analogy, 98 YALE L.J. I45, least as thus far described, seems ill-equipped to provide such a theory. It might therefore be said that efforts to reason from analogies are stuck in existing convictions, which are sometimes a morass, and that it is severely deficient in comparison to forms of reasoning that provide better resources for critical evaluation.98 Even this criticism is overdrawn. Sometimes reasoning by analogy does help to reveal mistakes. Reference to other cases helps show us that our initial judgments are inconsistent with what we actually think. The cross-burning problem established several propositions that might be jarring to those unarmed with analogies. Much of legal education consists in the testing of initial judgments by reference to other cases, and through this process of testing, it sometimes can be shown that those judgments must yield. 2. Indeterminacy; Dependence on Consensus. - The second objection is that reasoning by analogy is indeterminate in the absence of social consensus or a degree of homogeneity that will exist in no properly inclusive legal system. In the face of heterogeneity, reasoning by analogy may seem empty or indeterminate. Without a good deal of agreement, analogical reasoning cannot even get started. Something like this idea lay at the heart of the antifederalist objection to the American constitutional system; the federalists responded that heterogeneity could be a creative rather than destructive force.100 Perhaps the antifederalists were correct. According to those skeptical of analogical thinking, we can reason in this way only if we already agree on fundamental matters. Otherwise people will simply differ, and there will be no way to reason through their differences. If so, reasoning by analogy merely uncovers agreement where it al 98 See the Levi-Director story recounted above in note 25 and the criticisms of reflective equilibrium noted above in note 39. ready exists. Very little can be said on behalf of something so unambitious as that. 101 On this score reasoning in science is no different from reasoning elsewhere. Both depend on a certain degree of consensus. The perceived differences between scientific and other thought may stem partly from the fact that we tend to compare ethical or legal issues in which judgments are contested (affirmative action, the death penalty) with scientific issues in which matters are settled (the earth goes around the sun, dropped objects will fall). This is probably misleading; we might do better to compare the settled scientific judgments with the settled ethical ones (slavery is wrong, purposeless human suffering cannot be justified). See Alan Gewirth, Positive "Ethics" and Normative "Science," 69 PHIL. REV. 311, 3I2-13 INVESTIGATIONS ? 242, at 88 (G.E.M. PHILOSOPHICAL Anscombe trans., 3d ed. 1958) ("If language is to be a means of communication there must be agreement not only in definitions but also (queer as this may sound) in judgments. This seems to abolish logic but does not do so."). have seen several examples of this in our examination of the crossburning issue. 104 Things are different outside of law, simply because of the absence of precedents that can help generate an "overlapping consensus"105 on outcomes. The differences lead to two important conclusions. First, the method of analogy may indeed be less determinate outside of law. In law, we have a wide range of "fixed points" for inquiry, and this makes the analysis easier. Second, there will be a real difference between the legally correct outcome and the morally correct outcome. The difference lies in the fact that analogies operate as fixed points in legal reasoning, whereas in morality they are either revisable or entirely open-ended. Consider, for example, the fact that lawyers must take Roe v. Wade as authoritative as long as it stands, even if they think the decision abhorrent.'06 Even outside of law, the indeterminacy objection is not entirely persuasive. Very diverse people may have sufficient commonality on fundamental matters to permit considerable progress. Even if such commonality appears not to exist, a good deal of movement can occur through simultaneous engagement with what various participants in an engagement that would include the discussion say and think narratives about diverse experiences or history, personal and otherwise, as well as more conventional "reasons."107 (Note that the case method operates in part through narratives.)'08 In order to provide relevant information, and to counteract parochialism and bias, it is important to ensure that, in law and elsewhere, people with different perspectives and experiences are permitted to participate.'09 It is equally important to ensure that judges are alert 104 I do not suggest that there is always such a consensus within law. Sometimes there are competing principles and competing analogies. But sometimes the analogies really do provide the requisite commonality; this is all I mean to claim. criticizes on similar grounds Ronald Dworkin's analogy between moral and legal reasoning in his article The Original Position, cited above in note 22, at 28-29. 107 See, e.g., Mari J. Matsuda, Public Response to Racist Speech: Considering the Victim's to the range of possible low-level principles, and that they attempt to compare those principles with one another. But through some such route, people who initially disagree so strongly as to make conversation seem difficult can sometimes be brought together, at least to the point where analogical reasoning can start. Nearly everyone has had this experience. convictions. We might think about cases in which our convictions seem firm. We might agree, for example, that government can ban obscene telephone calls, or that it cannot ban even offensive and dangerous political speech. 3. The Search for Relevant Differences - The Inevitable Need for The final obCriteria Never Supplied by Analogical Reasoning. jection to analogical reasoning is that the process has yet to be adequately specified, and that when it is, it will emerge as a primitive and failed substitute either for a more general theory or for the effort to reach reflective equilibrium. This is, I believe, the most powerful objection to analogical reasoning; in an important sense, it is correct. But the nature of the objection, and the possible responses, are surprisingly complicated. 113 Note that it does not follow from the mere fact of disagreement that there are no correct answers to disputed questions in law or ethics, any more than it does in science. Nor does it follow, from the fact that legal categories are our categories, and revisable by us, that everything is up for grabs, or that we are in some sort of abyss. It is true that human beings, including lawyers, do not have unmediated access to the world; we see things through human frameworks. But this need not entail any form of skepticism or relativism. It would do so only if the only possible knowledge were external or transcendental, and there is no reason to think that. Indeed, people who think that the absence of external or transcendental foundations leads to relativism or skepticism often have a great deal in common with their purported adversaries. They have the same odd conception about what correct answers must be, to count as such. ceptives in marriage, or like a ban on incest? Is a restriction on abortion like a restriction on murder, or like a compulsory kidney transplant? To answer such questions, one needs a theory of relevant similarities and differences. By itself, analogical reasoning supplies no such theory. It is thus dependent on an apparatus that it is unable to produce.114 In short: Everything is a little bit similar to, or different from, everything else. Perhaps better: Everything is similar in infinite ways to everything else, and also different from everything else in the same number of ways."15 At the very least one needs a set of criteria to engage in analogical reasoning. Otherwise one has no idea what is analogous to what. 114 Cf. POSNER, supra note 2, at 88-92 (arguing that "reasoning by analogy . . . is not actually a method of reasoning, that is, of connecting premises to conclusions."); Roberto M. Unger, THE CRITicAL LEGAL STUDIES MOVEMENT 8 (I986) ("Without such a guiding vision, legal reasoning seems condemned to a game of easy analogies."). and then apply our answers to various cases rather than refusing to specify the general theory in advance and spending time examining the endless cases that are the staple of free speech law: perjury, misleading commercial speech, conspiracies, false cries of fire in a crowded theater, and so forth. On this view, reasoning by analogy is necessary only because of our failure to develop general principles, which ought to be evaluated in their own right. 117 Cf. THOMSON, supra note I, at 257 ("[I]t is precisely our moral views about examples, stories, and cases which constitute the data for moral theorizing."). Thus Thomson writes as if we can "falsify" general propositions by "testing" them against particular judgments. See also DWORKIN, supra note 22, at 28-37 (treating judgments as data points); cf. T.M. Scanlon, The Aims and Authority of Moral Theory, I2 OX. J. LEGAL STUD. I, 9 (I992) ("[W]e are very unlikely to have a considered judgement that a certain action would be wrong without having in mind some more 'theoretical' reason why it would [be] wrong. 'Considered moral judgements' are in this respect quite unlike 'data points': in the case of simple empirical observations we can be quite certain that something is the case without having any idea why it is so."). Scanlon's position may ultimately be right; but there are some uncertainties. Is it clear that there is a sharp difference between an observation that dropped objects fall, or for that matter that the earth is flat, unaccompanied by "any idea why it is so" and an observation that slavery or At least it seems clear that general principles and general theories are sometimes inadequate for legal reasoning. Often too many factors are relevant, and too many variations are possible, to allow a general formulation adequately to capture the range of right results in the cases.118 More particularly, any general theory will sometimes be too rigid and crude to account for the diversity and plurality of relevant goods. 1 19 On this view, correct answers plausibly consist not of deductions from general theory, but instead of coherent convictions about particular cases. In the law of free speech, for example, the Court has not fully explained what speech counts as "high value" and what speech falls in a lower tier.120 It is tempting to say that this is a major failure in constitutional law, and that the Court would do much better to tell us in plain terms what "test" it is using. But perhaps any test, described at a high level of generality, will be either vacuous or subject to decisive counterexamples. Perhaps this is not true for the First Amendment; it is possible that if we thought well enough, we would come up with a perfect general theory, or - a quite different point that the advantages of an inadequately precise test might outweigh the disadvantages of having no general theory at all. All I mean to suggest is that sometimes analogical reasoning might, in principle, be cruelty is wrong, unaccompanied by "any idea why it is so"? It may be that simple empirical observations and considered judgments about particular cases have the same (pragmatic) place in human reasoning. (defending a political conception of First Amendment) with Dworkin, The Coming Battles over Free Speech, supra note 22, at 55 (arguing that free speech cases should be resolved on the basis of a "constitutive" approach that would forbid government to intrude on listener or speaker autonomy except under the rarest of conditions). Undoubtedly Dworkin is correct that ideas about autonomy should play a major role in First Amendment law. But the question remains how much progress can be made in hard free speech cases without consulting a wide range of particular settings. A "top down" approach that applied the notion of autonomy would probably prove inadequate in cases involving restrictions on commercial advertising, unlicensed medical and legal advice, child pornography, private libel, threats, and so forth. See T.M. Scanlon, Jr., Freedom of Expression and Categories of Expression, 40 U. PITT. L. REV. 5I9, (rejecting his own earlier autonomy principle because.of its inability to account fully for judgments in particular cases). preferred to a general theory, simply because no such theory can adequately account for particular convictions, and because those convictions deserve priority in thinking about good outcomes in law. 121 In his discussion of reflective equilibrium, Rawls does not understand the category in quite this way, and instead emphasizes judgments in which we have a great deal of confidence. See RAWLS, supra note 6, at 48-5i. But it is unclear how we would have a great deal of confidence in a particular judgment if we have not submitted that judgment to scrutiny of this general kind. system). as an incomplete and truncated version of the search for reflective equilibrium. And on this view, we have not achieved real coherence unless a great deal is done both vertically and horizontally, that is, unless we have tested our particular convictions against many judgments of general principle as well as against many other particular convictions. If this is so, we do not have either considered judgments or coherence until we have thought through our high-level principles in far more detail than analogical thought ordinarily requires. This fact should not be entirely lamented; it is a virtue as well as a vice. Because of the need for predictability and stability in law, many questionable outcomes must be taken as fixed. With this point in mind, analogical reasoning might be defended on the ground that the best approach to certain areas of law is principled consistency with respect to individual cases and low-level principles. At least under real-world constraints, this form of principled consistency may be what we mean by truth, or right answers, in law or even morality. 126 This point bears on the claim that analogical reasoning requires criteria that analogies cannot themselves supply. Of course one needs criteria to engage in such reasoning. But those criteria will emerge from the process of comparing various cases; often they are not given or even describable in advance, except at an unhelpful level of generality. (offering a pragmatic conception of truth). The same point can be made in another way. The critics of analogical reasoning sometimes act as if analogies were "things," which either resolve or do not resolve contested cases.127 If they do resolve contested cases, they are not mere analogies but genuine rules; if they do not, they are nothing at all.128 But analogies should not be seen in this way. Their meaning lies in their use. They are not simply unanalyzed fact patterns; they are used to help people think through contested cases and to generate low-level principles. In this way they have a constitutive dimension, for the patterns we see are a product not simply of preexisting reality, but of our cognitive structures and our principles as well. 129 The principles and patterns we develop and describe are in turn brought to bear on, and tested through confrontation with, other cases. 127 See POSNER, supra note 2, at 89-90; Tushnet, supra note 2, at 825 (criticizing the view that the search for neutral principles is a constraint on "judicial choices"). Wittgenstein wrote: When we say that by our method we try to counteract the misleading effect of certain analogies, it is important that you should understand that the idea of an analogy being misleading is nothing sharply defined. No sharp boundary can be drawn round the cases in which we should say that a man was misled by an analogy. The use of expressions constructed on analogical patterns stresses analogies between cases often far apart. And by doing this these expressions may be extremely useful. It is, in most cases, impossible to show an exact point where an analogy begins to mislead us. Every particular notation stresses some particular point of view. (I989). The method of analogy has a close connection with pragmatism, see generally JAMES, supra note Iio (discussing irony); but it is not allied with "postmodernism," a constellation of ideas with increasing influence on the study of law. The relationship between postmodernism law raises some complex issues, and I restrict myself to two brief observations here. First, any position about law and politics, in order to be worth holding, must be justified by reference to reasons. We should not understand the category of reasons to be a narrow one, or to be strictly Cartesian; but a view unsupported by reasons is unlikely to deserve serious consideration. Many postmodernists, however, appear to reject reason-giving altogether, putting in its place power, or play, or conventions. See, e.g., JACQUES DERRIDA, OF GRAMMATOLOGY 50 (Gayatri C. Spivak trans., 1976) (play); FISH, supra note MICHEL FOUCAULT, POWER/KNOWLEDGE I I9 (Colin Gordon ed. & Colin Gordon, Leo Marshall, John Mephan, Kate Soper trans., I98I) (power). The substitution ensures that many postmodernists "can give no account of the normative foundations of [their] own rhetoric." JURGEN HABERMAS, THE PHILOSOPHICAL DISCOURSE OF MODERNITY 294 I987) (Fredrick Lawrence (conventions); trans., Second, some of postmodernism appears to depend on the claim that if claims cannot be vindicated or grounded in some transcendental or extra-human way, we are left with chaos, or the free play of perspectives, and certainly without a discussion that can be mediated through be understood as one of the endless number of "social constructs" to be observed from the appropriate distance. It is not a substitute or a disguise for some other, preferable form of reasoning. Much less does it conceal something called "politics."'131 On the contrary, it treats both law and politics as forms of moral reasoning, and it attempts to engage in precisely that. reasons. But the failure of transcendental conceptions of knowledge need not have this implication. The fact that there are no extra-human foundations for human knowledge does not mean that knowledge is impossible. For discussions from various perspectives, see Davidson, supra note 26, at 43; DONALD DAVIDSON, On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme, in INQUIRIES BEYOND BAUM, Sophistry About Conventions, in LOVE'S KNOWLEDGE, Claims about the alleged failure of reason, see Pierre Schlag, "Le Hors de Texte, 220-29 C'est Moi": The Politics of Form and the Domestication of Deconstruction, II CARDOZO L. seem to depend on an unnecessary conception of what reason must REV. I63I, be, to count as reason. Many of the postmodern claims now influential in the study of law turn out not to be postmodern at all, but instead a part of the philosophical heritage of pragmatism. 131 A claim of concealment is made at least implicitly in DUNCAN KENNEDY, LEGAL EDU(I983); and in Boyle, cited above in note 2, CATION AND THE REPRODUCTION OF HIERARCHY at I045-46, The term "politics," as I use it here, refers to judgments of value, which should be based on good reasons. There may well, however, be a large distinction between law and politics, in the sense that the arguments that are admissible in law are often different from those that are admissible in politics. If this distinction is to be justified, it should be understood as a political distinction rather than metaphysical one. Cf. John Rawls, Justice as Fairness: Political Not Metaphysical, I4 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 223, 224-26 (arguing that theories of justice should be drawn for political purposes and need not presuppose controversial metaphysical ideas). That is: The distinction is drawn for political reasons, in order, for example, to constrain the factors to which legal actors may point in making their decisions. Thus, in a contracts dispute, the wealth of the parties is ordinarily irrelevant, even though it is highly relevant for other officials in other settings. See DON HERZOG, HAPPY SLAVES 132 Of course there is analogical reasoning even there. See Hesse, supra note 8, at 325-34; Illhea Niiniluoto, Analogy and Similarity in Scientific Reasoning, in ANALOGICAL REASONING, supra note 3, at 27I. Carl B. Boyer and Uta C. Merzbach write: At first the primitive notions of number, magnitude, and form may have been related to contrasts rather than likeness the difference between one wolf and many, the inequality in size of a minnow and a whale, the unlikenesses of the roundness of the moon and the straightness of a pine tree. Gradually there must have arisen, out of the welter of chaotic lieve. But surely this does not disqualify it as a mode of reasoning. It may even be said to be the central feature of the common law method, prevalent of course in American constitutional law. And when analogical reasoning is working well, it provides a deep challenge to and to the occasionally ordinary understandings of the rule of law prominent movements toward codification and the replacement of analogical reasoning with clear rules, to be laid down by the legislature or courts133 in advance. We are now in a position to compare analogical reasoning with some other prominent approaches to law. I deal here with the search for reflective equilibrium; Ronald Dworkin's conception of law as "integrity"; and general theories, with special reference to the economic analysis of law. Precisely because of its lack of ambition, analogical reasoning is inferior on these counts. On the other hand, reasoning by analogy has four distinct advantages. Each of these advantages is especially important for people engaged in legal reasoning. They suggest that analogical reasoning may be a second-best alternative to the search for reflective equilibrium in light of the multiple constraints imposed on any legal system in the real world. new data make it necessary to reassess provisional fixed points. disagree with the results embodied in those precedents. In searching for reflective equilibrium, by contrast, everything is potentially revisable. The fact that precedents are fixed points helps to bring about an overlapping consensus as well, by constraining the areas of reasonable disagreement. In this way, analogical reasoning introduces a degree of stability and predictability. These are important virtues for law, and they sharply reduce the costs of reaching particular decisions. In short, lawyers could not try to reach reflective equilibrium without severely compromising the system of precedent. As noted, the judgments at work in the search for reflective equilibrium are subject to critical scrutiny, and any of them might be discarded.138 The point helps explain Rawls's suggestion that "for the purposes of this book, the views of the reader and the author are the only ones that count. The opinions of others are used only to clear our own heads."'39 Here we have a striking and illuminating contrast between the search for reflective equilibrium and analogical reasoning. In a legal system, precedents are far more than an effort "to clear our own heads." If a judge or lawyer is to attempt to reach reflective equilibrium, precedents will have at most the status of considered judgments about particular cases, and these might be subject to revision if they conflict with something else that he believes. In the legal system, precedents have a much firmer status. To be sure, precedents are not immune to revision; but the principle of stare decisis ensures that they operate as relatively fixed points. The search for reflective equilibrium is therefore a misleading description of law and in some ways an unattractive prescription. Participants in a legal system that aspires to stability should not be so immodest as to reject judgments reached by others whenever those judgments cannot be made part of reflective equilibrium for those particular participants. Of course, it is only a mixed blessing to have fixed points that are wrong as a matter of principle. Analogical reasoning may perpetuate confusion or injustice where reflective equilibrium would not. 138 On revisability and the search for equilibrium, see T.M. Scanlon, The Aims and Authority to statements "about what the law is." Often, at least, one cannot say "what the law is" without also saying something about "what the law should be." In other words, Dworkin believes that when lawyers disagree about what the law is with respect to some hard question, they are disagreeing about "the best constructive interpretation of the community's legal practice. "141 Thus, Dworkin argues that interpretation in law consists of different efforts to make a governing text "as good as it can be. "142 This is Dworkin's conception of law as integrity. Hercules, Dworkin's infinitely patient and resourceful judge, approaches the law in this way. 143 Dworkin places a large emphasis on "fit" as a criterion for correctness in legal outcomes. On Dworkin's view, we do not look at moral theory until we have exhausted the inquiry into "fitness" (although Dworkin is not entirely clear on this point). The supreme lawyerly virtue of integrity is connected with achievement of principled consistency among cases. But it is notable that Dworkin says little about the role of analogical reasoning, which lies at the heart of how lawyers actually think. 146 His account does not give a proper place to this form of reasoning. In his hands, theories are produced largely on the basis of abstract I am compressing some complex issues here. The conflation of Dworkin's approach with analogical thinking is understandable in light of the fact that, like analogizers, Dworkin places a large stress on "fit" and coherence, and little weight on external challenges to current holdings. For reasons discussed in the text, however, I do not wholly believe that Raz accurately describes Dworkin's view as expressed in either DWORKIN, TAKING RIGHTS SERIOUSLY, cited above in note i, at Io6-I5; or DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE, cited above in note i, at 240-50. moral theory. These theories are then brought to bear on particular problems. 147 But this is not how lawyers proceed. In deciding whether a restriction on cross-burning offends the First Amendment, lawyers do not really ask which interpretation will make the Amendment the best it can be. They do not begin with a high-level conception of the value promoted by the Amendment. To develop such a conception, they would have to ask questions that are too broad and abstract too hard, large, and open-ended for legal actors to handle. Such questions call for responses that are too deeply theorized. 147 For examples of this approach, see the discussions of affirmative action in DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE, cited above in note i, at 393-97, and of free speech in Dworkin, The Coming Battles Over Free Speech, cited above in note 22, at 55. Something of this kind, I believe, underlies the dispute in United Steelworkers of America in which the Court decided that private affirmative action is not v. Weber, 443 U.S. I93 barred under the Civil Rights Act of I964. See id. at I97. Realistically speaking, the disagreement among the Justices was not about anything Congress said or meant the relevant materials were indeterminate - but about whether affirmative action was relevantly different from ordinary discrimination. Though I cannot prove the point here, I believe that the dissenters' self-confidence about their view that the majority had distorted the law depended on their own judgment that affirmative action was not relevantly different. See, e.g., id. at 22630 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting). That judgment may be correct, but it requires an argument, not a mechanical reading of the statutory language. Analogical reasoning was therefore at least implicitly at work. judge - Harlan, say, rather than Hercules - uses analogical reasoning to say that case A is like case B, he must rely on a principle. And if he is reasoning well, he will have before him a range of other cases, C through Z, in which the principle is tested against other principles and thereby refined. At least if he is a distinguished judge, he will experience a kind of "conceptual ascent," in which the more or less isolated and small low-level principle is finally made part of a general theory, or of reflective equilibrium. In this way, we might conclude that analogical reasoning is indeed part of Dworkin's account, but only as an early step toward something both wider and deeper. One additional note. Dworkin's conception of law as integrity contains a theory of what it means for law to be legitimate. Hercules 149 See supra pp. 773-79. 150 See supra p. 779. Arrow's Impossibility Theorem, see KENNETH ARROW, SOCIAL CHOICE AND INDIVIDUAL VALUES (2d ed. I963), raises important problems for coherence theories in law, notably including Dworkin's account. I cannot discuss those problems here, but on a multimember judicial body, there may be serious cycling problems, in which, paradoxically, result A is favored over result B, which is favored over result C, which is (and here is the paradox) favored over result A; or decisions may turn, arbitrarily, on the order in which issues happen to arise ("path dependence"). See Frank H. Easterbrook, Ways of Criticizing the Court, 95 HARV. L. REv. 802, A strong theory of stare decisis, combined with a commitment to analogical thinking, may alleviate some of the cycling problems and thus produce greater stability in law, but it will simultaneously aggravate the problems of path dependence. See id. at 8I7-23. The point suggests that it will be difficult to achieve real coherence through decentralized, multimember courts, and that the Hercules metaphor will run into real difficulty. A system built on analogical reasoning aspires to less and can diminish cycling; but the problem of path dependence will result in a high degree of arbitrariness. See generally HURLEY, supra note I45, at 225-53 (arguing that coherence theories can survive the Impossibility Theorem); Lewis A. Kornhauser & Lawrence G. Sager, Unpacking the Court, 96 YALE L.J. 82, (I986) (arguing that courts will not face severe problems under the Impossibility Theorem). can produce vertical and horizontal consistency among judgments of principle in law. Harlan can offer nothing so bold. A legal system pervaded by analogy will not yield anything like full coherence. Perhaps this is a decisive defect. There can be no question that economic analysis of law has led to major advances. Above all, perhaps, it has done so by helping to untangle the social consequences of legal rules, many of which are counterintuitive, and all of which are relevant to the proper evaluation of law. There can be no question that instrumental rationality is highly pertinent to those designing legal rules. Economic analysis is, for this reason, exceptionally valuable for lawyers. Here it has a major advantage over analogical reasoning, which is far less helpful on the matter of consequences. One cannot discover consequences by examining other judicial holdings. thin a repertoire for inquiry should be designed so as to maximize wealth. This intuition can be shown to be too crude and general to be right, and by making reference to particular cases that appear to disprove it.153 A special advantage of analogical reasoning over economic analysis is that the former, unlike the latter, need not insist that plural and diverse social goods should be assessed according to the same metric. To make diverse goods commensurable in this way may do violence to our considered judgments about how each good should be characterized.154 Those considered judgments are far from embarrassing; they are part of what it means to think well. Consider, for example, the view that we should see all of the following as "costs": unemployment, the loss of a species, higher prices for pencils, the adaptation of workplaces to accommodate people on wheelchairs, sexual assault, and chilling effects on speech. If we understand all these things as "costs," to be assessed via the same metric, we will disable ourselves from making important qualitative distinctions. It might be objected that a more differentiated approach, one that insists on the plurality and diversity of goods, is fatally unscientific. To this objection we should respond that this conception of science is ill-suited to good thinking about a certain range of legal problems. What is required is not science, but practical reason.'55 The hard question, not yet fully elaborated in the philosophical literature, remains: How does one make choices in cases in which incommensurable social goods are at stake, and in which some of these goods must be sacrificed? An exploration of how analogical reasoning actually works may well be helpful in this important en illustrations of its weaknesses are contained (critiquing universal commodification). cited above After a sociological riot I read Aristotle's Ethics with some pleasure. The eternal, universal, wise, good man. He is much in advance of ordinary Christian morality with its (Never tell a lie. Sell all thou hast and give to the poor etc.) He has slapdash universals the ideals of altruism, and yet understands life is painting a picture not doing a sum, is a question of degree that specific cases can't be decided by general rules, and that everything that deavor. The analogical thinker is alert to the manifold dimensions of social situations and to multiple relevant similarities and differences. Unequipped with (or unburdened by) a unitary theory of the good or the right, she is in a position to see clearly and for themselves the diverse and plural goods that are at stake and to make choices among them. 156 The very search for relevant similarities and differences places a premium on this process of perceiving particulars. supra note 39, at ch. 4. I think that something of this kind is at least part of the import of Wittgenstein's remarks on categorization: "What is common to them all? - Don't say: 'There must be something common, or they would not be called 'games"' - but look and see whether there is anything common to all. - For if you look at them you will not see something that is common to all, but similarities, relationships, and a whole series of them at that. To repeat: don't think, but look!" WITTGENSTEIN, will be interpretive and to that extent evaluative. If the argument I have made is plausible, there may be much more to be said in favor of the common law method than is now popular. That method will have within it resources unlikely to be available to anyone laying down rules in advance. It follows that a large task for a legal system based on a general enthusiasm for rules is to introduce the virtues of analogical reasoning. Debates in contemporary administrative law are often about precisely this point.162 Many people have tried to obtain, in a rule-pervaded, statutory era, some of the advantages of analogical thinking and of particular examination of particular contexts.'63 Analogical reasoning is the conventional method of the lawyer; it plays a large role in everyday thinking as well. Its distinctive properties are a requirement of principled consistency, a focus on concrete particulars, incompletely theorized judgments, and the creation and testing of principles having a low or intermediate level of generality. Because of its comparative lack of ambition, this form of reasoning has some important disadvantages. Compared with the search for reflective equilibrium, it is insufficiently theoretical; it does not account for its own low-level principles in sufficient depth or detail. Compared with economics and empirical social science, it is at best primitive on the important issue of likely social consequences. Law should be more attuned to facts, and on this score analogical thinking may be an obstacle to progress. 162 Consicer the view that administrative agencies should be permitted large room for discretion in statutory interpretation. See Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense (I984). This view seems to contradict no less an authority Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842-45 than Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (i Cranch) I37, (I803), and it has for that reason been highly controversial. But the principle might be defended as a means of allowing caseby-case adjustment of literal language in particular circumstances, some of them new and unforeseen. The interpretive power of regulatory agencies will permit them to accommodate apparent rules to the complexities of individual cases - and to do so, in significant part, through analogical, case-by-case reasoning. (I982) (calling for courts to have the power to declare "obsolete" certain statutes). The rules-standards issue is explored from different angles in Colin S. Diver, The Optimal Precision of Administrative Rules, 93 YALE L.J. 65, 66-8o (I983); Duncan Kennedy, Form and Substance in Private Law Adjudication, 89 HARV. L. REv. I685, (I976); Louis Kaplow, RULES AND STANDARDS: AN EcONOMIc APPROACH, 42 DUKE L.J. (forthcoming I993); and Kathleen Sullivan, The Supreme Court, i991 Term - Foreword: The Justices of Rules and Standards, io6 HARV. L. REV. 22, 95-I22 not require people to develop full theories to account for their convictions; it promotes moral evolution over time; it fits uniquely well with a system based on principles of stare decisis; and it allows people who diverge on abstract principles to converge on particular outcomes. In any case it is unsurprising that analogical reasoning continues to have enormous importance in legal and political discussion. "To Generalize is to be an Idiot. I thank God I am not like Reynolds." WILLIAM BLAKE, Blake's Marginalia, in BLAKE'S POETRY AND DESIGNS 429, 440 (Mary L. Johnson & John E. Grant eds., I979). Note, however, that the second sentence undermines the first, by relying and thus by generalizing. (implicitly) on a conception of relevant differences and similarities The first sentence, itself a generalization, is undermined even more severely by Blake's generalization in the same passage: "To Particularize is Alone the Distinction of True Merit." Id.