 lature in times of emergency and when the Parliament is incapable of forming a cabinet. Some provisions indicate that dissolution is considered a solution of last resort to conflicts between the executive and legislative branches, one which is to be avoided by all means. In fact, the detailed preconditions in the Hungarian and Slovak constitutions seem to make dissolution almost impossible. In Hungary, Parliament must vote no confidence at least four times during a twelve-month period, and in Slovakia the cabinet policy statement must be rejected at least three times in six months for the Assembly to be dissolved. These prerequisites coexist with other limitations. The Romanian and Yugoslav constitutions prohibit dissolution in the last months of the terms of President and the parliament. The Hungarian President can dissolve the Assembly only twice during his term, while Romanian President can use it only once a year. Almost all the constitutions of the emerging democracies stipulate that the President must consult with other high officials and politicians before opting for dissolution. While the typical procedure is to consult the Speaker of the House, in Hungary the President must confer with the Prime Minister, the Speaker and the leaders of all the parliamentary factions. Some of the constitutions prohibit dissolution in time of presidential succession. Even if all the necessary preconditions are satisfied, an interim President does not possess this power. The 1992 Interim Constitution in Poland, among other novelties, contains a provision of crucial importance-the President is under obligation to dissolve the Parliament if the Legislature fails to adopt a budget bill in the three months following its introduction. Why social and economic rights don't belong in the new constitutions of post-Communist Europe. By Cass Sunstein If we look at the actual and proposed constitutions for Eastern Europe, we will find a truly dazzling array of social and economic rights. The Hungarian constitution, for example, protects not merely the right to equal pay for equal work, but also the right to an income conforming with the quantity and quality of work performed. The Slovak constitution guarantees the right to a "favorable living environment." Almost all of the actual and proposed drafts include the rights to recreation, to paid holidays, to food and shelter, to a minimum wage, and to much more. A chaotic catalogue of abstractions from the social welfare state coexists with the traditional rights to religious liberty, free speech, and so on. (For details, see my "Something Old, Something New," EECR, Spring 1992, page 18.) I think that this is a large mistake, possibly a disaster. It seems clear that Eastern European countries should use their constitutions to produce two things: (a) firm liberal rights-free speech, voting rights, protection against abuse of the criminaljustice system, religious liberty, barriers to invidious discrimination, property and contract rights; and (b) the preconditions for some kind of market economy. The endless catalogue of what I will be calling "positive rights," many of them absurd, threatens to undermine both of these important tasks. Second, there is a big difference between what a decent society should provide and what a good constitution should guarantee. A decent society ensures that its citizens have food and shelter; it tries to guarantee medical care; it is concerned to offer good education, good jobs, and a clean environment. It undoubtedly makes sense for nations in Eastern Europe to experiment with diverse kinds of market arrangements and with various strategies for redistribution (see John Roemer and Jon Elster's article on page 38). But a constitution is in large part a legal document, with concrete tasks. If the Constitution tries to specify everything to which a decent society commits itself, it threatens to become a mere piece of paper, worth nothing in the real world. (Hence I think that Herman Schwartz is incorrect to suggest that the opposition to positive rights in the constitution actually amounts to opposition to programs creating such rights; see "In Defense of Aiming High," EECR, Fall 1992, page 25.) Opposition to social and economic rights in the Constitution does not entail a belief that nations in Eastern Europe should eliminate social and economic programs that provide crucial protection against the vicissitudes of the free market. Governments should not be compelled to interfere with free markets. Some positive rights establish government interference with free markets as a constitutional obligation. For countries that are trying to create market economies, this is perverse. A constitution that prevents the operation of free labor markets may defeat current aspirations in Eastern Europe. Recall that the Hungarian Constitution protects not merely the right to equal pay for equal work, but also the right to an income conforming with the quantity and quality of work performed. This provision will have one of two consequences. (a) If the provision is to mean something, courts will have to oversee labor markets very closely, to make sure that every bargain produces the right wage. We know enough to know that government is ill-equipped to undertake this task. Courts are in an even worse position to do so. If courts are going to oversee the labor market, it will be impossible to have a labor market. (b) The relevant provisions will be ignored-treated as goals or aspirations not subject to legal enforcement. This is a better outcome than (a), and courts in Eastern Europe should be encouraged to reach this conclusion. But it is far from ideal to have a system in which many constitutional rights are ignored. emphasis on positive rights in the Eastern European documents suggests the remarkable and quite general absence of any distinction between the private and public spheres.) Perhaps some small companies in the East should be allowed to get ahead by paying their workers a great deal in return for long hours, or for less in the way of leave; perhaps not. Perhaps medical care should not be freeespecially for people who have the money to pay for it. These issues should be subject to democratic debate, not constitutional foreclosure. The inclusion of many positive rights could work against general current effort to diminish sense of entitlement to state protection and to encourage individual initiative. I have said that a decent society provides its citizens with food, shelter, and much more. But if positive dispensations from the state are seen as a matter of individual entitlement, there can be corrosive effects on individual enterprise and initiative. This effect can be seen in both the West and the East. The risk of corrosion is no reason to eliminate programs that provide for subsistence. But in today's Eastern Europe, it is important to undertake a cultural shift through which people will look less to the state for their support, and more to their own efforts and enterprise. One way to help do this is to provide social welfare guarantees through ordinary legislation, and to reserve the constitution for other matters. In this cultural shift, it will be understood that the state furnishes, among other things, a safety net for those who are unable to make provision for themselves. A constitution that indiscriminately merges guarantees of "just pay" and "recreation" with traditional liberal rights is likely to sendjust the wrong signals. actually help the lives of citizens in Eastern Europe, and it seems very possible that such rights would undermine the prospects for a form of constitutionalism that offers firm protection to basic rights and that furnishes the preconditions for the transition to a market economy. Constitutional issues in market socialism. By John Roemer andJon Elster The separation of powers is a central issue in constitutional thought. The separation of executive and legislative powers, discussed elsewhere in this issue, is a prominent case. An independent judiciary is another. In a broader sense, the independence of the central bank and of the state-owned media can also be seen in this perspective. The argument for separation of powers rests both on positive and negative considerations. On the one hand, the separation of powers is a form of division of labor that enhances the efficiency of the political system. On the other, it serves to prevent total usurpation of power by any one state agency.