 How presidential powers can legally expand without constitutional amendment. In the United States, the president is controlled by the Constitution and is in all respects subordinate to it. Insofar as it deals with presidential power, however, the American Constitution has proved to be a highly malleable document. With very few exceptions, the constitutional provisions relating to the president have not been changed at all since they were ratified in 1787, but in 1993 those provisions do not mean what they meant in 1787. The Constitution is a legal document, and it is enforced judicially, but its meaning was not fixed when it was ratified. In particular, the contemporary president has far broader powers than the original Constitution contemplated. It is remarkable but true that large-scale changes in the authority of the president have been brought about without changes in the constitutional text but, nevertheless, without illegality. emonial (at least in comparison to the American president). In the nations of what used to be the USSR, a president-part of a division between the executive and the legislature-has a more important role. But even where the president is largely ceremonial, there will be opportunities for accretions of power over time. Any particular constitutional arrangement is unlikely to be fixed over time. tional economy-in large part because of the economic interdependence among various regions, which is now generally acknowledged. It is a simple truth that the national government has far more authority than the framers of the Constitution originally envisaged. It is equally, if less simply, true that as a result of this shift, the president himself has assumed an array of duties and powers not within the original contemplation of the Constitution's authors. plicit provisions on these points, but it was not originally believed that the president would submit a budget or propose legislation. It was hardly believed that the president would have these powers of initiative, granting him considerable power over the content of national law. The president's current power of initiative, with respect to the budget and lawmaking, is quite fundamental. (Of course much legislation is initiated by people other than the president.) 5. The president's power to veto legislation has turned out to allow him a surprisingly large role in determining the content of national legislation. The founders of the Constitution deliberately and explicitly gave the president the veto power. But they did not contemplate its current importance, and they might well have been alarmed if they had been forewarned. Their principal goal was to allow the president to veto laws on constitutional rather than policy grounds, particularly in order to permit him to prevent Congress from intruding on the president's constitutional powers. This goal was narrow indeed; it did not anticipate a situation in which the power to veto would entail a significant role in lawmaking. congressional authorization. On the founding view, a congressional declaration of war was a precondition for war; the only exception was that the president could act on his own in order to repel a sudden attack on the United States. But in the twentieth century, a large amount of presidential war-making has been allowed without congressional declaration of war. are several possibilities. I outline them here because of their potential importance to current dilemmas in Eastern Europe. Flexible provisions and silences, allowing flexible (but not open-ended) interpretation Many of the changes have occurred because the relevant constitutional provisions are ambiguous, and they allow adaptation to changing circumstances. For example, the grant of "executive power" to the president leaves much uncertainty. lowed to act on his own. An emergency does not give the president any unilateral powers. A possible lesson is that constitutionally-granted emergency powers are not necessary and may even be harmful. Some distinguished academic observers (most notably Harry Wellington and David Strauss) believe that interpretation of the U.S. Constitution depends on particular judicial decisions, allowing the meaning of the document to change over time. Indeed, constitutional law in America (and in many other nations as well) has many features of the common law process. Translation Some people (most notably Lawrence Lessig) have argued that, when circumstances have changed, the Supreme Court must "translate" the original constitutional text in order to adapt it to the new conditions. Suppose, for example, that the founders of the Constitution originally sought to allow the president to make war on his own only for defensive purposes to repel sudden attacks on the United States. Suppose, too, that in modern conditions, threats to (say) Canada and Mexico are extremely threatening to the United States because of the strategic importance of these nations. Or suppose (as many people believe) that under current conditions, the line between "offensive" and "defensive" use of the military becomes extremely thin. States has had three constitutional regimes, not simply one. are many distinctive features to the American experiment in constitutionalism, and it is reasonable to think that few general lessons can be drawn from what has happened in the United States. But if we are to draw lessons, perhaps two are of special importance. The first involves the limited effects of constitutional text, at least over time. Constitutional meaning depends, in large part, on shared understandings and practices, and most of these will not be in the constitution itself. Although the Constitution is a legal document, there will be a great deal of opportunity to adapt constitutional meaning to changes in understanding and practice over time.