 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Speech Codes, Liberalism, and Related Problems One of my purposes is to defend the constitutionality of narrowly drawn restrictions on hate speech. LAW HAS RARELY BEEN at odds with academic freedom.1 In recent years, however, the development of campus "speech codes" has created a range of new con troversies. In these remarks, one of my purposes is to defend the constitutionality of narrowly drawn restrictions on hate speech, arguing in the process against the broader versions that have become popular in some institutions. My most general goal is to set the dispute over speech codes in the broader context of the liberal commitment to freedom of speech and academic pluralism. Through this approach it may be possible to overcome the "all or nothing" tone that has dominated much of public and even academic discussion. In the process of defending some narrow restrictions on hate speech, it will be necessary to say a good deal about the principle of neutrality in constitutional law, academic life, and perhaps elsewhere. Cass R Sunstein is KarlN. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. The author writes: "I draw here on some work published elsewhere: Cass R Sunstein, The Partial Constitution (Harvard University Press, 1993); Cass R. Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech (forthcoming, The Free Press, September 1993). ble justification. Cass Sunstein delivers his address at AAUFs annual meeting in Chapel Hill, N.C. In the system of "government by discussion, "private preferences and beliefs are not taken as fixed and static. Panthers, or by neo Nazis during a march in Skokie, Illinois, the home of many survivors of concentration camps. one may say anything at all at any time. A moment's reflection should show that this position could not be seriously maintained. It would not make sense to forbid government from regulating perjury, bribes, threats, fraudulent real estate deals, unlicensed medical and legal advice, willfully false advertising, and many other forms of expression. Realistically speaking, our choices are a range of nonabsolutionist approaches. attempted bribes are speech, not action. They may lead to action; but by themselves they are simply words. If I tell you that I want you to help me to commit an assault, I have spoken words; if I say that I will give you $10,000 if you vote for me, I have merely talked; if I say "Kill!" to a trained attack dog, I have done something regulable, but I have still just spoken. If these things are to be treated as action - that is, if they are not to be protected as speech - it is because of their distinctive features. This is what must be discussed. The word "action" is simply a placeholder for that unprovided discussion. The answer is that it would not be plausible to say that all speech stands on the same footing. For example, courts should not test regulation of campaign speeches under the same standards applied to misleading commercial speech, child pornography, conspiracies, libel of private persons, and threats. If the same standards were applied, one of two results would follow, and both are unacceptable. It does seem that any well-functioning system of free expression must ultimately distinguish between different kinds of speech. would ensure that government could not regulate criminal solicitation, child pornography, private libel, and false or misleading commercial speech, among others. The harms that justify such regulation are real, but they are insufficient to permit government controls under the extremely high standards applied to regulation of political speech. to political speech, thus defined, is justified on numerous grounds. Such an approach receives firm support from history - not only from the constitutional framers' theory of free expression, but also from the development of that principle through the history of American law. There can be little doubt that suppression by the government of political ideas that it disapproved, or found threatening, was the central motivation for the clause. The worst examples of unacceptable censorship involve efforts by government to insulate itself from criticism. Judicial interpretations over the course of time also support a political conception of the First Amendment. An insistence that "all speech is speech" would mean that the courts must eliminate many currently unobjectionable and even necessary controls. burden is greatest when political speech is at issue responds well to the fact that here government is most likely to be biased. The premise of distrust of government is strongest when politics are at issue. It is far weaker when government is regulating (say) commercial speech, bribery, private libel, or obscenity. In such cases there is less reason to suppose that it is insulating itself from criticism. regulation is most likely to be harmful. Restrictions on political speech have the distinctive feature of impairing the ordinary channels for political change; such restrictions are especially dangerous. If there are controls on commercial advertising, it always remains possible to argue that such controls should be lifted. If the government bans violent pornography, citizens can continue to argue against the ban. But if the government forecloses po litical argument, the democratic corrective is unavailable. Controls on nonpolitical speech do not have this uniquely damaging feature. Taken in concert, these considerations suggest that, in a liberal democracy, government should be under a special burden of justification when it seeks to control speech intended and received as a contribution to public deliberation. This does not mean that government is unconstrained when it attempts to regulate other speech. Recall that government cannot regulate speech because it is persuasive; recall too that offense at ideas is an illegitimate ground for legal controls. Always the government must be able to make a strong showing of harm. For this reason art, literature, and scientific speech will generally be protected from government controls even if some of these fall within the second tier. Of course these statements will leave ambiguities in hard intermediate cases. To the extent that we are dealing with private universities, the Constitution is not implicated at all, and hence all such restrictions are permissible. This is an exceptionally important point. Private universities can do whatever they like. They can ban all speech by Republicans, by Democrats, or by anyone they want to silence. But many private universities like to follow the Constitution even if they are not required to do so. In any case, public universities are subject to the Constitution, and so it is important to try to establish what the first amendment means for them. On the approach provided thus far, we can offer an important provisional conclusion: If campus speech restrictions at public universities cover not merely epithets, but speech that is part of social deliberation, they might well be seen as unconstitutional for that very reason.4 At least as a presumption, speech that is intended and received as a contribution to social deliberation is constitutionally protected even if it amounts to what is sometimes classified as hate speech - even if it is racist and sexist. Consider, for example, the University of Michigan's judicially invalidated ban on "[a]ny behavior, verbal or physical, that stigmatizes or victimizes an individual on the basis of race, ethnicity, religion, sex, sexual orientation, creed, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, handicap, or Vietnam-era veteran status, and that... creates an intimidating, hostile, or demeaning environment for educational pursuits.. . ." This broad ban forbids a wide range of statements that are part of the exchange of ideas. It also fails to give people sufficient notice of what statements are allowed. For both reasons, it seems invalid. In a famous case, Justice Frankfurter, speaking for a 5-4 majority of the Supreme Court, rejected this view. Beauharnais v. Illinois^ upheld an Illinois law making it unlawful to publish or exhibit any publication which "portrays depravity, criminality, unchastity, or lack of virtue of a class of citizens, which [publication] exposes the citizens of any race, color, creed or religion to contempt, derision, or obloquy or which is productive of breach of the peace or riots." The law was applied to ban circulation of a petition urging "the need to prevent the white race from becoming mongrelized by the negro," and complaining of the "aggressions, rapes, robberies, knives, guns, and marijuana of the negro." In upholding the law, Justice Frankfurter referred to a range of factors. He pointed to the historical exclusion of libel from free speech protection; to the risks to social cohesion created by racial hate speech; and to the need for judicial deference to legislative judgments on these complex matters. Many countries in Europe accept the same analysis and do not afford protection to racial and ethnic hate speech. But most people think that after New York Times v. Sullivan? Beauharnais is no longer the law. In New York Times, the Court indicated that the law of libel must be evaluated in accordance with the constitu If campus speech restrictions at public universities cover speech that is part of social deliberation they might well be seen as unconstitutional tional commitment to robust debate on public issues. The conventional view - which the Supreme Court has not directly addressed - is that racial hate speech contains highly political ideas, that it belongs in the free speech "core," and that it may not be suppressed merely because it is offensive or otherwise harmful. Standing by themselves, epithets are not intended as contributions to social deliberation about anything. But are restrictions on hate speech impermissibly selective? In R.A. V. v. St. Paul, the Court invalidated a law directed against a certain kind of hate speech, principally on the ground that it discriminated on the basis of subject matter. The case involved an act of crossburning on a private yard. All the justices agreed that the content-neutral trespass law could be applied against that act; the question was whether a special "hate speech" law was Controlling speech is, in one sense, a defining characteristic of the university. cause of the place of race in our social and political order." In his view, "[threatening someone because of her race or religious beliefs may cause particularly severe trauma or touch off a riot. . .; such threats may be punished more severely than threats against someone based on, for example, his support of a particular athletic team." Thus there were "legitimate, reasonable, and neutral justifications" for the special rule. But Justice Stevens spoke only for himself, and his view was firmly rejected by the majority. R.A. V. are incorrect in principle, because there are sufficiently neutral grounds for restrictions (a) and (b).8 Perhaps a university could neutrally decide that epithets directed against blacks, women, and homosexuals cause distinctive harms. But this conclusion is hard to reconcile with the RA. V. decision. Colleges and universities do, however, have some arguments that were unavailable to St. Paul, Minnesota. In order to make the conclusions thus far more than provisional, we have to address those arguments. If RA. V. does not apply to the campus, it might be because public universities can claim a large degree of insulation from judicial supervision. That claim to insulation is closely connected to the idea of academic freedom. problems. Indeed, controlling speech is, in one sense, a defining characteristic of the university. There are at least four different ways in which such controls occur. the third kind of academic control on speech - judgments about quality are pervasive. Such judgments affect admissions, evaluation of students in class and on paper, and evaluation of prospective and actual faculty as well. Academic decisions about quality will of course be based on a conception of appropriate standards of argument and justification. These standards involve judgments about merit or excellence that would of course be unacceptable in the setting of criminal punishment or civil fine, but that are a perfectly and nearly inescapable legitimate part of the educational function. At least this is so if there is no discrimination on the basis of viewpoint, that is, if the person involved in making the assessment offers judgments on the basis of standards of quality that are applied neutrally to everyone (an ambitious aspiration, and one that is conceptually complex). The job performance of teachers consists mostly of speech. When that performance is found wanting, it is almost always because of content. dents; but much the same is true for faculty members. Universities can impose on their faculty restrictive rules of decorum and civic participation. A teacher who refuses to teach the subject, fails to allow counter-arguments, treats students contemptuously, or vilifies them in class, can be penalized without offense to the Constitution. The job performance of teachers consists mostly of speech. When that performance is found wanting, it is almost always because of content, including judgments about subject matter and quality, and sometimes because of viewpoint. tent, and it would be most surprising if viewpoint discrimination did not affect many evaluations. usually firm controls on hate speech, so as not to compromise the values of education itself. The university might emphasize in this regard that it has a special obligation to protect all of its students as equal members of the community. This obligation calls for restrictions on what faculty members may say. The university might believe that certain narrowly defined forms of hate speech are highly destructive to the students' chance to learn. It might think that black students and women can be effectively excluded by certain forms of hate speech. Probably a university should be given more leeway to restrict hate speech than a state or locality, precisely because it ought to receive the beriefit of the doubt when it invokes concerns of this kind. Surely the educational mission ought to grant the university somewhat greater room to maneuver, especially in light of the complexity and delicacy of the relevant policy questions. Courts might also hesitate before finding viewpoint discrimination or impermissible selectivity. Perhaps there should be a presumption in favor of a university's judgment that narrowly defined hate speech directed at blacks or women produces harm that is especially threatening to the educational enterprise. two additional factors. First, there are numerous colleges and universities. Many students can choose among a range of alternatives, and a restriction in one, two, or more imposes an extremely small incursion into the system of free expression. Colleges that restrict a large amount of speech may find themselves with few students, and in any case other institutions will be available. Second, the Constitution is itself committed to the elimination of second-class citizenship, and this commitment makes it hard to say that an educational judgment opposed to certain forms of hate speech is impermissibly partisan. Just as a university might ban the use of profanity in class, so it might stop racial epithets and similar expressions of hatred or contempt. the use of profanity in class, or personally abusive behavior on campus, so it might stop racial epithets and similar expressions of hatred or contempt. This is not to say that students and teachers who violate this ban must be expelled or suspended. Generally informal sanctions, involving conversations rather than punishment, are much to be preferred. But the Constitution should not stand as a barrier to approaches of this sort, so long as the university is neutral in this way. We can imagine a range of statements that might make job performance quite difficult. exploring the question of the university's power over employees, arising out of the highly publicized decision of the City University of New York to remove Dr. Leonard Jeffries as chair of the black studies department at City College. Jeffries had reportedly made a range of apparently anti-Semitic remarks, blaming rich Jews for the black slave trade, complaining that Russian Jews and "their financial partners, the Mafia, put together a financial system of destruction of black people," and claiming that Jews and Italians had "planned, plotted, and programmed out of Hollywood" to denigrate blacks in films. Could the City University take these remarks as a reason to remove Jeffries from his position as department chair? (We should agree that removal could be justified if, as some say, it was a response to an inadequate record of publication, to poor research, or to low-quality work.) the removal was based on an effort neutrally to promote educational goals, or whether it was instead an effort to punish the expression of a controversial point of view. In the abstract this question is hard to answer, but it can be clarified through ex amples. Under the First Amendment, a public university could not fire a mathematics professor because he is a Republican, extremely conservative, or a sharp critic of the Supreme Court; such a discharge could not plausibly be connected with legitimate concerns about job performance. Even if the mathematics professor was a department chair, these political convictions are unrelated to job performance. move a department chair if his comments make him unable successfully to undertake his ordinary duties as chair. The governing principle seems to be this: A university can penalize speech if and only if it can show that the relevant speech makes it very difficult or impossible for the employee adequately to perform his job. Whenever a university seeks to punish speech, it should face a large burden to show that it is behaving neutrally, and not trying to punish a disfavored point of view. On this approach, teachers and researchers will almost always be protected. Controversial political statements will not be a sufficient basis for punishment or discharge. A political science professor may criticize (or endorse) the president without becoming less able to perform the job, and most teachers will be able to say whatever they like without subjecting themselves to the possibility of discipline. It follows that the City College could not punish (as it apparently tried to do) a philosophy professor for publishing the view that blacks are, on average, intellectually inferior to whites. It also follows that the City College could not remove Professor Jeffries from his tenured position merely because of actually or apparently antiSemitic statements. do not think that it should be adopted. Everyone seems to agree that the president and the governor may make hiring decisions on the basis of viewpoint; it would not make sense to disable the president from ensuring that high-level employees do not try, through There will be no substantial interference with the system of free expression if universities are given the narrow authority for which I have argued. speech, to undermine the president's program. Any resulting interference with the system of free expression seems minimal, and the president has a strong need for a loyal staff. Similarly, universities have powerful and legitimate reasons to expect their employees to perform their jobs, especially if those employees are engaged in highly public administrative tasks, and especially if professors who are not performing administrative tasks are realistically not threatened. At least under ordinary circumstances, there will be no substantial interference with the system of free expression if universities are given the narrow authority for which I have argued. I conclude that outside of legitimate judgments about quality and subject matter, universities may punish employees for their speech only in a narrow set of circumstances - almost always involving highly public, administrative positions in which the relevant speech makes it difficult or impossible for employees to perform their jobs. A system of free expression should be designed to safeguard the exchange of ideas. This understanding calls for protection of much of what might be considered "hate speech"; but it also allows restrictions on speech that amounts to epithets. There are some additional complexities in the academic setting. Universities are pervasively and necessarily engaged in regulation of speech, and this fact complicates many existing claims about hate speech codes. In the end I suggest that the test is whether the restriction on speech is a legitimate part of the institution's educational mission, understanding that ideal by reference to the commitment to liberal education. This mission is not neutral among different conceptions of the good. It embodies a substantive project (though the project is one that allows exposure to a wide range of competing conceptions). This understanding would not permit speech codes to endanger the exchange of ideas, but it would allow for mildly broader restrictions than would be acceptable for states and localities. & Both freedom and lack of freedom are socially constructed; they are an outcome of human practices.