JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Supreme Court Review 
This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC 
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms 
STANDING INJURIES In Association of Data Processing Serv Org v Camp,1 the Sup Court, in an opinion written by Justice William O. Douglas, r lutionized the law of standing. The Court rejected the old idea th a "legal interest" is a necessary basis for standing. Instead, it out a new requirement: the plaintiff must show an "injury in fa The Court clearly thought that it was possible to identify "in in fact" in an entirely law-free way. On the Court's view, ju should answer the question whether there was injury by loo at consequences, and without examining the relevant law. 
The Data Processing Court did not make clear whether in setti out the "injury in fact" test, it was speaking of the Administrat Procedure Act3 or the Constitution. But eventually the Court 
Cass R. Sunstein is Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chi Law School and Department of Political Science. 
AUTHOR'S NOTE: I am grateful to Thomas Brown for excellent research assistance. S397 US 150 (1970). 
the zone of interests" protected by the statutory or constitutional provision at issue, 156; but the Court meant this test to be quite lenient, and it is largely irrelevant for p purposes. If the discussion here is correct, however, the "zone" test holds some promi refocusing standing law on the question of congressional instructions. The recent tight of the "zone" test, see Air Courier Conference of America v American Postal Workers Unio US 51 whether Congress has conferred a right to bring suit. I cannot discuss this issue here, t it should emerge from the discussion that there is an intriguing relationship betwee reading of Northeastern Contractors and the possible tightening of the "zone" test. 
3 The relevant provision, which the Court purported to be interpreting, is 5 US "A person suffering legal wrong because of agency action, or adversely affected or agg by agency action within the meaning of a relevant statute, is entitled to judicial r thereof." The interpretation was misconceived; the APA contains no "injury in fact" t On the injury in fact idea and the APA, see Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? 91 L Rev 163, 181-82 (1992). 
? 1994 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0-226-36248-5/94/1993-0003$02.00 37 cluded that an injury in fact is a con standing under Article III of the Constit one has standing. This is an extraordi Contrary to the Court's recent claims, t has no basis in the text or history of th 
Indeed, the Court has never thoroughl "legal interest" to "injury in fact." But i said that it wanted to make it unnecessa its" in order to decide issues of standi instead to make the standing problem into the harm suffered by the plainti whether the plaintiff had standing woul or constitutional provision at issue.6 commonsensical, largely value-free in harm. If you are harmed, you have st you cannot sue. 
All this seems very simple and straig know whether an injury has been incu more vexing than it might appear. Co way; he thinks that the project woul believes that if the project is built, he w an actual incidence of cancer? An increased risk of cancer? A diminished opportunity to enjoy days without sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere? A diminution in the value of his property? Communication Commission is going to award a license to a rock music station on 104.3 FM. Is her injury the actual unavailability of classical music in her area? Her diminished opportunity to hear classical music? The unavailability of classical music on 104.3 FM? Her offense at the presence of rock music on the airwaves? against the father of her child, who was born out of wedlock; she hopes that the proceedings will convince him to pay child support. But the prosecutor acts only in cases involving children born within 
See, e.g., Simon v EKWRO, 426 US 26 (1976); Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife, 112 S Ct 2130 (1992). 
5 See Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? 91 Mich L Rev 163. 6 Subject to the qualification in note 2 supra. wedlock. Is Richardson's i child support? The actual a have her child treated the procedural injury, consisti environmental impact stat What sort of an injury mu Must they live near the wat to prepare the statement w harms must they connect 
Questions of this kind ma difference. Take a recent think that if the North A is ratified, the air will beco what, exactly, is their inju broadly-as, say, increase may have standing to cont acterized narrowly-as, say would not otherwise occur be deprived of access to co and they will be unable t defendant's conduct or lik favor. Few who are subjec show that they will get so 
Similar conclusions might b music. Such listeners will preferred fare elsewhere on fense" at rock music will point that raises further co inquiry into whether ther t7o CpeoompplearientTehreesFteudndinfostruAdyniinmgalbsisvonE an environmental impact statement. S Cir 1992), characterizing a similar inj s See the discussion in Lujan v Defend 9 The issue arose in Public Citizen district court found standing witho dressability. The court of appeals rev 10 Compare Office of Communication 1966); Public Citizen v Friends of the held,"1 it is highly speculative to sugges will necessarily lead a delinquent father to support payments. Therefore-as the C could be shown. 12 
It is astonishing but true that the Supreme Court has given very little guidance on a key issue in modern administrative law: how injuries should be characterized for purposes of standing. Its most serious and sustained confrontation with the issue came last term in Northeastern Florida Chapter of the Associated General Contractors v Jacksonville (hereafter Northeastern Contractors)." The result and the reasoning in the case are in conspicuous tension with other Supreme Court precedents, most of them quite recent. And the Court's distinctive approach, offered in an intriguing setting, has the potential to allow the Court to sort out much of the law in this area, and also to move standing doctrine in some generally salutary directions. This is so especially in light of the fact that, as we will see, the Northeastern Contractors case exposes the fundamental flaw in Data Processing-the view that it is possible to identify injuries without looking at law. One of the important legacies of Northeastern Contractors will be the understanding that in characterizing injury, it is the law that counts. In deciding whether there is standing, what matters is what the law says. There can be no law-free inquiry into the subject of injury. This will be my principal claim here. 
A. DESCRIPTION 
In Jacksonville and Duval County, Florida, there tion of construction contractors, operating under Northeastern Florida Chapter of the Associated Ge tors (hereinafter AGC). In 1991 AGC challenged Jac nority Business Enterprise program, which requir total city contract funds be set aside for minority prises. A minority business enterprise is defined owned at least 51% by a woman or a member of a min " Linda RS v Richard D, 410 US 614 (1973). 12 Id. " 113 S Ct 2297 (1993). 
AGC's members are mostly They regularly bid and per of Jacksonville. They com excluded from bidding on th minority business enterpri non-minority members of if not for the set-aside pro provides a cause of action f state law, they claimed that of the laws. 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit held that AGC lacked standing. " The key point was that its members had not alleged that they "would have bid more successfully on any one or more of these contracts if not for the ordinance."'16 They therefore could not show injury in fact. In the court's view, it was purely speculative to say that if the program were invalidated, AGC's members would be awarded any additional contracts. The plaintiffs action thus ran afoul of a number of Supreme Court decisions holding that there must be a concrete and definable injury to the plaintiff, one that was attributable to the defendant's conduct and likely to be remedied by a decree in the plaintiff's favor.17 
The Supreme Court reversed." The centerpiece of the Court's decision consisted of a description of the injury not as a failure to receive a contract, but instead as an inability to compete. This description of the injury stemmed from the Court's understanding of the Equal Protection Clause. "When the government erects a barrier that makes it more difficult for members of one group to obtain a benefit than it is for members of another group, a member of the former group seeking to challenge the barrier need not alleged that he would have obtained the benefit but for the barrier 14 42 USC ? 1983: "Every person who, under color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory, subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen of the United States or other person within the jurisdiction thereof to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the Constitution and laws, shall be liable to the party injured in an action at law, suit in equity, or other proper proceeding for redress." 'i 896 F2d 1283 (1990). 16 Id at 1219. 
"7 For discussion of these cases, see Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? 91 Mich L Rev 163; text at notes 38-50 infra. 
18 113 S Ct 2297 (1993). in order to establish standing."'9 The in was met by "the denial of equal treatment sition of the barrier."20 
It was therefore sufficient for the plaint ready and able to bid on contracts and from doing so as a result of the discri cluding, the most important precedent wa which Allan Bakke was allowed to challe program without showing that he would out the program. And in an intriguing an note, the Court added that because of t injury, the redressability requirements the Court appeared to say that since the i with the opportunity to compete, it w conduct; and it also followed that any j tiffs' favor would remedy their injury. 
The Court was aware that its decision was in some conflict with earlier outcomes, especially that in Warth v Seldin.23 In the Warth case, the Court had denied standing to a construction association that was seeking to challenge an allegedly discriminatory zoning ordinance. In trying to come to terms with Warth, the Court made two points. First, the association in Warth did not contend that it could not apply for variances and permits on an equal basis; its complaint was that it could not obtain variances and permits. Second, there was no allegation in Warth that any members had actually applied for a permit or variance for a current project. Here, by contrast, actual applications were alleged.24 B. EVALUATION 
It is not necessary to linger long over the questi Court's decision was correct. Section 1983 confers a cause of action on people whose federal rights have been violated by state law. 19 Id at 2303. 20 Id. 21 See Regents of the University of California v Bakke, 438 US 265, 281 n 14 (1978). 22 Id at 2303 n 5. 23 422 US 490 (1975). 
24 There was also a question of mootness, on which two justices dissented, id at 2305 (O'Connor, joined by Blackmun); but that question is not relevant for my purposes here. 
RIES The 
Equal 
to compete on an equal basis. sional schools in 
ar in 
Arkansas, they have been matter whether any par tic ul been admitted under a no plain tif fs in 
decree invalid ating the discr sion or award of a contract pend on what happens when The Court's conclu sion th ture of the interest protec itself hig hly nota ble, and it standin 
The 
been resolved if the 
dently of law. 
In order ev 
had to look at the So much for the at tempt la i would inquire into "injury cases is, in in which the every case-an issue is explo Something has to be said, the easy cases, the injury because law is irrelevant. 
s I legal 
background.28 In any case, what sense w to prove that they would a 2s Of course this question depends 
formulation on what "equal does n prote 26 The case may be different if ther admitted if he applied. But in almo admission is enough. I do not discu application for admission. Application would be futile-and in such a case a This issue was not squarely presented to suggest an application would be r 27 This is so their claim is correct on the merits. 
at least if we assume, as 28 I cannot discuss some of the complexities underlying this claim. For general discussion, see Fletcher, The Structure of Standing, 98 Yale L J 221 (1988); Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? 91 Mich L Rev 163. See also text at notes 53-55 infra (discussing the ways in which any claim about consequences is in fact underlain by norms). contracts? How would constitutional odd requirement? It may be difficult struct the facts sufficiently to assess th would have happened in a counterfactu difficult after the fact. Moreover, tha have no point. Because it would serve poses, it would be a waste of judicia would be some saving of judicial reso need to resolve disputes whose outcome award of a contract to any party; but sources, any gains seem likely to be smal constitutional goal seems to require the contract would be awarded. At least this is what the Court in Northeastern Contractors seemed to assume. Some such assumption must be implicit in the Court's readiness to characterize the injury as involving an opportunity rather than a more discrete harm. 
There is one possible line of response to this argument, suggested in the recent cases29 though, surprisingly, not even discussed i Northeastern Contractors. Certainly courts ought to minimize the oc casions for intervening with political processes; almost certainl this is especially so if we are dealing with a constitutional attac on state law. If the plaintiffs' interest is widely shared-and an "opportunity" is by definition likely to be widely shared-perhap judges should refuse to interfere with the outcomes of electora processes. And if the interest is as broad as the opportunity t compete, it is indeed going to be widely shared. On this view, t construction contractors in Northeastern Contractors-perhaps n incidentally, members of the white majority,30 though this particu lar point need not be emphasized here-ought to have been force to rely on the political process unless and until they could sho that contracts would actually have been awarded to them. Witho such a showing, all they had was a "generalized grievance," on that is best taken up before legislative bodies. Courts ought, i short, to require tangible, concrete harm, rather than injury t opportunities, as a way of minimizing the occasions for interfering 
JURIES with political processes. It f ern Contractors was right af 
In form, the Supreme Co persuasive in other contexts. should have addressed this of its prominence elsewher a significant gap in the Co 
The construction contrac not, however, an electoral m cal remedy may be relevant claim,32 it does not justif heard at all. The contracto taxpayers or ordinary citize fused, was not felt by all judicial interference with justify a restriction on stan been precluded from comp color. The dispute was har courts were to be made un would be unavailable to a constitutional or statutory c case,33 for example, equally their claims; the same is tru under (for example) th Clauses.34 A refusal to chara nity"-if based on the num stake-would wreak havoc with too much established law. For all these reasons, the outcome in Northeastern Contractors is unexceptionable. 
There is a further point. I have noted that in section 1983, Congress granted a cause of action to all those whose federal constitutional rights have been violated by state law.35 In Northeastern Contractors, the plaintiffs alleged that the set-aside program violated 46 THE SUPREME COURT their rights under the Equal Protectio congressionally conferred cause of act cient to establish standing. The Supre phasize this point-the creation of a whose federal rights have been violate major gap in the opinion. The Court did source of federal law that conferred plaintiffs. But if we attend to section simple. 
One final issue. In many cases since Data Processing, the Court has been faced with the implicit issue of how to characterize injuries in standing cases.36 Often the question is whether to characterize an injury in terms that are familiar to the common law. At common law, a discrete wrongdoer typically imposes a discrete wrong on a discrete person at an easily identifiable time. This is the basic form of the common law allegation, and it can easily be transplanted to the administrative law setting, where we might ask whether the same framework is at work. In public law cases, however, it is possible that the common law understanding should be rejected, on the theory that it is poorly adapted to the goals and functions of the modern state. The alternative is to characterize an injury as involving (for example) an increased probability of harm, an injury to an opportunity, or a failure to have potential wrongdoers face the kinds of incentives that Congress (or the Constitution) seeks to impose on them. In many cases the Court has opted for the common law characterization, and thus denied standing, when the public law alternative was fully available. Strikingly, in Northeastern Contractors the Court seemed to think that a common lawlike understanding, one that speaks in terms of discrete harms to discrete people, would make no sense; the Equal Protection Clause protects the opportunity to compete, not the award of contracts. We need not quarrel with this result in order to insist that the Court ought to have explained how this characterization of the injury fits, or fails to fit, with other cases. And it is here that the case leaves a conspicuous gap not only in logic but also for the future. 
36 See text at notes 38-50 infra. 
From what has been said thus far, it seems clear that Northeastern Contractors does not coexist easily with recent cases and trends in the area of standing. For this reason the case, though seemingly minor and technical, raises a host of complex and novel issues. It will be useful to begin by showing how the same analytic strategy used in Northeastern Contractors might have been used in a wide range of cases in which standing was denied. That strategy consists of recharacterizing the injury so as to ensure simultaneous compliance with the requirements of injury in fact and redressability.37 
Consider, for example, Linda RS v Richard D. 38 It will be recalled that the case involved a complaint that the local prosecutor had failed to prosecute fathers of illegitimate children for failure to provide child support. The plaintiff claimed that the discriminatory prosecution policy was in violation of the Equal Protection Clause. The Court denied standing. On the Court's analysis, the problem for purposes of standing was that the plaintiff could not show that her injury would be redressed by a decree in her favor. Perhaps the father would simply go to prison. Structurally, this approach is the same as that of the Court of Appeals in Northeastern Contractors. The failure of redressability stemmed from the narrow characterization of the injury, just as the broad characterization of the injury in Northeastern Contractors eliminated any problem with redressability. 
But it would have been equally plausible to say that the injury suffered in Linda RS involved not the absence of child support, but the opportunity to ensure that payments by the child's father were subject to the same incentives as everyone else similarly situated. That was the violation of the equality principle, and with respect to that violation, there was no problem with either injury or redressability-just as in Northeastern Contractors. Imagine, for example, if a local prosecutor initiated proceedings against white fathers 7 There are really two such requirements: the injury must be due to the defendant's conduct, and the injury must be likely to be remedied by a decree in the plaintiffs favor. In most cases, these will lead to the same result. See Allen v Wright, 468 US 737 (1984). 38 410 US 614 (1973). for child support, but not against bla such circumstances a mother of a child whose father is black complains that the discrimination has made it impossible for her to support her child. Would there be any problem with standing? Certainly there should not be,39 and Northeastern Contractors is a powerful precedent in her favor. The injury consists not of the absence of child support, but of the fact that her opportunity to receive child support is not subject to the same incentives as that of others similarly situated. 
The only difference between Linda RS and Northeastern Contractors is that the former involved an action against a criminal prosecutor to enforce the law. It therefore raised the arguably distinctive considerations involved in a proceeding by a private party against the government to require it to proceed against another private party. In Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife,40 the Supreme Court brought out this point, which had been largely implicit in several other cases.41 In Lujan, the Court said that a case in which a plaintiff sought enforcement action was the weakest case for standing. In the Court's view, the injury in such cases is especially likely to be speculative. As we have seen, however, whether the injury is speculative cannot be decided in the abstract; everything depends on how the injury is described.42 On that particular question, there is no difference between an ordinary action and one brought against the government for unlawful enforcement activity. On that particular question, it is utterly irrelevant whether the government is being asked to initiate proceedings. If the injury is characterized broadly, as it was in Northeastern Contractors, this difference should not make a difference. Certainly there is no Article II problem with a suit against a state or local prosecutor for unlawful discrimination.43 
Perhaps Article II concerns should bear on standing in cases in which the federal executive is the defendant. But any such concerns should be analytically separate. They should not be folded into the inquiry whether the injury is "speculative." The merger of these two questions-both complex enough-is a recipe for confusion. 39 See Heckler v Mathews, 465 US 728 (1986). 40 112 S Ct 2130 (1992). "' See, e.g., Allen v Wright, 468 US 737 (1984). 42 See text at notes 22, 38-39 supra. 3 See also Sunstein, Article II Revisionism, 92 Mich L Rev 131 (1993). I conclude, then, that on t Northeastern Contractors co RS, so as to allow standing 
So much for Linda RS. Tu redressability requiremen Simon v Eastern Kentucky W denied standing to indigent lations implementing the alleged that they had soug emergency rooms. They c that the new regulations d provide medical care to the plaintiffs should be denied that the change in policy of services of which they not show injury, for they policy had been in place, t For all we know, the denia any event. (Notice the struc ruling in Northeastern Contr 
But in Eastern Kentucky We characterized the relevant said that the injury involve are subject to the incentiv through the relevant provi plaintiffs could have comp opportunity to receive med the incentives for which t odd;4s but why would such appropriate than the parallel The Court itself has offered no answer. 
The second tax case is Allen v Wright.46 In that case, parents of schoolchildren attending schools undergoing a process of desegregation complained about an IRS policy granting tax deductions to people who send their children to all-white private schools. Ac44 426 US 26 (1976). 
"5 If it does, it is, I think, because of the persistence of common law thinking about injuries. See below. 
46 468 US 737 (1984). cording to the plaintiffs, the deduction existence jeopardized the desegregation "white flight." The Supreme Court deni the Court, the parents could not show tha would be affected in any way by a cha 
As a factual claim, the Court's point s is hardly clear that such a change would a But suppose that the plaintiffs had urge child would be affected in any particula had been injured in a legally cognizable fa to ensure that the process of desegregat fected by the grant of unlawful tax dedu have described their injury as involving desegregation process unaffected by unla flight. Here as well-the now-familiar used in Northeastern Contractors could ea thorize standing. 
As a further example, consider Lujan v There the plaintiffs were people interes endangered species and planning to go a at some unspecified future date. The pl the relevant agency's failure to apply t extraterritorially, a failure that, in their prospects as professionals and tourists. that the plaintiffs lacked standing, sin injury. Their "abstract" interest in pro members of the relevant species was no hand, the plaintiffs had acquired a plan the endangered species were imminentl deed be a concrete harm.48 Otherwise, n harm was speculative or merely ideolog 
Suppose, however, that following the a Contractors, the plaintiffs described thei to see a particular species at a particula harm to their opportunity to see certai 47 112 S Ct 2130 (1992). 
48 On this point see Japanese Whaling Ass'n v ACS, 47 to prospective whale watchers); Animal Protection Inst. 1992) (same, and characterizing injury as involving an o would this description be il tionally inadequate? Is the formal bids in Northeastern the conception of the injur 
Consider, finally, the most ministrative Procedure Act complains of agency nonco ments of the APA. Is there whether the agency would do dures were followed? Surel stems from the agency's fail has specified. It does not mat procedures, nonetheless fail injury consists of the increas the failure to comply with 
Northeastern Contractors sh gree of manipulability in the ing cases. In nearly every denied standing, it would h in such a way as to meet al that Northeastern Contractor terize the relevant injury. for the future-the Suprem 
A. POSITIVE LAW-AND THE DEMISE OF DATA PROCESSING 
I suggest that when courts are deciding how to ch ries, the starting point is positive law. The key q the initial one-involves constitutional or congre tions. It follows that the question of standing is question whether the plaintiff has a cause of act 49 5 USC ?? 551 et seq. 
50so Compare the discussion of procedural injuries in Lujan, which view: "This is not a case where plaintiffs are seeking to enforce a pr the disregard of which could impair a separate concrete interest of their requirement for a hearing prior to denial of their license applicat requirement for an environmental impact statement before a federal next door to them)." 112 S Ct at 2130, 2142. 
5s To the same effect see Fletcher, supra note 28; Currie, Misunders Supreme Court Review 41. mistake in the last generation, made i in Data Processing, was to split these issue is: Has the law entitled someone t look to the underlying provision of la injury that it is designed to prevent. No easy because it was clear that the const the opportunity to compete on an equ of a particular contract. EKWRO and cause in those settings, it is much har instructions on how to characterize th 
This general approach suggests that it decide whether there is an "injury" a courts must characterize injuries by l where else might they look in order t reject the effort of the Court in Data Pr interest" test in favor of "injury in divorce of these questions was brough consciously by Justice Douglas in the cessing case. It is hopeless to divorce t cannot know whether there is an injury law is. Before the enactment of the c example, a victim of racial discrimin was no harm for courts to redress; any and no basis for a lawsuit. After enac question of standing became trivially requirement was met." 
To be sure, it is sometimes transpare injury-as, for example, when someon jail. But even in such easy cases, an u some important conceptual work. We liberty as "injury" partly because our tradition makes such matters clear. I cases we can identify injuries as such wi the law. But as participants in the le cases are connected with shared unde background; and when the cases beco 52 See Fletcher, supra note 28 (collecting authorities 53 See Havens Realty Corp. v Coleman, 455 US 363 (1982) Co., 409 US 205 (1972). law is indispensable to an poses, there is harm. 
There is a close relationsh much broader claim that a in fact mediated by social n matter, and helping us to de who purport to be pure c may well be relying on a b purely consequential in cha all, and exactly how those t in social decisions. Consequ or perhaps never simply co we can understand, for ex offense is not a legally cogn nications Act, or for that 
If injuries are a product o broad limits (and perhaps decide whether people are that the appropriate charac on an understanding of posi eastern Contractors itself pa Processing, and explicitly so. Court actually reasoned abo stake under the Equal Pr Northeastern Contractors as that "legal interest," rathe in standing cases. 
B. STATUTORY SILENCE 
Positive law is a start; but it is only that. Freque does not attend with anything like particularity standing; frequently it is not easy to make inferences text, structure, and history. Frequently the character injury will be far from simple. To be sure, the statut and history might help. In EKWRO and Allen, fo Court might have been responding to the general 4 See generally Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics (19 Of5 LcouujarnsevtDheefeCnodnesrtsitouftion might sometimes create causes of action an 
Wildlife, 112 S Ct 2130 (1992), imposes a limit on t 
COURT person ought not to be allowed to litiga other.56 If this idea is in fact attributa goals and understandings, both cases mi of absence of injury, but because this o standing of the governing statutes. On thi say how the injury should be characteriz taken to have expressed a judgment abou excludes third-party actions in tax cases. 
In other settings, however, there is no judgment with which to work. In such s tion of the injury will be a product of ground understandings on the part of t of anything realistically attributable to approaches seem to be plausible candidat 
The first, a common law model of standi acterization of injury. This is so for t group of citizens should presumptively be ical process rather than the courts, and lems, constitutional in origin, whenever ci the executive to undertake enforcement action on their behalf. The second candidate, a public law model of standing, favors broad characterization of the injury. It does so principally on the theory that broad characterization is most likely to fit with congressional goals and expectations.58 
Of course broad-gauged models of these kinds cannot substitute for close engagement with particular statutes and facts. We cannot come up with a simple approach to unite the appropriate characterization of injuries in cases involving consumers, radio listeners, victims of discrimination, environmentalists, purchasers of securities, and many more. Any real case will require knowledge of the particular legal claim, and for these purposes abstractions provide at best broad orientation. But these alternative positions do seem 56 See EKWRO, supra note 4, at 46 (Stewart concurring). 
57 The general standing provision is 5 USC 702, see note 3 supra, and it is of course binding. The problem is that it is uninformative on the question at hand. If it is taken to require an "injury in fact," the question remains how any alleged injury is to be characterized. If it is to be taken to require a legal interest (as I think that it should), the question remains how to decide whether one exists. The APA provision therefore leaves a number of uncertainties. the most important draw on these positions ar the rest of this essay to a b 
The common law model. to begin with a dis tinction b subjected to governmental c tion59 (people for whom ers to the radio, vic tims sta of the ests objects of regula tion h are at stake, and the their right to judicial revie In to any case, no one denies t standing. 
But perhaps cou ing to beneficiaries of regul very numerous, and at least action of a certain kind or involving appropriate cha those with denying standing to r these facts foremost really turn on "injury"-th instead on a pa tional backdrop. 
That unde numerous beneficiaries ask t 
This idea might be justified on various grounds. Perhaps numerous beneficiaries ought to be relegated to their political remedies. 
Perhaps an agency that (for example) fails to apply the Endangered Species Act extraterritorially, or to prepare an environmental impact statement before going forward with NAFTA, ought to be forced to defend itself before the public and in democratic arenas, 
59 A qualification is necessary here: The distinction between regulated objects and regulatory beneficiaries depends on some controversial assumptions. These include the decision to take the common law system as the ordinary or natural state of affairs, and to see departures from that system as regulatory impositions into an otherwise prepolitical status quo. See Sunstein, supra note 3, at 196-97. I stay with conventional usage here, but for ease of exposition, not because of acceptance of what underlies that usage. Note also that the "beneficiaries" of regulation could plausibly be (a) narrow interest groups of various kinds, including companies exempted from statutory requirements, or (b) people who are actually the "objects" of regulation, that is, people who can be imposed upon only because of what the law says. On the latter point, see Jeremy Waldron, Homelessness and the Problem of Freedom, 39 UCLA L Rev 295 (1991). 
60 See Yakus v US, 321 US 414 (1944). rather than in court. This is a complex deliberation ought to be strongly favor course courts should be available if ther jury, of the sort familiar to the common l is at stake, standing should be denied. 
There are, moreover, good reasons to be c conscription of public resources-a prob issue in cases brought by regulatory be pany stops the government from regula conscription is at work.) If beneficiaries an agency on the ground that it has no sufficient intensity, perhaps there is a ris groups will be able to obtain enforcemen of others. The problem is especially serious an agency always has before it a wide ra scarce enforcement resources. A suit b make it harder for various social benefi ment-to be granted to group Y. Enviro tivity in Ohio may compromise efforts discrimination in California may impair en nois. This problem will rarely be visible to the particular problem before it. Considera Supreme Court to conclude that agency action, should be presumed unreviewabl 
Such considerations have special strength latory programs that must be coordinated time. Typically an agency is charged wi variety of different statutes, and it has t bringing about a coherent overall sche together provisions that were enacted at d must be implemented in a temporally ra is in an especially good position to decid be addressed, and when. A court is most cient overview to examine such issues.62 Thi that courts ought to presume that Congres to beneficiaries alleging only an "opportun in general, something more concrete m 6' Heckler v Chaney, 470 US 821, 832 (1985). 62 See the discussion of coordination in Breyer, Closing that discrete harms-of the sort demanded in EKWRO and Allenmust be shown in the typical administrative law case. 
On the approach I am suggesting, ideas of this sort would not have constitutional status. Congress could override the presumption against standing for "opportunity-type" harms by a clear statement. When it has done so, standing should be available for regulatory beneficiaries, however numerous, and however much courts will be overseeing (for legality) enforcement action. This is one way to understand things in the area of environmental law, where beneficiary suits are plentiful, and where Congress has firmly endorsed them.63 The common law model of standing would serve only to provide the background understandings against which to understand congressional silence. It would disallow suits by especially numerous beneficiaries unless Congress has said otherwise. Narrow characterization of the injury would really be a proxy for the relevant background understandings. In deciding standing cases, we would really be talking not of "injury in fact," but of the appropriate allocation of authority among Congress, courts, and agencies. 
This approach has the advantage of synthesizing a good deal of current law. It helps reconcile Northeastern Contractors with the cases that preceded it, most notably Allen v Wright and Lujan. It explains why the strategy in Northeastern Contractors-broad characterization of the injury-would not make sense when regulatory beneficiaries are seeking to compel enforcement action. The capacity for rationalization itself counts as a strong argument in favor of this approach. 
points. First, the common law model is untrue to the best understanding of Congress' goals and expectations. Second, the relevant constitutional concerns are without force. Suits by regulatory beneficiaries produce no constitutional difficulties. 
The initial point here is that regulatory statutes are rooted in ideas quite foreign to the common law. Typically they are enacted not to prevent discrete harms by discrete actors, but to restructure incentives or to ensure against what we might describe as probable or systemic harms. When Congress requires an environmental impact statement, for example, it is trying to restructure incentives 63 See, e.g., 30 USC 1270; 42 USC 6305; 42 USC 7604. by ensuring consideration of environment identifiable harms to identifiable people. schools receiving federal funds may not di sex, it is creating an incentive for sex equ particular results on particular schools students. When Congress imposes natio standards, it is trying to reduce system particular incidences of cancer. When Co hicles to reduce levels of air pollution, it i identifiable respiratory problems, but t produces lower aggregate risks. 
This is the characteristic form of mod Risk management, rather than redress o tional goal.64 In many ways, this differe departure from the more narrow right-du tic of the common law. In the face of that to be closely attuned to what Congre quence-a public law model of standinging to people complaining of opportunityCongress has not provided otherwise. He that listeners to radio, breathers of air in tims of discrimination, and others shoul to prevent the sorts of injuries that th designed to prevent. This understandin ensure that agencies adhere to the will of tion of "injury" would track the best unde to the national legislature in light of its g tions. 
Other considerations support this basi tion between regulated objects and regulat shaky conceptual foundations.6s The pu lation might well be counted as bene statutory and common-confers on the that are advantageous to their interests. of regulation might well be regarded a 64 Of course, risk management was a goal of the com Economic Analysis of Law (4th ed 1992). But the common la in the kinds of structural reform sought by modern reg 65 See note 59 infra. law-statutory and commo interests that they would p cases, the distinction betw take the common law as th and this judgment, howeve theory, ought not to be mad contrary views from Cong ensure that modern standin Deal shift in national legisla 
Moreover, it is plausible to t programs are at least somet the implementation process.6 to exert continuing influen cost barriers to exerting suc lic interest" organizations c tional problems. Often stat by a process of inadequate im of political pressure by reg adequately countered by th Whether or not transaction reason to believe that regu systematic disadvantage co if this is right, an asymme that lies at the heart of the from Congress' own standp nize insufficient enforceme the same time subjecting ag review.68 This result is hardl enacting regulatory statutes. 
Nor is it entirely persuasiv be required to resort to pol be able to win in court only them to victory. This mea 66 See Cass R. Sunstein, Constitutional 67 See, e.g., The Politics of Regulati Bureaucracy (1990). There is a compl James Tierney, Organized Interests and 68 To say all this is hardly to argue t pathologies in the regulatory state. Th supra note 62; Cass R. Sunstein, After 
COURT have-in the important sense-alread cess. To this extent, judicial review h processes by testing agency decisions aga tions, which are the ultimate source o 
Perhaps these ideas do not apply wh source of the plaintiffs' claims. In such demonstrate the "passive virtues"69 an to deliberate as long as possible. It seems will be cautious about allowing plaintif ruling on legislative or executive actio sonable to say that courts should not r stitution creates private rights of acti generally require a discrete harm to a di ing a case based solely on the Constitutio ing a cause of action.70 But statutory ca The argument for judicial refusal to hea weaker when plaintiffs are complainin forbids legislative action, but that a de requires a regulatory agency to take ac a case of that sort, considerations of de than against access to court. There is administrative or bureaucratic deliberation from an attack based on a statute where an interest protected by that statute is at stake. In any event, the regulated entities are, by hypothesis, entitled to judicial relief; they need not resort to the political process. Here too it is important to avoid building an asymmetry into the law of standing.71 None of this means that plaintiffs need not show an interest at all. But it does mean that in deciding whether a legal interest is at stake, the constitutional considerations do not counsel against granting standing to people who invoke "opportunity-type" harms. 
The same considerations suggest the difficulty of invoking Article II as a basis for denyin says that the President sha executed." Its basic purpose of enacted law. To be sur laws. But it does not forbi agency has failed to execu quired to do. Of course th to require agencies to enfo legal requirements to this e in the cases at hand. Articl the law. Suits by beneficia of executive default on that mine the allocation of pow so if a genuine legal claim of action is the best reading 
I think that these conside sions. First, Warth itself cause the plaintiffs' claim w ably right for the Court before assessing that claim. ences between constitution standing. Second, Allen an ing cases. Northeastern Cont could well have been desc applicable requirements. T outcomes in these cases wo assessment of the liabilit another. Perhaps Congress in that event, both cases but as a reading of the key Northeastern Contractors o that when Congress has be to characterize their injuri to opportunities. It follow began this essay, a creative 72 See Sunstein, supra note 17, for a late the relevant injury in such a wa standing.73 It also follows that the pu to fit well with most of current law, Wright as tax cases; emphasizing the d tional and statutory cases; and seeing requiring a more definite plan on the pa like the equivalent of a bid in Northeaste 
If the public law model is to be resi should adopt a clear statement principle, at the behest of large numbers of reg to require the executive to enforce th require an explicit congressional state ground concerns that are constitutional first and adjudication last, and that insis tial control over the enforcement proces principle should be adopted, but it is its apparent adversary-the public la approach would have the large benefit o tractors together with a set of cases easily coexist. In other words, both of discussed here would serve to synthesi with the complex body of law that pr 
Northeastern Contractors is the Court's first sustained encounter with a key issue in the new law of standing: the appropriate characterization of injuries. The Court's conclusion is unobjectionable, and there is nothing terribly wrong with the particular reasoning that underlay that conclusion. Section 1983 grants a cause of action to all those whose federal rights have been invaded by state law. The contractors in Northeastern Contractors complained that the set-aside program violated their constitutional rights. The Equal Protection Clause safeguards not particular outcomes, but general opportunities; and if the plaintiffs were correct on the merits, their legal rights had been violated. 
The basic problem with Northeastern Contractors is conceptual, 73 For some qualifications, see Sunstein, Standing and the Privatization of Public Law, supra note 58, at 1467-69. and though it does not bear goes very deep. The case e case, a fundamental probl assumption, key to Data P fied without reference to Whether there is an injur what the law says. The Cour Contractors confirm the decide the case without re Protection Clause. The case the view, vindicated by con istrative Procedure Act, th tion whether some source of law has conferred a cause of action on the plaintiff. 
Although a trend in this direction would be salutary, the Court has a large task of sorting out the relations among its previous decisions, nearly all of which ignore the issue of how to characterize injuries for purposes of standing. Northeastern Contractors fits poorly with the many cases in which the Court assumed or asserted a narrow characterization of the relevant injury. In all of those cases, the Court might easily have done what it did in Northeastern Contractors. It now remains to decide how the question of characterization is to be resolved. 
I have suggested here that the answer lies in positive law; it depends on congressional (or constitutional) instructions. Recognition of this point would itself be a significant advance insofar as it would maintain fidelity with both the Administrative Procedure Act and relevant constitutional provisions. But often congressional instructions are unclear, and they must be constructed on the basis of an understanding of the legislative and constitutional background. In the modern regulatory state, statutes are typically designed to restructure incentives, to diminish risks, or to protect opportunities, rather than to guarantee particular results to particular people. If this is correct, a broad characterization of the injury is generally appropriate in administrative law cases. Hence the strategy used in Northeastern Contractors-recharacterization of the 74 See also the discussion of the "zone" test, note 2 supra. 75 See Sunstein, supra note 17, for details. injury so as to ensure compliance with ought to be broadly generalizable. 
An alternative view would suggest that background, and the need for judicial forcement programs, standing ought gress has expressly granted standing harm, one that can be described in dis is at stake. This view would have the a Northeastern Contractors and a number on apparently similar facts. And altho alternative is ultimately unsound, the favor, for it would also have the virtu fundamental flaw of Data Processing, is both desirable and inevitable for co instructions, rather than to pretend to basis of "injury in fact" alone. 
