Occasional Papers

Law School Publications

University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

1993

Remembering 'TM'
Cass R. Sunstein

Elena Kagan

Follow this and additional works at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/occasional_papers

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein & Elena Kagan, "Remembering 'TM'," University of Chicago Law Occasional Paper, No. 30 (1993).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Law School Publications at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion
in Occasional Papers by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

Occasional  Papers from
The  Law School
The University  of Chicago

Number  30
Remembering  'TM'
Elena  Kagan
Cass R.  Sunstein

"For Justice  Marshall,"  published  originally  in  71  Texas
Law  Review  1125  (1993).  @  1993  by  the  Texas  Law
Review  Association. Reprinted  by  permission.

"On  Marshall's  Legal  Legacy,"  published  originally as
"On  Marshall's  Conception  of  Equality"  in  44
Stanford  Law  Review  1267  (1992).  @  1992  by  the
Board  of  Trustees  of the  Leland  Stanford  Junior
University.

Copies  of Occasional Papers from the  Law School  are
available  from  William  S.  Hein  &  Company,  Inc.,
1285  Main  Street,  Buffalo,  New  York  14209,  to
whom  inquiries  should  be  addressed.  Current  numbers
are  also  available  on  subscription  from  William  S.
Hein & Company,  Inc.

This  Occasional Paper is  devoted  to  reflections  on
Justice Thurgood Marshall,  who  died  on January 24,
1993.  The following articles were written by  University
of Chicago Law School faculty who  served as law clerks
to Justice Marshall-Assistant Professor Elena Kagan,
during the 1987  Term,  and Karl N.  Llewellyn  Professor
of Jurisprudence Cass R.  Sunstein, who  clerked for him
during the  1979  Term.

For Justice  Marshall

Elena Kagan*

A  few  days  after  Thurgood  Marshall's  death,  I stood
for  a  time  at  his  flag-draped  casket,  then  lying  in
state  at  the Supreme  Court,  and  watched  the people
of Washington  celebrate  his  life  and mourn  his  pass-
ing.  There  would  be,  the  next  day,  a  memorial  ser-
vice  for  the  Justice  in  the  National  Cathedral,  a
grand  affair  complete  with  a  Bible  reading  by  the
Vice  President  and  eulogies  by  the  Chief Justice  and
other  notables.  That  service  would  have  its
moments,  but it  would  not honor Justice  Marshall  as
the ordinary  people  of Washington  did.  On  the  day
the Justice's  casket  lay  in  state, some  20,000  of them
came  to  the  Court  and  stood  in  bitter  cold  for
upwards  of  an  hour  in  a  line  that  snaked  down  the
Supreme  Court  steps,  down  the  block,  around  the
corner,  and  down  the  block  again.  The  Justice's  for-
mer clerks  took turns standing at the casket,  acting as
a  kind  of honor  guard,  as  these  thousands  of people
filed by.  Passing before  me were people  of all races,  of
all  classes,  of  all ages.  Many  came  with children  and
spoke, as  they circuited  the casket, of the significance
of Justice  Marshall's  life.  Some  offered  tangible  trib-
utes-flowers  or  letters  addressed  to Justice  Marshall
or  his family.  One  left at  the  side  of the casket  a yel-
lowed  slip  opinion  of  Brown v.  Board of Education.'
There  never  before  has  been  such  an  outpouring  of
love  and  respect  for  a  Supreme  Court  Justice,  and
there  never  will  be  again.  As  I stood  and  watched,  I
felt  (as  I will  always  feel)  proud  and  honored  and

* Assistant  Professor,  University  of  Chicago  Law  School;  law

clerk to Justice Marshall,  1987 Term.

' 347 U.S.  483  (1954).

1

grateful  beyond  all  measure  to have  had the  chance
to work for  this hero of American  law  and  this extra-
ordinary man.

I first  spoke  with Justice  Marshall  in  the  summer
of 1986,  a few months  after I had applied  to  him for a
clerkship  position.  (It  seems  odd  to call  him Justice
Marshall  in  these  pages.  My  co-clerks  and  I called
him  "Judge"  or  "Boss"  to  his  face,  "TM"  behind  his
back;  he  called  me,  to  my  face  and  I  imagine  also
behind  my  back,  "Shorty.")  He  called  me  one  day
and,  with  little  in  the way  of preliminaries,  asked me
whether  I  still  wanted  a  job  in  his  chambers.  I
responded  that  I would  love  a job.  "What's  that?"  he
said,  "you already  have  a  job?" I tried,  in  every  way  I
could,  to correct  his apparent misperception.  I yelled,
I shouted,  I screamed  that I did  not have  a job,  that  I
wanted  a  job,  that  I would  be  honored  to  work  for
him.  To  all  of  which  he  responded:  "Well,  I don't
know,  if you  already  have  a  job  .
. ." Finally,  he
took  pity on me,  assured  me  that he  had been in  jest,
and  confirmed  that  I would  have  a  job  in  his  cham-
bers.  He  asked  me,  as  I recall,  only  one further  ques-
tion:  whether  I thought  I would  enjoy  working  on
dissents.

.

So  went  my  introduction  to  Justice  Marshall's
(sometimes  wicked)  sense  of humor.  He  took  constant
delight  in  baffling  and  confusing  his  clerks,  often  by
saying the  utterly  ridiculous with  an air  of such sobriety
that he  half-convinced  us  of his sincerity.  (There  was
the time, for  example, when he  announced sadly  that
he  would  have  to  recuse  himself  from  Gwaltney of
Smithfield  v.  Chesapeake Bay  Foundation.2  When  we
pressed  him  for  a  reason,  he  hemmed  and  hawed  for
many minutes,  only finally to say:  "Because I 1-o-o-o-o-v-e
their  ham."  When  we  laughed,  he  assumed  an  atti-
tude of great  indignation  and began  instructing  us on
proper  recusal  policy.  It  was  early  in  the  Term;  per-
haps  we  may  be  forgiven  for thinking  for  a  moment
that, after  all, this was  not a  joke.)  He had  an endless
supply  of jokes, not  all  of them,  I must  admit, appro-
priate  to  print  in  the  pages  of a  law  review.  And  he
was  the  greatest  comic  storyteller  I have  ever heard,
or  ever  expect  to  hear.  This  talent,  I think,  may  be
impossible  to communicate  to those  never exposed  to
it. It was  a matter of timing (the  drawn-out lead-up,  the
pregnant  pause),  of vocal  intonations  and  inflections,

2 484  U.S.  49 (1987).

2

and  most of all  of facial  expressions  (the  raised  brow,
the sparkling  eyes,  the sidelong  glance).  Suffice  it to
say  that  at  least  once  in  the course  of every  meeting
we  had  with  him  (and  those  were  frequent),  my  co-
clerks  and  I would  find  ourselves  holding  our  sides
and  gasping  for  breath,  as  we  struggled  to regain  our
composure.

Thinking  back,  I'm  not  sure  why  we  laughed  so
hard-or  rather,  I'm  not  sure  why  Justice  Marshall
told his  stories  so as  to  make  us laugh-because  most
of  the stories  really  weren't  funny.  To be  sure,  some
were  pure  camp.  (When  Justice  Marshall  was  investi-
gating  racial  discrimination  in  the  military  in  Korea,
a  soldier  demanded  that  he  provide  a  password;  the
hulking  [and, of course,  black]  Marshall  looked down
at  the  soldier  and  asked,  "Do  you  really  think  I'm
North  Korean?"  And  when  assisting  in  the drafting
of  the  Kenyan  Constitution,  the  Justice  was  intro-
duced  to  Prince  Philip.  "Do  you  care  to  hear  my
opinion  of  lawyers?"  Prince  Philip  asked  in  posh
British  tones,  mimicked  to  great  comic  effect  by
Justice  Marshall.  "Only,"  Justice  Marshall  replied-
before  the  two  discovered  mutual  ground  in  a  taste
for  bourbon-"if  you  care  to  hear  my  opinion  of
princes.")  But  most  of the stories,  if told by  someone
else,  would  have expressed  only sorrow  and  grimness.
They  were  stories  of growing  up  black  in  segregated
Baltimore,  subject  to  daily  humiliation  and  abuse.
They  were  stories  of representing  African-American
defendants  in  criminal cases-often  capital  cases-in
which  a fair  trial  was  not  to  be  hoped  for,  let  alone
expected.  (He  knew  he  had  an  innocent  client,
Justice  Marshall  said,  when  the  jury  returned  a  sen-
tence  of  life  imprisonment,  rather  than  execution.)
They  were  stories  of  the physical  danger  (the  lynch
mobs,  the  bomb-throwers,  the  police  themselves)
that  the  Justice  frequently  encountered  as  he  tra-
versed  the  South  battling  state-imposed  segregation.
They  were  stories of prejudice,  violence,  hatred,  fear;
only  as told by Justice  Marshall could  they ever  have
become  stories  of humor and transcending  humanity.
The  stories  were  something  more  than  diversions
(though,  of course,  they were  that too).  They  were  a
way  of showing  us  that,  bright  young  legal  whipper-
snappers  though  we  were,  we  did  not  know  every-
thing;  indeed, we  knew, when  it came  to matters of real
importance,  nothing.  They were  a way of showing  us
foreign  experiences  and  worlds,  and  in  doing  so,  of

3

reorienting  our  perspectives  on  even  what  had
seemed  most familiar. And  they served  another function
as well:  they reminded  us,  as Justice  Marshall thought
all  lawyers  (and  certainly  all  judges)  should  be
reminded,  that  behind law  there  are  stories-stories  of
people's  lives  as  shaped  by  law,  stories  of  people's
lives  as  might  be  changed  by  law.  Justice  Marshall
had  little  use  for  law  as  abstraction,  divorced  from
social  reality  (he  muttered  under  his  breath  for days
about Judge  Bork's remark  that he  wished  to serve  on
the Court because  the experience  would  be  "an  intel-
lectual  feast");  his  stories  kept  us focused  on law  as  a
source  of human well-being.

That  this  focus  made  the  Justice  no  less  a
"lawyer's  lawyer"  should  be  obvious;  indeed,  I think,
quite  the opposite.  I knew,  of course,  before  I became
his  clerk  that  Justice  Marshall  had  been  the  most
important-and  probably  the greatest-lawyer  of the
twentieth  century.  I knew  that  he  had  shaped  the
strategy  that  led  to  Browm  v.  Board of Education and
other  landmark  civil  rights  cases;  that  he  had
achieved  great renown  (indeed,  legendary status)  as  a
trial  lawyer;  that he had  won  twenty-nine  of the thirty-
two  cases  he  argued  before  the  Supreme  Court.  But
in  my  year  of clerking,  I think  I saw  what  had  made
him  great.  Even  at  the  age  of  eighty,  his  mind  was
active  and  acute, and  he  was  an almost  instant  study.
Above  all, though, he  had the great  lawyer's  talent (a
talent  many  judges  do not  possess)  for  pinpointing  a
case's  critical  fact  or  core  issue.  That  trait,  I think,
resulted from  his  understanding of the  pragmatic-of
the  way  in  which  law  worked  in  practice  as  well  as
on  the books,  of the way  in  which  law  acted  on  peo-
ple's  lives.  If  a  clerk  wished  for  a  year  of  spinning
ever  more  refined  (and  ever  less  plausible)  law-
school  hypotheticals,  she  might  wish  for  a  clerkship
other  than  Justice  Marshall's.  If she  thought  it more
important  for  a Justice  to  understand  what  was  truly
going  on in  a  case  and  to  respond  to  those  realities,
she belonged  in Justice  Marshall's  chambers.

None  of  this  meant  that  notions  of  equity  gov-
erned  Justice  Marshall's  vote  in  every  case;  indeed,
he  could  become  quite the  formalist  at times. During
the  Term  I clerked,  the  Court  heard  argument  in
Torres v.  Oakland Scavenger Co.'  There,  a  number  of
Hispanic  employees  had  brought  suit  alleging  employ-

487 U.S.  312  (1988).

4

ment discrimination.  The district  court dismissed  the
suit,  and  the  employees'  lawyer  filed  a  notice  of
appeal.  The  lawyer's  secretary,  however,  inadvertent-
ly  omitted  the  name  of one plaintiff from the  notice.
The  question  for  the  Court  was  whether  the  appel-
late  court  had  jurisdiction  over  the  party  whose
name  had  been  omitted;  on  this  question  rode  the
continued  existence  of the employee's discrimination
claim.  My  co-clerks  and  I  pleaded  with  Justice
Marshall  to  vote .(as Justice  Brennan  eventually  did)
that  the  appellate  court  could  exercise  jurisdiction.
Justice  Marshall  refused.  As  always  when  he  dis-
agreed  with  us,  he  pointed  to  the  framed  judicial
commission  hanging  on  his  office  wall  and  asked
whose  name  was  on  it.  (Whenever  we  told  Justice
Marshall  that  he  "had  to"  do  something-join  an
opinion,  say-the Justice  would look  at us coldly  and
announce:  "There  are  only  two  things  I have to  do-
stay  black  and  die."  A  smarter  group  of  clerks  might
have  learned  to  avoid  this  unfortunate  grammatical
construction.)  The  Justice  referred  in  our  conversa-
tion  to his  own years  of trying civil  rights  claims.  All
you  could  hope  for,  he  remarked,  was  that  a  court
didn't  rule  against  you  for  illegitimate  reasons;  you
couldn't  hope,  and  you had  no right to  expect,  that  a
court  would  bend  the rules  in  your  favor.  Indeed,  the
Justice  continued,  it  was the very existence  of rules-
along  with the judiciary's  felt obligation  to adhere  to
them-that  best  protected  unpopular  parties.
Contrary  to  some  conservative  critiques,  Justice
Marshall  believed  devoutly-believed  in a  near-mys-
tical  sense-in  the  rule  of  law.  He  had  no  trouble
writing  the TorTes opinion.

Always,  though,  Justice  Marshall  believed  that
one  kind of law-the  Constitution-was  special,  and
that  the courts  must  interpret  it  in a special  manner.
Here,  more  than  anywhere  else,  Justice  Marshall
allowed  his  personal  experiences,  and  the knowledge
of suffering  and  deprivation  gained  from those  expe-
riences,  to  guide  him.  Justice  Marshall  used  to  tell  of
a  black  railroad  porter  who  noted  that  he  had  been
in every  state  and  every  city  in  the country,  but  that
he  had never  been  anyplace  where he  had  to  put  his
hand  in  front  of his  face  to  know  that  he  was  black.
Justice  Marshall's  deepest  commitment  was  to  ensuring
that  the Constitution  fulfilled its  promise  of eradicating
such  entrenched  inequalities-not  only  for  African-
Americans,  but for all Americans  alike.

5

The  case  I think  Justice  Marshall  cared  about
most  during  the  term  I clerked  for him  was Kadnas v.
Dickinson Public Schools.'  The  question  in  Kadrmas
was  whether  a school  district  had  violated  the  Equal
Protection  Clause  by  imposing  a  fee  for  school  bus  ser-
vice  and  then refusing  to  waive  the fee  for an  indigent
child  who  lived  sixteen  miles  from  the  nearest
school.  I remember,  in  our  initial  discussion  of  the
case,  opining to Justice Marshall  that  it  would  be dif-
ficult  to  find  in  favor  of  the  child,  Sarita  Kadrmas,
under  equal  protection  law.  After  all,  I said,  indi-
gency  was  not  a  suspect  class;  education  was  not  a
fundamental  right;  thus,  a  rational  basis  test  should
apply,  and the school  district  had  a  rational basis  for
the contested  action. Justice  Marshall  (I must digress
here)  didn't  always  call  me  "Shorty";  when  I said  or
did something particularly  foolish,  he called  me  (as,  I
hasten  to  add,  he  called  all  his  clerks  in  such  situa-
tions)  "Knucklehead."  The  day  I first  spoke  to  him
about  Kadrmas was  definitely  a  "Knucklehead"  day.
(As  I recall,  my  handling  of Kadrnns earned  me  that
appellation  several  more  times,  as Justice  Marshall
returned  to  me  successive  drafts  of the  dissenting
opinion  for  failing  to  express-or  for  failing  to
express  in a  properly  pungent  tone-his understand-
ing  of the case.)  To Justice  Marshall,  the  notion that
government  would  act  so as  to deprive  poor  children
of an education-of "an  opportunity  to improve  their
status  and  better  their  lives"'-was  anathema.  And
the  notion  that  the  Court  would  allow  such  action
was  even  more  so;  to do this would be to  abdicate  the
judiciary's  most  important  responsibility  and  its most
precious  function.

For  in  Justice  Marshall's  view,  constitutional
interpretation  demanded,  above  all  else,  one  thing
from  the  courts:  it  demanded  that  the  courts  show  a
special  solicitude  for  the despised  and disadvantaged.
It  was  the  role  of  the  courts,  in  interpreting  the
Constitution,  to protect  the people  who went  unpro-
tected  by  every  other  organ  of government-to  safe-
guard  the  interests  of  people  who  had  no  other
champion.  The  Court  existed  primarily  to  fulfill  this
mission.  (Indeed,  I think  if Justice  Marshall  had  had
his  way,  cases  like Kadrmas would have been  the only
cases  the  Supreme  Court  heard.  He  once  came  back

487 U.S.  450  (1988).

s  Id.  at 468-69  (Marshall, J..  dissenting).

6

from  conference  and  told  us  sadly  that  the  other
Justices  had  rejected  his  proposal  for a  new  Supreme
Court  rule.  "What  was  the  rule,  Judge?"  we  asked.
"When  one  corporate  fat  cat  sues  another  corporate
fat cat,"  he replied,  "this Court  shall have no jurisdic-
tion.")  The  nine  Justices  sat,  to  put  the  matter  baldly,
to  ensure  that  Sarita  Kadrmas  could  go  to  school  each
morning.  At any  rate,  this  was why they sat  in Justice
Marshall's  vision  of  the  Court  and  Constitution.
And however  much  some recent  Justices  have sniped
at  that vision,  it  remains a thing of glory.

During  the  year  that  marked  the  bicentennial  of
the Constitution,  Justice  Marshall  gave  a characteris-
tically  candid  speech.  He  declared  that  the
Constitution,  as  originally  drafted  and  conceived,
was  "defective"; only  over the course  of 200 years  had
the  nation  "attain[ed]  the  system  of  constitutional
government,  and  its  respect  for  . . . individual  free-
doms  and  human  rights,  we  hold  as  fundamental
today."'  The  Constitution  today,  the  Justice  contin-
ued,  contains  a  great  deal  to  be proud  of. "[B]ut  the
credit  does  not belong  to  the  Framers.  It  belongs  to
those  who  refused  to  acquiesce  in  outdated  notions
of 'liberty,'  'justice,'  and 'equality,'  and who strived to
better them."'  The credit,  in  other  words,  belongs  to
people  like  Justice  Marshall.  As  the  many  thousands
who  waited  on  the Supreme  Court  steps  well  knew,
our modern  Constitution is  his.

6  Thurgood  Marshall,  The  Constitution's  Bicentennial:
Commemorating the  Wrong Document?,  40  Vand.  L.  Rev.  1337,  1338
(1987).

' Id.  at 1341.

7

On Marshall's Legal  Legacy

Cass  R. Sunstein*

Was  Justice  Thurgood  Marshall  an  egalitarian?  Did  he
believe  that  the Constitution  should  be  used  to produce
"equality of result" for  those  he happened  to  favor?

I write  at  a  time  when  many  people,  especially
those  in the federal judiciary,  believe  that both ques-
tions  should  be  answered  with  an  emphatic  "Yes."
But it  isn't so.

Above  all,  Thurgood  Marshall  will  be  remem-
bered  for  his  role  in  Brown  v.  Board of Education,'
and  indeed  it  is in  that case  that  one can  find  many
of the  central  elements  of  Marshall's  conception  of
the  Constitution.  Brown  is  commonly  thought  to
have been  a  case  about  racial  discrimination.  It  is even
said  to  have  established  a  constitutional  norm  of
"color-blindness."  But  to the  participants  in  the case,
and  to the Court at  the time,  the case  was fundamen-
tally  about  education.2  The  briefs  and oral  argument
stressed  not  color-blindness,  but  the  need  for  equal
educational  opportunity.  And  the  Court  listened.  In
the  passage  that Justice  Marshall  particularly  liked  to
quote,  the Court said:

. Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  Law  School  and
Department  of  Political  Science,  University  of Chicago.  The  author
was  law clerk to Justice  Marshall during the 1979  Term.

347 U.S.  483  (1954).

2  Brown was  followed  by  Boiling v.  Sharpe,  347 U.S.  497  (1954).
According  to  Professor  Hutchinson,  an  early  draft  of the  Bolling  opin-
ion  stated explicitly  that education  is a  fundamental  interest for consti-
tutional purposes. The draft read:

This Court has applied  similar reasoning  to  analogous  situations in
the  field  of education,  the  very  subject  now  before  us.  Thus  chil-
dren  and  parents  are  deprived  of the  liberty  protected  by  the Due
Process  Clause when  the children  are prohibited  from pursuing cer-
tain  courses,  or from  attending  private  schools  and  foreign-lan-
guage  schools.  Such  prohibitions  were  found  to be  unreasonable,
and  unrelated  to  any  legitimate  governmental  objective. Just  as  a
govemment  may  not  impose  arbitrary  restrictions  on  the  parent's
right  to  educate  his child,  the  government  must  not  impose  arbi-
trary  restraints  on  access  to  the education  which  the  government
itself provides....  We have  no  hesitation in concluding that segre-
gation  of children  in  the  public  schools  is a  far  greater  restriction
on  their liberty  than  were  the  restrictions  in the  school cases  dis-
cussed  above.

Dennis J. Hutchinson,  Unanimity  and  Desegregation:  Decisionmaking  in
the  Supreme  Court,  1948-1958,  68  Geo.  L.J.  1, 45  (1979)  (citation
omitted).  Professor  Hutchinson  reports  that  Justice  Marshall  was  gen-
uinely  delighted  to  see  that  early  draft,  responding,  "That's  it!  That's
what  the  case  was  about!"  Personal  Communication  from  Dennis
Hutchinson (Dec.  7, 1991).

8

Today,  education  is  perhaps  the  most  important
function  of  state  and  local  governments.  Compul-
sory  school  attendance  laws  and  the  great  expendi-
tures  for education  both demonstate our recognition
of the  importance  of education  to our democratic
society.  It  is  required  in  the  performance  of  our
most  basic  public  responsibilities,  even  service  in
the armed  forces.  It  is the  very foundation  of good
citizenship.  Today  it  is a  principal  instrument  in
awakening  the  child  to cultural  values,  in prepar-
ing  him  for  later  professional  training,  and  in
helping  him  to  adjust  normally  to  his  environ-
ment.  In  these  days,  it  is  doubful  that  any  child
may reasonably  be  expected  to succeed  in life  if he
is denied  the opportunity  of an  education.3
Brown  was  a  case  about  education.  In  this,  I
believe,  lies  the  clue  to  understanding  the  well-
springs  of  Marshall's  life,  work,  and  vision  of  the
Constitution.

The  long  struggle  by  the  NAACP-a  struggle
within  and  against  the  "separate  but  equal"  doc-
trine-was  undertaken,  first  and  foremost,  with  an
eye  toward  the  achievement  of  equal  educational
opportunity.  Above  all,  Marshall  and others  objected
to a practice  that would  engrain second-class  citizen-
ship  in children,  and do  so with  respect to  the social
service  most  indispensable  for  an  equal  chance  in
life.  Hence  what  seems  to  me  the  most  revealing
moment  in  Justice  Marshall's  argument  in Brown.  In
response  to  a  question  from  Justice  Reed  about
whether  the  state  should  consider  desegregation's
potential  negative  impact  on  "law  and  order,"
Marshall  said:

.

[Whites  and  blacks]  are  fighting  together  and
living together.  For example,  today  they  are  work-
ing  together  in  other  places.  .
. I  know  in  the
South where  I spend most of my  time,  you will  see
white  and  colored  kids  going  down  the  road
together to  school. They separate  and  go to differ-
ent schools,  and  they  come out  and play together.
I do  not  see  why  there  would  necessarily  be  any
trouble if they  went to school together.4

3 Brown,  347 U.S.  at 493.

Oral  Argument,  Briggs  v.  Elliot  (Dec.  10,  1952)  (companion
case  to  Brown), in  49  Landmark  Briefs  and  Arguments 345-46  (Philip
B.  Kurland & Gerhard  Casper eds.,  1975).

9

Marshall's  early commitment  to  equal  educational
opportunity carried  over  to  his work  on the Court.  It
helps  explain  many  of  his  votes  and  writings;  it
unites a  number of seemingly  disparate  ideas.'  A  con-
spicuous  example  is Marshall's  greatest  opinion,  dis-
senting  in  San Antonio School District v.  Rodriguez, 6  a
case  that  has  emerged  as  one  of the  most  important
since  Brown  itself.  In  that  case,  the  Supreme  Court
upheld  significant  disparities  in  per-pupil  expendi-
tures  in  school  financing  in  Texas.  Marshall's  dis-
senting  opinion  rested  above  all  on  the  centrality  of
education  to  constitutionally  protected  liberties.
First,  Marshall  said,  education  is  connected  with
freedom  of  speech:  "Education  directly  affects  the
ability  of  a  child  to  exercise  his  First  Amendment
rights,  both as  a source  and as  a  receiver  of information
and  ideas, whatever interests  he may  pursue  in life."'

Second,  education  is central to  the system  of self-
government:  "Education  may  instill  the  interest  and
provide  the tools necessary  for political discourse  and
debate.  Indeed,  it  has frequently  been  suggested  that
education  is  the  dominant  factor  affecting  political
consciousness  and participation."'

Third, Marshall  argued  that education  is  a crucial
mechanism  for  allowing  people  to  overcome  disad-
vantaged  conditions.  It  ensures,  not  equality  of
resources  or outcomes,  but  a fair chance.  "[T]he  right
of  every  American  to  an  equal  start  in  life,  so  far  as
the provision  ..  . of education  is  concerned,  is  far too
vital  to  permit  state  discrimination  on  grounds  as
tenuous  as  those  presented  by  this  record."'  This  is

s  In  1986,  at  the Judicial  Conference  of the  Second  Circuit,
Justice  Marshall  repeated words  I heard  at the end of a clerks' reunion:

[Tihe  goal  of a  true democracy  such  as  ours,  explained  simply,  is
that any baby  born in  these  United States, even if he is born  to the
blackest,  most illiterate,  most  unprivileged Negro  in Mississippi,  is,
merely  by being  born and  drawing his first breath  in  this democracy,
endowed  with  the  exact  same  rights  as  a  child  born  to  a
Rockefeller.

Of  course  it's  not  true.  Of  course  it never  will  be  true.  But  I
challenge  anybody  to tell me that  it isn't  the type  of goal we  should
try to get to  as fast as we  can.

Thurgood  Marshall,  Address Before  the Annual Judicial Conference  of
the  Second Judicial  Circuit  of the  United  States  (Sept.  5,  1986),  in
115  F.R.D. 349, 354  (1987).
6  411  U.S.  1 (1973).
7  Id. at  112  (Marshall, J.,  dissenting).
8  Id. at  113  (footnote omitted).
9  Id. at  71; see  also Kadrmas v.  Dickinson Pub.  Sch.,  487  U.S.  450,
471  (1988)  (Marshall, J.,  dissenting)  ("For the poor, education  is often
the only  route  by  which to  become  full participants  in our  society.  In
allowing  a  State to  burden  the  access  of poor  persons  to an  education,
the Court denies  equal opportunity and discourages hope.").

10

not  an  egalitarian  theme.  It  is about  prospects  from
the start, not results in the middle.

The  same  themes  appear  throughout  Marshall's
work.  For  him,  education  supplies  "the  basic  tools
and  opportunities  that  might  enable  [people]  to
rise."'"  Thus  the  Constitution  should  be  seen  to
reflect  "a  deep  distrust  of policies  that  specially  bur-
den  the  access  of  disadvantaged  persons  to  the  gov-
ernmental  institutions  and  processes  that  offer
members  of  our  society  an  opportunity  to  improve
their  status  and  better  their  lives.""  Such  distrust  is
justified because

[a]  statute  that  erects  special  obstacles  to  educa-
tion  in  the  path  of  the  poor  naturally  tends  to
consign  such  persons  to  their  current  disadvan-
taged  status.  By  denying  equal  opportunity  to
exactly  those  who need  it  most,  the  law  not only
militates  against  the  ability  of each  poor  child  to
advance  herself  or  himself,  but  also  increases  the
likelihood  of the creation  of a discrete  and perma-
nent underclass. 2
Marshall  was not an  egalitarian.  His conception of
equality  was extremely  old-fashioned.  An outgrowth
of his  experiences  with  segregation,  that  conception
involved,  as  its  defining  feature,  a  commitment  to
equality  of opportunity.  In  Marshall's  constitutional
vision,  this commitment  entailed,  first  and  foremost,
a  right  to  equal  prospects  in  education.  But  it  also
required  more generally an opposition  to all  caste sys-
tems-understood  as  second-class  citizenship,  in
which  one  group  is  systematically  below  others  on
the basis  of  a  morally  irrelevant  factor  such  as  race,
sex,  or  disability.  In  his  view,  rejection  of caste  was
the  central  lesson  of the  Civil  War  Amendments:
"The  intent  of  the  Fourteenth  Amendment  was  to
abolish  caste  legislation.  When  state  action  has  the
predictable  tendency  to  entrap  the  poor  and  create  a
permanent  underclass,  that  intent is frustrated." "

Thus  the  equal  protection  principle  did  not  ban
all  racial  differentiation.  It  did  not  require  color-
blindness.  For  Marshall,  this  precept  was  ahistorical;

'o Kadrmas, 487  U.S. at 469  (Marshall, J.,  dissenting).
"Id.  at 468-69.
U  Id.  at 470;  see also Martinez  v.  Bynum,  461  U.S.  321,  345-51
(Marshall,  J.,  dissenting)  (reiterating  his  view that  a  child's

(1983) 
education  is a fundamental  interest).

'  Kadnnas,  487  U.S.  at  469  (Marshall,  J.,  dissenting)  (citations

omitted).

11

it  was  insufficiently  attuned  to  the particular  history
behind  the  Civil  War  Amendments.  The  principal
point  of those  Amendments  was  not  to  require  that
people  who  were  similarly  situated  be  treated  "the
same."  Instead,  Marshall  thought  that  the  core
meaning  of the Equal  Protection  Clause  was  that  the
government  could  not  translate  morally  irrelevant
differences  into  a  form  of second-class  citizenship.  It
could  not  take  skin  color, or  gender,  and  turn  these
into  social  disadvantages  for  blacks  or  women. 
It  is
highly  misleading  to  say  that  this  is  a  vision  of  the
Fourteenth  Amendment  that  favored  the  "rights  of
groups"  over "the  rights  of individuals."  In any  effort
to  dismantle  a  caste  system,  caste  membership  is
highly  relevant  to  remedial  policies,  and precisely  in
the  interest  of  "the  rights  of  individuals."  At  least
Marshall  thought  that  government  could  reasonably
so believe.

It  was  on  this  ground  that  Marshall  argued  that
discrimination  on  the  basis  of  disability  should  be
subject  to  special  scrutiny  under  the  Fourteenth
Amendment."  And  most  notably,  it  was  on  this
ground  that he  rejected  the constitutional  assault  on
affirmative  action. 6  For  him,  that  assault  was  filled
with  bitter  ironies.  There  was  no  basis,  he  thought,
for  the  view  that  affirmative  action  offended  the
vision  of the framers  of the  Civil War  Amendments,
who had themselves  engaged  in  affirmative  action."

Nor  was  invalidation  of  affirmative  action  com-
pelled  by  principle.  In  Marshall's  view,  most  racial
discrimination  was  objectionable  because  of  its  par-
ticular  purposes  and  its  particular  effects-that  is,
because  it  served  to  create  a  system  of  caste.  When

" See  Rostker  v.  Goldberg, 453  U.S.  57,  86  (1981) 

(Marshall,  J.,
dissenting)  (arguing  that  the exclusion  of women  from  registration  for
the  draft  is unconstitutional);  Personnel  Admin.  of Mass.  v.  Feeney,
442  U.S.  256, 281  (1979)  (Marshall, J.,  dissenting)  (arguing  that veter-
ans'  preference  statute  constitutes  impermissible  gender  discrimina-
tion).  It is notable  that Justice Marshall  was  the  most vigorous  voice  of
opposition,  under  the  Equal  Protection  Clause,  to  official  practices
connected  to  the  exclusion  of women  from  the  military;  he  insisted
that this exclusion was  part  and parcel  of women's  second-class citizen-
ship.  Id. at 285.

'5 City  of  Cleburne v.  Cleburne Living  Ctr.,  Inc.,  473  U.S.  432,

455  (1985)  (Marshall, J.,  concurring  in part and  dissenting  in part).

16 City of Richmond v.  ].A.  Croson Co.,  488  U.S.  469,  528 (1989)
(Marshall,  J.,  dissenting);  Fullilove v.  Klutznick,  448  U.S.  448,  517
(1980)  (Marshall,  J.,  concurring);  Regents  of  the  Univ.  of Cal.  v.
Bakke,  438  U.S.  265,  387  (1978)  (Marshall,  J.,  concurring  in part  and
dissenting  in part).

"  Bakke, 438  U.S.  at 396-98.

12

the  use  of  race  has  quite  different  purposes  and
effects,  it  should be evaluated  more  leniently.

To  Marshall,  the  deepest  irony  of  the  modem
attack  on affirmative action was  that it ripped  the hard-
won  victories  against  racial  discrimination  entirely.
out of their  particular historical  context,  when  it was
precisely  that  context  that  made  the  words  ones  of
opprobrium.  Thus  for  Marshall,  the  constitutional
assault  on affirmative  action  "pervert[ed]  the  intent
of  the  Framers  by  substituting  abstract  equality  for
the  genuine  equality  the  Amendment  was  intended
to  achieve.""

By  "genuine  equality,"  Marshall  did  not  mean
equality  of result.  Instead,  he  referred  to a  system  in
which  the  caste-like  features  of  American  society
had  been  dismantled-a  dismantling  that  was  part
and  parcel  of the  attack,  decades  earlier,  on  Jim
Crow.  Hence his  unusually  personal  last  paragraph  in
Bakke:

I fear  that we  have  come  full  circle.  After  the  Civil
War  our  Government  started  several  "affirmative
action"  programs.  This  Court  in  the  Civil Rights
Cases  and  Plessy v.  Ferguson destroyed  the  move-
ment  toward  complete  equality. For  almost  a  cen-
tury  no  action  was  taken,  and  this  nonaction  was
with the tacit approval of the courts.  Then we had
Brown  and  the Civil  Rights Acts  of Congress, fol-
lowed  by  numerous  affirmative-action  programs.
Now,  we  have  this  Court  again  stepping  in,  this
time  to  stop  affirmative-action  programs  of  the
type  used by  the University  of California.'9
Thus far  I have suggested  that Marshall's  constitu-
tional  vision  included  a  commitment  to  equality  of
opportunity,  particularly  in  education,  and  a  rejec-
tion of caste.  Of all  Justices  to  serve  on  the  Supreme
Court,  Marshall  was  also  by  far  the  most  insistently
protective  of  poor  people.  Indeed,  he  moved  very
close  to  a  belief  in a  constitutional  right  to freedom
from  desperate  conditions.  This  right is  the third  and
final  cornerstone  in  Marshall's  conception  of equality.
It  was  also  connected,  though  less  directly,  with  the
original wellsprings  of Brown.

At the  very  least,  Marshall  believed  that  any  sys-
tem  that  left  an  identifiable  class  of  Americans  in

I  Bakke,  438 U.S.  at 398.
'9  Id.  at 402 (citations  ommitted).

13

conditions  of  this  kind  should  be  subject  to  careful
scrutiny  under  the  Equal  Protection  Clause.  Under
this  view,  no  one  should  be  deprived,  without  good
reason,  of adequate  education,  police  protection,
food,  shelter, or medical care.20

This  principle  is hardly  egalitarian.  It merely  affords
a basic  minimum.  It  allows  enormous  variations  in  liv-
ing  standards.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Marshall
objected  to  such  variations.  But  it  would  not permit
people  to  fall  below  a  specified  floor.  Certainly
Marshall  believed  that  poor  people  could  not  be
deprived of access to the basic  institutions of a demo-
cratic  society,  including  the  political  process,  the
judicial  process,"  and  education.  In  an  appropriate
case,  I  think  that  he  would  also  have  held  that  the
government  could  not  constitutionally  deprive  people
of the  basic  means  of subsistence-that  it  could  not
allow  them to fall beneath  a decent minimum.2

Marshall  was  not  an  egalitarian.  But  in  his  con-
ception  of  the  Constitution,  courts  were  to  assume
an  aggressive  role  in  promoting  equality  of opportu-
nity. At  a  minimum,  that role  entailed  vigilance  over
discrimination  with  respect  to  education,  probably
even  a right  to education;  an attack on  caste  systems;
and  a  willingness  to  look  skeptically  at  any  state
action  that  allowed  people  to be  subject  to desperate
conditions.

The Supreme  Court has rejected  this  vision of the
Constitution  in  all  of  its  fundamentals.  It  is  by  no
means  clear  that  the  Court  has  been  wrong  to  do
this.  A  serious  commitment  to  Marshall's  vision
would  entail  an  extraordinary  judicial  role,  one  for
which  the  courts  are  quite  ill-suited.  There  is good
evidence  that  courts  are  generally  ineffective  in
bringing  about  systematic,  stable  social  change. 2 3

20 See  Harris  v.  McRae,  448  U.S.  297,  337  (1980)  (Marshall,  J.,
dissenting);  Memorial  Hosp.  v.  Maricopa  County,  415 U.S.  250, 259-62
(1974);  Dandridge v.  Williams,  397  U.S.  471,  508  (1970)  (Marshall,  J.,
dissenting).

21  See  United States v.  Kras, 409  U.S.  434,  458  (1973)  (Marshall,

J.,  dissenting).

22 See  Dandridge v.  Williams,  397  U.S.  471,  508,  522  (1970)
(Marshall, J.,  dissenting)  (noting  that  the  Supreme  Court "has  already
recognized  that when a  benefit, even a 'gratuitous'  benefit, is necessary
to  sustain  life,  stricter  constitutional  standards,  both  procedural  and
substantive, are  applied  to  the deprivation  of that  benefit").  (citations
omitted).

2  See  Gerald N.  Rosenberg,  The Hollow Hope  72-106  (1991).  Like

Rosenberg,  I am  referring  to  broad social  change  through  the courts-
large-scale  institutional  shifts,  not  "negative"  decrees  that  do  not
involve such shifts.

14

Implementation  is  always  required,  and  implementa-
tion  will  sometimes  encounter  unexpected  obstacles.
Courts  are  ill-equipped  to  understand  the  complex
systemic  effects  of ad hoc  intervention.

Even  when  courts  are  effective,  there  are  serious
problems  in  judge-led  reform  from  the  standpoint  of
democratic  legitimacy.  Reform  through  the  courts  may
dampen  the  practice  of citizenship,  an  individual  and
collective  good.  And  if reform  does  not  have  a democ-
ratic  pedigree,  it  may  run  into  severe  resistance.  Such
resistance  may  in  turn  undermine  the  very  causes
that  the Court purports to favor.  The judicial struggle
with  abortion  may  well  be  an  example.  It  is  at  least
plausible  to think  that Roe  v.  Wade14  demobilized  the
women's  movement,  contributed  to  the  defeat  of the
Equal  Rights  Amendment,  and  helped  create  the
moral  majority,  in  a way  having  quite  adverse  effects
for the cause  of equality on the basis of sex."

In any  case,  the  era of Brown-an era  that produced
so  many  extraordinary  developments  in  American
law,  many  of  them  engineered  by  Marshall-was  an
exceptional  one  in  American  history.  It  had  no  real
predecessors.  It  is  doubtful  whether  it  will  have  any
real  successors.

The  capacities  of the  courts  are  one  thing;  the
relationship  of the  Constitution  to  American  life  is
another.  Many  Americans  continue  to  live  in  des-
perate  conditions.  They  are  without  hope,  food,  or
shelter.  They  are  subject  to  both  random  and  sys-
temic  criminal  violence-usually  from  the  private
sector, sometimes  from the police.  Blacks and women
are  disproportionately  victims.  Many  children  are
without  decent  life  prospects.  A  system  with  caste-
like  features  currently  exists  with respect to  race,  sex,
and  disability.  Many  Americans  never  receive  a
decent  education.  In educational  opportunities  there
are  persistent,  extraordinary,  and  unnecessary  dispar-
ities,  and  these  are  correlated  with  race  and  other
moral  irrelevancies.

Even  if the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States
lacks  the willingness,  the tools,  or the  competence  to
respond  to  the situation,  it remains  plausible  to think
that  the Constitution  of the United  States  is not an

2  410 U.S.  113 (1973).
25  See G.  Rosenberg,  supra note  29, at 336-43.

15

irrelevance.  Other  institutions,  most  notably  Con-
gress,  the  President,  and  state  governments,  have
duties  of fidelity  to  the  founding  document.  Those
institutions  are  not  burdened  with  the  limits  that
face  the judiciary.

It  is  fully  plausible  to  think  that Marshall's  vision
of the Constitution will  continue  to have a  conspicu-
ous  place  in  American  constitutional  thought.  But
increasingly,  its place  may  be the halls  of the legisla-
tures  and  the  bureaucracies,  rather  than  the  judiciary.
This  is  an  extraordinary  irony:  More  than  anyone
else,  Marshall  is responsible  for  the  idea  that  social
reform,  through  the  courts  in  the  name  of  the
Constitution,  was  both possible  and desirable.

The  last  words  come  from  Marshall  himself.  In
1980,  the  city  of  Baltimore  erected  a  statute  of
Thurgood  Marshall.  It  was  able  to  persuade  him  to
attend  the  ceremony-a  real  accomplishment  in  light
of his storied  reluctance  to receive  public tribute.  But
this  was  a  remarkable  event.  Baltimore  had  been  a
segregated  city,  and  one of  Marshall's  first  endeavors
after  graduating  from  law  school  was  to  desegregate
Maryland's  all-white  law  school.  The dedication  of a
statue  honoring  a  black  civil  rights  lawyer  who  had
abolished  American  apartheid  would  have  been
unfathomable  fifty  or sixty years  before.

Surely  this  was an  occasion for  celebration-of  an
extraordinary  life  of  accomplishment,  and  of the
remarkable  achievements  of  the  civil  rights  revolu-
tion. But Marshall would have  nothing of it:

Some  . . . feel  we  have  arrived.  Others  feel
there  is nothing  more  to do. I just want  to  be  sure
that  when  you  see  this  statue,  you  won't  think
that's  the  end  of  it.  I  won't  have  it  that  way.
There's  too much work to be  done."

26  Dale Russakoff,  Trbute to  Marshall; City of Baltimore Dedicates
Statue  to  Ist Native  Son  on  High  Court,  Wash.  Post,  May  17,  1980,
at Cl.

16

Occasional  Papers
from
The Law  School
The University  of Chicago
1111  East 60th Street
Chicago,  Illinois  60637

No.1. 

"A Comment  on Separation  of Power"
Philip B.  Kurland,  November  1, 1971.

No. 2.  "The Shortage of Natural  Gas"

Edmund W. Kitch, Februrary  1, 1972.

No. 3.  "The Prosaic Sources  of Prison Violence"

Hans W.  Mattick, March  15,  1972.

No. 4.  "Conflicts of Interest  in Corporate  Law  Practice"
Stanley  A. Kaplan, January  10,  1973.

No. 5.  "Six Man Juries,  Majority Verdicts-
What Difference  Do They Make?"
Hans Zeisel,  March  15,  1973.

No. 6.  "On Emergency  Powers  of the  President:

Every Inch a King?"
Gerhard  Casper,  May 31,  1973.

No. 7.  "The Anatomy of Justice  in  Taxation"
Walter J. Blum  and  Harry Kalven Jr.,
October  1, 1973.

No. 8.  "An Approach  to Law"

Edward H.  Levi, October  15,1974.

No. 9.  "The New  Consumerism  and  the Law  School"
Walter J. Blum, February  15,  1975.

No.  10.  "Congress and  the Courts"

Carl  McGowan,  April  17,  1975.

No.  11.  "The Uneasy  Case  for Progressive  Taxation

in  1976"
Walter J. Blum, November  19,  1976.

No.  12.  "Making  the Punishment Fit  the Crime:

A  Consumers'  Guide  to Sentencing Reform"
Franklin E.  Zimring, January  24,  1977.

No.  13.  "Talk to Entering  Students"

James  B.  White, August  15,  1977.

No. 14.  "The Death  Penalty  and  the  Insanity Defense"

Hans Zeisel,  April  15,  1978.

17

No.  15.  "Group Defamation"

Geoffrey R. Stone, August  10,  1978.

No.  16.  "The University  Law School  and  Practical

Education"
Carl  McGowan,  December 20,1978.

No.  17.  "The Sovereignty  of the  Courts"

Edward  H. Levi, July  15,  1981.

No.  18.  "The Brothel  Boy"

Norval Morris,  March  15,  1982.

No.  19.  "The Economists  and  the Problem  of Monopoly"

George J. Stigler, July  1, 1983.

No.  20.  "The Future  of Gold"

Kenneth  W. Dam, July  15,  1984.

No.  21.  "The Limits of Antitrust"

Frank  H. Easterbrook, April  15,  1985.

No.  22.  "Constitutionalism"

Gerhard  Casper,  April 6,  1987.

No.  23.  "Reconsidering  Miranda"

Stephen J. Schulhofer, December  15,  1987.

No.  24.  "Blackmail"

Ronald H. Coase,  November  14,  1988.

No.  25.  "The Twentieth-Century  Revolution  in
Family Wealth  Transmission"
John H.  Langbein,  December  8,  1989.

No. 26.  "The State of the Modem  Presidency:

Can  It Meet  Our Expectations?"
Stuart  E. Eizenstat, March  10,  1990.

No.  27.  "Flag  Burning and  the Constitution"

Geoffrey R.  Stone, May  1, 1990.

No. 28.  "The  Institutional Structure  of Production"
Ronald  H.  Coase, May  15,  1992.

No.  29. "The  Bill of Rights:  A  Century  of Progress"

John  Paul Stevens,  December  1, 1992.

No. 30.  "Remembering  'TM"'

Elena Kagan  and  Cass R.  Sunstein, June  8,  1993.

18

