 Article II Revisionism Cass R. Sunstein * One of the most striking developments of the last decade has been the new use of Article II in public law adjudication. Article II is a prominent feature not only of cases involving the creation of federal institutions that are independent of the President,' but also of new disputes involving reviewability, scope of review, and standing. 2 It is especially interesting that some key standing cases, nominally decided under Article III, have an unambiguous root in a distinctive understanding of Article II.3 Thus it is suggested that certain grants of standing to citizens, taxpayers, or others without an individuated injury - would compromise the vesting of executive power in the President and the grant of power to the President, rather than to courts or to citizens, to "take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed."' 4 Article II appears to be doing much of the crucial work in the key Article III cases, and Justice Scalia's powerful dissenting opinion in Morrison v. Olson 5 may be enjoying a surprising rebirth in the law of standing. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard.-Ed. I am grateful to Akhil Amar, Larry Lessig, and David Strauss for helpful comments on an earlier draft. grants of standing.6 Indeed, on several important matters, we are very much in agreement. We agree that Article III forbids courts from hearing cases in which the plaintiff has no cause of action, but that, under Article I, Congress can create causes of action whenever it chooses. 7 We agree that the citizen suit, while consistent with Article III, has a mixed record as a matter of simple policy 8 We agree that Article II poses no barrier to suits in cases involving individuated injuries, even when a beneficiary of a regulatory program is seeking greater enforcement of the law.9 I also want to emphasize that Krent and Shenkman have put their finger on a key but underanalyzed feature of the recent standing decisions. 6. Harold J. Krent & Ethan G. Shenkman, Of Citizen Suits and Citizen Sunstein, 91 MIcH. their understanding of Article II. I will try, however, to indicate why that understanding seems to be quite adventurous as a matter of constitutional history and structure. In the end, I suggest that their conception of Article II amounts to a form of constitutional revisionism, in the interest of judgments of policy and fact that are plausible but that lack sufficiently clear constitutional roots to be invoked by courts. Let me begin with a brief outline of the basic argument. Krent and Shenkman contend that Article II reflects a commitment to a unitary executive, and that the grant of citizen standing fatally compromises that commitment. 10 In their view, it is the President who is entrusted with the authority to oversee all implementation of federal law.1 This idea stems from the constitutional judgment that there should be political accountability for the redress of "public harms," that is, harms shared by the public as a whole.' 2 The political process is the appropriate, and indeed the exclusive, check on inadequate redress of these harms. 13 To be sure, people with individuated interests can bring suit against executive illegality, even if the illegality amounts to insufficient enforcement of the law. "Privately accountable relators," however, are altogether different. Under Article II, they should not be allowed to bring suit against either private defendants acting in violation of the law14 or against the executive itself. This principle applies even if Congress creates bounties for citizens.' 5 If citizens lacking individuated interests were permitted to bring suit, they would undermine the forms of political accountability that are guaranteed by the system of unitariness in execution of the laws. It is for this reason that Article II bans the citizen suit. that I believe the Court would resolve the other way. See Sunstein, supra note 9, at 231-33. because the distinction may not be workable for the purposes to which Krent and Shenkman seek to use it. The key point is that we cannot decide whether an injury is individuated in the abstract; this determination depends on whether the law has defined it as individuated. If Congress can enact law to decide whether injuries are individuated, it may ensure that injuries that were once nonindividuated are now in fact individually held, and it may grant standing to individuals to vindicate those interests. Of course there are differences between public and nonpublic goods. Perhaps Krent and Shenkman mean to argue that some public goods cannot give rise to standing. But to some extent the very difference between public and nonpublic goods is an artifact of law. Whether a good is public depends at least partly on whether the government has said that it can be owned privately. In any case, I do not think that the differences between public and nonpublic goods have constitutional status for purposes of standing. It is not clear why Congress should be disabled from granting each of us a kind of property right in a certain state of affairs even if many or all of us share that right and from saying that each of us is entitled to vindicate that right in court. raised the slightest question under Article II. Criminal law enforcement by citizens is a well-established device in Anglo-American law. 19 Even if some forms of citizen enforcement of the criminal law might be constitutionally troublesome, we are dealing here with civil actions, where the historical evidence cuts very hard against the invocation of Article II. Imagine, for example, that the plaintiffs in Lujan 2 had purchased airline tickets to the areas in which endangered species were at risk. In that event, they would unquestionably have had a sufficient "injury in fact" to challenge the failure to apply the Endangered Species Act extraterritorially. But if they had airline tickets, would they compromise Article II concerns any less? I do not believe so. Along the Article II dimension, there is no difference between citizen suits and suits by people with individuated interests. If suits against the executive by people with individuated interests do not violate Article II as everyone agrees it is hard to see why the same suits violate Article II merely because of the absence of an individuated interest. The issue is somewhat different in suits brought by citizens against the government. Perhaps there is an Article II problem if a court says that the executive must act in a certain class of cases. To come to terms with this claim, it is necessary to see what exactly the court will decide and what will be at stake. If the citizen suit is to go forward, the question for judicial decision is whether the relevant agency has violated federal law in circumstances in which the law dictates action of a certain kind. The court has no authority to issue a judgment because of a policy disagreement; it must find illegality.26 If the agency has violated the law, the court will so hold and issue an appropriate decree. The question is this: Why, precisely, do such suits raise an Article II issue? The problem does not arise under the "Take Care" Clause. By hypothesis, the President will win in court if he has "taken care" and lose only if he violated that duty. It is not so easy to see why the "Take Care" Clause forbids courts from ordering the President to carry out the law. Indeed, Krent and Shenkman do not really believe that the clause forbids courts from doing this. They believe that, when an individuated injury is at stake, a decree to this effect raises no Article II problem.27 Again: if Article II allows courts to interfere with law implementation by ordering the President to "take care" at the behest of a plaintiff with an individuated injury, why does Article II offer a freestanding objection to such an order at the behest of a citizen? No good reason comes to mind. (1984), the agency receives the benefit of all reasonable doubts. standable as a matter of policy, but it does not seem to be more than that.