University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1993 

Conflicting Values in Law 
Conflicting Values in Law 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Conflicting Values in Law," 62 Fordham Law Review 1661 (1993). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

CONFLICTING  VALUES  IN  LAW

CASS R.  SUNSTEIN *

I 

thank you all for coming on a rainy  day.  Actually,  I am a little preoc-
cupied  right now  because  there was  in  a Fordham  colleague's  office  a
chart  which  said  how  much  Elvis  would  weigh  on  every  planet  and  on
the  Sun.  On  Pluto,  Elvis  would  weigh  a  mere  thirteen  pounds;  and  on
the Sun, Elvis would weigh  over 7,000  pounds.  This is actually  related  to
my  topic.

I  have  two  quotations  with  which  to  begin.  The  first  is  from  the
United  States  Constitution,  and  it  goes  like  this:  "No  title  of  Nobility
shall  be granted  by  the United  States."'

The  second  quotation  is  from  a  recent  winner  of the  Nobel  Prize  in
Economics,  the University  of Chicago's  own  Gary  Becker.  Here  is how
the second  one goes:  "An  efficient  marriage  market"-now,  this  is  per-
sonally relevant  to  some  people  here,  I know,  so  please  do  listen:

[A]n efficient  marriage  market  assigns  imputed  income  or "prices"  to
all  participants  that  attract  them  to  suitable  polygamous  or  monoga-
mous marriages.  Imputed prices  are  also used  to match  men  and  wo-
men of different  qualities:  some participants...  choose  to be  matched
with  "inferior"  persons  because  they  feel  "superior"  persons  are  too
expensive....

[A]n  efficient  marriage  market  usually  has  positive assortative  mat-
ing,  where  high-quality  men  are  matched  with  high-quality  women
and  low-quality  men  with  low-quality  women,  although  [and  this
makes  it  somewhat  less  depressing]  negative  assortative  mating  is
sometimes  important.2

I think there is a connection between  the  quotation  from the Constitu-
tion and the  quotation from  Gary Becker, and  I hope this  will  emerge  in
the  course of my  comments.

What I want to do is explore two  claims  and say  something  about their

implications  for  law.

The first claim  is  that we  value  things  in  different  ways;  that is  to say,
we value things  not only in  terms of intensity, but in  qualitatively  distinct
ways.  It is  not simply  the  case  that  some  things  are  valued  more;  it  is
also the case  that some  things  are valued  differently  from others.  That is
my  first claim,  about  different  modes  of valuation.

*  Karl N.  Llewellyn  Professor of Jurisprudence,  University  of Chicago  Law  School
and Department  of Political  Science.  This  essay  was  presented  as  the  Robert  L.  Levine
lecture at Fordham  University  School of Law.  It has  been  lightly  edited,  and  footnotes
have been added,  but it retains  the form  and style of the oral remarks.  For a  more formal
and  detailed  presentation,  see  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Incommemesurability and  Valuation in
Law, 92  Mich.  L.  Rev.  779  (1994).

1. U.S.  Const.  art.  I,  ยง 9, cl.  8.
2.  Gary  S.  Becker,  A Treatise  on the  Family  108  (2d  ed.  1991).

1661

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1661 1993-1994

1662

FORDHAM LAW REVIEW

(Vol.  62

The second claim is that human  goods are not commensurable.  This is
to  say  that  there  is  no  available  metric  along  which  we  can  align  the
various  goods  that  are  important  to  us,  and  that  any  effort  to  come  up
with  a  metric,  like  utility  or  dollars,  while  nominally  designed  to  aid
human  reasoning, actually  makes  human  reasoning  worse than  what  it is
when  it is  working  well.

So the first claim has to do  with diverse  modes of valuation;  the second
has  to  do  with  incommensurability.  I  do  think  that  these  claims  have
important  implications  for  law, though,  unfortunately,  it  is not  the  case
that  these claims  lead  simply  to particular  recommendations.  So  I  have
to  apologize  in  advance  for saying  that  while  these  things  bear  on  how
legal problems  are thought about,  it is  not true  that  they  lead  directly  to
particular outcomes.  But by  way of diminishing  the level  of abstraction,
let  me  say  something  about  the  areas  of law  on  which  they  do  bear.

In  environmental  law,  it  often  seems  as  if there  is  a  debate  between
economists  and  environmentalists,  with  economists  acting  as  if  they
value  the  environment  somewhat  less  than  the  fanatical  environmental-
ists who  value it a lot.  It might be more  accurate  to say  that  economists
and  environmentalists  value  the  environment  in  diferent  ways,  with
economists  thinking  that the  environment  is  for human  exploitation  and
use,  and  environmentalists  sometimes  challenging  that  assumption.

In  debates  over  surrogacy  and prostitution,  I  think  it is  very  hard  to
make  sense  of very  prominent  current  views  within  the  law  without  not-
ing the  existence of an objection  to surrogacy  arrangements  and prostitu-
tion  that  says  that  the  way  in  which  those  transactions  value  sexuality
and  reproduction  is  unfortunate  and  deserving  of disapproval.

Many  current  debates  over  the role  of religion  in  society  have  a  lot  to
do  with  modes  of valuation.  A  big  decision  the  Clinton  Administration
has to make,  I think in the  next two  weeks,  is how  to handle the Reagan-
Bush  Executive  Order'  on  federal  regulation,  which  moves  cost/benefit
analysis  to  the  fore.  How  cost/benefit  analysis  is  thought  about  has
everything  to  do  with  modes  of valuation.

The  talk  will come  in three parts:  the first will  have to  do  with  modes
of  valuation;  the  second  will  discuss  commensurability;  the  third,  and
longest,  will have to  do with  law;  here  I will try  to bring all  of this  down
to  earth.  So  if the  stuff with  which  I  am  about  to  get  going  seems  too
abstract,  I  promise  that  the  examples  will  come  before  terribly  long.

I.  MODES  OF  VALUATION

I have  said  that  we  value  things  in  different  ways,  that goods  are  sub-

ject  to  diverse  modes  of valuation.

Let's  begin  with  a  simple  distinction  between  goods  that  are  intrinsi-
I  think

cally  valuable  and  goods  that  are  instrumentally  valuable. 

3.  See  Exec.  Order  No.  12,291,  3  C.F.R.  127  (1982),  reprinted in  5  U.S.C.  ยง 601

(1988).

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1662 1993-1994

1994]

CONFLICTING VALUES  IN  LAW

1663

Scrooge  is the only character  I  know for whom  a dollar bill  was  intrinsi-
cally  valuable.  For the rest of us,  a dollar bill is  valuable  for what  it can
do;  it  is  not  valuable  in  itself. 
Education  is  something  that  has  both
instrumental  and  intrinsic  value;  that  is,  it  is  valuable  in  itself and  it  is
valuable for what  it can  do  for you.  If we knew  somebody  who  thought
that  education  was  solely  of  instrumental  value,  it  would  seem  quite
strange.

Goods  like  friendships  are  of  intrinsic  value;  they  are  valuable  for
themselves  and  not valuable  because  of what  they  are  an instrument  to.
So a first distinction  is the distinction between  instrumental and intrin-

sic value.

The  category  of goods  that  have  intrinsic  value  is  itself quite diverse.
There  are goods  that are intrinsically  valuable  that produce  respect-an
acquaintance  might do  that.  There are goods that are intrinsically  valua-
ble that  produce  affection-a  friendship.  There  are things  that  produce
wonder  or  awe,  like  a  great  musical  work  or  a  mountain.  There  are
things  that  produce  gratitude  or  love.  And  there  are  things  that  are
solely for  use-our  category  of instrumental  goods.

So every  day  we make  differences  among modes  of valuation.  This  is
not simply true of good things;  it is  also true of bad  things.  Some  things
produce  contempt;  others  produce  anger  and so  forth.  There  is  a  wide
range of negative  and  positive valuations.

Somebody  who  didn't  make  distinctions  among  modes  of  valuation
might  seem  really  strange,  like  a  character  in  a  science  fiction  story,  or
obtuse.  If you  saw  someone  who  had just  pro  or  con  attitudes  without
making these distinctions,  it would be  an odd  figure  indeed,  though  if we
thought for  a bit, we  could  probably  think of fictional characters  who fit
that  bill.

What  I want to suggest is that  there isn't any super-concept-like  hap-
piness, or utility, or wealth maximization,  or good-that  can  make sense
out  of our  reflective  evaluations  in  their  diversity.  That  is  to  say,  there
isn't any  big thing of which  all  these things are  simply  aspects.  Any  big
thing  that  can  be  identified  must  allow  room  for  the  qualitative  distinc-
tions that  modes  of valuation  embody.

That  is  basically  an  outline  of modes  of valuation.  Conflicts  among

modes  of valuation  are  really  pervasive.

You  can  imagine  an  economist,  let's  say,  who  is  working  hard  on  a
paper  and  who  has  scheduled  lunch  with  an  out-of-town  friend.  Let's
suppose the economist  would like to cancel the lunch, but feels  bad about
it because  it is kind of disrespectful  and inconvenient.  Let's suppose  the
economist  says  to  the  friend,  "I  will  compensate  you-  S20,  40,  $80,
$100,  $160-for  the  cancellation."  This  would  be  an  absurd  response,
though  perhaps  it  has  happened,  and  perhaps  the  so-called  victim  was,
on  balance,  happy  as  a  result.  It  would  be  an  absurd  response  because
the payment of cash  as compensation  for  his  cancellation  of lunch  is  in-
consistent  with  the way someone  values a  friend.  It is not, I think, quite

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1663 1993-1994

1664

FORDHAM LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  62

right to  say that  the cash is less  valuable than  the  lunch; in  fact,  if we  are
talking about aggregates  and amounts, the  cash  might well  be less  valua-
ble  than the lunch.  It is that the payment  of cash  is inconsistent  with  the
way  the  lunch  is  valued,  and  that's  what  makes  it seem  like  an  insult.

I  think  that  this  somewhat  absurd  example  helps  with  an  extraordi-
nary  array  of cases  in  which  social  norms  or  attitudes  or  law block  the
use of dollars as a mechanism  for doing  some sort  of exchange  work.  Let
me just  give  some  examples.

If an  adult  neighbor  asks  another  adult  neighbor  to  mow  his  or  her
lawn for  a fee,  it would probably  be  perceived  as an insult,  as if the adult
neighbor  is  being  treated  as  a  servant  rather than  as  a person  worthy  of
respect.  To  offer  the  dollars  is  turning  the  neighbor  into  someone  for
your  use.

If someone says  to  you,  "I will  pay you  a lot  of money  if you  go out of
town  and  leave  your  family  for  two  months,"  you  might  do  it,  but  it
would  seem  awful.  On the  other  hand,  if an  employer  says,  "As  part  of
this job you have to leave  for a month  or two, that is part  of what the job
is"-it's  called  employment  with  a  New  York  law  firm,  let's  say-it
might be  okay.  I think  that  the  difference  between  the  two  cases  is  that
in  one  case,  absence  from  family  is  being  sought  by  the  employer,  so-
called,  as  a  good  to  be  promoted  for its  own  sake;  whereas  in  the  other
case,  the  absence  is brought  about  as  a  kind  of by-product  of a job.

The movie  "Indecent  Proposal"  is all  about this-the use  of dollars  as
a  way  of turning  someone  into  a  sexual  object  and  what  that  does  to  a
relationship.  To get  a little closer  to  law,  suppose  that  in  a  case  of envi-
ronmental  protection,  we  are  trying  to  figure  out  how  much  to  value  a
mountain.  If a  certain number  of dollars  is assigned  to protection  of the
mountain,  which  is  almost  certainly  a  fine  thing  to  do,  it  might  well  be
jarring  to  say,  in  a  kind  of very  simple  way,  "The  mountain  is  really
worth,  say,  two  million  dollars."  That  is jarring,  I  think,  because  the
way  the  dollars are valued  is different  from the  way  the mountain  is  val-
ued.  The mountain  is valued as something  worthy  of respect for some, or
maybe  awe  and wonder  for others,  and  dollars,  though  maybe  deserving
a kind of wonder and  awe,  get a  different  kind of wonder and  awe  from a
mountain.

I  think  this  issue  is  all  over  the  current  debate  with  respect  to  surro-
gacy  arrangements,  so-called  "baby  selling,"  and  prostitution.  Judge
Posner  has  suggested  a market  in babies  in  writing  that  perhaps  (in  my
view  unfortunately)  disqualifies  him  for  appointment  to  the  Supreme
Court of the United States.4  The argument  is  very provocative  and  inter-
esting.  One  thing  it  doesn't  quite  pick  up  on  is  the  possibility  that  the
way babies  are valued  is inconsistent  with  trading them  on  markets,  and
that  is  undoubtedly  part  of  the  horror  at  the  public  reaction  to  the
proposal.

4.  See  Richard  A.  Posner,  Sex  and  Reason  409-17  (1992).

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1664 1993-1994

1994]

CONFLICTING VALUES  IN LAW

1665

I have  given many  examples in which  dollar trading of things  is incon-
sistent  with  the  mode  of valuation  of those  intrinsic  goods.  But  this  is
not  simply  a  problem  for  money.  If someone  treated  a  cat  in  the  same
way that  ordinary people  treat a spouse,  or if someone  treated a diamond
in  the way  that  most  people  treat  an  animal,  something  odd  would  be
going  on.  Quite  apart  from  the  issue  of  financial  equivalence,  people
make  distinctions  in  modes  of valuation  in  their  reactions  to  goods  or
events.

In  lots of areas  involving suggested  political  or legal  changes,  there  is
an issue with respect to modes  of valuation.  We  cannot describe  the shift
from feudalism  to  capitalism  in  a  sentence,  but  one thing  that  happened
in  that  shift  was  a  transition  from  one  mode  of  valuation  to  another.
With  respect  to  the  legal  attack  on  segregation  and  slavery,  a  reform
occurred  in which  people  who  were  formerly  for  other  people's  use  and
control were  seen as  entitled to equal  respect.  With  respect  to the exclu-
sion of religious convictions from the public realm, something  that seems
to  have occurred  in  the  last twenty  years, sometimes  at least,  is that cer-
tain  modes  of valuation  are  being  ruled  off limits  to  politics.'

The movement for animal rights presents  a lot of puzzles.  This  isn't at
all the  place to come to closure on that complicated  issue.  But  the move-
ment for animal  rights might be best taken as suggesting  that animals  are
entitled to either respect  or consideration,  and  not to be  treated as  some-
thing  for  human  exploitation  and  use.  What  the  movement  for  animal
rights  is  trying  to  do  is  to  shift  the  mode  of valuation  and  not  only  the
intensity  or quantity  of valuation.

I have one more notation  on modes  of valuation  and  then we are on  to
commensurability.  It often  happens  in a first-year class that  there will be
some question  raised about the  value  of a  life or  a  house, and  some stu-
dent will rebel against the effort  to monetize,  at which point  an instructor
or another student  will say,  "Well,  that  means  you  must think  the life  or
the  house  is  infinitely  valuable,"  at  which  point  the  debate  is  over.  It
works  as  a laugh  line and  as  a decisive  objection.  I  think that  victory-
the infinite  valuation point-is unearned.  Often  what  the student  is  say-
ing,  in  the  resistance  to  monetization,  is  not  about  infinite  value,  but
about the fact that things are valued  in different  ways.  If the student  says
that,  he  or  she  has  to  explain  a  lot.  The  conversation  is  hardly  con-
cluded, but at least  we can  start to  understand  what it is that he or she is
getting at.

So  much  for modes  of valuation.

II. 

INCOMMENSURABILITY

By  "incommensurability,"  I mean  to suggest  that  some  human  goods
cannot  be  aligned  along  a  single  metric  without  doing  violence  to  our
considered judgments  about  how  those goods  are best characterized  and

5.  For a  discussion,  see Stephen  L.  Carter, A  Culture  of Disbelief (1993).

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1665 1993-1994

1666

FORDHAM LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  62

experienced.  By this  I  mean  that if you  develop  a single  metric, like dol-
lars,  by  which  to  align  things,  you  will  often  do  violence  to  your  own
judgments  about  how  those  things are  best  understood.

Here is a  story.  At  an academic  conference,  a  friend  of mine was  buy-
ing a present  for his  daughter  at a bookstore which  also had presents  for
kids.  He  was  somewhat  embarrassed  to  be  buying  a  present  for  his
daughter  at  an  academic  conference.  He  said,  "I'm  purchasing  good-
will."  Now,  he  loved  his  daughter  and  he  wasn't  purchasing  goodwill,
but  he  was  translating  into  the  terms  of commensurability  what  it  was
that he was doing;  he was acting as if what he was  doing was partaking of
monetary  exchange.

This is  a jarring  description.  By  telling  the story,  I mean  to  suggest  is
that sometimes  there is  no  single  metric  available  by  which  to  order  our
assessments  of various different  goods.  This  is not to  say  that judgments
among incommensurable  goods  are irrational  or not  subject  to  reasoned
valuation.  We  decide  all  the  time  whether  to  take  a  job  in  one  city  or
another, whether  to do  one thing or another during the evening,  whether
to take a vacation  or not.  Often incommensurable  goods are  at stake and
judgments  are made,  and they  can  be reasonable  or not.  I  am  suggesting
that  if these  various  goods  are  aligned  on  a  single  metric,  then  we  are
doing violence  to  our  best  characterizations  of what  those  things  are.

It would  not  be  conceptually  impossible  to  make  things  commensura-
ble-to line up,  for example,  vacation  and work,  or being  with family  or
not, along a single metric, to use something  like utility or dollars in  order
to  get  analysis  going.  Mill,  the  great  utilitarian,  was  extremely  tortured
on  the  commensurability  point.  But  this  would  be  a  way  of  doing  vio-
lence,  I  think,  to  the  way  we  really  think  about  these  things.

There is a  relationship  between  my claim  that  there  are diverse  modes
of valuation  and  my  claim  about  incommensurability,  but  I want just to
bracket that  for a  moment;  to say a few  more  words about  incommensu-
rability,  and  then  to  get  to  some  specifics.

One  point  about  incommensurability  is  that  in  its most  extreme  form,
it blocks  certain  reasons  for  action  completely.  Sometimes  the  existence
of incommensurability  rules off-limits  certain bases  for  doing  things  that
are  on-limits  in  other places.  Consider  what  might  happen  if a  parent  is
asked,  "For  how  much  would  you  sell  your  child?"  It  is  not  as  if the
parent  is  insulted  because  the  amount  is  too  low;  it  is  not  as  if  one  is
asked,  "Could  I  buy  your  suit  for  a  dollar?"  It  is  not  as  if the  amount
seems  scandalously  low.  It's as  if there  is  something  extremely  inappro-
priate  about  entertaining  the  choice  at  all.

This  is  also  the  case,  I  think,  in  areas  of constitutional  rights,  where
Ronald  Dworkin  describes  rights as  "trumps," 6  and  where  the  Supreme
Court  says  administrative  convenience  is  not  a  basis  for  intruding  on  a

6.  See  Ronald  Dworkin,  Taking  Rights  Seriously  at  xi-xii,  187-205  (1978).

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1666 1993-1994

1994]

CONFLICTING VALUES  IN  LAW1

1667

fundamental  right.7  I  think our notion  of what  rights  are is  inflected,  at
least, with an understanding  that they cannot be  compromised  for certain
kinds  of reasons,  as well  as  that  they  cannot be  compromised  unless the
reason is very strong.  You have to have a certain sort of reason as well as
a reason  of a certain  level  of intensity.

Some  of the most  interesting  cases  of incommensurability  are  ones  in
which  the existence  of no  single metric  makes  certain reasons  for action,
like  the  acceptance  of dollars,  wholly  illegitimate  as  a  basis  for  action.
But incommensurability  is not just a barrier  to action;  it also makes pos-
sible certain valuable human relations.  Without incommensurability,  our
understanding  of what a friendship is,  or what it means to be  a parent,  or
what a beach  is, would be compromised  badly.  So we ought  not to think
of the  existence  of incommensurability  as  simply  an  obstacle.  It  is  also
freedom-promoting,  in the  sense  that  it  makes  possible  certain  valuable
human  connections  and relationships.

Some  people  think  that  claims  of  this  sort-and  I  am  going  to  stay
abstract  just  for  a  moment  longer-are  not  so  important  because  it  is
equally  accurate  to  say  that  certain  things  are  valued  a  whole  lot  more
than  others.  It  is  just  as  accurate  to  say  things  are  valued  more  than
others  as  it is  to  say  that  they  are  valued  differently.  The  philosopher
Donald  Regan  writes  that,  "when  someone  refuses  to  sell  friendship  for
dollars,  I think what  such  a person  is most  likely  to  mean  is that  friend-
ship  is more valuable  than any amount of money,  or, in  other words, that
the  value of friendship  is  in  comparably  greater."'  Says  Regan,  "When
someone  refuses  to  sell  a  child,  it is  closer  to  the  truth  to  say  that  we
regard the value  of parenthood  as incomparably  greater  than the value of
money  than  to  say  that  we  regard  these  values  as  incommensurable." 9
Regan  is  suggesting  that  these  cases  are best  made  sense  of by  saying
that  some  things we  value  a  lot,  and  in  his  view,  it  clouds  things  to say
that they  are valued  differently.  I think that Regan's  challenge to incom-
mensurability-as  a  description  of what  people  mean  and  what  they  ex-
perience-is  unsuccessful.  It is possible  to  imagine  someone  who  thinks
that  the  value  of parenthood  or  friendship  is  much  higher  than  dollars
and not that the value is different  from dollars,  but  it would  be  a strange
person if his assessment  of why the child  would  not be  sold was  really,  "I
just  like  this  child  a  lot  more  than  even  ten  million  dollars,  even  ten
billion dollars."  In other words, part of what it means  to be  a parent is to
rule  off-limits,  even  as  a consideration,  the  exchange  of the  relationship
for  dollars.

I promised  I was going  to get  more concrete,  and  I  am  about  to.  Now

I'm going  to  talk  about  law.

Two  qualifications.  It  is not  the case  that law  automatically  maps,  or

7.  See  Goldberg  v.  Kelly,  397  U.S.  254,  266  (1970).
8. Donald  H.  Regan,  Authority and  Value:  Reflections on  Raz's Morality of Free-

dom,  62 S. Cal.  L. Rev.  995,  1058  (1989).

9.  IiL  at  1067-68.

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1667 1993-1994

1668

FORDHAM LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  62

translates  our best  valuations  into,  legal  requirements.  We  might  think,
for  example,  that  there  is  something  about  prostitution  that  is  debasing
to  human sexuality,  and so it is good  to have a social  norm that  says that
prostitution  is not the preferred  sexual mode.  But we  might think, at the
same  time,  that  the  law ought  not  to  ban prostitution.  It  would  be  per-
fectly reasonable  to say  that surrogacy  arrangements  are not the best way
of producing  children,  but  the  law  won't  ban that.  So  one  might  think
that  the  legal  system  ought  not  to  do  what  social  norms  do.

My  other qualification  is this:  I am going  to go now over  a wide range
of areas  of law and  suggest how  these  issues might  bear  on  current  legal
disputes,  without attempting  at all  to resolve  these issues.  I  am  going  to
sacrifice  depth for  breadth.

The  unifying  theme  has  to  do  with  what  we  might  call the  expressive
function  of law.  By  the expressive  function  of law,  I mean not simply the
social  consequences  of law,  which  are  what  are  typically  described,  but
also  what  sorts  of values  the  law  expresses.  This,  I  think,  plays  a  tacit
role  in  lots  of legal  debates.

For  example,  there  is  a lot  of work  among  economists  and some  law-
yers  about  whether  the  antidiscrimination  laws  of  the  1960s  actually
changed  the  world  at all.  Are  the  lives of black people  better  off because
of  those  laws?  Some  people  think  that  the  evidence  is  not  fully  in.  If
what  I am  about  to say  is  right, it still counts  in  favor of those laws  that
they  express  an  appropriate  valuation  of the  role  of skin  color in  human
relations-even  if we  cannot show  and  do  not  know whether  those  laws
have  resulted in higher  welfare for  the groups  they  are intended  to bene-
fit.  That is to say that the  values that the law  expresses  are themselves  of
interest  independent  of the  direct  social  consequences.

We  should break up  this idea  of the  expressive function  of law into two
different  notions.  The  first  is  that  we  might  care  about  the  expressive
function  of law because  the value the law  expresses  will  itself have conse-
quences  for social  attitudes.  If it is  the  case  that prostitution  is regularly
admitted  into society,  it might be  that  social  attitudes  will shift  in  a way
that  is  unfortunate.

I  think  a  lot  of debate  over  such  things  as  affirmative  action,  capital
punishment,  surrogacy  arrangements,  prostitution,  and  drug legalization
have  to  do  with  the  social  effects  of the  mode  of valuation  that  law  ex-
presses.  And  here  we  are talking  about  consequences:  Is  the expression
of an  appropriate  mode,  in  a way  that  will affect  social  attitudes  for  the
better  or  for  the  worse?

But  there is  another  notion  which  is  not  quite  about  effects  on  social
attitudes.  Here  I have  a  quotation  for  you  that  grabbed  me  while  I  was
writing  this  paper.  It  is  a quotation  from  a  civil  rights  demonstrator  in
the 1960s:

If I  had  known  that  not  a single  lunch  counter would  open  as  a  result
of my  action  I  could  not  have  done  differently  than  I  did.  If  I  had
known  violence  would  result,  I could  not  have done differently  than  I

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1668 1993-1994

1994]

CONFLICTING VAL  UES IN  LAW

1669

did.  I am  thankful for the sit-ins if for no  other reason  than that  they
provided me  with  an  opportunity  for making  a  slogan  into  reality,  by
turning a decision into an  action.  It seems  to me that this is what life  is
all about.10

Now, this is a very stark version  of the expressive  function of law-the
notion that the valuation that  law  expresses  is worth attention  independ-
In  this  lies  the  stuff of  fanaticism,  so  one
ent  of social  consequences. 
wants to be  cautious  about the  endorsement  of the law's  expressive  func-
tion quite apart  from social  consequences.  But  I  think it is hard  to get  a
full handle on legal  debates without seeing  that the expressive  function-
even  in  this  stark,  totally  nonconsequential  sense-is  part  of  what  the
debates  are  about.

Now  for some  specifics.  In  our  society,  the  law  carves  up  the  world
into different  social spheres:  politics,  religion,  family, labor  unions,  mar-
kets.  One  way to  get a handle  on  what  is  done through  this  legal  differ-
entiation  is  to  see  it  as  a  way  a  liberal  society-"liberal"  in  the  old
sense-makes  space for  different  modes  of valuation.  The  family is  typi-
cally the sphere  for affection and  love;  religion is the sphere  for devotion;
the market is the sphere  for use; politics  is the sphere  for the exchange  of
reasons.

Social  criticism  often  consists  of saying  that  one sphere  does  not  live
up  to its aspiration;  that  the family,  nominally  a  sphere for  love,  is  actu-
ally  a  sphere for  domination;  or that  politics,  nominally  a sphere  for  the
exchange  of reasons,  is  actually  a  place  where  money  and  use  are  very
important.  I  do  not mean  to question  these  possibilities.  All  I  mean  to
suggest  is  that  social  differentiation  in  this  really  critical  sense  is  best
understood  as  an effort  to  make  space  for different  evaluative  modes.

The  Establishment  Clause  of  the  Constitution  is  very  hard  to  make
sense  out of.  What social work  is it doing,  in saying  that the government
cannot  establish  an  official  religion?  As  it  has  come  to  be  understood,
one  thing  that  it  does  is  to  exclude  from  the  political  realm  a  certain
mode of valuation which is perfectly  acceptable  in  the private realm,  that
is,  one of devotion  to a  deity.  That mode  of valuation-let's  call it wor-
ship-is acceptable  privately; but it has no role  in the public sphere.  The
Establishment  Clause,  I  think,  at  its  inception  and  now  is  best  under-
stood  as  excluding  a  mode  of valuation  from  political  life.

The Equal  Protection  Clause can  be seen  as a big generalization  of the
titles of nobility  clause  with  which  I began.  It has  a  similar  aspiration.
At least  one of the  things  the equal  protection  clause is  trying to  do is to
say  that modes  of valuation  that reflect  inadequate  respect  for  blacks  or
women are not an  acceptable  part of political  debate.  An  effort  to pass a
law because  of a belief that  one group  is  below  another  is  systematically
out  of bounds.

The  Supreme  Court  has  placed  an emphasis  on  the  legitimacy  of rea-

10.  James  Miller,  "Democracy  is  in  the Streets"  52  (1987).

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1669 1993-1994

1670

FORDHAM LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  62

sons for  governmental  action. 1  A literacy  test  that  is  disguised  to  pro-
duce  good  electors  is  fine;  a  literacy  test  that  it  supposed  to  exclude
blacks  is not fine. 12  If all we cared  about  is consequences,  it might  not be
extremely  easy  to make  sense  out of that.  Consequentialists  are very  ag-
ile; but  I think we  do  not make full  sense  out of what is  happening in  the
area  of equality  law without  seeing  that the  mode  of valuation  is  crucial
to judicial  determinations  of whether  the  equality  norm  is  violated.

In the law  of environmental  protection,  there are  a lot of puzzles.  Re-
cently,  Americans  were  asked  whether  they  agreed  with  the  statement
that  "the  environment  is  more  important  than  anything  and  worth  pro-
tecting  regardless  of  the  cost."  Guess  how  many  Americans  said  yes?
Eighty  percent. 3

In response  to surveys,  when people are asked,  "How  much would you
have  to  be  paid  in  order  to  allow  degradation  of a  park  or  the  air  of a
certain  percentage?"  over  half refused  to  answer.' 4  If people  are  asked,
"How  much  would  you  pay to  allow  continued  existence  of the park,  or
continued existence  of an endangered  species?"  they will give  an amount
that  it  is  not  always  that  high.  But  if they  are  asked  how  much  would
they  have to be paid,  they say  something like, "Get  out of here, surveyor.
I  don't  answer those  questions."

If we  look  at  our  cost/benefit  charts-expenditures  per  life  saved-
there  are wild  disparities,  ranging  from  about  zero  dollars per life  saved
to  the  billions."'  One  regulation  apparently  cost  over  a  trillion  dollars
per life  saved-a  pretty  dumb  regulation.

I think that it is not easy to make  sense out of this without adverting  to
the fact that  people are often saying  things that suggest that the  way they
value the  environment  is inconsistent  with  exchange for  cash  straight  up.
Now  again,  this  is  not  a  claim for  infinite  valuation  of the  environment.
It  is  a  claim  that  one  can  get  some  purchase  on  the  seemingly  weird
results  by attending  to what  people  actually  say  when  they  start  to  spell
these  things out-which  has  to  do not  with  infinite  valuation,  but  differ-
ent  kinds  of valuation  of what  it  is  that  the  environment  is  for.  When
they  say  such things  as,  "No  amount  of money  would  be  compensation
for  the  extinction  of  a  species,"  they  are  talking  quite  the  way  parents
would  if asked  how  much  they  would  have  to  be  paid  to  give  up  their
daughter.

If this  is  right,  the  problem  with  cost/benefit  analysis  is not  that  it  is
distributionally  wrong,  or that it is  inferior  to the  status  quo;  it  is proba-
bly  better  than the  status  quo  of crazy  quilt  patterns and  irrational  regu-

11.  See  Washington  v.  Davis,  426  U.S.  229,  239  (1976).
12.  See  id. at 245- 46.
13.  See Poll Shows Four of Five Americans Support Environment, Even  Over Economy,

23  Env.  Rep.  (BNA)  1155  (Aug. 7,  1992).

14.  See  Daniel  Kahneman  et  al.,  The  Endowment Effect,  Loss Aversion,  and Status

Quo Bias, 5  J.  Econ.  Persp.  193,  202-03  (1991).

15.  See  Stephen  Breyer,  Breaking  the  Vicious  Circle  24-27  (1993).

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1670 1993-1994

1994]

CONFLICTING VALUES  IN  LAW

1671

lations.  The  problem  with  cost-benefit  analysis  is that  it is  obtuse.  It is
obtuse because  it does  not  disaggregate  its various  ingredients  and  allow
participants in the democratic  process  a full picture of the differently  val-
ued  goods that are at stake.  If you  are told that the  cost/benefit  analysis
for an OSHA regulation  has  flunked, you  know much  too  little.  What is
important to know is what those numbers represent.  Do they  mean more
unemployment,  more  poverty,  or  higher  food  prices?  A  more  disaggre-
gated  picture  of consequences,  while  more  unruly,  would  give  a  better
account.

All this  does  not just relate to public law;  it relates  to private  law,  too.
In the law of contracts, courts sometimes give specific  performance  reme-
dies;  that  is,  not  dollar  damages  but  a  right  to  the  thing  itself.  I  guess
Kim Bassinger  was  almost  compelled  to do  a  specific  performance  for  a
movie  that has  been  released  with  another  actress.

Here  a real puzzle  in  Anglo-American  law:  When is specific  perform-
ance granted?  For economists,  this  quite a puzzle.  The conventional  an-
swer is that  specific  performance  is granted  when the thing  in question-
let's say  it is a painting  or a piece  of land-has  value to the  plaintiff that
is too hard for courts to assess,  so the costs of assessment  are so  high that
the  courts will  order  specific  performance. 16

There  is  undoubtedly  something  to  that,  but  I  do  not  think  it  is  the
whole  picture.  I think  part  of what  is  going  on  when  the  court  orders,
"You  deliver  the painting  or the land,"  is  that the  court is  thinking  that
the person is entitled not to something that is valued as much as the  thing
for which  he or she contracted;  the  plaintiff is entitled  to something  that
is  valued  in  the same way  as  the  thing for  which  he  or  she  contracted.
The insistence  on  specific  performance  remedies  in  various  areas  of con-
tract law has  to do with  the difficulty  of thinking of compensatory  reme-
dies,  in  terms  of dollars,  as  really  restoring  a status  quo  ante.

If that is right, it has large implications for thinking about  tort law and
contract law,  where it is usually  thought that  the purpose of the law  is to
restore the plaintiff to the  position he would  have occupied  if not  for the
injury.  It might be the case  that  this  view  is not  quite accurate;  that  the
restoration of the status  quo ante is  not feasible;  and  that what  the law  is
doing  if specific  performance  is not  available  is  something  different.

I  have two  more  notations  to  make.  One is  about  feminism  and  the

other  is  about  legal  reasoning.

For feminism,  I have two  quotations  for you.  Richard  Rorty,  the phi-
losopher,  has  paraphrased  Catharine  MacKinnon  very  prominently  as
saying  that  "being  a woman  is not yet a  way  of being a  human  being."' 7
Mike  Tyson,  the  boxer,  during  his  rape  trial,  and  this  was  widely
quoted-even  more  widely  quoted  than  Richard  Rorty  or  Catharine
MacKinnon-Mike  Tyson  said,  "I  love  women."  I  wanted  to  find  that

16.  See  Richard  A.  Posner,  Economic  Analysis  of  Law  ยง 4.11  (3d  ed.  1986).
17.  Richard  Rorty, Feminism and Pragmatism, 30  Mich.  Q.  Rev.  231  (1989).

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1671 1993-1994

1672

FORDHAM LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  62

and  cite  it,  speculating  that  something  more  interesting  than  appears
might be at work.  I put  it in  the computer  and  I got,  for just a two-year
period,  125  references  to  the  words  "I  love  women,"  many  of them  in-
volving  men  accused  of sexual  harassment  or sexual  assault.

I think that  there is  a connection  between  the Tyson quotation  and  the
MacKinnon  quotation.  I  do  not  think Tyson  was  lying.  I  think  he was
reflecting  a  mode  of  valuation  which  is  sincere.  I  think  at  work  in
Rorty's  paraphrase  of MacKinnon  is  a  claim  that  women  are  typically
valued  either for use or through  love  and not sufficiently  through  respect
or  in  ways  that  human  beings  deserve  to  be  valued,  that  is,  for  their
dignity.

I  think  a  lot  of feminism  in  law  has  to  do  with  an  insistence  that  the
typical modes  of valuation,  having to  do with intense affection  or use, are
not adequate and that respect or dignity ought to be the substitutes.  This
claim  obviously  bears  on-even  if it  does  not  resolve-such  matters  as
the  distribution of work  within  marriage,  abortion,  prostitution  and  sur-
rogacy,  sexual  harassment,  and  much,  much  more.

Many  of the  debates  over  surrogacy  and prostitution  have to  do  with
the  claim  that  women's  sexual  and  reproductive  capacities  are  being
turned  into  objects  for  the  use  and  control  of others,  in  ways  that  are
inconsistent  with  law's  appropriate  expressive  function.

III.  LEGAL  REASONING

In many places  analogical  reasoning  is not popular.  Much  more popu-
lar  is top-down  reasoning:  here  is a  desirable  end-let's  call  it  efficiency,
or  utility,  or  equality,  or  dignity,  or  something  else-and  let's  use  the
specified  value  to  work  problems  through.  Analogical  reasoning  is  not
now  treated  with  much  dignity,  though  it  is  the  stock  in  trade  of  the
lawyer.

A  famous  if perhaps  apocryphal  story  at  the  University  of  Chicago
goes  like  this:  Edward  Levi  was the  Dean  of the University  of Chicago,
and his  great book  is actually  a  tribute  to  analogical  reasoning.'"  When
he  was  Dean,  Levi  also  helped  introduce  law  and  economics  into  the
legal  culture.  The  way  he  did  this  was  to  have  a  fellow  named  Aaron
Director,  who  never  published  much  but  was  really  very  influential,
come  in  and  teach  every  fifth  antitrust  class.  The  way  the  story  goes,
Levi  would  spend  four  brilliant  classes  doing  analogical  reasoning.  Did
he have a  theory?  No.  But he certainly  could manipulate  the  cases.  Di-
rector  would  come  in the  fifth  class  and  show  that  what  Levi  had  been
doing  made  no sense.  Director had a theory.  By  the end,  the story goes,
even  Levi  was  converted.

This  is  something  that  has  happened  in  many  places  in  the  legal  cul-
ture,  and in  many  different  areas  of law.  In  antitrust,  Director  may  well
have  rightly  converted  everyone,  but  it  is  not  clear  that  the  victory  has

18.  See  Edward  H.  Levi,  An  Introduction  to  Legal  Reasoning  (1949).

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1672 1993-1994

1994]

CONFLICTING VALUES  IN  LAW

1673

been earned  everywhere.  The analogical  thinker  is  unequipped  with  and
unburdened  by  a  unitary  conception  of the  good or  the  right;  he is  alert
to  particulars;  and  he  is  able  to  see  the  diverse  modes  of  valuation  at
stake  in many legal  disputes.  It may  well  be in  some  areas  of the law-
torts is  a candidate,  free  speech is  another  candidate-a  plurality  of val-
ues  is at  stake.  Precisely  because  the  analogical  thinker does  not have  a
top-down  theory, but  instead  is  open  to  the  possibility  of plural  and  di-
verse theories of value,  the analogical thinker has something  to be said  on
his  or  her behalf.

It is time to conclude.  I have not said much  about the  important  issue
of choice-that  is, choice between  modes  of valuation  and  among incom-
mensurable  goods.  I  have  asserted,  and  I  want  to  assert  it  once  more,
that  some  decisions  are  reasonable  and  others  not, so  one  ought  not  to
identify  incommensurability  with  reasonlessness  or indeterminacy.

But I do  want to say  that  the loss of diverse  modes  of valuation  would
be for  the  legal  culture  as  for  the  political  culture,  something  of a  trag-
edy,  not least  because  it would make  the very  notion of tragedy  puzzling
or  even  incomprehensible.

I  have  a  quotation  from  Mill  and  then  a  final  note.  The  quotation
from  Mill comes  from  his  "Essay  on  Bentham."  Mill  thought  that Ben-
tham  was like  a  one-eyed  man.  Because  he  had only  one  eye,  he could
see  farther than  anybody  else, but he could  not see  everything  that other
people  see.  Wrote  Mill:

Nothing is  more curious  than  the absence  of recognition  in  any  of his
writings of the existence  of conscience,  as a  thing distinct  from  philan-
thropy,  from  affection  for  God  or man,  and  from  sel-interest  in  this
world  or  in the  next....

Nor is  it only  the moral part of man's  nature..,  that  he overlooks;
he but faintly recognises,  as a  fact in  human  nature,  the pursuit  of any
other  ideal  end  for  its  own  sake.  The  sense  of honour,  and  personal
dignity..,  the love of beauty, the passion  of the artist;  the love  of order
... the love action, the thirst for movement  and activity....  the  love of
ease:-None  of  these  powerful  constituents  of  human  nature  are
thought  worthy  of a  place. 

.... 9

My  largest  suggestion is  that  an insistence  on  diverse  modes  of valua-
tion  may  be  one  of the  most  important  lessons  that  emerges  from  the
study  of public  and  private  law.

19.  John  Stuart  Mill,  Mill  on  Bentham  and  Coleridge  66-68  (F.R.  Lewis  ed.,  1962)

(1938).

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1673 1993-1994

HeinOnline  -- 62 Fordham L. Rev. 1674 1993-1994

