 JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. http://about.jstor.org/terms The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Supreme Court Review In Association of Data Processing Serv Org v Camp,1 the Supreme Court, in an opinion written by Justice William O. Douglas, revolutionized the law of standing. The Court rejected the old idea that a "legal interest" is a necessary basis for standing. Instead, it set out a new requirement: the plaintiff must show an "injury in fact."2 The Court clearly thought that it was possible to identify "injury in fact" in an entirely law-free way. On the Court's view, judges should answer the question whether there was injury by looking at consequences, and without examining the relevant law. Cass R. Sunstein is Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. cluded that an injury in fact is a constitutional prerequisite for standing under Article III of the Constitution.4 Without injury, no one has standing. This is an extraordinarily novel development. Contrary to the Court's recent claims, the notion of injury in fact has no basis in the text or history of the Constitution.5 Indeed, the Court has never thoroughly explained the shift from "legal interest" to "injury in fact." But in Data Processing, the Court said that it wanted to make it unnecessary to investigate "the merits" in order to decide issues of standing, and it appeared to seek instead to make the standing problem turn on a law-free inquiry into the harm suffered by the plaintiff. Under this framework, whether the plaintiff had standing would not turn on the statutory or constitutional provision at issue.6 Instead it would turn on a commonsensical, largely value-free inquiry into the question of harm. If you are harmed, you have standing; without an injury, you cannot sue. minished opportunity to enjoy days without sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere? A diminution in the value of his property? 2. Jones likes classical music, and she is unhappy that the Federal Communication Commission is going to award a license to a rock music station on 104.3 FM. Is her injury the actual unavailability of classical music in her area? Her diminished opportunity to hear classical music? The unavailability of classical music on 104.3 FM? Her offense at the presence of rock music on the airwaves? 3. Richardson wants the local prosecutor to initiate proceedings against the father of her child, who was born out of wedlock; she hopes that the proceedings will convince him to pay child support. But the prosecutor acts only in cases involving children born within wedlock. Is Richardson's injury the diminished incentive to pay child support? The actual absence of child support? The failure to have her child treated the same way as legitimate children? 4. Friends of the Planet (FOP) claim that they have suffered a procedural injury, consisting of an agency's failure to prepare an environmental impact statement before developing a waterway.7 What sort of an injury must FOP allege in order to bring suit?8 Must they live near the waterway? Must they show that the failure to prepare the statement will degrade their waters? What kinds of harms must they connect to any such degradation? Questions of this kind may seem exotic, but they make all the difference. Take a recent example: People who live near Mexico think that if the North Atlantic Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) is ratified, the air will become dirtier, and they will be injured. But what, exactly, is their injury?9 If the injury can be characterized broadly-as, say, increased exposure to dirtier air-many people may have standing to contest NAFTA. If the injury must be characterized narrowly-as, say, cancers and respiratory diseases that would not otherwise occur-many and or perhaps all people will be deprived of access to court. They will lack the requisite injury, and they will be unable to show that any injury is due to the defendant's conduct or likely to be redressed by a decree in their favor. Few who are subject to dirtier air actually will be able to show that they will get some disease without court action. music. Such listeners will almost certainly be able to find their preferred fare elsewhere on the dial. o (It is unclear that their "offense" at rock music will count as a legally cognizable injury, a point that raises further complexities for the notion of a value-free inquiry into whether there has been "injury.") And as the Court to people interested in studying bison, in the context of a challenge to failure to complete an environmental impact statement. See also Fund for Animals v Lujan, 962 F 2d 1391 (9th Cir 1992), characterizing a similar injury as involving an "opportunity." s See the discussion in Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife, 112 S Ct 2130 (1992). 9 The issue arose in Public Citizen v USTR, 822 F Supp 21 (DDC 1993), in which the district court found standing without closely investigating the issues of injury and redressability. The court of appeals reversed on other grounds. held,"1 it is highly speculative to suggest that prosecutorial action will necessarily lead a delinquent father to make good on past child support payments. Therefore-as the Court also held-no injury could be shown. 12 It is astonishing but true that the Supreme Court has given very little guidance on a key issue in modern administrative law: how injuries should be characterized for purposes of standing. Its most serious and sustained confrontation with the issue came last term in Northeastern Florida Chapter of the Associated General Contractors v Jacksonville (hereafter Northeastern Contractors)." The result and the reasoning in the case are in conspicuous tension with other Supreme Court precedents, most of them quite recent. And the Court's distinctive approach, offered in an intriguing setting, has the potential to allow the Court to sort out much of the law in this area, and also to move standing doctrine in some generally salutary directions. This is so especially in light of the fact that, as we will see, the Northeastern Contractors case exposes the fundamental flaw in Data Processing-the view that it is possible to identify injuries without looking at law. One of the important legacies of Northeastern Contractors will be the understanding that in characterizing injury, it is the law that counts. In deciding whether there is standing, what matters is what the law says. There can be no law-free inquiry into the subject of injury. This will be my principal claim here. In Jacksonville and Duval County, Florida, there is an association of construction contractors, operating under the name of Northeastern Florida Chapter of the Associated General Contractors (hereinafter AGC). In 1991 AGC challenged Jacksonville's Minority Business Enterprise program, which requires that 10% of total city contract funds be set aside for minority business enterprises. A minority business enterprise is defined as one that is owned at least 51% by a woman or a member of a minority group. AGC's members are mostly non-minorities under the program. They regularly bid and perform construction work for the City of Jacksonville. They complained, however, that they had been excluded from bidding on the contracts that had been set aside for minority business enterprises. They contended that many of the non-minority members of AGC would have bid on those contracts if not for the set-aside program. Invoking section 1983,14 which provides a cause of action for people deprived of federal rights by state law, they claimed that they had been denied equal protection of the laws. The Supreme Court reversed." The centerpiece of the Court's decision consisted of a description of the injury not as a failure to receive a contract, but instead as an inability to compete. This description of the injury stemmed from the Court's understanding of the Equal Protection Clause. "When the government erects a barrier that makes it more difficult for members of one group to obtain a benefit than it is for members of another group, a member of the former group seeking to challenge the barrier need not alleged that he would have obtained the benefit but for the barrier 14 42 USC ? 1983: "Every person who, under color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory, subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen of the United States or other person within the jurisdiction thereof to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the Constitution and laws, shall be liable to the party injured in an action at law, suit in equity, or other proper proceeding for redress." in order to establish standing."'9 The injury in fact requirement was met by "the denial of equal treatment resulting from the imposition of the barrier."20 It was therefore sufficient for the plaintiffs to claim that they are ready and able to bid on contracts and that they were prevented from doing so as a result of the discriminatory policy. In so concluding, the most important precedent was the Bakke decision,21 in which Allan Bakke was allowed to challenge an affirmative action program without showing that he would have been admitted without the program. And in an intriguing and seemingly offhand footnote, the Court added that because of this characterization of the injury, the redressability requirements were fully met.22 By this the Court appeared to say that since the injury was the interference with the opportunity to compete, it was due to the defendant's conduct; and it also followed that any judicial decree in the plaintiffs' favor would remedy their injury. earlier outcomes, especially that in Warth v Seldin.23 In the Warth case, the Court had denied standing to a construction association that was seeking to challenge an allegedly discriminatory zoning ordinance. In trying to come to terms with Warth, the Court made two points. First, the association in Warth did not contend that it could not apply for variances and permits on an equal basis; its complaint was that it could not obtain variances and permits. Second, there was no allegation in Warth that any members had actually applied for a permit or variance for a current project. Here, by contrast, actual applications were alleged.24 (O'Connor, joined by Blackmun); but that question is not relevant for my purposes here. It is not necessary to linger long over the question whether the Court's decision was correct. Section 1983 confers a cause of action on people whose federal rights have been violated by state law. The Equal Protection Clause is concerned to ensure an opportunity to compete on an equal basis.25 If blacks who want to attend professional schools in Arkansas are not permitted to attend such schools in Arkansas, they have been deprived of their rights.26 It does not matter whether any particular person can show that he would have been admitted under a nondiscriminatory policy. So too for the plaintiffs in Northeastern Contractors.27 The appropriate remedy is a decree invalidating the discrimination, not a requirement of admission or award of a contract. Whether these things follow will depend on what happens when the discriminatory barrier is removed. The Court's conclusion that standing existed because of the na ture of the interest protected by the Equal Protection Clause is by itself highly notable, and it has general implications for the law of standing. The Northeastern Contractors case could not possibly have been resolved if the Court looked at the issue of "injury" independently of law. In order even to identify the relevant injury, the Court had to look at the law, that is, the Equal Protection Clause. So much for the attempt in Data Processing to ensure that courts would inquire into "injury in fact" without investigating law. In cases in which the issue is how to characterize the injury-that is, in every case-an exploration of "facts" will not be enough. Something has to be said, at least implicitly, about law as well. In the easy cases, the injury seems obviously present, but this is not because law is irrelevant. It is because there is agreement on the legal background.28 In any case, what sense would it make to require the plaintiffs to prove that they would actually have been awarded the relevant 2s Of course this formulation does not imply a judgment about affirmative action; that question depends on what "equal protection" means, a question that is irrelevant here. admitted if he applied. But in almost all realistically imaginable cases, a prohibition on admission is enough. I do not discuss here the question whether someone must allege application for admission. Application may be discouraged by the discriminatory barrier-it would be futile-and in such a case a facial attack on the barrier would seem acceptable. This issue was not squarely presented in Northeastern Contractors, though the Court seemed to suggest an application would be required. their claim is correct on the merits. see Fletcher, The Structure of Standing, 98 Yale L J 221 (1988); Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? 91 Mich L Rev 163. See also text at notes 53-55 infra (discussing the ways in which any claim about consequences is in fact underlain by norms). contracts? How would constitutional goals be served by such an odd requirement? It may be difficult or even impossible to reconstruct the facts sufficiently to assess the matter. Evaluation of what would have happened in a counterfactual world is often extremely difficult after the fact. Moreover, that assessment would seem to have no point. Because it would serve no ascertainable set of purposes, it would be a waste of judicial resources. Perhaps there would be some saving of judicial resources too, by avoiding the need to resolve disputes whose outcome may not result in an actual award of a contract to any party; but with respect to judicial resources, any gains seem likely to be small. In any event, no serious constitutional goal seems to require the plaintiff show that an actual contract would be awarded. At least this is what the Court in Northeastern Contractors seemed to assume. Some such assumption must be implicit in the Court's readiness to characterize the injury as involving an opportunity rather than a more discrete harm. with political processes. It follows that the lower court in Northeastern Contractors was right after all. persuasive in other contexts.31 In Northeastern Contractors, the Court should have addressed this underlying concern, especially in light of its prominence elsewhere in the law of standing. Here we find a significant gap in the Court's opinion. case,33 for example, equally numerous plaintiffs are allowed to offer their claims; the same is true in many constitutional cases brought under (for example) the Equal Protection and Due Process Clauses.34 A refusal to characterize the injury in terms of "opportunity"-if based on the numbers of people whose interests were at stake-would wreak havoc with too much established law. For all these reasons, the outcome in Northeastern Contractors is unexceptionable. their rights under the Equal Protection Clause. The existence of a congressionally conferred cause of action should have been sufficient to establish standing. The Supreme Court neglected to emphasize this point-the creation of a cause of action for people whose federal rights have been violated-and here we have another major gap in the opinion. The Court did not refer to the particular source of federal law that conferred a right to bring suit on the plaintiffs. But if we attend to section 1983, the case seems relatively simple. injury as involving (for example) an increased probability of harm, an injury to an opportunity, or a failure to have potential wrongdoers face the kinds of incentives that Congress (or the Constitution) seeks to impose on them. In many cases the Court has opted for the common law characterization, and thus denied standing, when the public law alternative was fully available. Strikingly, in Northeastern Contractors the Court seemed to think that a common law like understanding, one that speaks in terms of discrete harms to discrete people, would make no sense; the Equal Protection Clause protects the opportunity to compete, not the award of contracts. We need not quarrel with this result in order to insist that the Court ought to have explained how this characterization of the injury fits, or fails to fit, with other cases. And it is here that the case leaves a conspicuous gap not only in logic but also for the future. From what has been said thus far, it seems clear that North eastern Contractors does not coexist easily with recent cases and trends in the area of standing. For this reason the case, though seemingly minor and technical, raises a host of complex and novel issues. It will be useful to begin by showing how the same analytic strategy used in Northeastern Contractors might have been used in a wide range of cases in which standing was denied. That strategy consists of recharacterizing the injury so as to ensure simultaneous compliance with the requirements of injury in fact and redressability.37 Consider, for example, Linda RS v Richard D. 38 It will be recalled that the case involved a complaint that the local prosecutor had failed to prosecute fathers of illegitimate children for failure to provide child support. The plaintiff claimed that the discriminatory prosecution policy was in violation of the Equal Protection Clause. The Court denied standing. On the Court's analysis, the problem for purposes of standing was that the plaintiff could not show that her injury would be redressed by a decree in her favor. Perhaps the father would simply go to prison. Structurally, this approach is the same as that of the Court of Appeals in Northeastern Contractors. The failure of redressability stemmed from the narrow characterization of the injury, just as the broad characterization of the injury in Northeastern Contractors eliminated any problem with redressability. 7 There are really two such requirements: the injury must be due to the defendant's conduct, and the injury must be likely to be remedied by a decree in the plaintiffs favor. In most cases, these will lead to the same result. See Allen v Wright, 468 US 737 (1984). for child support, but not against black fathers. Suppose that in such circumstances a mother of a child whose father is black com plains that the discrimination has made it impossible for her to support her child. Would there be any problem with standing? Certainly there should not be,39 and Northeastern Contractors is a powerful precedent in her favor. The injury consists not of the absence of child support, but of the fact that her opportunity to receive child support is not subject to the same incentives as that of others similarly situated. party. In Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife,40 the Supreme Court brought out this point, which had been largely implicit in several other cases.41 In Lujan, the Court said that a case in which a plaintiff sought enforcement action was the weakest case for standing. In the Court's view, the injury in such cases is especially likely to be speculative. As we have seen, however, whether the injury is speculative cannot be decided in the abstract; everything depends on how the injury is described.42 On that particular question, there is no difference between an ordinary action and one brought against the government for unlawful enforcement activity. On that particular question, it is utterly irrelevant whether the government is being asked to initiate proceedings. If the injury is characterized broadly, as it was in Northeastern Contractors, this difference should not make a difference. Certainly there is no Article II problem with a suit against a state or local prosecutor for unlawful discrimination.43 Perhaps Article II concerns should bear on standing in cases in which the federal executive is the defendant. But any such concerns should be analytically separate. They should not be folded into the inquiry whether the injury is "speculative." The merger of these two questions-both complex enough-is a recipe for confusion. I conclude, then, that on the issue of injury, the strategy used in Northeastern Contractors could equally well have been used in Linda RS, so as to allow standing to be granted. But in Eastern Kentucky Welfare Rights Org., the Court could have characterized the relevant injury quite differently. It could have said that the injury involved the interest in ensuring that hospitals are subject to the incentives that Congress sought to introduce through the relevant provision of the Internal Revenue Code. The plaintiffs could have complained that their "injury" involved the opportunity to receive medical services on the conditions and with the incentives for which the statute provided. Perhaps this seems odd;4s but why would such a conception of the injury be any less appropriate than the parallel conception in Northeastern Contractors? The Court itself has offered no answer. "5 If it does, it is, I think, because of the persistence of common law thinking about cording to the plaintiffs, the deductions were unlawful, and their existence jeopardized the desegregation process by encouraging "white flight." The Supreme Court denied standing. According to the Court, the parents could not show that their particular children would be affected in any way by a change in IRS policy. would this description be illegitimate? Why would it be constitutionally inadequate? Is the plane ticket in Lujan the equivalent of formal bids in Northeastern Contractors? If so, why should we accept the conception of the injury entailed by these requirements? Consider, finally, the most conventional of cases under the Administrative Procedure Act.49 A company regulated by the EPA complains of agency noncompliance with the procedural requirements of the APA. Is there a hard standing issue if it is doubtful whether the agency would do anything different if the right procedures were followed? Surely not. The legally cognizable injury stems from the agency's failure to follow procedures that Congress has specified. It does not matter if an agency, having followed those procedures, nonetheless fails to do what the company wishes. The injury consists of the increased likelihood of harm, stemming from the failure to comply with procedural requirements.'s Northeastern Contractors shows, in short, that there is a large de gree of manipulability in the characterization of the injury in standing cases. In nearly every case in which the Supreme Court has denied standing, it would have been possible to describe the injury in such a way as to meet all applicable requirements. It follows that Northeastern Contractors poses a large question of how to characterize the relevant injury. And on this question-the critical one for the future-the Supreme Court has offered no guidance. I suggest that when courts are deciding how to characterize inju ries, the starting point is positive law. The key question-certainly the initial one-involves constitutional or congressional instructions. It follows that the question of standing is the same as the question whether the plaintiff has a cause of action.51 The major view: "This is not a case where plaintiffs are seeking to enforce a procedural requirement the disregard of which could impair a separate concrete interest of theirs (e.g., the procedural requirement for a hearing prior to denial of their license application, or the procedural requirement for an environmental impact statement before a federal facility is constructed next door to them)." 112 S Ct at 2130, 2142. Supreme Court Review 41. mistake in the last generation, made in Justice Douglas's opinion in Data Processing, was to split these questions apart. Always the issue is: Has the law entitled someone to bring suit? Courts should look to the underlying provision of law in order to identify the injury that it is designed to prevent. Northeastern Contractors was easy because it was clear that the constitutional provision protects the opportunity to compete on an equal basis, not merely the loss of a particular contract. EKWRO and Allen were much harder because in those settings, it is much harder to discern congressional instructions on how to characterize the injury. question of standing became trivially easy. Of course the injury requirement was met." To be sure, it is sometimes transparently clear that there is an injury-as, for example, when someone loses $10,000 or is put in jail. But even in such easy cases, an understanding of law does some important conceptual work. We see the loss of money or liberty as "injury" partly because our legal (not to mention social) tradition makes such matters clear. I do not deny that in some cases we can identify injuries as such without knowing much about the law. But as participants in the legal culture, even the easy cases are connected with shared understandings about the legal background; and when the cases become hard, an assessment of 52 See Fletcher, supra note 28 (collecting authorities critical of Data Processing). law is indispensable to an assessment of whether, for legal purposes, there is harm. much broader claim that any social assessment of "consequences" is in fact mediated by social norms identifying which "consequences" matter, and helping us to decide how to characterize them.54 People who purport to be pure consequentialists-in philosophy or lawmay well be relying on a background normative theory, itself not purely consequential in character, that helps us see what counts at all, and exactly how those things that do count ought to be assessed in social decisions. Consequential approaches, in short, are rarely or perhaps never simply consequential. It is only in this way that we can understand, for example, the (probably correct) view that offense is not a legally cognizable harm under the Federal Communications Act, or for that matter under the Clean Air Act. broad limits (and perhaps across the board), it is for Congress to decide whether people are entitled to bring suit.ss It also follows that the appropriate characterization of the injury should be based on an understanding of positive law. Especially intriguingly, Northeastern Contractors itself paves the way toward a repudiation of Data Processing, and explicitly so. In deciding on the relevant injury, the Court actually reasoned about the nature of the "legal interest" at stake under the Equal Protection Clause. We can therefore see Northeastern Contractors as at least a partial endorsement of the view that "legal interest," rather than "injury in fact," is the key issue in standing cases. Positive law is a start; but it is only that. Frequently Congress does not attend with anything like particularity to the issue of standing; frequently it is not easy to make inferences from statutory text, structure, and history. Frequently the characterization of the injury will be far from simple. To be sure, the statutory structure and history might help. In EKWRO and Allen, for example, the Court might have been responding to the general idea that one 4 See generally Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics (1993). person ought not to be allowed to litigate the tax liability of another.56 If this idea is in fact attributable to Congress' ordinary goals and understandings, both cases might be right-not because of absence of injury, but because this outcome is the best understanding of the governing statutes. On this view, Congress did not say how the injury should be characterized, but Congress could be taken to have expressed a judgment about standing. That judgment excludes third-party actions in tax cases. The first, a common law model of standing, favors narrow characterization of injury. This is so for two reasons: (1) any large group of citizens should presumptively be required to use the political process rather than the courts, and (2) there are special problems, constitutional in origin, whenever citizens attempt to require the executive to undertake enforcement action on their behalf. The second candidate, a public law model of standing, favors broad characterization of the injury. It does so principally on the theory that broad characterization is most likely to fit with congressional goals and expectations.58 Of course broad-gauged models of these kinds cannot substitute for close engagement with particular statutes and facts. We cannot come up with a simple approach to unite the appropriate characterization of injuries in cases involving consumers, radio listeners, victims of discrimination, environmentalists, purchasers of securities, and many more. Any real case will require knowledge of the particular legal claim, and for these purposes abstractions provide at best broad orientation. But these alternative positions do seem to be the most important and most general candidates; ideas that draw on these positions are usually implicit in the cases. I devote the rest of this essay to a brief discussion of their merits. the objects of regulation have standing. Their common law interests are at stake, and the Due Process Clause may well protect their right to judicial review of interferences with those interests.60 In any case, no one denies that the objects of regulation are entitled to standing. But perhaps courts should be reluctant to grant standing to beneficiaries of regulatory programs, at least when they are very numerous, and at least when they seek to require enforcement action of a certain kind or degree. We might think that the cases involving appropriate characterization of injuries, and especially those denying standing to regulatory beneficiaries, ought to be seen with these facts foremost in mind. Thus seen, the cases do not really turn on "injury"-that term is a smokescreen for the real concern-but instead on a particular understanding of the constitutional backdrop. That understanding calls for judicial caution when numerous beneficiaries ask the government to initiate enforcement proceedings. 59 A qualification is necessary here: The distinction between regulated objects and regulatory beneficiaries depends on some controversial assumptions. These include the decision to take the common law system as the ordinary or natural state of affairs, and to see departures from that system as regulatory impositions into an otherwise prepolitical status quo. See Sunstein, supra note 3, at 196-97. I stay with conventional usage here, but for ease of exposition, not because of acceptance of what underlies that usage. Note also that the "beneficiaries" of regulation could plausibly be (a) narrow interest groups of various kinds, including companies exempted from statutory requirements, or (b) people who are actually the "objects" of regulation, that is, people who can be imposed upon only because of what the law says. On the latter point, see Jeremy Waldron, Homelessness and the Problem of Freedom, 39 UCLA L Rev 295 (1991). rather than in court. This is a complex issue on which political deliberation ought to be strongly favored over adjudication. Of course courts should be available if there is a sharply focused injury, of the sort familiar to the common law; but if no such injury is at stake, standing should be denied. Such considerations have special strength in the context of regulatory programs that must be coordinated with each other and over time. Typically an agency is charged with implementation of a variety of different statutes, and it has the large responsibility of bringing about a coherent overall scheme. Typically it must fit together provisions that were enacted at different periods and that must be implemented in a temporally rational manner. An agency is in an especially good position to decide which problems need to be addressed, and when. A court is most unlikely to have a sufficient overview to examine such issues.62 This idea fortifies the view that courts ought to presume that Congress did not grant standing to beneficiaries alleging only an "opportunity-type" harm. At least in general, something more concrete must be claimed. It follows that discrete harms-of the sort demanded in EKWRO and Allen must be shown in the typical administrative law case. by ensuring consideration of environmental effects, not to prevent identifiable harms to identifiable people. When Congress says that schools receiving federal funds may not discriminate on the basis of sex, it is creating an incentive for sex equality, rather than imposing particular results on particular schools with respect to particular students. When Congress imposes national occupational safety standards, it is trying to reduce systemic risks, not to eliminate particular incidences of cancer. When Congress requires motor vehicles to reduce levels of air pollution, it is not attempting to cure identifiable respiratory problems, but to produce air quality that produces lower aggregate risks. tion between regulated objects and regulatory beneficiaries rests on shaky conceptual foundations.6s The purported objects of regulation might well be counted as beneficiaries insofar as lawstatutory and common-confers on them a wide range of rights that are advantageous to their interests. The so-called beneficiaries of regulation might well be regarded as objects insofar as it is 64 Of course, risk management was a goal of the common law too; see Richard Posner, Economic Analysis of Law (4th ed 1992). But the common law judges lacked the tools to engage in the kinds of structural reform sought by modern regulatory agencies. law-statutory and common-that allows people to intrude on interests that they would prefer to protect. As it operates in the cases, the distinction between beneficiaries and objects tends to take the common law as the normal or desirable state of affairs, and this judgment, however plausible it might be as a matter of theory, ought not to be made by courts in the face of conspicuously contrary views from Congress. This idea would be an effort to ensure that modern standing law is consistent with the post-New Deal shift in national legislation.66 Moreover, it is plausible to think that beneficiaries of regulatory programs are at least sometimes at a comparative disadvantage in the implementation process.67 Often they are too poorly organized to exert continuing influence. Often they face large transactions cost barriers to exerting such influence; this is so even though "public interest" organizations can sometimes help overcome organizational problems. Often statutes enacted by Congress are defeated by a process of inadequate implementation, which can be the result of political pressure by regulated industries, pressure that is not adequately countered by those who seek vigorous implementation. Whether or not transactions cost barriers are severe, there is no reason to believe that regulated industries are at a universal or systematic disadvantage compared to regulatory beneficiaries. And if this is right, an asymmetry in the law of standing-of the sort that lies at the heart of the common law model-could be perverse from Congress' own standpoint. Such an asymmetry would immunize insufficient enforcement action from legal scrutiny, while at the same time subjecting aggressive enforcement action to judicial review.68 This result is hardly likely to fit with Congress' goals in enacting regulatory statutes. have-in the important sense-already won in the political process. To this extent, judicial review helps to fortify democratic processes by testing agency decisions against congressional instructions, which are the ultimate source of agency authority. source of the plaintiffs' claims. In such cases, perhaps courts should demonstrate the "passive virtues"69 and allow the political process to deliberate as long as possible. It seems right to insist that courts will be cautious about allowing plaintiffs to obtain a constitutional ruling on legislative or executive action. For this reason, it is reasonable to say that courts should not readily assume that the Constitution creates private rights of action. Moreover, courts should generally require a discrete harm to a discrete interest before hearing a case based solely on the Constitution, without a statute creating a cause of action.70 But statutory cases present a different issue. The argument for judicial refusal to hear the plaintiffs' claim is far weaker when plaintiffs are complaining not that the Constitution forbids legislative action, but that a democratically enacted statute requires a regulatory agency to take action of a particular kind. In a case of that sort, considerations of democracy point toward rather than against access to court. There is no special need to insulate administrative or bureaucratic deliberation from an attack based on a statute where an interest protected by that statute is at stake. In any event, the regulated entities are, by hypothesis, entitled to judicial relief; they need not resort to the political process. Here too it is important to avoid building an asymmetry into the law of standing.71 None of this means that plaintiffs need not show an interest at all. But it does mean that in deciding whether a legal interest is at stake, the constitutional considerations do not counsel against granting standing to people who invoke "opportunity-type" harms. cle II as a basis for denying standing to beneficiaries.72 Article II says that the President shall "take Care that the laws be faithfully executed." Its basic purpose is to require executive implementation of enacted law. To be sure, it forbids judicial execution of the laws. But it does not forbid courts from saying that a regulatory agency has failed to execute the laws, as it is constitutionally required to do. Of course there would be a problem if courts were to require agencies to enforce the law as courts wished, or without legal requirements to this effect. But nothing of this kind is at risk in the cases at hand. Article II obliges the President to implement the law. Suits by beneficiaries of regulatory statutes, complaining of executive default on that fundamental obligation, do not undermine the allocation of power set up by Article II. At least this is so if a genuine legal claim is at stake, and if recognition of a cause of action is the best reading of legislative instructions. sions. First, Warth itself may well have been rightly decided. Because the plaintiffs' claim was constitutional in nature, it was probably right for the Court to require more particular allegations before assessing that claim. In any case, there are important differences between constitutional and statutory claims for purposes of standing. Second, Allen and EKWRO were wrong as "pure" standing cases. Northeastern Contractors shows that the relevant injuries could well have been described in terms that would satisfy all applicable requirements. The strongest argument on behalf of the outcomes in these cases would rest on the peculiarities of judicial assessment of the liability of one taxpayer in a case brought by another. Perhaps Congress did not want to allow this result, and in that event, both cases were right-not as a reading of "injury," but as a reading of the key issue, congressional instructions. Third, Northeastern Contractors ought to stand for the general proposition that when Congress has been silent, plaintiffs should be permitted to characterize their injuries as involving increased risks or harms to opportunities. It follows that in all of the cases with which I began this essay, a creative plaintiff ought to be allowed to formu 72 See Sunstein, supra note 17, for a more detailed discussion. late the relevant injury in such a way as to allow for a grant of standing.73 It also follows that the public law model can be made to fit well with most of current law, seeing EKWRO and Allen v Wright as tax cases; emphasizing the difference between constitutional and statutory cases; and seeing Lujan as a narrow ruling, requiring a more definite plan on the part of the plaintiffs, rather like the equivalent of a bid in Northeastern Contractors. Northeastern Contractors is the Court's first sustained encoun ter with a key issue in the new law of standing: the appropriate characterization of injuries. The Court's conclusion is unobjectionable, and there is nothing terribly wrong with the particular reasoning that underlay that conclusion. Section 1983 grants a cause of action to all those whose federal rights have been invaded by state law. The contractors in Northeastern Contractors complained that the set-aside program violated their constitutional rights. The Equal Protection Clause safeguards not particular outcomes, but general opportunities; and if the plaintiffs were correct on the merits, their legal rights had been violated. 73 For some qualifications, see Sunstein, Standing and the Privatization of Public Law, supra and though it does not bear on the result in the case, that problem goes very deep. The case exposes, more clearly than any previous case, a fundamental problem in the modern law of standing-the assumption, key to Data Processing, that "injuries" can be identified without reference to positive law. This assumption is false. Whether there is an injury depends at least in significant part on what the law says. The Court's reasoning and result in Northeastern Contractors confirm the point; it would have been impossible to decide the case without reference to the meaning of the Equal Protection Clause. The case thus inaugurates a healthy return74 to the view, vindicated by constitutional history75 and by the Administrative Procedure Act, that the question of standing is the question whether some source of law has conferred a cause of action on the plaintiff. injuries for purposes of standing. Northeastern Contractors fits poorly with the many cases in which the Court assumed or asserted a narrow characterization of the relevant injury. In all of those cases, the Court might easily have done what it did in Northeastern Contractors. It now remains to decide how the question of characterization is to be resolved. injury so as to ensure compliance with all standing requirementsought to be broadly generalizable. background, and the need for judicial caution in overseeing enforcement programs, standing ought to be denied unless (a) Congress has expressly granted standing or (b) a common law-like harm, one that can be described in discrete, individualized terms, is at stake. This view would have the advantage of explaining both Northeastern Contractors and a number of cases that deny standing on apparently similar facts. And although I have urged that this alternative is ultimately unsound, there is much to be said in its favor, for it would also have the virtue of helping to correct the fundamental flaw of Data Processing, and of reestablishing that it is both desirable and inevitable for courts to focus on legislative instructions, rather than to pretend to assess standing issues on the basis of "injury in fact" alone.