 

 

 

Standing Injuries
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein
Source: The Supreme Court Review, Vol. 1993 (1993), pp. 37-64
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3109576
Accessed: 19-09-2016 03:00 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

http://about.jstor.org/terms

The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
The Supreme Court Review

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 CASS R. SUNSTEIN

 STANDING INJURIES

 In Association of Data Processing Serv Org v Camp,1 the Supreme
 Court, in an opinion written by Justice William O. Douglas, revo-
 lutionized the law of standing. The Court rejected the old idea that
 a "legal interest" is a necessary basis for standing. Instead, it set
 out a new requirement: the plaintiff must show an "injury in fact."2
 The Court clearly thought that it was possible to identify "injury
 in fact" in an entirely law-free way. On the Court's view, judges
 should answer the question whether there was injury by looking
 at consequences, and without examining the relevant law.

 The Data Processing Court did not make clear whether in setting
 out the "injury in fact" test, it was speaking of the Administrative
 Procedure Act3 or the Constitution. But eventually the Court con-

 Cass R. Sunstein is Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago,

 Law School and Department of Political Science.

 AUTHOR'S NOTE: I am grateful to Thomas Brown for excellent research assistance.

 S397 US 150 (1970).

 2 Id at 153. The Court also suggested that the plaintiffs injury must be "arguably within
 the zone of interests" protected by the statutory or constitutional provision at issue, id at
 156; but the Court meant this test to be quite lenient, and it is largely irrelevant for present
 purposes. If the discussion here is correct, however, the "zone" test holds some promise of
 refocusing standing law on the question of congressional instructions. The recent tightening
 of the "zone" test, see Air Courier Conference of America v American Postal Workers Union, 498
 US 517 (1991), should be welcomed as an effort to return to the legal interest test, asking
 whether Congress has conferred a right to bring suit. I cannot discuss this issue here, though
 it should emerge from the discussion that there is an intriguing relationship between my
 reading of Northeastern Contractors and the possible tightening of the "zone" test.

 3 The relevant provision, which the Court purported to be interpreting, is 5 USC 702:
 "A person suffering legal wrong because of agency action, or adversely affected or aggrieved
 by agency action within the meaning of a relevant statute, is entitled to judicial review
 thereof." The interpretation was misconceived; the APA contains no "injury in fact" test.
 On the injury in fact idea and the APA, see Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? 91 Mich
 L Rev 163, 181-82 (1992).

 ? 1994 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
 0-226-36248-5/94/1993-0003$02.00

 37

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 38 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 cluded that an injury in fact is a constitutional prerequisite for
 standing under Article III of the Constitution.4 Without injury, no
 one has standing. This is an extraordinarily novel development.
 Contrary to the Court's recent claims, the notion of injury in fact
 has no basis in the text or history of the Constitution.5

 Indeed, the Court has never thoroughly explained the shift from
 "legal interest" to "injury in fact." But in Data Processing, the Court
 said that it wanted to make it unnecessary to investigate "the mer-
 its" in order to decide issues of standing, and it appeared to seek
 instead to make the standing problem turn on a law-free inquiry
 into the harm suffered by the plaintiff. Under this framework,
 whether the plaintiff had standing would not turn on the statutory
 or constitutional provision at issue.6 Instead it would turn on a
 commonsensical, largely value-free inquiry into the question of
 harm. If you are harmed, you have standing; without an injury,
 you cannot sue.

 All this seems very simple and straightforward. But how do we
 know whether an injury has been incurred? The question is much
 more vexing than it might appear. Consider the following cases.
 1. Smith lives near a proposed project for developing a water-
 way; he thinks that the project would make the air dirtier. He
 believes that if the project is built, he will be injured. Is his injury
 an actual incidence of cancer? An increased risk of cancer? A di-

 minished opportunity to enjoy days without sulfur dioxide in the
 atmosphere? A diminution in the value of his property?

 2. Jones likes classical music, and she is unhappy that the Federal
 Communication Commission is going to award a license to a rock
 music station on 104.3 FM. Is her injury the actual unavailability
 of classical music in her area? Her diminished opportunity to hear
 classical music? The unavailability of classical music on 104.3 FM?
 Her offense at the presence of rock music on the airwaves?

 3. Richardson wants the local prosecutor to initiate proceedings
 against the father of her child, who was born out of wedlock; she
 hopes that the proceedings will convince him to pay child support.
 But the prosecutor acts only in cases involving children born within

 See, e.g., Simon v EKWRO, 426 US 26 (1976); Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife, 112 S Ct

 2130 (1992).

 5 See Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? 91 Mich L Rev 163.

 6 Subject to the qualification in note 2 supra.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 2] STANDING INJURIES 39

 wedlock. Is Richardson's injury the diminished incentive to pay
 child support? The actual absence of child support? The failure to
 have her child treated the same way as legitimate children?

 4. Friends of the Planet (FOP) claim that they have suffered a
 procedural injury, consisting of an agency's failure to prepare an
 environmental impact statement before developing a waterway.7
 What sort of an injury must FOP allege in order to bring suit?8
 Must they live near the waterway? Must they show that the failure
 to prepare the statement will degrade their waters? What kinds of
 harms must they connect to any such degradation?

 Questions of this kind may seem exotic, but they make all the
 difference. Take a recent example: People who live near Mexico
 think that if the North Atlantic Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
 is ratified, the air will become dirtier, and they will be injured. But
 what, exactly, is their injury?9 If the injury can be characterized
 broadly-as, say, increased exposure to dirtier air-many people
 may have standing to contest NAFTA. If the injury must be char-
 acterized narrowly-as, say, cancers and respiratory diseases that
 would not otherwise occur-many and or perhaps all people will
 be deprived of access to court. They will lack the requisite injury,
 and they will be unable to show that any injury is due to the
 defendant's conduct or likely to be redressed by a decree in their
 favor. Few who are subject to dirtier air actually will be able to
 show that they will get some disease without court action.

 Similar conclusions might be reached for our listeners to classical

 music. Such listeners will almost certainly be able to find their
 preferred fare elsewhere on the dial. o (It is unclear that their "of-
 fense" at rock music will count as a legally cognizable injury, a
 point that raises further complexities for the notion of a value-free
 inquiry into whether there has been "injury.") And as the Court

 7 Compare The Fund for Animals v Espy, 814 F Supp 142 (DDC 1993), granting standing

 to people interested in studying bison, in the context of a challenge to failure to complete
 an environmental impact statement. See also Fund for Animals v Lujan, 962 F 2d 1391 (9th
 Cir 1992), characterizing a similar injury as involving an "opportunity."

 s See the discussion in Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife, 112 S Ct 2130 (1992).
 9 The issue arose in Public Citizen v USTR, 822 F Supp 21 (DDC 1993), in which the
 district court found standing without closely investigating the issues of injury and re-
 dressability. The court of appeals reversed on other grounds.

 10 Compare Office of Communication of the Church of Christ v FCC, 359 F2d 994 (DC Cir

 1966); Public Citizen v Friends of the Earth, 5 F3d 549 (1993).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 40 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 held,"1 it is highly speculative to suggest that prosecutorial action
 will necessarily lead a delinquent father to make good on past child
 support payments. Therefore-as the Court also held-no injury
 could be shown. 12

 It is astonishing but true that the Supreme Court has given very
 little guidance on a key issue in modern administrative law: how
 injuries should be characterized for purposes of standing. Its most
 serious and sustained confrontation with the issue came last term

 in Northeastern Florida Chapter of the Associated General Contractors v
 Jacksonville (hereafter Northeastern Contractors)." The result and the
 reasoning in the case are in conspicuous tension with other Su-
 preme Court precedents, most of them quite recent. And the
 Court's distinctive approach, offered in an intriguing setting, has
 the potential to allow the Court to sort out much of the law in this
 area, and also to move standing doctrine in some generally salutary
 directions. This is so especially in light of the fact that, as we will
 see, the Northeastern Contractors case exposes the fundamental flaw
 in Data Processing-the view that it is possible to identify injuries
 without looking at law. One of the important legacies of Northeast-
 ern Contractors will be the understanding that in characterizing in-
 jury, it is the law that counts. In deciding whether there is stand-
 ing, what matters is what the law says. There can be no law-free
 inquiry into the subject of injury. This will be my principal claim
 here.

 I. THE CASE

 A. DESCRIPTION

 In Jacksonville and Duval County, Florida, there is an associa-
 tion of construction contractors, operating under the name of
 Northeastern Florida Chapter of the Associated General Contrac-
 tors (hereinafter AGC). In 1991 AGC challenged Jacksonville's Mi-
 nority Business Enterprise program, which requires that 10% of
 total city contract funds be set aside for minority business enter-
 prises. A minority business enterprise is defined as one that is
 owned at least 51% by a woman or a member of a minority group.

 " Linda RS v Richard D, 410 US 614 (1973).

 12 Id.

 " 113 S Ct 2297 (1993).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 2] STANDING INJURIES 41

 AGC's members are mostly non-minorities under the program.
 They regularly bid and perform construction work for the City
 of Jacksonville. They complained, however, that they had been
 excluded from bidding on the contracts that had been set aside for
 minority business enterprises. They contended that many of the
 non-minority members of AGC would have bid on those contracts
 if not for the set-aside program. Invoking section 1983,14 which
 provides a cause of action for people deprived of federal rights by
 state law, they claimed that they had been denied equal protection
 of the laws.

 The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
 held that AGC lacked standing. " The key point was that its mem-
 bers had not alleged that they "would have bid more successfully
 on any one or more of these contracts if not for the ordinance."'16
 They therefore could not show injury in fact. In the court's view, it
 was purely speculative to say that if the program were invalidated,
 AGC's members would be awarded any additional contracts. The
 plaintiffs action thus ran afoul of a number of Supreme Court
 decisions holding that there must be a concrete and definable injury
 to the plaintiff, one that was attributable to the defendant's conduct
 and likely to be remedied by a decree in the plaintiff's favor.17

 The Supreme Court reversed." The centerpiece of the Court's
 decision consisted of a description of the injury not as a failure to
 receive a contract, but instead as an inability to compete. This
 description of the injury stemmed from the Court's understanding
 of the Equal Protection Clause. "When the government erects a
 barrier that makes it more difficult for members of one group to
 obtain a benefit than it is for members of another group, a member
 of the former group seeking to challenge the barrier need not al-
 leged that he would have obtained the benefit but for the barrier

 14 42 USC ? 1983: "Every person who, under color of any statute, ordinance, regulation,
 custom, or usage, of any State or Territory, subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen
 of the United States or other person within the jurisdiction thereof to the deprivation of
 any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the Constitution and laws, shall be liable
 to the party injured in an action at law, suit in equity, or other proper proceeding for
 redress."

 'i 896 F2d 1283 (1990).

 16 Id at 1219.

 163; text at notes 38-50 infra.

 18 113 S Ct 2297 (1993).

 "7 For discussion of these cases, see Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? 91 Mich L Rev

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 42 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 in order to establish standing."'9 The injury in fact requirement
 was met by "the denial of equal treatment resulting from the impo-
 sition of the barrier."20

 It was therefore sufficient for the plaintiffs to claim that they are
 ready and able to bid on contracts and that they were prevented
 from doing so as a result of the discriminatory policy. In so con-
 cluding, the most important precedent was the Bakke decision,21 in
 which Allan Bakke was allowed to challenge an affirmative action
 program without showing that he would have been admitted with-
 out the program. And in an intriguing and seemingly offhand foot-
 note, the Court added that because of this characterization of the

 injury, the redressability requirements were fully met.22 By this
 the Court appeared to say that since the injury was the interference
 with the opportunity to compete, it was due to the defendant's
 conduct; and it also followed that any judicial decree in the plain-
 tiffs' favor would remedy their injury.

 The Court was aware that its decision was in some conflict with

 earlier outcomes, especially that in Warth v Seldin.23 In the Warth
 case, the Court had denied standing to a construction association
 that was seeking to challenge an allegedly discriminatory zoning
 ordinance. In trying to come to terms with Warth, the Court made
 two points. First, the association in Warth did not contend that it
 could not apply for variances and permits on an equal basis; its
 complaint was that it could not obtain variances and permits. Sec-
 ond, there was no allegation in Warth that any members had actu-
 ally applied for a permit or variance for a current project. Here,
 by contrast, actual applications were alleged.24

 B. EVALUATION

 19 Id at 2303.

 20 Id.

 22 Id at 2303 n 5.

 23 422 US 490 (1975).

 21 See Regents of the University of California v Bakke, 438 US 265, 281 n 14 (1978).

 24 There was also a question of mootness, on which two justices dissented, id at 2305

 (O'Connor, joined by Blackmun); but that question is not relevant for my purposes here.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 It is not necessary to linger long over the question whether the

 Court's decision was correct. Section 1983 confers a cause of action

 on people whose federal rights have been violated by state law.

 2] STANDING INJURIES 43

 The Equal Protection Clause is concerned to ensure an opportunity
 to compete on an equal basis.25 If blacks who want to attend profes-
 sional schools in Arkansas are not permitted to attend such schools
 in Arkansas, they have been deprived of their rights.26 It does not
 matter whether any particular person can show that he would have
 been admitted under a nondiscriminatory policy. So too for the
 plaintiffs in Northeastern Contractors.27 The appropriate remedy is a
 decree invalidating the discrimination, not a requirement of admis-
 sion or award of a contract. Whether these things follow will de-
 pend on what happens when the discriminatory barrier is removed.
 The Court's conclusion that standing existed because of the na-

 ture of the interest protected by the Equal Protection Clause is by
 itself highly notable, and it has general implications for the law of
 standing. The Northeastern Contractors case could not possibly have
 been resolved if the Court looked at the issue of "injury" indepen-
 dently of law. In order even to identify the relevant injury, the
 Court had to look at the law, that is, the Equal Protection Clause.
 So much for the attempt in Data Processing to ensure that courts
 would inquire into "injury in fact" without investigating law. In
 cases in which the issue is how to characterize the injury-that
 is, in every case-an exploration of "facts" will not be enough.
 Something has to be said, at least implicitly, about law as well. In
 the easy cases, the injury seems obviously present, but this is not
 because law is irrelevant. It is because there is agreement on the
 legal background.28

 In any case, what sense would it make to require the plaintiffs
 to prove that they would actually have been awarded the relevant

 2s Of course this formulation does not imply a judgment about affirmative action; that

 question depends on what "equal protection" means, a question that is irrelevant here.

 26 The case may be different if there is absolutely no chance that the plaintiff could be

 admitted if he applied. But in almost all realistically imaginable cases, a prohibition on
 admission is enough. I do not discuss here the question whether someone must allege
 application for admission. Application may be discouraged by the discriminatory barrier-it
 would be futile-and in such a case a facial attack on the barrier would seem acceptable.
 This issue was not squarely presented in Northeastern Contractors, though the Court seemed
 to suggest an application would be required.

 27 This is so at least if we assume, as we must for purposes of the standing question, that

 their claim is correct on the merits.

 28 I cannot discuss some of the complexities underlying this claim. For general discussion,

 see Fletcher, The Structure of Standing, 98 Yale L J 221 (1988); Sunstein, What's Standing
 After Lujan? 91 Mich L Rev 163. See also text at notes 53-55 infra (discussing the ways in
 which any claim about consequences is in fact underlain by norms).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 44 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 contracts? How would constitutional goals be served by such an
 odd requirement? It may be difficult or even impossible to recon-
 struct the facts sufficiently to assess the matter. Evaluation of what
 would have happened in a counterfactual world is often extremely
 difficult after the fact. Moreover, that assessment would seem to

 have no point. Because it would serve no ascertainable set of pur-
 poses, it would be a waste of judicial resources. Perhaps there
 would be some saving of judicial resources too, by avoiding the
 need to resolve disputes whose outcome may not result in an actual
 award of a contract to any party; but with respect to judicial re-
 sources, any gains seem likely to be small. In any event, no serious
 constitutional goal seems to require the plaintiff show that an actual
 contract would be awarded. At least this is what the Court in

 Northeastern Contractors seemed to assume. Some such assumption
 must be implicit in the Court's readiness to characterize the injury
 as involving an opportunity rather than a more discrete harm.

 There is one possible line of response to this argument, suggested
 in the recent cases29 though, surprisingly, not even discussed in
 Northeastern Contractors. Certainly courts ought to minimize the oc-
 casions for intervening with political processes; almost certainly
 this is especially so if we are dealing with a constitutional attack
 on state law. If the plaintiffs' interest is widely shared-and any
 "opportunity" is by definition likely to be widely shared-perhaps
 judges should refuse to interfere with the outcomes of electoral
 processes. And if the interest is as broad as the opportunity to
 compete, it is indeed going to be widely shared. On this view, the
 construction contractors in Northeastern Contractors-perhaps not
 incidentally, members of the white majority,30 though this particu-
 lar point need not be emphasized here-ought to have been forced
 to rely on the political process unless and until they could show
 that contracts would actually have been awarded to them. Without
 such a showing, all they had was a "generalized grievance," one
 that is best taken up before legislative bodies. Courts ought, in
 short, to require tangible, concrete harm, rather than injury to
 opportunities, as a way of minimizing the occasions for interfering

 29 United States v Richardson, 418 US 166 (1974); Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife, 112 S Ct

 2130 (1992); Allen v Wright, 468 US 737 (1992).

 30 Compare J. H. Ely, The Constitutionality of Reverse Discrimination, 41 U Chi L Rev 723

 (1974).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 2] STANDING INJURIES 45

 with political processes. It follows that the lower court in Northeast-
 ern Contractors was right after all.

 In form, the Supreme Court has found this argument highly

 persuasive in other contexts.31 In Northeastern Contractors, the Court
 should have addressed this underlying concern, especially in light
 of its prominence elsewhere in the law of standing. Here we find
 a significant gap in the Court's opinion.

 The construction contractors burdened by the program were
 not, however, an electoral majority. While the possibility of politi-
 cal remedy may be relevant to an assessment of the merits of their
 claim,32 it does not justify the view that the case should not be
 heard at all. The contractors are hardly in the same position as
 taxpayers or ordinary citizens; their injury, even if somewhat dif-
 fused, was not felt by all or most. In principle, the need to limit
 judicial interference with political processes is far too general to
 justify a restriction on standing when a discrete class of people has
 been precluded from competing with others on the basis of skin
 color. The dispute was hardly abstract or hypothetical. And if
 courts were to be made unavailable to the plaintiffs here, courts
 would be unavailable to a wide range of people making familiar
 constitutional or statutory claims. In the typical administrative law

 case,33 for example, equally numerous plaintiffs are allowed to offer
 their claims; the same is true in many constitutional cases brought
 under (for example) the Equal Protection and Due Process
 Clauses.34 A refusal to characterize the injury in terms of "opportu-
 nity"-if based on the numbers of people whose interests were at
 stake-would wreak havoc with too much established law. For all

 these reasons, the outcome in Northeastern Contractors is unexcep-
 tionable.

 There is a further point. I have noted that in section 1983, Con-
 gress granted a cause of action to all those whose federal constitu-
 tional rights have been violated by state law.35 In Northeastern Con-
 tractors, the plaintiffs alleged that the set-aside program violated

 31 Allen v Wright, 468 US 737 (1984); Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife, 112 S Ct 2130 (1992).

 32 See Ely, The Constitutionality of Affirmative Action, supra note 30.

 33 See, e.g., Industrial Union v API, 448 US 607 (1980); NRDC v EPA, 824 F2d 1146 (DC

 Cir 1987); MVMA v State Farm, 463 US 29 (1983).

 34 See, e.g., Brown v Bd of Educ, 349 US 294 (1955); Griswold v Connecticut, 381 US 479

 (1965).

 35 See note 14 supra.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 46 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 their rights under the Equal Protection Clause. The existence of a
 congressionally conferred cause of action should have been suffi-
 cient to establish standing. The Supreme Court neglected to em-
 phasize this point-the creation of a cause of action for people
 whose federal rights have been violated-and here we have another
 major gap in the opinion. The Court did not refer to the particular
 source of federal law that conferred a right to bring suit on the
 plaintiffs. But if we attend to section 1983, the case seems relatively
 simple.

 One final issue. In many cases since Data Processing, the Court
 has been faced with the implicit issue of how to characterize inju-
 ries in standing cases.36 Often the question is whether to character-
 ize an injury in terms that are familiar to the common law. At
 common law, a discrete wrongdoer typically imposes a discrete
 wrong on a discrete person at an easily identifiable time. This is
 the basic form of the common law allegation, and it can easily be
 transplanted to the administrative law setting, where we might ask
 whether the same framework is at work. In public law cases, how-
 ever, it is possible that the common law understanding should be
 rejected, on the theory that it is poorly adapted to the goals and
 functions of the modern state. The alternative is to characterize an

 injury as involving (for example) an increased probability of harm,
 an injury to an opportunity, or a failure to have potential wrongdo-
 ers face the kinds of incentives that Congress (or the Constitution)
 seeks to impose on them. In many cases the Court has opted for
 the common law characterization, and thus denied standing, when
 the public law alternative was fully available. Strikingly, in North-
 eastern Contractors the Court seemed to think that a common law-

 like understanding, one that speaks in terms of discrete harms to
 discrete people, would make no sense; the Equal Protection Clause
 protects the opportunity to compete, not the award of contracts.
 We need not quarrel with this result in order to insist that the
 Court ought to have explained how this characterization of the
 injury fits, or fails to fit, with other cases. And it is here that
 the case leaves a conspicuous gap not only in logic but also for the
 future.

 36 See text at notes 38-50 infra.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 2] STANDING INJURIES 47

 II. PRECEDENTS AND PUZZLES

 From what has been said thus far, it seems clear that North-

 eastern Contractors does not coexist easily with recent cases and
 trends in the area of standing. For this reason the case, though
 seemingly minor and technical, raises a host of complex and novel
 issues. It will be useful to begin by showing how the same analytic
 strategy used in Northeastern Contractors might have been used in a
 wide range of cases in which standing was denied. That strategy
 consists of recharacterizing the injury so as to ensure simultane-
 ous compliance with the requirements of injury in fact and re-
 dressability.37

 Consider, for example, Linda RS v Richard D. 38 It will be recalled
 that the case involved a complaint that the local prosecutor had
 failed to prosecute fathers of illegitimate children for failure to
 provide child support. The plaintiff claimed that the discrimina-
 tory prosecution policy was in violation of the Equal Protection
 Clause. The Court denied standing. On the Court's analysis, the
 problem for purposes of standing was that the plaintiff could not
 show that her injury would be redressed by a decree in her favor.
 Perhaps the father would simply go to prison. Structurally, this
 approach is the same as that of the Court of Appeals in Northeastern
 Contractors. The failure of redressability stemmed from the narrow
 characterization of the injury, just as the broad characterization of
 the injury in Northeastern Contractors eliminated any problem with
 redressability.

 But it would have been equally plausible to say that the injury
 suffered in Linda RS involved not the absence of child support, but
 the opportunity to ensure that payments by the child's father were
 subject to the same incentives as everyone else similarly situated.
 That was the violation of the equality principle, and with respect
 to that violation, there was no problem with either injury or re-
 dressability-just as in Northeastern Contractors. Imagine, for exam-
 ple, if a local prosecutor initiated proceedings against white fathers

 7 There are really two such requirements: the injury must be due to the defendant's
 conduct, and the injury must be likely to be remedied by a decree in the plaintiffs favor.
 In most cases, these will lead to the same result. See Allen v Wright, 468 US 737 (1984).

 38 410 US 614 (1973).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 48 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 for child support, but not against black fathers. Suppose that in
 such circumstances a mother of a child whose father is black com-

 plains that the discrimination has made it impossible for her to
 support her child. Would there be any problem with standing?
 Certainly there should not be,39 and Northeastern Contractors is a
 powerful precedent in her favor. The injury consists not of the
 absence of child support, but of the fact that her opportunity to
 receive child support is not subject to the same incentives as that
 of others similarly situated.

 The only difference between Linda RS and Northeastern Contrac-
 tors is that the former involved an action against a criminal prosecu-
 tor to enforce the law. It therefore raised the arguably distinctive
 considerations involved in a proceeding by a private party against
 the government to require it to proceed against another private

 party. In Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife,40 the Supreme Court brought
 out this point, which had been largely implicit in several other
 cases.41 In Lujan, the Court said that a case in which a plaintiff
 sought enforcement action was the weakest case for standing. In
 the Court's view, the injury in such cases is especially likely to
 be speculative. As we have seen, however, whether the injury is
 speculative cannot be decided in the abstract; everything depends on
 how the injury is described.42 On that particular question, there is no
 difference between an ordinary action and one brought against the
 government for unlawful enforcement activity. On that particular
 question, it is utterly irrelevant whether the government is being
 asked to initiate proceedings. If the injury is characterized broadly,
 as it was in Northeastern Contractors, this difference should not

 make a difference. Certainly there is no Article II problem with a
 suit against a state or local prosecutor for unlawful discrimination.43
 Perhaps Article II concerns should bear on standing in cases in
 which the federal executive is the defendant. But any such concerns
 should be analytically separate. They should not be folded into the
 inquiry whether the injury is "speculative." The merger of these
 two questions-both complex enough-is a recipe for confusion.

 39 See Heckler v Mathews, 465 US 728 (1986).

 40 112 S Ct 2130 (1992).

 "' See, e.g., Allen v Wright, 468 US 737 (1984).

 42 See text at notes 22, 38-39 supra.

 3 See also Sunstein, Article II Revisionism, 92 Mich L Rev 131 (1993).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 2] STANDING INJURIES 49

 I conclude, then, that on the issue of injury, the strategy used in
 Northeastern Contractors could equally well have been used in Linda
 RS, so as to allow standing to be granted.

 So much for Linda RS. Turn now to the key cases involving the
 redressability requirement, both arising under the tax code. In
 Simon v Eastern Kentucky Welfare Rights Org. ,44 the Supreme Court
 denied standing to indigent plaintiffs challenging a change in regu-
 lations implementing the Internal Revenue Code. The plaintiffs
 alleged that they had sought and been denied services at hospital
 emergency rooms. They contended (what was not controverted)
 that the new regulations decreased the incentives of hospitals to
 provide medical care to the indigent. According to the Court, the
 plaintiffs should be denied standing because they could not show
 that the change in policy was responsible for the particular denial
 of services of which they complained. In other words, they could
 not show injury, for they could not establish that if the previous
 policy had been in place, they would have received free services.
 For all we know, the denial of services might have taken place in
 any event. (Notice the structural similarity to the Court of Appeals
 ruling in Northeastern Contractors.)

 But in Eastern Kentucky Welfare Rights Org., the Court could have

 characterized the relevant injury quite differently. It could have
 said that the injury involved the interest in ensuring that hospitals
 are subject to the incentives that Congress sought to introduce
 through the relevant provision of the Internal Revenue Code. The
 plaintiffs could have complained that their "injury" involved the
 opportunity to receive medical services on the conditions and with
 the incentives for which the statute provided. Perhaps this seems
 odd;4s but why would such a conception of the injury be any less
 appropriate than the parallel conception in Northeastern Contractors?
 The Court itself has offered no answer.

 The second tax case is Allen v Wright.46 In that case, parents of
 schoolchildren attending schools undergoing a process of desegre-
 gation complained about an IRS policy granting tax deductions to
 people who send their children to all-white private schools. Ac-

 "5 If it does, it is, I think, because of the persistence of common law thinking about

 44 426 US 26 (1976).

 injuries. See below.

 46 468 US 737 (1984).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 50 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 cording to the plaintiffs, the deductions were unlawful, and their
 existence jeopardized the desegregation process by encouraging
 "white flight." The Supreme Court denied standing. According to
 the Court, the parents could not show that their particular children
 would be affected in any way by a change in IRS policy.

 As a factual claim, the Court's point seems quite reasonable; it
 is hardly clear that such a change would affect any particular child.
 But suppose that the plaintiffs had urged, not that any particular
 child would be affected in any particular way, but that each child
 had been injured in a legally cognizable fashion by the IRS's failure
 to ensure that the process of desegregation was not adversely af-
 fected by the grant of unlawful tax deductions. The plaintiffs might
 have described their injury as involving the opportunity to have a
 desegregation process unaffected by unlawful incentives for white
 flight. Here as well-the now-familiar punchline-the strategy
 used in Northeastern Contractors could easily have been used to au-
 thorize standing.

 As a further example, consider Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife.47
 There the plaintiffs were people interested in the preservation of
 endangered species and planning to go abroad to see certain species
 at some unspecified future date. The plaintiffs complained about
 the relevant agency's failure to apply the Endangered Species Act
 extraterritorially, a failure that, in their view, injured their future
 prospects as professionals and tourists. The Supreme Court held
 that the plaintiffs lacked standing, since they could not show an
 injury. Their "abstract" interest in protecting and even in seeing
 members of the relevant species was not enough. If, on the other
 hand, the plaintiffs had acquired a plane ticket to places in which
 the endangered species were imminently at risk, there would in-
 deed be a concrete harm.48 Otherwise, no injury was at stake; any
 harm was speculative or merely ideological.

 Suppose, however, that following the approach in Northeastern
 Contractors, the plaintiffs described their injury not as an inability
 to see a particular species at a particular time, but instead as a
 harm to their opportunity to see certain endangered species. Why

 47 112 S Ct 2130 (1992).

 48 On this point see Japanese Whaling Ass'n v ACS, 478 US 221 (1986) (allowing standing
 to prospective whale watchers); Animal Protection Inst. v Mosbacher, 799 F Supp 173 (DDC
 1992) (same, and characterizing injury as involving an opportunity).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 2] STANDING INJURIES 51

 would this description be illegitimate? Why would it be constitu-
 tionally inadequate? Is the plane ticket in Lujan the equivalent of
 formal bids in Northeastern Contractors? If so, why should we accept
 the conception of the injury entailed by these requirements?

 Consider, finally, the most conventional of cases under the Ad-
 ministrative Procedure Act.49 A company regulated by the EPA
 complains of agency noncompliance with the procedural require-
 ments of the APA. Is there a hard standing issue if it is doubtful
 whether the agency would do anything different if the right proce-
 dures were followed? Surely not. The legally cognizable injury
 stems from the agency's failure to follow procedures that Congress
 has specified. It does not matter if an agency, having followed those
 procedures, nonetheless fails to do what the company wishes. The
 injury consists of the increased likelihood of harm, stemming from
 the failure to comply with procedural requirements.'s

 Northeastern Contractors shows, in short, that there is a large de-

 gree of manipulability in the characterization of the injury in stand-
 ing cases. In nearly every case in which the Supreme Court has
 denied standing, it would have been possible to describe the injury
 in such a way as to meet all applicable requirements. It follows
 that Northeastern Contractors poses a large question of how to charac-
 terize the relevant injury. And on this question-the critical one
 for the future-the Supreme Court has offered no guidance.

 III. A PROPOSAL

 A. POSITIVE LAW-AND THE DEMISE OF DATA PROCESSING

 I suggest that when courts are deciding how to characterize inju-

 ries, the starting point is positive law. The key question-certainly
 the initial one-involves constitutional or congressional instruc-
 tions. It follows that the question of standing is the same as the
 question whether the plaintiff has a cause of action.51 The major

 49 5 USC ?? 551 et seq.

 50so Compare the discussion of procedural injuries in Lujan, which seems to support this

 view: "This is not a case where plaintiffs are seeking to enforce a procedural requirement
 the disregard of which could impair a separate concrete interest of theirs (e.g., the procedural
 requirement for a hearing prior to denial of their license application, or the procedural
 requirement for an environmental impact statement before a federal facility is constructed
 next door to them)." 112 S Ct at 2130, 2142.

 5s To the same effect see Fletcher, supra note 28; Currie, Misunderstanding Standing, 1981

 Supreme Court Review 41.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 52 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 mistake in the last generation, made in Justice Douglas's opinion
 in Data Processing, was to split these questions apart. Always the
 issue is: Has the law entitled someone to bring suit? Courts should
 look to the underlying provision of law in order to identify the
 injury that it is designed to prevent. Northeastern Contractors was
 easy because it was clear that the constitutional provision protects
 the opportunity to compete on an equal basis, not merely the loss
 of a particular contract. EKWRO and Allen were much harder be-
 cause in those settings, it is much harder to discern congressional
 instructions on how to characterize the injury.

 This general approach suggests that it is quite hopeless to try to
 decide whether there is an "injury" apart from positive law. If
 courts must characterize injuries by looking at positive law-and
 where else might they look in order to do this?-it is necessary to
 reject the effort of the Court in Data Processing to abandon the "legal
 interest" test in favor of "injury in fact." As we have seen, the
 divorce of these questions was brought about explicitly and self-
 consciously by Justice Douglas in the (now-infamous52) Data Pro-
 cessing case. It is hopeless to divorce the two questions because we
 cannot know whether there is an injury without knowing what the
 law is. Before the enactment of the civil rights act in 1964, for
 example, a victim of racial discrimination lacked "injury"; there
 was no harm for courts to redress; any harm was purely ideological
 and no basis for a lawsuit. After enactment of the statute, the

 question of standing became trivially easy. Of course the injury
 requirement was met."

 To be sure, it is sometimes transparently clear that there is an
 injury-as, for example, when someone loses $10,000 or is put in
 jail. But even in such easy cases, an understanding of law does
 some important conceptual work. We see the loss of money or
 liberty as "injury" partly because our legal (not to mention social)
 tradition makes such matters clear. I do not deny that in some
 cases we can identify injuries as such without knowing much about
 the law. But as participants in the legal culture, even the easy
 cases are connected with shared understandings about the legal
 background; and when the cases become hard, an assessment of

 52 See Fletcher, supra note 28 (collecting authorities critical of Data Processing).

 53 See Havens Realty Corp. v Coleman, 455 US 363 (1982); Trafficante v Metropolitan Life Ins.

 Co., 409 US 205 (1972).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 2] STANDING INJURIES 53

 law is indispensable to an assessment of whether, for legal pur-
 poses, there is harm.

 There is a close relationship between this general point and the

 much broader claim that any social assessment of "consequences" is
 in fact mediated by social norms identifying which "consequences"
 matter, and helping us to decide how to characterize them.54 People
 who purport to be pure consequentialists-in philosophy or law-
 may well be relying on a background normative theory, itself not
 purely consequential in character, that helps us see what counts at
 all, and exactly how those things that do count ought to be assessed
 in social decisions. Consequential approaches, in short, are rarely
 or perhaps never simply consequential. It is only in this way that
 we can understand, for example, the (probably correct) view that
 offense is not a legally cognizable harm under the Federal Commu-
 nications Act, or for that matter under the Clean Air Act.

 If injuries are a product of law, it follows that at least within

 broad limits (and perhaps across the board), it is for Congress to
 decide whether people are entitled to bring suit.ss It also follows
 that the appropriate characterization of the injury should be based
 on an understanding of positive law. Especially intriguingly, North-
 eastern Contractors itself paves the way toward a repudiation of Data
 Processing, and explicitly so. In deciding on the relevant injury, the
 Court actually reasoned about the nature of the "legal interest" at
 stake under the Equal Protection Clause. We can therefore see
 Northeastern Contractors as at least a partial endorsement of the view
 that "legal interest," rather than "injury in fact," is the key issue
 in standing cases.

 B. STATUTORY SILENCE

 Positive law is a start; but it is only that. Frequently Congress
 does not attend with anything like particularity to the issue of
 standing; frequently it is not easy to make inferences from statutory
 text, structure, and history. Frequently the characterization of the
 injury will be far from simple. To be sure, the statutory structure
 and history might help. In EKWRO and Allen, for example, the
 Court might have been responding to the general idea that one

 4 See generally Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics (1993).

 5 Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife, 112 S Ct 2130 (1992), imposes a limit on this understanding.

 Of course the Constitution might sometimes create causes of action and hence standing.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 54 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 person ought not to be allowed to litigate the tax liability of an-
 other.56 If this idea is in fact attributable to Congress' ordinary
 goals and understandings, both cases might be right-not because
 of absence of injury, but because this outcome is the best under-
 standing of the governing statutes. On this view, Congress did not
 say how the injury should be characterized, but Congress could be
 taken to have expressed a judgment about standing. That judgment
 excludes third-party actions in tax cases.

 In other settings, however, there is no plausible congressional
 judgment with which to work. In such settings, the characteriza-
 tion of the injury will be a product of what we might call back-
 ground understandings on the part of the judiciary, rather than
 of anything realistically attributable to Congress. Two alternative
 approaches seem to be plausible candidates for judicial adoption,57

 The first, a common law model of standing, favors narrow char-
 acterization of injury. This is so for two reasons: (1) any large
 group of citizens should presumptively be required to use the polit-
 ical process rather than the courts, and (2) there are special prob-
 lems, constitutional in origin, whenever citizens attempt to require
 the executive to undertake enforcement action on their behalf. The

 second candidate, a public law model of standing, favors broad
 characterization of the injury. It does so principally on the theory
 that broad characterization is most likely to fit with congressional
 goals and expectations.58

 Of course broad-gauged models of these kinds cannot substitute

 for close engagement with particular statutes and facts. We cannot
 come up with a simple approach to unite the appropriate character-
 ization of injuries in cases involving consumers, radio listeners,
 victims of discrimination, environmentalists, purchasers of securi-
 ties, and many more. Any real case will require knowledge of the
 particular legal claim, and for these purposes abstractions provide
 at best broad orientation. But these alternative positions do seem

 56 See EKWRO, supra note 4, at 46 (Stewart concurring).

 57 The general standing provision is 5 USC 702, see note 3 supra, and it is of course
 binding. The problem is that it is uninformative on the question at hand. If it is taken to
 require an "injury in fact," the question remains how any alleged injury is to be character-
 ized. If it is to be taken to require a legal interest (as I think that it should), the question
 remains how to decide whether one exists. The APA provision therefore leaves a number
 of uncertainties.

 8 Related issues are discussed in more detail in Cass R. Sunstein, Standing and the Pri-

 vatization of Public Law, 88 Colum L Rev 1432 (1988).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 2] STANDING INJURIES 55

 to be the most important and most general candidates; ideas that
 draw on these positions are usually implicit in the cases. I devote
 the rest of this essay to a brief discussion of their merits.

 1. The common law model. On one view, it is especially important
 to begin with a distinction between the objects of regulation (people
 subjected to governmental controls) and the beneficiaries of regula-
 tion59 (people for whom statutes are enacted, like consumers, listen-
 ers to the radio, victims of discrimination, and so forth). Of course

 the objects of regulation have standing. Their common law inter-
 ests are at stake, and the Due Process Clause may well protect
 their right to judicial review of interferences with those interests.60
 In any case, no one denies that the objects of regulation are entitled
 to standing. But perhaps courts should be reluctant to grant stand-
 ing to beneficiaries of regulatory programs, at least when they are
 very numerous, and at least when they seek to require enforcement
 action of a certain kind or degree. We might think that the cases
 involving appropriate characterization of injuries, and especially
 those denying standing to regulatory beneficiaries, ought to be seen
 with these facts foremost in mind. Thus seen, the cases do not
 really turn on "injury"-that term is a smokescreen for the real
 concern-but instead on a particular understanding of the constitu-
 tional backdrop. That understanding calls for judicial caution when
 numerous beneficiaries ask the government to initiate enforcement
 proceedings.

 This idea might be justified on various grounds. Perhaps numer-
 ous beneficiaries ought to be relegated to their political remedies.
 Perhaps an agency that (for example) fails to apply the Endangered
 Species Act extraterritorially, or to prepare an environmental im-
 pact statement before going forward with NAFTA, ought to be
 forced to defend itself before the public and in democratic arenas,

 59 A qualification is necessary here: The distinction between regulated objects and regula-
 tory beneficiaries depends on some controversial assumptions. These include the decision
 to take the common law system as the ordinary or natural state of affairs, and to see
 departures from that system as regulatory impositions into an otherwise prepolitical status
 quo. See Sunstein, supra note 3, at 196-97. I stay with conventional usage here, but for
 ease of exposition, not because of acceptance of what underlies that usage. Note also that
 the "beneficiaries" of regulation could plausibly be (a) narrow interest groups of various
 kinds, including companies exempted from statutory requirements, or (b) people who are
 actually the "objects" of regulation, that is, people who can be imposed upon only because
 of what the law says. On the latter point, see Jeremy Waldron, Homelessness and the Problem
 of Freedom, 39 UCLA L Rev 295 (1991).

 60 See Yakus v US, 321 US 414 (1944).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 56 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 rather than in court. This is a complex issue on which political
 deliberation ought to be strongly favored over adjudication. Of
 course courts should be available if there is a sharply focused in-
 jury, of the sort familiar to the common law; but if no such injury
 is at stake, standing should be denied.

 There are, moreover, good reasons to be concerned about private
 conscription of public resources-a problem that is uniquely at
 issue in cases brought by regulatory beneficiaries. (When a com-
 pany stops the government from regulating something, no such
 conscription is at work.) If beneficiaries are bringing suit against
 an agency on the ground that it has not enforced the law with
 sufficient intensity, perhaps there is a risk that some well-organized
 groups will be able to obtain enforcement resources at the expense
 of others. The problem is especially serious in light of the fact that
 an agency always has before it a wide range of possible claims to
 scarce enforcement resources. A suit brought by group X may
 make it harder for various social benefits-including law enforce-
 ment-to be granted to group Y. Environmental enforcement ac-
 tivity in Ohio may compromise efforts in New York; redress of
 discrimination in California may impair enforcement efforts in Illi-
 nois. This problem will rarely be visible to a court, which has only
 the particular problem before it. Considerations of this sort led the
 Supreme Court to conclude that agency inaction, unlike agency
 action, should be presumed unreviewable.61

 Such considerations have special strength in the context of regu-
 latory programs that must be coordinated with each other and over
 time. Typically an agency is charged with implementation of a
 variety of different statutes, and it has the large responsibility of
 bringing about a coherent overall scheme. Typically it must fit
 together provisions that were enacted at different periods and that
 must be implemented in a temporally rational manner. An agency
 is in an especially good position to decide which problems need to
 be addressed, and when. A court is most unlikely to have a suffi-
 cient overview to examine such issues.62 This idea fortifies the view

 that courts ought to presume that Congress did not grant standing
 to beneficiaries alleging only an "opportunity-type" harm. At least
 in general, something more concrete must be claimed. It follows

 6' Heckler v Chaney, 470 US 821, 832 (1985).

 62 See the discussion of coordination in Breyer, Closing the Vicious Circle (1993).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 2] STANDING INJURIES 57

 that discrete harms-of the sort demanded in EKWRO and Allen-

 must be shown in the typical administrative law case.

 On the approach I am suggesting, ideas of this sort would not
 have constitutional status. Congress could override the presump-
 tion against standing for "opportunity-type" harms by a clear state-
 ment. When it has done so, standing should be available for regula-
 tory beneficiaries, however numerous, and however much courts
 will be overseeing (for legality) enforcement action. This is one
 way to understand things in the area of environmental law, where
 beneficiary suits are plentiful, and where Congress has firmly en-
 dorsed them.63 The common law model of standing would serve
 only to provide the background understandings against which to
 understand congressional silence. It would disallow suits by espe-
 cially numerous beneficiaries unless Congress has said otherwise.
 Narrow characterization of the injury would really be a proxy
 for the relevant background understandings. In deciding standing
 cases, we would really be talking not of "injury in fact," but of the
 appropriate allocation of authority among Congress, courts, and
 agencies.

 This approach has the advantage of synthesizing a good deal of
 current law. It helps reconcile Northeastern Contractors with the
 cases that preceded it, most notably Allen v Wright and Lujan. It
 explains why the strategy in Northeastern Contractors-broad char-
 acterization of the injury-would not make sense when regulatory
 beneficiaries are seeking to compel enforcement action. The capac-
 ity for rationalization itself counts as a strong argument in favor of
 this approach.

 2. The public law model. A competing view would stress two
 points. First, the common law model is untrue to the best under-
 standing of Congress' goals and expectations. Second, the relevant
 constitutional concerns are without force. Suits by regulatory bene-
 ficiaries produce no constitutional difficulties.

 The initial point here is that regulatory statutes are rooted in
 ideas quite foreign to the common law. Typically they are enacted
 not to prevent discrete harms by discrete actors, but to restructure
 incentives or to ensure against what we might describe as probable
 or systemic harms. When Congress requires an environmental im-
 pact statement, for example, it is trying to restructure incentives

 63 See, e.g., 30 USC 1270; 42 USC 6305; 42 USC 7604.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 58 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 by ensuring consideration of environmental effects, not to prevent
 identifiable harms to identifiable people. When Congress says that
 schools receiving federal funds may not discriminate on the basis of
 sex, it is creating an incentive for sex equality, rather than imposing
 particular results on particular schools with respect to particular
 students. When Congress imposes national occupational safety
 standards, it is trying to reduce systemic risks, not to eliminate
 particular incidences of cancer. When Congress requires motor ve-
 hicles to reduce levels of air pollution, it is not attempting to cure
 identifiable respiratory problems, but to produce air quality that
 produces lower aggregate risks.

 This is the characteristic form of modern regulatory statutes.
 Risk management, rather than redress of grievances, is a conven-
 tional goal.64 In many ways, this difference signals a fundamental
 departure from the more narrow right-duty relations characteris-
 tic of the common law. In the face of that departure, courts ought
 to be closely attuned to what Congress has done. The conse-
 quence-a public law model of standing-would be to allow stand-
 ing to people complaining of opportunity-like harms, at least where
 Congress has not provided otherwise. Hence it should be presumed
 that listeners to radio, breathers of air in identifiable regions, vic-
 tims of discrimination, and others should be allowed to bring suit
 to prevent the sorts of injuries that the regulatory scheme was
 designed to prevent. This understanding would be designed to
 ensure that agencies adhere to the will of Congress, and its concep-
 tion of "injury" would track the best understanding to be attributed
 to the national legislature in light of its general goals and expecta-
 tions.

 Other considerations support this basic approach. The distinc-

 tion between regulated objects and regulatory beneficiaries rests on
 shaky conceptual foundations.6s The purported objects of regu-
 lation might well be counted as beneficiaries insofar as law-
 statutory and common-confers on them a wide range of rights
 that are advantageous to their interests. The so-called beneficiaries
 of regulation might well be regarded as objects insofar as it is

 64 Of course, risk management was a goal of the common law too; see Richard Posner,

 Economic Analysis of Law (4th ed 1992). But the common law judges lacked the tools to engage
 in the kinds of structural reform sought by modern regulatory agencies.

 65 See note 59 infra.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 2] STANDING INJURIES 59

 law-statutory and common-that allows people to intrude on
 interests that they would prefer to protect. As it operates in the
 cases, the distinction between beneficiaries and objects tends to
 take the common law as the normal or desirable state of affairs,

 and this judgment, however plausible it might be as a matter of
 theory, ought not to be made by courts in the face of conspicuously
 contrary views from Congress. This idea would be an effort to
 ensure that modern standing law is consistent with the post-New
 Deal shift in national legislation.66

 Moreover, it is plausible to think that beneficiaries of regulatory

 programs are at least sometimes at a comparative disadvantage in
 the implementation process.67 Often they are too poorly organized
 to exert continuing influence. Often they face large transactions
 cost barriers to exerting such influence; this is so even though "pub-
 lic interest" organizations can sometimes help overcome organiza-
 tional problems. Often statutes enacted by Congress are defeated
 by a process of inadequate implementation, which can be the result
 of political pressure by regulated industries, pressure that is not
 adequately countered by those who seek vigorous implementation.
 Whether or not transactions cost barriers are severe, there is no

 reason to believe that regulated industries are at a universal or
 systematic disadvantage compared to regulatory beneficiaries. And
 if this is right, an asymmetry in the law of standing-of the sort
 that lies at the heart of the common law model-could be perverse
 from Congress' own standpoint. Such an asymmetry would immu-
 nize insufficient enforcement action from legal scrutiny, while at
 the same time subjecting aggressive enforcement action to judicial
 review.68 This result is hardly likely to fit with Congress' goals in
 enacting regulatory statutes.

 Nor is it entirely persuasive to say that the beneficiaries should
 be required to resort to political remedies. The beneficiaries will
 be able to win in court only if they can invoke a statute that entitles
 them to victory. This means that they can succeed only if they

 66 See Cass R. Sunstein, Constitutionalism After the New Deal, 101 Harv L Rev 421 (1987).
 67 See, e.g., The Politics of Regulation (James Q. Wilson ed, 1980); James Q. Wilson,
 Bureaucracy (1990). There is a complex set of influences here. See Kaye Schlozman and
 James Tierney, Organized Interests and American Democracy (1986).

 68 To say all this is hardly to argue that beneficiary suits are an important corrective to
 pathologies in the regulatory state. Those pathologies lie much deeper. See Stephen Breyer,
 supra note 62; Cass R. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution (1990).

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 60 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 have-in the important sense-already won in the political pro-
 cess. To this extent, judicial review helps to fortify democratic
 processes by testing agency decisions against congressional instruc-
 tions, which are the ultimate source of agency authority.

 Perhaps these ideas do not apply when the Constitution is the

 source of the plaintiffs' claims. In such cases, perhaps courts should
 demonstrate the "passive virtues"69 and allow the political process
 to deliberate as long as possible. It seems right to insist that courts
 will be cautious about allowing plaintiffs to obtain a constitutional
 ruling on legislative or executive action. For this reason, it is rea-
 sonable to say that courts should not readily assume that the Con-
 stitution creates private rights of action. Moreover, courts should
 generally require a discrete harm to a discrete interest before hear-
 ing a case based solely on the Constitution, without a statute creat-
 ing a cause of action.70 But statutory cases present a different issue.
 The argument for judicial refusal to hear the plaintiffs' claim is far
 weaker when plaintiffs are complaining not that the Constitution
 forbids legislative action, but that a democratically enacted statute
 requires a regulatory agency to take action of a particular kind. In
 a case of that sort, considerations of democracy point toward rather
 than against access to court. There is no special need to insulate
 administrative or bureaucratic deliberation from an attack based on

 a statute where an interest protected by that statute is at stake. In
 any event, the regulated entities are, by hypothesis, entitled to
 judicial relief; they need not resort to the political process. Here
 too it is important to avoid building an asymmetry into the law of
 standing.71 None of this means that plaintiffs need not show an
 interest at all. But it does mean that in deciding whether a legal
 interest is at stake, the constitutional considerations do not counsel

 against granting standing to people who invoke "opportunity-type"
 harms.

 The same considerations suggest the difficulty of invoking Arti-

 69 Alexander Bickel, The Least Dangerous Branch (1965).

 70 Compare United States v Richardson, 408 US 166 (1974), and Valley Forge Christian College
 v Americans United for the Separation of Church and State, 454 US 464 (1982), with Bivins v Six
 Unknown Named Agents, 418 US 166 (1974), and Flast v Cohen, 392 US 83 (1968).

 7 There are lurking questions here on the appropriate place of "protection by govern-
 ment" in the constitutional background. I cannot discuss those questions here. For relevant
 discussion, see Heymann, 41 Duke L J 507 (1991); Strauss, Due Process, Inaction, and Private
 Wrongs, 1989 Supreme Court Review 53. The New Deal of course bears on these issues.
 See Sunstein, Constitutionalism After the New Deal, 101 Harv L Rev 421.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 2] STANDING INJURIES 61

 cle II as a basis for denying standing to beneficiaries.72 Article II
 says that the President shall "take Care that the laws be faithfully
 executed." Its basic purpose is to require executive implementation
 of enacted law. To be sure, it forbids judicial execution of the
 laws. But it does not forbid courts from saying that a regulatory
 agency has failed to execute the laws, as it is constitutionally re-
 quired to do. Of course there would be a problem if courts were
 to require agencies to enforce the law as courts wished, or without
 legal requirements to this effect. But nothing of this kind is at risk
 in the cases at hand. Article II obliges the President to implement
 the law. Suits by beneficiaries of regulatory statutes, complaining
 of executive default on that fundamental obligation, do not under-
 mine the allocation of power set up by Article II. At least this is
 so if a genuine legal claim is at stake, and if recognition of a cause
 of action is the best reading of legislative instructions.

 I think that these considerations would justify several conclu-

 sions. First, Warth itself may well have been rightly decided. Be-
 cause the plaintiffs' claim was constitutional in nature, it was prob-
 ably right for the Court to require more particular allegations
 before assessing that claim. In any case, there are important differ-
 ences between constitutional and statutory claims for purposes of
 standing. Second, Allen and EKWRO were wrong as "pure" stand-
 ing cases. Northeastern Contractors shows that the relevant injuries
 could well have been described in terms that would satisfy all
 applicable requirements. The strongest argument on behalf of the
 outcomes in these cases would rest on the peculiarities of judicial
 assessment of the liability of one taxpayer in a case brought by
 another. Perhaps Congress did not want to allow this result, and
 in that event, both cases were right-not as a reading of "injury,"
 but as a reading of the key issue, congressional instructions. Third,
 Northeastern Contractors ought to stand for the general proposition
 that when Congress has been silent, plaintiffs should be permitted
 to characterize their injuries as involving increased risks or harms
 to opportunities. It follows that in all of the cases with which I
 began this essay, a creative plaintiff ought to be allowed to formu-

 72 See Sunstein, supra note 17, for a more detailed discussion.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 62 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 late the relevant injury in such a way as to allow for a grant of
 standing.73 It also follows that the public law model can be made
 to fit well with most of current law, seeing EKWRO and Allen v
 Wright as tax cases; emphasizing the difference between constitu-
 tional and statutory cases; and seeing Lujan as a narrow ruling,
 requiring a more definite plan on the part of the plaintiffs, rather
 like the equivalent of a bid in Northeastern Contractors.

 If the public law model is to be resisted, it is because courts
 should adopt a clear statement principle, one that opposes standing
 at the behest of large numbers of regulatory beneficiaries seeking
 to require the executive to enforce the law. This principle would
 require an explicit congressional statement, on the basis of back-
 ground concerns that are constitutional in nature, that seek politics
 first and adjudication last, and that insist on the need for presiden-
 tial control over the enforcement process. I do not believe that this
 principle should be adopted, but it is certainly intelligible. Like
 its apparent adversary-the public law model of standing-this
 approach would have the large benefit of fitting Northeastern Con-
 tractors together with a set of cases with which it does not now
 easily coexist. In other words, both of the approaches that I have
 discussed here would serve to synthesize Northeastern Contractors
 with the complex body of law that preceded it.

 CONCLUSION

 Northeastern Contractors is the Court's first sustained encoun-

 ter with a key issue in the new law of standing: the appropriate
 characterization of injuries. The Court's conclusion is unobjection-
 able, and there is nothing terribly wrong with the particular reason-
 ing that underlay that conclusion. Section 1983 grants a cause of
 action to all those whose federal rights have been invaded by state
 law. The contractors in Northeastern Contractors complained that the
 set-aside program violated their constitutional rights. The Equal
 Protection Clause safeguards not particular outcomes, but general
 opportunities; and if the plaintiffs were correct on the merits, their
 legal rights had been violated.

 The basic problem with Northeastern Contractors is conceptual,

 73 For some qualifications, see Sunstein, Standing and the Privatization of Public Law, supra

 note 58, at 1467-69.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 2] STANDING INJURIES 63

 and though it does not bear on the result in the case, that problem
 goes very deep. The case exposes, more clearly than any previous
 case, a fundamental problem in the modern law of standing-the
 assumption, key to Data Processing, that "injuries" can be identi-
 fied without reference to positive law. This assumption is false.
 Whether there is an injury depends at least in significant part on
 what the law says. The Court's reasoning and result in Northeastern
 Contractors confirm the point; it would have been impossible to
 decide the case without reference to the meaning of the Equal
 Protection Clause. The case thus inaugurates a healthy return74 to
 the view, vindicated by constitutional history75 and by the Admin-
 istrative Procedure Act, that the question of standing is the ques-
 tion whether some source of law has conferred a cause of action

 on the plaintiff.

 Although a trend in this direction would be salutary, the Court
 has a large task of sorting out the relations among its previous
 decisions, nearly all of which ignore the issue of how to characterize

 injuries for purposes of standing. Northeastern Contractors fits poorly
 with the many cases in which the Court assumed or asserted a
 narrow characterization of the relevant injury. In all of those cases,
 the Court might easily have done what it did in Northeastern Con-
 tractors. It now remains to decide how the question of characteriza-
 tion is to be resolved.

 I have suggested here that the answer lies in positive law; it
 depends on congressional (or constitutional) instructions. Recogni-
 tion of this point would itself be a significant advance insofar as it
 would maintain fidelity with both the Administrative Procedure
 Act and relevant constitutional provisions. But often congressional
 instructions are unclear, and they must be constructed on the basis
 of an understanding of the legislative and constitutional back-
 ground. In the modern regulatory state, statutes are typically de-
 signed to restructure incentives, to diminish risks, or to protect
 opportunities, rather than to guarantee particular results to particu-
 lar people. If this is correct, a broad characterization of the injury
 is generally appropriate in administrative law cases. Hence the
 strategy used in Northeastern Contractors-recharacterization of the

 74 See also the discussion of the "zone" test, note 2 supra.

 75 See Sunstein, supra note 17, for details.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 64 THE SUPREME COURT REVIEW [1993

 injury so as to ensure compliance with all standing requirements-
 ought to be broadly generalizable.

 An alternative view would suggest that in light of the Article II

 background, and the need for judicial caution in overseeing en-
 forcement programs, standing ought to be denied unless (a) Con-
 gress has expressly granted standing or (b) a common law-like
 harm, one that can be described in discrete, individualized terms,

 is at stake. This view would have the advantage of explaining both
 Northeastern Contractors and a number of cases that deny standing
 on apparently similar facts. And although I have urged that this
 alternative is ultimately unsound, there is much to be said in its
 favor, for it would also have the virtue of helping to correct the
 fundamental flaw of Data Processing, and of reestablishing that it
 is both desirable and inevitable for courts to focus on legislative
 instructions, rather than to pretend to assess standing issues on the
 basis of "injury in fact" alone.

This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

