Booth School of Business, University of Chicago

The Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 36, No. 1, Part 2, John M. Olin Centennial 
 

Against Interest-Group Theory: A Comment on Peltzman, "The Political Economy of the Decline
of American Public Education" 
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein 
Source: 
Conference in Law and Economics at the University of Chicago (Apr., 1993), pp. 379-383
Published by: 
 for 
and 
Stable URL: 
Accessed: 25-01-2016 20:57 UTC

Booth School of Business, University of Chicago

http://www.jstor.org/stable/725481

University of Chicago Law School

University of Chicago Press

 

 

 

 

 

REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/725481?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents

 

You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, University of Chicago Law School and University of Chicago 
Press are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Journal of Law & Economics.

 

 

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 209.175.73.10 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 20:57:23 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

AGAINST  INTEREST-GROUP  THEORY: 
A  COMMENT ON  PELTZMAN, "THE 
POLITICAL ECONOMY OF THE  DECLINE 
OF AMERICAN  PUBLIC EDUCATION"* 

CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN 
University  of  Chicago 

M ANY people think that political outcomes can be  "explained" as 
products of the influence of  self-interested, well-organized groups with 
high stakes in the outcome. Undoubtedly this is often true. But causation 
in politics is a complex matter. If we find that a group has benefited from 
a public policy, we know something important, but one thing we do not 
know is that the policy exists because it benefits that group. If controls 
on automobile emissions are enacted in a period in which the labor move- 
ment is weakening, we  know something, but we  do not know that the 
controls are caused by the weakening of the labor movement. These are 
prosaic claims, but I think they have large implications for many of the 
arguments of interest-group theory. 

Peltzman's intriguing article' is  generally cautious.  But  in  several 
places, it becomes rather bold. In explaining the decline of  American 
education from 1960 to  1980, Peltzman claims, "[T]he plausible rule of 
politics is substantial."2 Later in the article, he says, "Industry pressure 
does have a substantial effect on performance."3 These claims are reason- 
able, but we do not know that they are true. Both of them seem to me 
inadequately supported. I  conclude that Peltzman has  generated ex- 
tremely interesting data and shown some suggestive correlations. But he 
has not yet made any real demonstration of causation. 

*  Presented  at  the  John  M.  Olin  Centennial  Conference  in  Law  and  Economics  at  the 
University  of  Chicago  Law  School,  Chicago,  April  7-9,  1992.  The  author  is  a  Karl  N. 
Llewellyn  Professor  at the  Law  School  and Department  of  Political  Science  at the  Univer- 
sity  of  Chicago. 

I  Sam  Peltzman,  The  Political  Economy  of  the  Decline  of  American  Public  Education, 

in this  issue. 

2  Id.  at 322. 
3  Id.  at 359. 

[Journal of Law  & Economics,  vol.  XXXVI  (April  1993)] 
?  1993 by  The  University  of  Chicago.  All  rights reserved.  0022-2186/93/3601-0016$01.50 

379 

This content downloaded from 209.175.73.10 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 20:57:23 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

380 

THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND  ECONOMICS 

I want to support this general point with six particular questions. 
1.  Did  School  Performance  Really  Deteriorate?  Peltzman  makes 
strong arguments for the view that school performance deteriorated from 
1960 to 1980, but the proposition remains a bit blurred.4 We do know that 
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores went down, but the SAT is taken 
by  a  college-bound elite.  Decreases in  SAT scores do  not necessarily 
mean decreases in overall school performance. And there is indeed some 
contrary evidence for high school  students as  a  whole.  For example, 
national norm studies-taken  from 1955 to 1983 and including a nationally 
representative sample of  high school juniors-suggest  a much steadier 
set of scores. These studies do not reveal the same kind of decline as is 
shown by the SAT trends. Other tests suggest similar results. Indeed, a 
federal study, Project TALENT, actually found a slight gain in scores by 
1970 eleventh graders over those by 1960 eleventh graders. 

None  of  this demonstrates that Peltzman is  wrong in claiming that 
school performance deteriorated. But it does suggest the possibility that 
the SAT decline shows a decline in performance for elites, not for high 
schoolers as a whole.5 If this is so, the causal picture gets more compli- 
cated. It may also be true that in 1960-80 the schools emphasized skills 
not picked up by the SAT, a possibility that would introduce even greater 
difficulties into the picture. 

2.  What about  Factors  Independent  of  Schooling?  School  perfor- 
mance is almost certainly a function of family structure and family back- 
ground.6 Children in two-parent households appear to do better than chil- 
dren with only one parent in the home.7 We can speculate that school 
children do less  well if their parents are in the midst of a divorce. It is 
thus possible that the decline in SAT scores was attributable to factors 
unrelated to the educational environment, narrowly defined. 

Peltzman would do well to attempt to control for this possibility, mea- 
suring his  educational factors against noneducational causes.  The ab- 
sence of  such an effort makes it especially difficult to  make confident 
claims about causation. 

3.  Timing  Problems  and  the  Aggregate  Data.  Peltzman  explores 
and sometimes seems to  endorse the view that schools deteriorated in 
part because of (a) the growth in labor unions and (b) shifts in financial 

4 See  Charles Murray & R.  J. Herrnstein,  What's  Really  behind the SAT-Score  Decline, 

106 Pub.  Interest  32 (1992),  on  which  I draw here. 

5 Id. 
6  See  John  Chubb  &  Terry  Moe,  Politics,  Markets,  and  America's  Schools,  at  ch.  4 

(1990). 
7 Id. 

This content downloaded from 209.175.73.10 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 20:57:23 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

COMMENT II 

381 

responsibility from local to state government. But if we look at the aggre- 
gate data, we  will find some general oddities. Between 1946 and 1972, 
the financing ratios between local and state government remained about 
the same. From 1946 to 1950, the state funded about 39 percent, whereas 
local government funded about 58 percent. By  1972, the state was still 
funding 39 percent, and local government was funding over 52 percent- 
hardly a significant shift. And yet it was in the period from 1961 to 1972 
that SAT scores were  significantly declining. The aggregate data thus 
suggest a puzzle. The supposedly causal shift in financial responsibility 
did not occur at all during a significant part of the crucial period. 

The data for labor unions raise a  similar issue.  From 1961 to  1962, 
there was a huge jump in National Education Association (NEA) mem- 
bership-from  less than 4 percent to 54 percent. But from 1962 to  1971, 
teacher union density remained roughly constant, rising to a statistically 
insignificantly increased level of 56.9 percent in 1971. Note again that it 
was in this very period-from  the early 1960s to 1971-that  SAT scores 
were declining. The labor union data pose an additional puzzle for Peltz- 
man since they suggest that teacher union density stayed roughly con- 
stant while educational "output" declined. 

Perhaps the disaggregated data take care of the problem. Perhaps we 
can think about differences in the nature of the NEA over time or about 
the rise of the "bad union," the American Federation of Teachers (AFT). 
But even if this is so, Peltzman's own, more particular findings undermine 
the view that the data show a causal effect from unionization and shifts 
in financing. 

4.  Labor Unions?  Peltzman notes that the evidence on labor unions 
is  mixed,  because  of  matters of  timing and  detail.8 The  disclaimer 
seems necessary. School performance actually seems to have improved 
with the success of the NEA in the 1960s and 1970s. There is therefore 
no evidence that the NEA contributed to a decline in education. There 
appears to be some correlation between such decline and success by the 
AFT, but the data here are merely fragmentary. The AFT has never had 
a large percentage of teachers-somewhere  between a tenth and a fifth 
of  teachers during the period of  national SAT decline. Moreover, we 
appear to  have  incomplete information on  AFT membership between 
1960 and 1971. Surely there is too little evidence to claim causation as a 
result of AFT membership, let alone union membership. At the very best, 
I think that we have a mildly suggestive correlation. 

5.  Shifts in Financing?  There is  apparently a correlation between 
the early shifts to state funding and early declines in SAT performance. 

8  Peltzman,  supra  note  1, at  352-56. 

This content downloaded from 209.175.73.10 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 20:57:23 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

382 

THE  JOURNAL  OF  LAW  AND  ECONOMICS 

But there is no correlation at all between the later shifts to state funding- 
those in  the  1980s-and  SAT performance. For this reason Peltzman 
concludes, consistently with the data, that the shift "is a symptom rather 
than a cause."9 I am not certain what he means by this. But at least we 
can agree that the data do not establish, or even strongly suggest, that 
the shift in financing produced a decline in performance. Thus far, then, 
the claim of causation seems unproved with respect to both union density 
and financing practices. 

6.  Businesses?  Peltzman's most striking finding is that school per- 
formance declined in areas in which the use of educated labor by politi- 
cally important employees grew the most, and in which newly important 
industries used the most educated labor. As  Peltzman emphasizes, the 
finding is strongly counterintuitive. If industry pressure was to have any 
effect,  one  would expect  school  performance to  increase in precisely 
those areas. 

Without more, we  might think that this counterintuitive correlation 
says absolutely nothing about causation. We might see  this finding as 
resembling a demonstration that the performance of a sports team, or the 
economy of a foreign country, was correlated with shifts in SAT scores. 
(Both of  these  are likely true.) Now  it  is  possible to  come up with a 
plausible story to explain the anomaly-as  Peltzman has in fact done.?1 
But it is almost always possible for inventive people to come up with a 
plausible story. The question is whether with respect to the causal role 
of industry pressure, we  have anything more than that. I think that on 
the present evidence, we do not. 

I conclude with a more general remark, one that extends well beyond 
Peltzman's article to theories of regulation in general. "Functional analy- 
sis" involves the attribution of causality to a practice after a showing of 
its effects.l1 A key part of pseudoscience, it is prominent in Marxism (X 
is  in the interest of  capitalists; therefore, it exists  because it is  in the 
interest of capitalist) and feminism (X is in the interest of men, therefore 
it exists  because it  is  in  the  interest of  men). It is  also prominent in 
economics, including interest-group theory. Having shown that a practice 
is efficient, some people think that they have shown that it exists because 
it is efficient; having shown that a practice serves identifiable interests, 
some people think they have shown that it exists for that very reason. 

9 Id.  at 366. 
10 Id.  at 367-68. 
1 It is  well  discussed  in  Jon  Elster,  Ulysses  and  the  Sirens:  Studies  in  Rationality  and 
Irrationality 28-35  (1979);  Jon  Elster,  Explaining  Technical  Change,  at  ch.  2  (1983): Jon 
Elster,  Sour Grapes  101-8  (1983). 

This content downloaded from 209.175.73.10 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 20:57:23 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

COMMENT II 

383 

Economists and economically inclined lawyers have become extremely 
sophisticated in revealing the effects  of  legal regulation. We might be 
able to  demonstrate, for example, that occupational safety and health 
regulation is in the interest of large firms, or that regulation of new risks 
(and exemption of old ones) helps to cartelize existing industry. But from 
this it is often said to follow that regulation exists because of its beneficial 
effects on large firms or existing industry. I hope that I have said enough 
to  show that this does  not follow.  Often it is  more than enough to be 
able to demonstrate the social consequences of legal rules, without also 
claiming to have shown causation.'2 

12 Of course, a demonstration of effects may be relevant to the issue of causation; from 
effects we can generate plausible stories about contributing factors. But there is a large 
difference between plausibility and truth. To assess the matter of truth about the causes of 
regulation, we need to know a good deal more than interest-group and public choice theory 
typically provide. 

A related point: Sometimes economic theories of regulation appear insufficiently to inves- 
tigate the possibility that the system preceding the specific regulation at issue is itself the 
product of self-interested action and that that specific regulation is in some sense a counter 
or a corrective to an interest-driven status quo. The lack of investigation here has led to a 
significant gap in the literature. It would be exceptionally interesting to see whether failure 
to regulate is sometimes attributable to interest-group power, or (less ambitiously) to show 
that the absence of regulation produces predictable winners and losers. See Einer Elhague, 
Does Interest Group Theory Justify More Intrusive Judicial Review? 101 Yale L.  J. 31 
(1991); Cass Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution 2-3  (1990). The issue is not raised by 
Peltzman's article here, however, and hence I do not discuss it. 

This content downloaded from 209.175.73.10 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 20:57:23 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

