University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1993 

Information, Please Feature 
Information, Please Feature 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Information, Please Feature," 2 East European Constitutional Review 54 (1993). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

EAST EUROPEAN  CONsTrrrUTIONAL  REVIEW

New  constitutions could require governments  to keep  track of  what  counts.

INFORMATION,  PLEASE

By  Cass R. Sunstein

Many Eastern European constitution-makers  are explor-
ing intriguing  innovations in  the  theory  and  practice  of
constitutionalism.  In  keeping  with  this  spirit  of experi-
mentation,  it  might  well  make  sense  for  Eastern
Europeans to consider  an entirely new constitutional pro-
vision, one that would require their governments to com-
pile and publicize an annual Human Development Index
(HDI). The  HDI might be based  on an understanding of
what  matters  most to  human lives,  including  longevity,
educational  achievement,  and  average  income.  An  an-
nual  HDI  could  be  a  substantial  step  toward  promoting
greater  political  accountability,  toward  improving  inad-
equate information-gathering capacities, and toward con-
centrating governmental attention on what matters most.
If the HDI requirement is not included  in the constitution,
it  should  probably  be  required  by  another  form  of law,
one  that  is  understood  to  be  both  fundamental  and
enduring.

Thus  far,  the  new  Eastern  European  constitutions
have  focused  on  human  development  through  vague
aspirations requiring the government to provide medical
care,  environmental  quality,  leisure  time, just  pay,  and
much  more  (see  "Something  Old,  Something  New,"
EECR, Winter  1993).  Aspirations  of  this  kind  might
well prove unenforceable,  and  in any case there is reason
to doubt whether  they will do much good. By contrast, a
constitutionally-compelled  HDI  might  well  serve  as  an
important spur to public and private efforts-both national
and international-to counteract  existing social  problems
in  Eastern  Europe.  Rather  than  offering  an  endless
catalogue  of  broad  and  probably  meaningless  positive
rights, Eastern  European  nations  would  do  well  to  im-
pose  on  their  governments  a  continuing  obligation  to

inform  their citizens,  and  the  international  community,
of how  current  policies  have  actually  affected  human
lives. Such a provision  would also fit extremely well with
the right, generally  recognized  in the new constitutions,
to receive information.

The  idea  of a  "human  development  index"  comes
out of the United Nations Development Program, which
has published annual Human  Development Reports since
1990. The purpose of the HDI is to furnish a comprehen-
sible  measure of the  nature  of people's  lives  in  different
nations and, by allowing comparative assessments,  to get
a sense  of progress over time and of what sorts of govern-
ment strategies  work best. The  precise ingredients  of the
HDI  are  of course  a  matter  for  discussion  and  debate-
itself  a  potentially  beneficial  process-and  there  is  no
reason  to insist  that any nation  should limit itself to  any
specific set  of guidelines. The  key point  is to ensure  that
nations focus on  what matters most, that is, the nature of
human lives under the existing political  regime.

What is  HDI?

The HDI is a simple concept. The current United Nations
approach  grows  out of attention  to  the (a) longevity,  (b)
knowledge,  and  (c)  income  of individuals.  Thus  under-
stood,  the  HDI  is  superior  to  many  other  possible
indicators of human welfare, such as gross national  prod-
uct  or average  income,  standing  alone.  Even  if average
income  is  high, a  nation  is doing poorly  when  too  many
of its  people  are  dying  young.  Similarly,  the  gross  na-
tional  product-though  a  popular  measure  of  national
performance-is  only crudely correlated  with things that
are important. Even if we wanted  to, we could not  mea-
sure "utility" directly; and such economic notions as "mnaxi-

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 54 1993

SUMMER  1993

mized wealth" seem an inadequate measure of what mat-
ters most.

Under  the  UN  approach,  "longevity"  is  calculated
on  the  basis  of life  expectancy  at birth.  "Knowledge"  is
determined  by a formula based on adult literacy and mean
years  of schooling, with  literacy  counting  for  two-thirds
of the  measurement.  The "income" ingredient, growing
out of per capita gross national  product, is calculated from
a  formula  that  adjusts  this figure  to take  account  of the
particular  nation's  poverty  level,  purchasing  capacities,
and distribution of wealth.  Unlike long  life  and  literacy,
income  of course  has  purely  instrumental  (rather  than
intrinsic)  importance.  Income  matters  only  because  of
what it allows  people to do or to be. Nonetheless,  income
is  undoubtedly  connected  with  a  wide  range  of human
capacities,  and  it  is  easier  to  measure  directly  than  are
many of those capacities.  The UN  measurement  affords
equal  weight to each of the three variables.

There  is  nothing  inevitable  about  the  current  UN
approach,  and  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that  Eastern
European  nations  should  do  exactly  what  the  UN  has
done.  The  creation  of an  index-a  single  number-to
capture "human development" raises many complexities.
For example, it is highly controversial  to give equal weight
to each variable. Perhaps longevity deserves more weight;
perhaps  other  variables  should  be  considered.  Nor  is  it
clear  that Eastern  European  countries  should  adopt  the
current  formula  for  measuring  "knowledge."  Any  "in-
dex" for assessing  these  matters is  likely to have  a  degree
of arbitrariness.  It  is  especially  important  to  ensure  that
the disaggregated  ingredients of any conclusions are made
public.

Interesting  variations  on HDI can  be  found  in other
nations, especially Scandinavia.  The Swedish  assessment
of  "standard  of  living"  is  more  disaggregatcd  and  less
mathematical  than the UN approach.  It takes account of
health and access to health care; education and skills; hous-
ing; security of life and property (including freedom  from
crime);  availability  of recreation  and  cultural  resources;
employment;  income and  wealth; and political participa-
tion.  Of  special  interest  is  the  Swedish  insistence  that
well-being is not to be measured in  purely subjective  terms.
People  sometimes adjust  their aspirations  to  a  status quo
containing  deprivation  and  injustice, and  for  this reason
it is important to see what goods and opportunities people
actually  have,  not  merely  what  they  think  about  their

situation.  Compared  to  the  UN  approach,  a  particular
advantage  of the  Swedish  approach  is  that it is  relatively
robust; the disadvantage  is  its complexity.

An interesting  alternative  is a comparative  survey in
Scandinavian  countries, growing out of the  University of
Helsinki.  In addition  to the  Swedish  factors,  the  Finnish
approach  emphasizes  the  quality  of the  biological  and
physical  environment, including air and  water pollution;
the  nature  of  relations  with  other  people  in  the  local
community,  in  the  family,  and  within  the  workplace;
and  opportunities  to  enjoy  nature.  The  comparative
survey  is  intended  to  include  both  objective  and  subjec-
tive  indicators of welfare.

Whatever  the particular approach,  it is  both possible
and  important  to  show  variations  between  men  and
women  and  among  different regions  and  various  ethnic
groups.  We will learn a great deal  if we are able to  show
that  certain  well-defined  groups  come  out  consistently
below others.  Information of this kind can improve demo-
cratic debate,  which  too  often  depends  on  intuition  and
anecdote  rather  than  on  solid  facts.  I will  return  to this
point shortly.

Current results in Eastern Europe and elsewhere

The  1993  United  Nations report shows some  intriguing
results. The  report  ranks  173 countries. The  first six  are
Japan,  Canada,  Norway,  Switzerland,  Sweden,  and  the
United States;  the  last six  are  Mali,  Niger, Burkina Faso,
Afghanistan,  Sierra  Leone,  and  Guinea.

Of  the  Eastern  European  countries,  the  highest-
ranking  is  Czechoslovakia,  ranked  26th;  Hungary  is
number  28,  Lithuania 29,  Estonia  34,  Latvia  35,  Russia
37,  Bulgaria  40,  Ukraine  45,  Poland  48,  Georgia  49,
Kazakhstan  54,  Azerbaijan  62,  Moldova  64,  Romania
77,  and  Albania  78.  The  first  fifty-five  countries  are
classified as having "high human development";  thus only
Azerbaijan, Moldova,  Romania, and  Albania fall  outside
of that category.

Notably, though, sone  of the  trend  lines for Eastern
Europe show  substantially  less improvement  since  1960
than  the  parallel  trends  in  other  nations.  In  Eastern
Europe,  life expectancy  has generally  stayed constant  or
improved  by  about  two  years  in  this  thirty-year  period,
whereas  there has  been  an  eleven-year  increase  in Japan
and  about  a  six-year  leap  in  Canada,  the  United  States,
Germany,  and  Austria.  Also  notably,  Eastern  European

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 55 1993

countries have compiled  relatively little information about
quality of life for their citizens, so comparative data over
time are  unavailable. On the other hand, the report indi-
cates  that previously  Communist countries  have  a good
deal of available human capital for the current transition,
especially  because  of  significant  recent  investments  in
education and health.

There are  interesting  relationships  among the  three
variables  of longevity,  knowledge,  and  income.  Some
countries  with relatively  high  income  ranks  (including
Algeria, Namibia, and  South Africa) have  relatively  low
HDI ranks. Some countries have HDI ranks that are well
above  their  income  ranks  (including  China, Colombia,
and Uruguay).

There  are  also  important  variations  among  groups
within a single country. In America, for example, whites,
standing alone, rank above Japan in HDI, whereas blacks
rank around 31st, and Hispanics around 35 (next to Esto-
nia).  In  addition,  and  significantly,  women  fare  much
worse  than  men  in  terms  of HDI.  Unfortunately,  exist-
ing information  from Eastern Europe  appears extremely
sketchy,  and  does  not  allow  full  comparisons  between
men and  women,  among  ethnic  groups,  or  among geo-
graphic  regions  within  countries.  As we will  see,  the ab-
sence  of adequate information  from Eastern Europe itself
provides  an  argument  in  favor  of a  new  constitutional
requirement,

The case  for constitutionalizing  HDI

At  the  present  time,  few  constitutions  require  the
compilation  of reports  and information. I think  this is an
unfortunate  gap  in  the  theory  and  practice  of
constitutionalism.  It  would  be  most valuable  to  add  to
Eastern  European  constitutions  a  provision  of  the
following  sort:  "Each year, the government shall compile and
make available a human development index. This index shall be
designed to  reflect the quality of life in the nation in the previous
year. It shall contain information about longevity, educational at-
tainments, per capita income, and other relevant variables." The
particular wording of the  provision is not critical;  what is
important is the general  idea.

An  HDI should  be  a  powerful  educative  force, pro-
moting  democratic  processes  and  at  the  same  time
counteracting  the very problems  that the HDI measures,
such as premature  death, lack of education, and poverty.
A special advantage of an HDI is that it focuses  attention

EAST  EUROPEAN  CONsrTuIONAI.  REVIEw

on what matters  most; it gives  a shorthand  but informa-
tive  formula  for  measuring  whether  things  are  getting
better or worse. There are several  reasons, moreover, for
constitutionalizing an  HDI requirement.

First, a constitutional requirement of compilation and
disclosure  of an  HDI could  do a  great  deal  to  promote
political  accountability.  It could  do this  by ensuring  that
the  public  is  aware  of what  governmental  policies  have
done  for  those  subject  to  them.  This  awareness  might
well be a large aid to democratic  processes. In this respect,
the HDI can be seen as a structural  part of the constitution,
one  that is designed  to provide  some of the preconditions
for  a  well-functioning  democratic  system.  The  point  is
especially  important  for  Eastern  Europe,  where  the key
question  for  the next generation  has to  do with  the  real-
world effects of various initiatives, many of which will be
highly  experimental  in  character.  A  constitutional
commitment  to cataloguing the effects of those initiatives
would  be an important and salutary  step.

Second,  the use of an HDI should  help focus govern-
mental and  public attention on the right questions. Many
nations  already  recognize  this  general  point  at  the
subconstitutional  level. Thus they require annual reports
about unemployment, poverty, economic trends, and the
gross national  product. The existence  of relatively  objec-
tive  information  on  these  issues  helps hold  government
accountable  for what matters. it also helps inform  demo-
cratic debate, day-to-day policymaking,  and the  electoral
process itself.

Third, an HDI could help counteract the feeling, now
apparently  widespread  among  many  citizens  in  Eastern
Europe, that  the new  order is  treating free markets  as an
inherent  or  independent  good,  quite  apart  from  what
markets  are  doing for people subject to them. In defend-
ing  social  and  economic  rights,  Wiktor  Osiatynski  has
powerfully  invoked  this concern  about  the  relationship
between  political  legitimacy  and  explicit  governmental
focus, at the  constitutional  level,  on social and  economic
difficulties.  Perhaps  the concern  is best  met  through  an
HDI, putting  private and  public  attention  on what  mar-
kets  are accomplishing,  rather  than  by enshrining  social
and economic  rights.

Fourth, the HDI should help private and public forces
to redress  the very  problems that it catalogues. By draw-
ing national  and international  attention  to such  issues as
longevity, education,  and  incomes-and  to  variations be-

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 56 1993

SUMMER  1993

tween  men and women  and among relevant groups  and
regions-the  relevant  information  can  spur  valuable
initiatives.  We  already  have  a  good  deal  of empirical
knowledge about the potential  effects of such techniques.
Public disclosure of information about hunger and famines
is a  principal  motivating  force for  remedial  and  preven-
tive  action  by  government,  as Jean  Dreze  and  Amartya
Sen showed  in their  1989  book Hunger and Public Action.
So  too, exposure  of environmentally  degrading  activity
within  the United States has  been  a powerful catalyst  to
public  and  private  remedies. Competition  can  of course
provide  incentives  for  improvement.  International
competition over maximizing the current HDI-together
with  the  prospect  for  national  and  international
embarrassment-may  well  yield  improvements  in many
nations.

There  is a  final  point. The  HDI could  help counter-
act  two  mutually  reinforcing  problems  in  Eastern  Eu-
rope. These are (a)  inadequate information-gathering  ca-
pacities and (b) a conspicuous  pathology of many democ-
racies, which  is to direct public  and  governmental  atten-
tion toward issues that are often only indirectly connected
with real  improvements in human lives. In the aftermath
of Communism,  it  is  clear  that  many  East  European
countries  need  to  assemble  much  more  objective
information on how people are actually doing.  Ironically,
a democratic system can be an obstacle to this goal insofar
as  it  tends  to  direct  attention  to  alleged  scandals  in  the
high levels of government, or gossip about their activities,
rather  than  the  question  whether  policy  initiatives  are
having  beneficial effects  for  the citizenry. A large  advan-
tage of the HDI-especially if it receives media attention-
is that it tends to place public attention  in the right place.
There  is evidence  that  this  beneficial  result  has  already
occurred  from the publication  of the annual  UN reports.

Pitfalls and enforcement  issues

To say  all  this  is  hardly  to  claim  that a  constitutonally
mandated  HDI  would  be  a  panacea,  or  to  deny  that  it
brings  potential  problems.  By  themselves,  compilation
and publication  of information  are  only  that. The effect
of information  depends  on  what  people  do  with  it.
Moreover,  reasonable  people disagree  about what ought
to  be  counted  in  an  HDI,  and  here  there  is room  for
errors. It is surely possible  that many HDI's will be based
on  unreasonable  judgments  about  what  matters,  or  on

large mistakes about the facts.

An  HDI  would,  no doubt, raise  significant  adminis-
trative  issues.  For one  thing, the  proposal  presupposes  a
significant  degree  of  administrative  competence  and
capacities.  It  is  possible  that  a  full-scale  program  of
information-gathering  will  take  some  time  to  develop.
Despite Western images of the omniscient Big Brother, it
seems  clear that Communist regimes  have  had, on  many
important  matters, highly undeveloped capacities for gath-
ering  information.  An  HDI  requirement  might  well
stimulate  improvements on  this score, but we should not
underestimate  the difficulties  of successfully  performing
the relevant  information-gathering  tasks.

There  is  also  a  risk  that  governmental  or  private
corruption  or  self-interest  might  well  infect  the  HDI  in
any  given  year.  The  result  would  he  inaccurate  and
inflated numbers. This is an especially important concern
in  Eastern  Europe,  where  citizens  arc  accustomed  to
reports  by  the  government  showing  that  everything  is
getting better. Past  practice  has  made  citizens extremely
skeptical  of such proclamations;  extreme  cynicism  about
governmental  reports  is  an  unfortunate  legacy  of
Communist  regimes.  For  this  reason  it  is  important  to
ensure that the compilation of the relevant information  is
as objective  and professional  as possible.

Two  remedies  suggest  themselves.  First,  legal  steps
should  be  taken  domestically  to  ensure  that  those  who
are compiling  the data are independent of politics. Build-
ing  on an  analogy  to  the central  bank,  the  ombudsman,
and  the  public  broadcasting  system,  legal  and  even
constitutional  guarantees  could  create  the  necessary
independence-by,  for example, calling for term  appoint-
ments  and  forbidding politically-motivated  discharge  of
the relevant officials. Second, there should  be international
monitoring of the HDI. Something of this sort goes on  in
the  UN  in any event, and  might well provide some  pro-
tection  against  the risks of bias and  error.

If the  HDI  is  to  appear  in  the  constitution,  other
issues arise. Will the  HDI be subject tojudicial review? If
the  government  prepares  no  HDI,  or  a  deeply  flawed
one,  can  the  Constitutional  Court  respond?  These  are
complex  issues,  and  I  have  only  tentative  suggestions  to
offer. I propose that the Court ought to have the authority
to  compel  issuance  of the  HDI,  and  that  every  citizen
should  have  an  enforceable  right to  the document  itself.
(As  noted  above, this  idea  might  fit well  with  the  right,

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 57 1993

EAsT  EUROPEAN  CONSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW

now  popular  in  Eastern  Europe,  to receive  information
from  government.)  I also  suggest  that  there  should  be
judicial  review  to ensure  minimal adequacy  of the  HDI,
including  professional objectivity. The Court should  de-
fer  to  reasonable judgments  on  what  is  to  be  included.
But it should  be available as a backstop.

Not incidentally, there could be large democratic ben-
efits  from  the  very  complexity  of the  question  of what
belongs  in  the  HDI.  This  is  a  subject  on  which  public
discussion  may  be  highly  beneficial.  It  is important  for
citizens to think about what sorts of things count injudg-
ments about quality of life-decent health care, long lives,
recreation, education, environmental quality, and so forth.
Many constitutional  provisions amount to  window-
dressing,  offering  broad  promises  but doing  little  good.
No  constitution-no  set  of words on  paper-can  guaran-

tee  good  results  for  citizens.  The  danger  of  creating
unhelpful  "paper  rights"  is  especially  severe  when
constitutions  require  positive  governmental  action,  by
such  means  as  the  ever-popular  rights  to  free  medical
care,  environmental  quality, and  recreation  and  leisure
time. By  contrast, constitutionally  mandating  the HDI-
an objective  statistical  report  that raises implications  for,
but places  no overt obligations  on, policymakers-might
well count as a substantial step toward improved democ-
racy  and  better  lives  for  the  people  of Eastern  Europe.
Not incidentally,  it could also  count as an important  de-
velopment  in  the  theory  and  practice  of constitutional-
ism.

Cass RK  Sunstein is the  author, most recently, of The  Partial
Constitution (Harvard University Press, 1993.)

HeinOnline  -- 2 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 58 1993

