University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

1994

Rules and Rulelessness
Cass R. Sunstein

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "Rules and Rulelessness" (Coase-Sandor Institute for Law & Economics Working Paper No. 27, 1994).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

CHICAGO

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 27
(2D SERIES)

Rules  and  Rulelessness

Cass R. Sunstein

THE  LAW  SCHOOL
THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO

Rules and Rulelessness

Cass R. Sunstein*

[T]he establishment of broadly applicable general  principles  is  an
essential component of the judicial process.

—Justice Antonin Scalia, The Rule of Law is A Law of Rules

[T]he highest ethical life of the mind consists at all times in the
breaking of rules which have grown too narrow for the actual case
—William James, Principles of Psychology

Introduction

There are two  stylized conceptions  of  legal judgment.  The  first,
associated  with  Jeremy  Bentham  and  more  recently  with  Justices
Hugo  Black  and  Antonin  Scalia,  places  a  high  premium  on  the
creation and application  of  general  rules.  On  this  view,  public  au-
thorities should avoid “balancing  tests” or close attention  to individ-
ual circumstances. They  should attempt  instead to give guidance  to
lower  courts,  future  legislators,  and  citizens  through  clear,  abstract
rules  laid  down  in  advance  of actual  applications.  The  second  con-
ception, associated with  Blackstone and more recently with  Justices
Felix Frankfurter and John Marshall Harlan,  places a high  premium
on  law-making  at  the  point  of application through  case-by-case de-
cisions,  narrowly  tailored  to  the  particulars  of  individual  circum-
stances. On this view, public authorities should stay close to the  de-
tails of the controversy before them,  and avoid broader principles al-
together.  The  problem  with  broad  principles  is  that  they  tend  to
overreach; they may be erroneous or unreasonable as  applied to cases
not before the court.
                                                                                                               
*Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  Law  School  and
Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This  text  consists  of  a
very preliminary version of the second of the 1994  Tanner  Lectures  in  Human
Values,  to  be  delivered  at  Harvard  University  in  November  1994.  All  rights
reserved.

2

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

It would  not  be easy to overstate the  importance  of  the  contro-
versy between  the  two  views. Such  issues arise in  every area  of  law;
they  often  involve fundamental  liberties.  Of  course  familiar  under-
standings  of  the  rule of law  prize, as a safeguard  of  freedom,  broad
rules laid down in advance; but the American legal system also  values
close attention  to the  details  of  each  case.  In  every  area  of  regula-
tion—the environment,  occupational safety and health,  energy pol-
icy, communications, control of  monopoly  power—it is necessary to
choose between general rules and case-by-case decisions.

In  its purest form,  enthusiasm  for  genuinely  case-specific  deci-
sions is incoherent. Few if any judgments  about a particular case are
entirely particular. Almost any judgment  about a particular case  de-
pends on the use of  principles, or reasons. Any  principles or reasons
are, by their  very nature, broader  than  the  case  for  which  they  are
designed. Case-by-case particularism is  not  a  promising  foundation
for law.

In  many  circumstances,  however,  enthusiasm  for  rules  seems
senseless. Sometimes  public authorities  cannot  design  general  rules,
because they lack relevant information. Sometimes  general  rules will
fail, because the legal system seeks subtle judgments about a range  of
particulars. Often general  rules will  be poorly suited to the  new  cir-
cumstances that  will  be  turned  up  by  unanticipated  developments.
Often  rulemakers cannot  foresee  the  circumstances  to  which  their
rules will be applied. Often rules will be too crude, since they run  up
against intransigent  beliefs about how  particular cases should be re-
solved. In short, the costs of  making  rules, and of  adhering  to rules,
are often extremely high.

One of  my principal goals in  this essay is to respond to a perva-
sive  social  phenomenon:  extravagant  enthusiasm  for  rules  and  the
rule  of  law.  Case-by-case  decisions  are  an  important  part  of  legal
justice. At the same time, we should keep in  mind  the  characteristic
vices  of  rulelessness,  which  include  bias,  unequal  treatment,  and
high costs. Particularism is even worse than a mixed blessing for  law;
it is an invitation to error and abuse.

As  a  way  of  reducing  the  risks  of  both  rules  and  case-by-case
judgments,  I  suggest  two  principal  alternatives.  The  first  is  prag-
matic. It involves a highly  contextualized inquiry into  the  levels and
kinds  of  error  and  injustice  via  rules  or  via  rulelessness.  Surprising
progress can  be  made  through  such  inquiries.  Rules  cannot  be  fa-

Rules and Rulelessness

3

vored or disfavored in  the  abstract; everything  depends on  whether,
in context, rules are superior to the  alternatives. The  second involves
a  presumption  in  favor  of  what  I  will  call  privately  adaptable
rules—rules that allocate initial entitlements  but do not  specify end-
states,  and  that  harness  private  forces  to  determine  outcomes.
Privately adaptable rules are typically invoked in support of economic
markets. I  argue here that  they  also  deserve  an  honored  place  in  a
legal  system  committed  to  a  wide  range  of  corrections  to  the
operation of economic markets.

I. Sources of Law

Law has  a toolbox, containing  many  devices. Lawyers have cus-
tomarily opposed rules (“do not go over 60 miles per hour”) to stan-
dards (“do not drive unreasonably fast”), with rules seeming hard and
fast, and  standards  seeming  open-ended.  There  is  indeed  a  differ-
ence  between  rules  and  standards.  But  the  rules-standards  debate
captures only a part of what is at stake, and it is important  to have a
fuller  sense  of  the  repertoire  of  available  devices.  In  this  section  I
outline a number of them; my goal is only to clarify some terms that
will come up throughout.

interpret 

First,  however,  a  cautionary  note.  It  will  be  apparent  that
whether a legal provision is a rule, a presumption, a principle, a stan-
dard, a set of  factors—or something  else—cannot  be decided in  the
abstract. Everything depends on the understandings and practices of
the  provision.  The  American
the  people  who 
Constitution,  for  example,  says  that  “Congress  shall  make  no  law
abridging the freedom of speech.” This  provision might  operate as a
rule if people take it as a flat ban  on  certain sorts  of  regulations.  It
could  operate  as  a  presumption  if  people  see  it  as  saying  that
Congress  can  regulate  speech  only  if  it  makes  a  demonstration  of
harm  of  certain kinds and  degrees.  Or  it  could  be  a  set  of  factors;
once we parse notions like “abridging” and “the freedom of  speech,”
perhaps  we  will  decide  cases  on  the  basis  of  an  inquiry  into  two,
three, or more relevant considerations. The  content  and nature  of  a
legal provision cannot be read off the provision. It  is necessary to see
what people take it to be.

For this reason we  should distinguish among  three  kinds of  ac-
tors. The first is the person or institution  that  issues  the  relevant le-

4

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

gal provision. The  second is the  person or institution  that  is  subject
to the provision. The third is the  person or institution  charged  with
the power to interpret the  provision. If  we  take a rule to be a provi-
sion that  minimizes law-making  power  in  particular  cases  (see  be-
low),  a  lawmaker  may  intend  to  issue  a  rule,  but  the  interpretive
practices of  the  interpreting  institution  may turn  the  provision into
something  very different. Whether  a provision is  a  rule  or  not  is  a
function  of  interpretive  practices,  and  the  lawmaker  has  limited
power over those practices.

A. Untrammeled Discretion

By “untrammeled discretion,” I mean the  capacity to exercise of-
ficial power  as  one  chooses,  by  reference  to  such  considerations  as
one  wants  to consider, weighted  as  one  wants  to  weight  them.  A
legal system cannot  avoid some degree of  discretion, in the  form  of
power  to choose according to one’s moral or political lights.  As  we
will  see, the  interpretation  of  seemingly  rigid  rules  itself  allows  for
discretion. But a legal system can  certainly make choices about how
much discretion it wants various people to have.

A  system  of  untrammeled  discretion  exists  when  there  are  no
limits on  what  officials may consider in  reaching  a decision and on
how much weight various considerations deserve; hence there are no
limits on the officials’ power  to  decide what  to do. Both  inputs and
outputs are unconstrained.  In  the  real  world,  untrammeled  discre-
tion is quite rare. But perhaps some police officers come  very close to
this sort of authority, in light of the practical unavailability of review.
As we will soon see, it is too simple to oppose rules to discretion.
The basic problem with this opposition is that interpretation of  rules
involves  discretion,  and  that  so-called  discretion  is  rarely  untram-
meled in the legal context.

B.  Rules

Often  a system of  rules is thought  to be the  polar opposite of  a
system of untrammeled discretion. In fact there is no  such polar op-
position. Rules  do  not  eliminate  discretion.  There  is  a  continuum
from  rules  to  untrammeled  discretion,  with  factors  and  standards
(see below) falling in between.

The  key characteristic of  rules is that  they  specify outcomes  be-
fore particular cases arise. Rules are defined by the  ex ante  character

Rules and Rulelessness

5

of law. By a system of  rules, I  therefore  mean  to refer to something
very  simple:  approaches  to  law  that  make  most  or  nearly  all  legal
judgments  under  the  governing  legal  provision  in  advance  of  actual
cases.1  We  have  rules,  or  (better)  rule-ness,  to  the  extent  that  the
content of  the  law  has been  set down  in  advance of  applications of
the  law.  In  the  extreme case, all of  the  content  of  the  law  is  given
before cases arise. This  is an  ambitious  goal—impossibly  ambitious.
As we will see, no approach to law is likely to avoid allowing  at least
some legal judgments  to be made  in  the  context  of  deciding  actual
cases. Rules do not  and indeed cannot  contain  all  of  the  necessary
instructions for their own  interpretation. Nonetheless,  it is  possible
to ensure that  a wide range  of  judgments  about particular cases will
occur in advance.

On this  view, a system of rules exists to the  extent  that  most or
all of the  real work  of  deciding cases and giving content  to the  law
has been done before the actual applications. We have a rule, or rule-
ness, to the extent that decisions about cases have been made ex ante
rather  than  ex  post.  If  a  key  function  of  law  is  to  assign  entitle-
ments, a rule can thus  be defined as the  full or nearly full ex  ante  as-
signment of legal entitlements, or the complete or nearly complete  ex  ante
specification of legal outcomes.

When a rule is in play, the  decision of cases does not  depend on
ex post assignments—as it does when,  for example,  a  judge  decides
whether  someone  is liable for nuisance  by seeing whether  his  con-
duct  was  “unreasonable”  (assuming  this  term  has  not  been  given
precise content  in  advance) or when  a judge  decides  whether  a  re-
striction on  abortion imposes an  “undue burden” (making  the  same
assumption). In  the  purest  case,  the  responsibility  of  the  decision-
maker is to find  only  the  facts; the  law  need  not  be  found.  When
rules are operating, an  assessment of  facts, combined  with  an  ordi-
nary understanding  of  grammar, semantics, and  diction—and  with
more substantive  understandings  on  which  there  is  no  dispute—is
usually sufficient to decide the case.

Rules may be simple  or  complex.  A  law  could  say,  for  example,
that  no  one  under eighteen  may drive. It  could be somewhat  more
complex,  saying  that  people  under  eighteen  may  not  drive  unless
                                                                                                               
1This  understanding  is  close  to  that  in  Louis  Kaplow,  Rules  and

Standards:  An  Economic  Analysis,  42 Duke LJ 469 (1992).

6

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

they pass certain special tests. Or it could be quite complex, creating
a formula for deciding who may drive. It might look, for example, to
age; performance  on  a written  examination;  and  performance  on  a
driving test. Each of these three  variables might  be given a specified
numerical weight.

Rules  can  also  be  specific  or  abstract.  Specific  rules  apply  to  a
narrow class of cases; abstract rules apply to a broad class of  cases. An
abstract rule might  say, for example, that  no  one  may drive over 60
miles per hour, or that  all cars must be equipped with  catalytic con-
verters. A specific rule might  say  that  President  Nixon’s  papers  are
public property; that the first amendment allows government  to ban
advertisements  for  casino  gambling  when  gambling  has  been
unlawful  in  the  recent  past;  or  that  sixth-grade  students  may  be
suspended without a hearing  for a period of  less than  two  weeks, if
there  has been  a serious allegation of  criminal activity.  All  rules  are
defined  in  terms  of  classes,  but  sometimes  the  rule  is  narrowly
tailored so as to pick up only a few cases, or perhaps only one.

C. Rules With Excuses: Necessity or Emergency Defenses

It is familiar to find rules that have explicit or implicit exceptions
for cases  of  necessity  or  emergency.  It  is  unfamiliar,  indeed  nearly
impossible, to find rules without any such exceptions. For example, a
person may be banned from taking the life of  another;  this is a rule;
but self-defense is a valid excuse. Many  constitutions  allow  abridge-
ments  of  individual  rights  in  case  of  emergency.  The  American
Constitution allows the President to suspend the writ of habeas cor-
pus in time of war. Other constitutions say that certain rights can  be
abridged under unusual circumstances. We  might  go so far as to say
that almost all rules have at least some implicit exceptions.

The  consequences of  making  exceptions depend  on  the  details.
An exception could be narrow but vague, as in  the  idea that  reason-
able limits on free speech can be made under conditions of  war.  The
conditions  are  rare  and  the  exception  therefore  narrow;  but  the
meaning  of  the  exception  is  vague  (what  are  “reasonable  limits?”).
Or the  exception  could  be  narrow  and  specific,  as  in  the  idea  that
under conditions of war, members of the Communist party may not
work  for the  government  in  any  capacity.  An  exception  might  be
broad and vague  or  broad  and  specific.  A  specific  exception  might

Rules and Rulelessness

7

well  convert  the  rule with  exceptions into  a complex rule, or  a  for-
mula.

D.  Presumptions

A legal system may  contain  presumptions  or  presumptive  rules.
The  law  may  presume,  for  example,  that  when  the  government
regulates  speech  on  the  basis  of  its  content,  the  regulation  is  un-
constitutional. But the presumption might be rebutted by claims of a
certain  kind  and  strength,  as  when  government  can  show  a  clear
and present danger. The  law  might  presume that  an  employer may
not discriminate on the basis of  race; but the  presumption might  be
rebutted by a showing that, for example, a black actor is necessary to
play the part of Othello.

The  legal system  is  pervaded  by  rules  that  operate  as  presump-
tions and that can be countered by showings of a particular kind and
a particular degree. The  line  between  presumptions  and  rules  with
emergency exceptions is thin. A rule with necessity or emergency ex-
ceptions might be described, somewhat  imprecisely, as a strong  pre-
sumption. With  presumptions, it is necessary to know  what  counts
as  a  rebuttal,  and  whether  the  presumption  and  the  rebuttal  are
specific or vague, broad or narrow.

E.  Factors

We  might  contrast  both  untrammeled  discretion  and  rule-
bound  ways  of  proceeding  with  approaches  that  allow  particular
judgments  to  emerge  through  the  decisionmaker’s  assessment  and
weighing of a number of  relevant  factors,  whose  precise  content  has  not
been  specified  in  advance.  The  key  point  is  that  several  factors  are
pertinent to the decision, but there  is no  rule, simple or complex, to
apply. There is no rule because the  factors are not  described exhaus-
tively  and  precisely  in  advance,  and  because  their  weight  has  not
been fully specified. Hence the decisionmaker cannot  rely simply on
“finding the facts” and “applying the law.” The content of the  law  is
not given; part of it must be found. There is a degree of  ex post allo-
cation of legal entitlements.

On this score, the difference between  rules and factors is one  of
degree rather than  kind. As  we  will  see,  those  who  interpret  rules
must determine at least some of their content. In a system of factors,
moreover, the decisionmaker cannot do whatever she wants. But the

8

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

content of the law is created in large part by those who must  apply it
to particular cases, and not  by people who  laid it down  in  advance.
To a considerable extent, we do not know  what  the  law  is until  the
assessment of particular cases.

Consider  the  Emergency  Petroleum  Allocation  Act  of  1973,
which  regulated pricing and allocation of  petroleum  products  from
1973 to 1981. The  statute  required  the  agency  to  “provide  for”  nine
factors,  “to  the  maximum  extent  practicable.”  These  factors  were
“protection of public health,  safety, and welfare;  (2) maintenance  of
all  public  services;  (3)  maintenance  of  agricultural  operations;  (4)
preservation  of  an  economically  sound  and  competitive  petroleum
industry; (5) operation of  all refineries  at  full  capacity;  (6)  equitable
distribution of crude oil and petroleum products; (7) maintenance  of
exploration and production of fuels; (8) economic  efficiency; and (9)
minimization  of  interference  with  market  mechanisms.”2  Congress
added that  each  of  the  nine  factors  is  equally  important.  There  is
much to be said about this quite bizarre list. What  is important  here
is that an explicit enumeration of factors may be possible.

In  most contexts,  however,  any  given  list  of  relevant  factors  is
not exhaustive. Life may turn up other  relevant factors that  are hard
or impossible to identify in  advance. In  most areas of  law  governed
by factors rather than  rules, it is understood that  the  identified fac-
tors, if described at a level of specificity, are not  complete—or that  if
they  are  intended  to  be  complete,  they  are  stated  in  a  sufficiently
general way,  so as to allow  unanticipated,  additional  considerations
to apply.

F.  Standards

Rules are often  compared with  standards.3 A ban  on  “excessive”
speeds on the highway is familiarly thought to involve a standard; so
too with  a requirement that  pilots be “competent,” or that  behavior
in the classroom be “reasonable.” As standards, these might  be com-
pared with a 55 miles per hour speed limit, or a ban on pilots who  are
                                                                                                               

2Act Nov. 27, 1973, P.L. 93-159, @ 1, 87 Stat. 627 (1973).
3See,  e.g.,  Louis  Kaplow,  Rules  and  Standards:  An  Economic  Analysis,
42 Duke LJ 469 (1992); Duncan  Kennedy,  Form  and  Substance  in  Private  Law
Adjudication,  89  Harv  L  Rev  1685  (1976);  Kathleen  Sullivan,  Foreword:  The
Justices  of  Rules  and  Standards,  106 Harv  L  Rev.  22  (1992);  Colin  S.  Diver,
The Optimal Precision of Administrative Rules, 93 Yale LJ 65 (1983)

Rules and Rulelessness

9

over the  age of 70,  or a requirement  that  students  sit  in  particular,
assigned seats.

The contrast between rules  and standards is very useful. It  iden-
tifies the fact that with some legal provisions, interpreters have to do
a  great  deal  of  work  in  order  to  generate  the  necessary  content.
With  a  standard,  it  is  not  possible  to  know  what  we  have  in  ad-
vance. The  meaning  of  a standard depends on  what  happens  with
its applications. The important feature of standards is that they share
with factors  a refusal to specify outcomes in  advance. Standards de-
part  from  factors  in  refusing  to  specify  the  sorts  of  considerations
that  are  relevant  in  particular  applications.  It  would  not  be  right,
however,  to  say  that  standards  offer  more  discretion  than  factors.
The amount of discretion depends on the context.

Here  too, moreover, the  nature  of  the  provision cannot  be  read
off  its  text,  and  everything  will  depend  on  interpretive  practices.
Once  we  define  the  term  “excessive,”  we  may  well  end  up  with  a
rule. Perhaps officials will decide that a speed is excessive whenever  it
is over 60 miles per hour. If  a standard is  transparent,  in  the  sense
that there is a clear ex ante understanding of its meaning, it is a rule.
Or we  may instead end up with  a  set  of  factors  or  a  presumption.
Perhaps  anyone  who  goes over 60 miles per hour  will  be  presumed
to  have  gone  excessively  fast,  unless  special  circumstances  can  be
shown. Or perhaps the judgment about excessive speed will  be based
on need, weather conditions,  traffic, time of  day, and so forth.  The
principal distinction  between  rules and  standards  turns  on  the  fact
that  we  do not  know  what  a  standard  is,  or  means,  until  it  is  ap-
plied.4 Something of the same  kind can  be said of  rules (see below),
but it cannot be said nearly so bluntly.

G. Principles

In  law,  principles  are  often  said  to  be  both  deeper  and  more
general than rules. We might say that rules are justified by principles.
The  justification of  the  rule could be used to interpret its meaning;
hence courts  will  resort to the  principle in  trying  to understood the
rule. For example, there is a principle to the effect that it is wrong  to
take human  life  without  sufficient  cause;  the  law  implements  this
principle with a range of rules governing  homicide. There  is a prin-
                                                                                                               

4See Kaplow, supra note 2.

10

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

ciple to the effect that it is wrong  not  to keep your promises; hence
the  law  contains  a  range  of  rules  for  enforcement  of  contractual
obligations. A common  use of  the  term  “principle”  in  law  involves
the justifications behind rules.

There  is another  and  quite  different  understanding  of  the  no-
tion of principle in  law.  Any  legal system contains  explicitly formu-
lated  principles  as  well  as  rules;  these  principles  do  not  lie  behind
rules but instead bear on  the  resolution of  cases. Thus  it is said that
no person may profit from his own wrong; that he  who  seeks equity
must do equity;  that  ambiguous  statutes  should  be  construed  so  as
not  to apply outside the  territorial boundaries of  the  United  States.
The status of  legal principles is somewhat  mysterious; they  differ in
weight,  ranging  from  strong  presumptions  to  tie-breakers  when
cases are otherwise  in  equipoise. Usually they  operate as factors. But
principles are not rules. We might say that  principles are more flexi-
ble than rules, in the sense that principles bear on  cases without  dis-
posing of them. The distinction should not  be overstated. Since  any
given rule X is unlikely to resolve all cases that  fall under the  literal
language of rule X, the difference between rules and principles is one
of degree rather than of kind.

What  is the  relationship between  a principle and a standard? If
we see a principle as the  justification for a rule, the  difference seems
obvious:  a  standard  is  not  a  justification  for  an  (already  specified)
rule, but instead a legal provision that needs a good deal of  specifica-
tion to be used to resolve individual cases. If  we  understand a princi-
ple as a relevant consideration in  the  decision  of  cases,  the  distinc-
tion between principles and standards is more complex. As I  under-
stand it here, a legal principle is different from a legal standard in the
sense that  the  latter “covers” individual cases without  specifying  the
content  of  the  analysis  in  particular  cases,  whereas  a  principle  is  a
background notion  that  does not  by  itself  cover  an  individual  case,
but is instead brought  to bear on  it. This  is a lamentably vague for-
mulation.  But  the  distinction  makes  intuitive  sense.  Compare  a
standard banning  unreasonable  risks  with  a  principle  to  the  effect
that statutes should be construed so as to avoid constitutional doubts.
One final complication. It  is sometimes said that  a decision in  a
case turns on a “principle,” as in the  idea that  speech may not  be re-
stricted unless there is a clear and present danger, or that  discrimina-
tion  on  the  basis of  race is presumed invalid, or that  no  contract  is

Rules and Rulelessness

11

valid without  consideration. In  this usage, a principle is  not  distin-
guishable from a standard, and at some points below,  I  will  use the
terms interchangeably.

H.  Analogies

The  last  category  is  not  a  simple  alternative  to  the  others.
Sometimes a legal system proceeds by comparing the case at  hand  to
a case (or to cases) that have come before. The prior case is inspected
to see whether  it  “controls,”  or  should  be  extended  to,  the  case  at
hand. The prior case will be accompanied by an opinion, which  may
contain a rule, a  standard,  a  set  of  factors,  or  something  else.  The
court deciding the  present case will  inspect relevant  similarities  and
differences.  That  court,  not  bound  by  the  previous  opinion,  may
produce a rule, a standard, a set of  factors, or  something  else.  With
analogy, we  do not  have a decision by  rule,  because  the  rule  is  not
specified in  advance of the  process of analogical thinking.  The  rule
emerges from comparison of cases, and it is applied only after it has
been specified. Analogical thinking is rule-based (or standard-based)
only in the  sense that  it depends on  a rule (or a standard); but ana-
logical  thinking  does  not  involve  simple  rule-application  (or  stan-
dard-application) because the  rule (or the  standard)  is  not  given  in
advance. Analogical reasoning is thus not a form of rule-application.
When courts proceed with analogies, then, the  nature  of  the  le-
gal provision—its content and even its character as a rule, a standard,
a  set  of  factors—is  not  known  before  the  analogical  process  takes
place. The nature of the provision is specified in the  case at hand  by
grappling with the precedent; we do not know what  we  have before
the grappling occurs. It is unusual, however,  for analogical thinking
to yield rules. Most of  the  time, an  analogy will produce a standard,
one  that  makes sense of  the  outcomes in  the  case at  hand  and  the
case that came before.

II. Rules and the Rule of Law

A system of  rules  is  often  thought  to  be  the  signal  virtue  of  a
system of  law.  Indeed, the  rule of law  seems to require  a  system  of

12

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

rules.5 The  idea has a constitutional  source. The  due  process  clause
of  the  American  Constitution  is sometimes interpreted so as  to  re-
quire rules, or rule-like provisions, and  to  forbid  a  system  based  on
analogies, standards, or factors. This  is particularly important  in  the
area of  criminal justice and freedom of  speech, where  the  “void  for
vagueness” doctrine requires clear rules before the  state may regulate
private conduct.

It  is  not  an  overstatement  to  say  that  the  void  for  vagueness
doctrine is  among  the  most  important  guarantees  of  liberty  under
law.  Consider Papachristou  v.  City  of Jacksonville,6 which  is  exem-
plary on the point.

In the early 1970s, it was  a crime to engage  in  “vagrancy” in  the
City of Jacksonville. The category of “vagrancy” covered “Rogues and
vagabonds,  or  dissolute  persons  who  go  about  begging,  common
gamblers,  persons  who  use  juggling  or  unlawful  games  or  plays,
common drunkards, common  night  walkers . . . persons wandering
or strolling around from place to place without any lawful purpose or
object, habitual loafers, disorderly persons . . . persons  able  to  work
but habitually living upon the earnings of  their wives or minor  chil-
dren . . . .” A number of people were arrested under this law. Among
them were two white women, Papachristou and Calloway, who  had
been traveling in a car with two black men, Melton and Johnson.

The Supreme Court reversed the  convictions  on  the  theory that
the  Jacksonville  ordinance  was  inconsistent  with  the  due  process
clause. It  was  “void  for  vagueness,”  because  it  failed  to  provide  fair
notice  that  contemplated  conduct  is  unlawful,  and  because  “it  en-
courages  arbitrary  and  erratic  arrests  and  convictions.”  The  Court
emphasized several points:  “The  poor among  us, the  minorities, the
average householder are not in business and not  alerted to the  regu-
latory  schemes  of  vagrancy  laws;  and  we  assume  that  they  would
have  no  understanding  of  their  meaning  and  impact  if  they  read
them.”  Moreover,  the  “ordinance  makes  criminal  activities  that  by
“[p]ersons
modern  standards  are  normally 
‘wandering  or  strolling’  from  place  to  place  have  been  extolled  by
                                                                                                               
5Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom (1944);  Lon  Fuller,  The  Morality
of Law (1962); Joseph Raz, The  Rule  of  Law  and  its  Virtue,  in  The  Authority
of Law 210 (1986).

innocent.”  Thus 

6405 US 156(1972).

Rules and Rulelessness

13

Walt Whitman and Vachel Lindsay. . . . The  difficulty is that  these
activities  are  historically  part  of  the  amenities  of  life  as  we  have
known  them.”

The  ordinance  was  also  unlawful  because  it  put  “unfettered
discretion . . . in the hands  of  the  Jacksonville police.” To  say this is
not  to deny that  the  ordinance could serve  important  law  enforce-
ment  purposes.  The  Court  said:  “Of  course,  vagrancy  statutes  are
useful to the police. Of course, they are nets making  easy the  round-
up of so-called undesirables. But the  rule of law  implies equality and
justice in its application.”

Notably, the Court quoted a law  review article to the  effect  that
“‘Algeria is rejecting  the  flexibility introduced in  the  Soviet criminal
code by the  ‘analogy’ principle, as have  the  East-Central  European
and  black  African  states.”  Many  systems  of  criminal  justice  have
made it an offense to engage in conduct  that  is “analogous” to what
is specifically prohibited. The  analogical principle has played a  large
role in  Chinese  criminal  law.7  Apparently  the  Supreme  Court  be-
lieved that this analogical approach to the  criminal law8  raises severe
questions under the due process clause.

We  can  take  Papachristou  to  exemplify  a  failure  of  the  rule  of
law. But what  specifically does this concept  entail?  We  can  identify
several characteristics.9  

a. Clear, general, publicly accessible rules laid down in advance.
It is plain that the rule of  law  requires rules that  are clear, in  the
sense that  people need not  guess about their meaning,  and that  are
general, in  the  sense that  they apply to classes rather than  particular
people or groups. Laws  should be publicly accessible as  well.  It  fol-
lows that there is a ban  on  “secret law.” Legal proscriptions must be
available to the public. Of course vague laws—banning,  for example,
excessive or unreasonable behavior—are unacceptable, at least in  the
criminal context; they are akin to “secret law” in  the  sense that  peo-
ple cannot  know  what,  specifically,  they  entail.  The  idea  that  law
                                                                                                               
7See  Jon  Elster,  Solomonic  Judgments  217  (1989),  citing  an  unpublished

paper by Hungdad Chiu.

in the United States.

8England  too  had  analogical  crimes.  This  tradition  was  of  course  rejected

9I  claim  little  originality  here,  drawing  on  Fuller,  The  Morality  of  Law,

supra note 5, and Raz, in The Authority of Law, supra note 5.

14

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

should be laid down  in  advance  is  associated  with  the  notion  that
rules, to qualify as such, must specify outcomes  before  the  point  of
application. When rules are operating, people who interpret or apply
the  law  do not  give content  to the  law  in  the  encounter  with  par-
ticular problems.

In  the  real  world  of  law,  many  complexities  arise  on  these
counts. It is a fiction to say that  would-be criminals actually consult
the law in advance of the crime. In  fact  we  do not  know  the  extent
to  which  criminal  statutes  are  understood  by  the  general  public.
Undoubtedly the answer varies from  area to area, and in  many  cases
people could not describe the law  with  much  accuracy. It  is also the
case that many laws, including  criminal statutes, have a high  degree
of ambiguity. No legal system is without  a large degree of  discretion
to give content  to law  at points of  application, and this means  that
ruleness will  be  limited  even  in  legal  systems  highly  committed  to
the rule of law. Perhaps this is a failure of the  rule of law,  but it also
seems  to  be  a  product  of  the  limitations  of  human  language  and
foresight.

b.  Prospectivity;  no  retroactivity.
In a system of rules, retroactive lawmaking is disfavored, and it is
banned  altogether  in  the  context  of  criminal  prohibitions.  In  gen-
eral, laws must operate prospectively only. The  ban  on  ex post facto
laws  is  the  clearest  prohibition  on  retroactivity.  More  modestly,
American  law  includes  an  interpretive  principle  to  the  effect  that
civil laws will  ordinarily apply prospectively. If  the  legislature  wants
to apply a law  retroactively, it must  do  so  unambiguously,  and  if  it
does so unambiguously, there is at least a question to be raised under
the due process clause.

c. Conformity between law on the books and law in the world.
If the law does not  operate in  the  books as it does in  the  world,
the  rule of law  is compromised. If  there  is  little  or  no  resemblance
between  enacted law  and real law,  the  rule  of  law  cannot  exist.  If
the  real  law  is  different  from  the  enacted  law,  generality,  clarity,
predictability,  fair  notice,  and  public  accessibility  are  all  sacrificed.
People must be permitted to monitor  official  conduct  by  testing  it
against enacted law.

Rules and Rulelessness

15

In many  legal systems, of  course, there  is an  occasional split be-
tween what the  law  says and what  the  law  is, and often  the  split is
severe.  But  the  frequency  of  the  phenomenon  should  not  deflect
attention from the fact that this is a failure of the rule of law.

d.  Hearing  rights  and  availability  of  review  by  independent  ad-

judicative  officials.

The rule of law requires a right to a hearing in which  people can
contest the government’s claim that the relevant conduct meets legal
requirements  for  either  the  imposition  of  harm  or  the  denial  of
benefits. Someone  who  is alleged to have committed  a crime, or to
have forfeited rights to social security benefits or a driver’s license, is
entitled to some forum  in  which  he  can  claim  that  the  legal  stan-
dards have not  in  fact  been  violated.  Ordinarily  the  purpose  of  the
hearing is to ensure that the facts have been accurately found.  There
should also be some form  of  review by independent  officials, usually
judges entitled to a degree of independence from political pressures.

e. Separation between law-making and law-implementation.
Legal systems committed  to the  rule of law  separate the  task  of
making the law  from  the  task of  implementing  the  law.  For exam-
ple,  the  nondelegation  principle  requires  that  the  legislature  lay
down rules in advance; it therefore prohibits rules from being created
by  the  people  who  execute  them.  The  nondelegation  principle  is
now  honored  much  more in  the  breach than  in  the  observance,  in
part because there are no  clear criteria by which  to distinguish law-
making from law-implementation.  The  distinction  is one  of degree
rather than  kind. But in  some areas of  law,  people  engaged  in  en-
forcement activity are constitutionally constrained from  giving con-
tent to the law. The area of criminal justice is an important example.

f. No rapid  changes  in  the  content  of law;  no contradictions  or in-

consistency in the law.

If  the  law  changes  too  quickly,  the  rule  of  law  cannot  exist.
People will not be able to adapt their conduct to what is required. So
too  if  the  law  contains  inconsistency  or  contradiction,  which  can
make it hard or impossible to know  what  the  rules are. Needless to
say, people should not  be placed under  mutually  incompatible  obli-
gations. The  problem of  rapidly changing  law  was  a prime impetus
behind  the  adoption  of  the  American  Constitution.  Hence

16

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

Madison wrote: “The mutability of the laws of the States is found to
be a serious evil. The  injustice of  them  has been  so frequent  and so
flagrant  as to alarm the  most  steadfast  friends  of  Republicanism.  I
am persuaded that  I  do not  err in  saying that  the  evils issuing from
these  sources  contributed  more  to  the  uneasiness  which  produced
the Convention, and prepared the public mind  for a general reform,
than  those  which  accrued  to  our  national  character  and  interest
from  the  inadequacy  of  the  Confederation  to  its  immediate  ob-
jects.”10

Both  of  these  phenomena—unstable 

law  and  inconsistent
law—are  part  of  the  fabric  of  the  modern  regulatory  state.
Sometimes  regulatory  law  changes  very  quickly,  thus  making  it
difficult  for  people  to  plan.  Sometimes  regulatory  law  imposes
conflicting  obligations, so that  it is  hard  for  people  to  know  what
they are supposed to do. These are important  pathologies of modern
law, and they produce high levels of inefficiency and injustice.

g. Likelihood of agreement on meaning of rules from people  who  dis-

agree on first principles.

A particular  advantage  of  a  system  of  rules  is  that  people  who
disagree on much else may nonetheless agree about the meaning of a
rule. A law that forbids people from going over 55 miles per hour  has
the  same meaning  to Republicans  and  Democrats,  libertarians  and
socialists, anarchists and members of  the  Ku  Klux Klan.  When  the
rule of law  is in  place, people can  know  what  the  rules are without
adverting  to  first  principles.  Indeed,  adverting  to  first  principles  is
generally illegitimate, short  of  civil  disobedience.  By  their  very  na-
ture, rules ban  people from  basing their decisions on  considerations
that are perfectly legitimate in other settings.

This  is  an  oversimplification,  as  we  will  see.  Disagreements
about first principles may break out in disputes over the  meaning  of
rules. But the oversimplification has fundamental  truth.  And  in  this
oversimplification also lies some of  the  enduring  truth  of  legal posi-
tivism, the  law-politics distinction, and the  view that  ours is a gov-
ernment of law, not human beings.
                                                                                                               

10Letter to Thomas Jefferson, October 24, 1787.

Rules and Rulelessness

17

III. The Case for Rules

A  great  virtue  of  rules  is  that  they  circumscribe  permissible
grounds  for  both  action  and  argument;  in  doing  so,  they  reduce
costs of many  diverse kinds. I  have said that  in  a heterogeneous  so-
ciety,  containing  people  of  limited  time  and  capacities,  this  is  an
enormous  advantage.  It  saves  a  great  deal  of  effort,  time,  and  ex-
pense. But by truncating the sorts of  value-disputes that  can  arise in
law,  it also ensures that  disagreements  will  occur  along  a  narrowly
restricted range.

A. Different Kinds of Rules

I  now  discuss some of  the  characteristic virtues  of  decisions  ac-
cording to rules. First, however, it is important to note  that  rules fall
in several different  categories. Here  is a nonexhaustive  account,  tied
to my special concerns here.

1. Often rules are a summary of wise decisions; they are defended
on  the  grounds  that  they  are  a  good  summary,  and  that  they  are
desirable as rules, rather than mere advice or rules of  thumb,  so as to
save the  costs  of  making  individualized  decisions.  Of  course  a  rule
that  counts  as  a  summary  of  wise  decisions  may  operate,  for  good
pragmatic reasons, as a  genuine  rule—one  that  cannot  be  revisited
during  particular  applications.  If  people  over  the  age  of  sixty  are
banned from being commercial pilots, it is because this is a pretty ac-
curate summary of  good individual  decisions,  and  less  costly  to  ad-
minister than any alternative. (Consider the expenditures that  would
be required to assess competence in every case.) If  we  say that  people
with sat scores below 500 will not  be admitted to a certain college,
it is for a similar reason.

2. Often rules establish conventions or otherwise enable people to
coordinate their behavior so  as  to  overcome  collective  action  prob-
lems. This is true, for example, with respect to rules of the road. The
rule that people must drive on the left-hand  side of the  road is valu-
able because it tells people where to drive, not because it is any better
than  its opposite. We  do not  think  that  people  must  drive  on  the
left because it is a wise decision, in the  individual  case  unaccompa-
nied by rules, to drive on  the  left. So  too, rules may solve  prisoner’s
dilemmas, in  which  individually rational decisions can  lead to social
irrationality or even disaster. The  rules governing  emission of  pollu-

18

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

tants  are  an  example.  And  if  each  polluter  felt  free  to  revisit  the
justification for the rule, the prisoner’s dilemma might not be solved.
The best solution is probably to fix a rule and to require everyone to
adhere to it.

3. Some  rules  have  an  expressive  function.  The  rules  governing
who may marry whom,  for example, say something  about the  insti-
tution of marriage and about social convictions  of  who  is entitled to
public recognition of a relational commitment. Three people cannot
be  married,  nor  can  people  of  the  same  sex.  These  rules  do  not
summarize  individually  wise  decisions,  but  instead  express  a  social
judgment about relations and valuations. We  might say that  the  ex-
pressive function of law includes the effects of law on social attitudes
about relationships, events, and prospects,  and  also  the  “statement”
that law makes independently of such effects.

4.  Some  rules  overcome  the  problem  of  time  inconsistency.
Suppose that  in order to succeed in  your plans, you need to  engage
in  consistent  behavior  over  time.  Perhaps  an  exercise  program  re-
quires you to work out for one hour, and just one  hour,  every day; or
perhaps a good diet requires you to eat the same things,  more or less,
at the  same time for a period. In  these circumstances, a rule that  is
enforceable 
social
sanctions—may be the best way to proceed.

some  mechanism—perhaps 

through 

Societies can face similar problems. Perhaps  good monetary  pol-
icy for a certain  period requires the  Federal Reserve Board to do the
same thing  each  month;  suppose too that  without  a rule, and with
particularized consideration of  what  to  do  each  month,  the  Board
would  do  inconsistent  things.  Adoption  of  a  rule  may  ensure  the
requisite  consistency.  In  this  way,  a  rule  may  be  a  precommitment
strategy that overcomes predictable problems with ruleless decisions.

B. Defending Rules As Rules

Rules  might  produce  incompletely  theorized  agreements—agree-
ments  among  people  who  disagree  on  questions  of  theory  or  on
fundamental  values.  Rules  might  do  this  in  three  different  ways.
First, people can agree that  a rule is binding,  or authoritative, with-
out agreeing on a theory of why  it is binding,  and without  agreeing
that  the  rule  is  good.  Theories  of  legitimate  authority  are  highly
pluralistic, and acceptance of rules  can  proceed from  diverse founda-
tions.

Rules and Rulelessness

19

Second,  people can  often  converge  on  a  rule  without  taking  a
stand on large issues of the  right  or the  good. Acceptance  of  prece-
dents is a familiar practice. So  too,  people  can  urge  a  60  miles  per
hour  speed  limit,  a  prohibition  on  bringing  elephants  into  restau-
rants, a ten-year minimum  sentence  for attempted rape,  and  much
more without taking a stand on debates between Kantians and utili-
tarians,  and  indeed  without  offering  much  in  the  way  of  general
theory at all. Of  course acceptance of  any  legal  provision  requires  a
reason or a principle; my point  is only  that  a wide range  of  starting
points can yield the same rule and even the same reason or principle,
so long  as these are described at a low  or intermediate level of  gen-
erality.  When  legislatures  and  bureaucracies  issue  rules,  they  can
usually do so without getting into high-level theory.

Third,  rules  sharply  diminish  the  level  of  disagreement  among
people who  are subject to them,  and  among  people  who  must  in-
terpret and apply them.  When  rules are in  place, theories  need  not
be invoked in  order for us to know  what  rules  mean,  and  whether
they  are binding.  This  generalization is a bit crude; but it is  funda-
mentally right. In  this section, I  am concerned  principally with  the
advantages of  rules for those who  must  follow,  enforce,  and  inter-
pret the law.

1. Rules minimize the informational  and  political  costs  of reaching

decisions  in  particular  cases.

If we understand rules to be complete or nearly complete ex ante
specifications of outcomes in particular cases, we  can  readily see that
rules  have  extraordinary  virtues.  Without  rules,  decisions  are  ex-
tremely  expensive;  rules  can  produce  enormous  efficiency  gains.
Every day we  operate as we  do because of  rules, legal and  nonlegal,
and often the rules are so internalized that  they  become second-na-
ture, greatly easing the  costs of  decisions and  making  it  possible  to
devote our attention to other matters.

Rules are disabling for just this reason; but they are enabling  too.
Like the rules of grammar, they  help make  social life possible. If  we
know that there will be one and only one President, we  do not  have
to decide how many presidents there will be. If  we  know  that  a will
must have two  witnesses,  we  do  not  have  to  decide,  in  each  case,
how  many  witnesses there  must be to  a  will.  It  thus  emerges  that
rules both  free up time  for  other  matters  and  facilitate  private  and

20

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

public decisions by establishing the  frameworks  within  which  they
can be made.

By adopting rules, people can  also overcome  their  own  myopia,
weakness  of  will,  confusion,  venality,  or  bias  in  individual  cases.
Rules make it unnecessary for each  of  us  to  investigate  to  examine
fundamental  issues in  every instance  (and in  that  now-familiar  way
they can create a convergence on particular outcomes by people who
disagree on basic matters). Rules can,  in  short, be the  most efficient
way  to proceed, by saving time and effort,  and by reducing  the  risk
of  error in  particular cases. This  holds true for individuals and  soci-
eties alike. Societies and their representatives too  may  be  subject  to
myopia, weakness of will, confusion, venality, or bias, and rules safe-
guard against all of these problems.

These  ideas  justify  the  general  idea  that  rules  should  be  en-
trenched in the sense that they apply even if their rationale does not.
Recall  two  related  points:  A  rule  is  not  really  a  rule  if  decision-
makers feel free to disregard it if its application is not supported by its
justification; and if decision-makers investigate the  grounds for  rules
before applying them,  they  convert rules  into  something  very  close
to standards or factors. There is much  to be said on  behalf  of  refus-
ing to inquire into the grounds for rules. If we substitute for rules an
investigation of whether  their justification makes sense in  each  in-
stance, we  are engaging  in  a  form  of  case-by-case  decisionmaking,
and it is easy to underestimate the often  enormous  costs of  that  way
of  proceeding.  Officials  may  be  pressed  by  the  exigencies  of  a
particular  case  to  seek  individualized  justice,  without  seeing  the
enormous expense, and risk of unfairness, of that goal.

Some  of  the  costs of rulelessness are simply a matter of compil-
ing  information.  To  know  whether  a  particular  pilot  is  able  to  fly
competently, we need to know a lot of details. But some of  the  costs
are of  a different  character. Suppose that  we  are deciding  on  emis-
sions levels for substances that contribute to destruction of the ozone
layer, or that  we  are thinking  about when  to go forward  with  pro-
jects  that  threaten  endangered  species.  Information  is  important
here, but it is also necessary for multiple people to reach  closure  on
hard  and  even  tragic  matters.  For  this  reason,  there  may  be  high
costs or great difficulty in producing a rule; proceeding through  fac-
tors may involve lower  cost ex ante.  But once  a rule is set forth,  in-
dividual officials can bracket those matters and take the  decision as a

Rules and Rulelessness

21

given. An  advantage of  having  a rule is that  those who  must inter-
pret rules need not  make  difficult  judgments  about  first  principles.
They can take those judgments as given, at least for the most part.

The  high  costs—informational  and  political—of  ruleless  deci-
sions are often not  visible to those who  are deciding whether  to lay
down  rules in  the  first instance.  The  Supreme  Court,  for  example,
can  see that  rules will  bind  its  members,  perhaps  unfortunately,  in
subsequent cases, and therefore  might  avoid rule-making  in  the  in-
terest of  maintaining  flexibility for the  future. The  Court might  so
decide without  easily seeing that  the  absence of rules will  force liti-
gants  and lower  courts to guess, possibly  for  a  generation  or  more,
about the real content  of  the  law.  In  this way  the  Court can  inter-
nalize the benefits of flexibility while  “exporting” to others the  costs
of  rulelessness.  So  too,  legislatures  can  see  that  rules  may  contain
major mistakes, or that  they  cannot  be  compiled  without  large  in-
formational and  political costs—without,  perhaps, fully understand-
ing  that  the  absence of  rules will  force  administrative  agencies  and
private  citizens  to  devote  enormous  effort  to  giving  the  law  some
concrete content.

Thus far I have emphasized the benefits of  rules to legal institu-
tions. But a particular advantage of  rules, connected  with  the  infor-
mational  cost of rulelessness, is that  they  enable individuals to align
their  conduct  accordingly,  and  thus  to  plan  without  fear  of  sanc-
tions.  Rules  can  therefore  provide  strong  incentives  for  people  to
bring  their  behavior  into  compliance.  While  many  of  the  various
costs of rulelessness must be borne by public officials, who  must give
content  to the  law  in  particular  cases,  high  costs  can  be  borne  by
citizens and corporations as well. People will be unable to plan; they
will also have to invest large amounts of resources in trying to predict
outcomes and to persuade people that  the  balance  of  factors  favors
them in particular cases. For all these reasons, a good justification for
insisting on rules involves the multiple expenses of  proceeding with-
out them.

As we have seen, rules are also a  way  of  overcoming  myopia and
some unusual collective action problems. All of  us adopt rules in  our
everyday  life,  whether  presumptive  or  conclusive.  A  person  may
adopt a rule—simply for himself—in  order to diminish the  costs  of
decision  in  particular  cases;  or  in  order  to  protect  himself  from
shortsightedness, in  the  form  of  behavior that  has high  short-term

22

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

benefits,  low  short-term  costs,  but  high  aggregate  costs  and  low
aggregate benefits; or in order to ensure against the kind of  intraper-
sonal collective action problem that arises when  he  fails to take ade-
quate  account  of  what  we  might  metaphorically  see  as  the
“successive selves” affected by his acts.

For example, Jones might decide never to take a drink during the
weekday, or never to go into  work  on  Saturday, or to  exercise every
other day. Jones may do this in order not to have to make individual-
ized decisions, and in  order to adopt rules that  produce good aggre-
gate  outcomes  notwithstanding  particular  cases  of  high  costs  and
low  benefits. Even  to consider whether  to make  an  exception  in  a
particular case may not  be worthwhile—because  if one  exception  is
possible, the possibility of exception is omnipresent,  and the  costs of
deliberation go up enormously. The  phenomenon  of  imperfect  but
efficient,  optimal,  or  otherwise  desirable  rule-bound  choice  is  om-
nipresent in personal lives.

There are analogues at the social and legal level. Rules may facili-
tate  social  decisionmaking  by  reducing  the  costs  of  individualized
consideration. If we adopt a rule to the  effect  that  there  will  be two
senators, rather than three  or six, we  do not  have to decide in  every
case how many senators there will be, and this is a highly  facilitative
device  for  a  democracy.  As  a  social  practice,  constitutionalism  has
this general feature. The  rules embodied in  constitutionalism,  often
thought to conflict with democracy, in fact make it possible.

Legal rules  can  also  overcome  social  myopia.  Myopia  may  take
the form  of  decisions whose  long-term  costs dwarf  their  long-term
benefits,  despite  cases  where  the  short-term  benefits  are  high.
Consider mandatory retirement rules and the social security disability
grid.11 Constitutionalism  is also an  attempt  to  counteract  decisions
that  seem to make  short-term  sense,  but  that  are  in  the  long  run
harmful or self-defeating.

Of course these costs may be lower than those produced by some
rules, and thus we cannot say, in the abstract,  whether  rules are bet-
ter than rulelessness from the standpoint of  private citizens. A  com-
pany would  probably prefer  a  law  calling  for  an  assessment  of  five
factors before any pollutant  may be banned,  to a law  saying that  all
pollutants  are  banned.  A  homosexual  rights  group  would  prefer  a
                                                                                                               

11See Heckler v. Campbell, 461 US 458 (1983).

Rules and Rulelessness

23

law  saying that  discrimination against homosexuals  will  be  prohib-
ited where a three-part test so suggests, to a law  saying that  discrim-
ination  against  homosexuals  is  always  acceptable.  We  can  still  say,
however,  that  factors  will  produce  costs  of  certain  kinds,  and  that
these costs may be very  high.  Note  in  this  regard  that  mechanical
formulas often perform better than clinical discretion in  the  areas of
medical diagnosis and college admission.12

2. Rules  are  impersonal  and  blind;  they  promote  equal  treatment

and reduce the likelihood of bias and arbitrariness.

We have seen that rules may reduce human  error in  the  form  of
confusion  or ignorance;  they  can  also counteract  something  worse,
that is, bias, favoritism, or discrimination on  the  part of people who
decide particular cases. In  this way  they  are  associated  with  impar-
tiality. Their impartiality is captured in  the  notion  that  the  Goddess
justice  is  “blind.”  Rules  are  blind  to  many  features  of  a  case  that
might  otherwise  be  relevant  and  that  are  relevant  in  some  social
looks,  height,  and  so
contexts—religion,  social  class,  good 
forth—and  also  to  many  things  on  whose  relevance  people  have
great difficulty in agreeing.

The  claim that  rules promote generality and in  that  sense equal
treatment  requires an  important  qualification.  Of  course  rules  sup-
press many differences among cases; they  single out a particular fea-
ture of  a  range  of  cases  and  subsume  all  such  cases  under  a  single
umbrella. In  this sense,  rules  make  irrelevant  features  of  cases  that
might  turn  out,  on  reflection  by  people  making  particular  judg-
ments, to be relevant indeed. Should  everyone who  has exceeded 60
miles per hour be treated the same way? Should everyone falling  in  a
particular unfortunate  spot in  a social security grid  be  denied  bene-
fits?  If  equality requires the  similarly situated to be treated similarly,
the question is whether people are similarly situated, and rules do not
permit a particularized inquiry on  that  score. In  this  way  rules  may
actually fail to promote equal treatment  as  compared  with  ruleless-
ness.13
                                                                                                               

12See Jon Elster, Local Justice 169 (1992).
13See Frederick Schauer, Playing By The Rules 136-37 (1991).

24

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

3.  Rules  serve  appropriately  both  to  embolden  and  to  constrain

decision-makers  in  particular  cases.14

A special  advantage  of  rules  is  that  judges  (and  others)  can  be
emboldened  to  enforce  them  even  when  the  particular  stakes  and
the particular political costs are high. Rules that have been set out by
the legislature or by the  judges themselves may provide the  basis for
courageous decisions that  might  otherwise  be difficult to reach  and
to legitimate. The fact that  rules resolve all cases before the  fact  can
thus  make  it  possible  for  officials  to  stick  with  certain  judgments
when they  should do so, but when  they  might  be tempted to devi-
ate.

Suppose, for example, that  the  Supreme  Court  has  set  out  the
Miranda  rules,  and  that  everyone  knows  that  they  will  be  applied
mechanically and to every criminal defendant. If  so, judges  can  refer
to those rules, and in  a sense hide behind  them,  in  cases  in  which
the  defendant  is especially despised, and in  which  it  is  tempting  to
say that  the  rules should yield before a balancing  test to be  resolved
unfavorably to the  defendant.  Similarly for  the  implementing  doc-
trines for free speech. For example, if the  rule  banning  discrimina-
tion against viewpoints is well-entrenched in the law  of  free speech,
judges can refer to that rule in  invalidating laws banning  flag-burn-
ing, even  in  the  face of severe and otherwise  irresistible public pres-
sure. The key advantage here (one that can  be a disadvantage too) is
that  rules decide cases in  advance of  the  point  of  application.  They
also make it unnecessary and even illegitimate to return  to first prin-
ciples.  If  judges  decided  on  the  content  of  law  at  the  point  of
(political  charged)  application,  and  if  they  had  to  go  back  to  first
principles, they might not adhere to those principles at all  when  the
stakes are high,  or there  would  be sharp disagreements among  peo-
ple who thought that the rules were bad on balance.

In one sense rules reduce responsibility for particular cases, by al-
lowing the authority to claim that it is not his choice, but the  choice
of others who  have laid down  the  rule. Officials can  claim that  the
previous choice  is not  being  made  but  simply  followed.  When  the
rule is ambiguous, this claim is fraudulent.  But  it  is  true  when  the
rule is clear. In a system in which  rules are binding,  and  are seen to
                                                                                                               
14See  Antonin  Scalia,  The  Rule  of  Law  is  a  Law  of  Rules,  56  U  Chi  L

Rev 1175, 1185 (1989).

Rules and Rulelessness

25

be binding, the law  can  usefully stiffen  the  judicial spine in  cases in
which this is a valuable guarantor  of  individual liberty against public
attack.

At the same time, rules reduce the risk that  illegitimate or irrele-
vant  factors  will  enter  into  the  decision,  at  least  compared  with
standards or factors, where  judicial discretion is broader at the  point
of application and where  unarticulated considerations may weigh  in
the  balance.  A  judge’s  sympathetic  or  unsympathetic  reaction  to  a
particular party (or lawyer)  may  tip  the  balance  in  a  case  based  on
factors. This  is  less  likely  when  rules  are  operative.  Here  too  rules
have large virtues in a system that aspires to decisions amidst hetero-
geneity.

4.  Rules  promote  predictability  and  planning  for  private  actors,

Congress, and others.

From the standpoint of people who are subject to public force, it
is especially important  to know  what  the  law  is before the  point  of
application. Indeed,  it  may  be  more  important  to  know  what  the
law is than to have a law of any particular kind.

In  modern  regulation,  a  pervasive  problem  is  that  members  of
regulated classes face ambiguous and  conflicting  guidelines,  so  that
they do not know  how  to plan. Under a balancing  test, neither  the
government  nor  affected citizens may know  in  advance about  their
obligations.  Consider,  by  contrast,  the  Miranda  rules.  A  special
virtue of those rules is that they tell the  police actually what  must be
done,  and  therefore  eliminate  guessing-games  that  can  be  so  de-
structive  to  planning  ex  ante.  So  too  in  the  environmental  area,
where  clear rules are often  far  better  than  the  “reasonableness”  in-
quiry characteristic of the common law.

5.  Rules  increase  visibility  and  accountability.
When rules are at work, it is clear who is responsible, and who  is
to  be  blamed  if  things  go  wrong.  This  is  most  obviously  valuable
when  the  rulemaker has a high  degree of accountability  and  legiti-
macy;  consider  the  President  and  the  Congress.  A  large  problem
with  a system based  on  standards  or  factors  is  that  no  one  knows
who  is  really  responsible  if,  for  example,  the  air  stays  dirty  or  is
cleaned up at excessive cost. If  the  Miranda  rules  create  a  problem,
the Court is obviously the source of the problem. But if a due process

26

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

calculus based on factors produces mistakes of  various sorts, it is pos-
sible that the Court itself will  escape the  scrutiny it deserves. People
may blame the  lower-court  judges assessing the  factors, rather than
the Court itself.

There is a related point. Without rules, the  exercise of  discretion
can be invisible, or at least less visible to  the  public and affected par-
ties. At the same time, rules allow the public to monitor  compliance.
This monitoring is harder to achieve in a system of factors.

6.  Rules  avoid  the  humiliation  of subjecting  people  to  exercises  of

official discretion in their particular case.

A special advantage of rules is that because of  their fixity, ex ante
quality, and generality, they  make it unnecessary  for  citizens  to  ask
an official for permission to engage in conduct  that  they seek. Rules
turn citizens into right-holders, able to ask for certain treatment  as a
matter of right.  Discretion, standards,  or  factors  are  more  likely  to
make citizens into supplicants, requesting official help, with  officials
the  situation  of  each  citizen.
encountering 
Importantly,  factors  allow  mercy,  in  the  form  of  relief  from  rigid
rules. But rules have the  comparative  advantage  of  forbidding  offi-
cials  from  being  punitive,  or  unmoved,  for  irrelevant  or  invidious
reasons, by a particular applicant’s request.

the  details  of 

Compare, for example,  a  mandatory  retirement  for  people  over
the age of 70 with a  law  permitting  employers to discharge employ-
ees who, because of their age, are no longer able to perform their job
adequately. One advantage of the former over the latter is that  if you
are an employee, it is especially humiliating and stigmatizing to have
employers decide whether  you  have  been  rendered  incompetent  by
age. A rule avoids this inquiry altogether, and it might be favored for
this reason even if it is both over- and under-inclusive.

IV. Against Rules, I: Are Rules Too Conservative?  Are
They Associated With Unduly Free Markets?

I now identify three arguments against rules. The  first challenge
is  that  rules  embody  “formal  equality”  and  are  for  this  reason  too
conservative, or too closely  associated  with  excessively  free  markets;
in  this  way  rules  are  said  to  be  sectarian  after  all.  The  second
challenge  is  that  rules  cannot  do  what  is  claimed  for  them,  since
disagreements about foundational issues will  indeed break out at the

Rules and Rulelessness

27

moment of application. The third challenge is that  the  generality of
rules, and their blindness to particulars, is a  political  vice,  because  a
just  system  allows  equity,  or  adaptation  to  the  particulars  of
individual  cases.  There  is  nothing  in  the  first  challenge,  some
important  truth  in  the  second,  and  some  enduring  wisdom  in  the
third.

A. The Rule of Law As A Check on Legislation

Some people think that the requirements of the  rule of law  pro-
vide an important check on partisanship or selectivity insofar as these
are reflected in law. On this view, the rule of law is a requirement of
generality, and the  requirement of  generality  forbids  law  from  im-
posing  selective  benefits  or  selective  burdens.  In  this  notion  lies
much  of  the  debate over the  ideas  of  impartiality  and  neutrality  in
law.

An influential discussion appears in Justice Robert Jackson’s con-
curring opinion in the Railway  Express case.15 New  York City pro-
hibited  anyone  from  operating  an  “advertising  vehicle”  on  the
streets, that is, a vehicle that sells its exterior for advertising purposes.
The  New  York law  exempted from  the  general prohibition the  use
of  advertising on  vehicles that  are engaged in  the  ordinary  business
of the owner, and not used mainly or only for advertising.

Railway  Express,  a  company  operating  nearly  2000  trucks  for
advertising purposes, challenged  the  New  York  law  under  the  due
process and equal protection clauses. The Supreme Court upheld the
law, emphasizing that judges should defer to legislatures, and noting
that  the  local authorities might  have  believed  that  people  who  ad-
vertise  their  own  wares  on  trucks  do  not  present  the  same  traffic
problems. The Court added that  “the fact  that  New  York City sees
fit  to  eliminate  from  traffic  this  kind  of  distraction  but  does  not
touch what may be even greater ones in a different  category, such as
the  vivid displays on  Times Square,  is  immaterial.  It  is  no  require-
ment  of equal protection  that  all evils  of  the  same  genus  be  eradi-
cated or none  at all.”16 In  this way  the  Court rejected the  idea that
the principle of generality imposed serious limits on  legislative classi-
fications.
                                                                                                               

15336 US 106
16Id at 110.

28

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

Justice Jackson took this seemingly mundane  case as an  occasion
for celebrating the use of  the  equal protection  clause as a  guarantor
of the rule of law, understood as a ban  on  selectivity. Justice Jackson
began  by contrasting  the due process clause  with  the  equal  protec-
tion clause. The due process clause does not  require equality; instead
it imposes an  absolute, flat barrier to legislative enactments.  In  this
way  it  “leaves  ungoverned  and  ungovernable  conduct  which  many
people  find  objectionable.”  But  the  equal  protection  clause  is  not
similarly disabling. “It  merely means  that  the  prohibition or regula-
tion  must  have  a  broader  impact.”  The  requirement  of  breadth  in
turn  serves  a  democratic  function.  “[T]here  is  no  more  effective
practical guaranty against arbitrary or unreasonable government  than
to require  that  the  principles  of  law  which  officials  would  impose
upon  a  minority  must  be  imposed  generally.  Conversely,  nothing
opens the door to arbitrary action so effectively as to allow  those  of-
ficials to pick and choose only a few  to whom  they  will apply legis-
lation and thus to escape the  political retribution that  might  be vis-
ited upon them if larger numbers were  affected. Courts can  take no
better measure to assure that  laws  will  be  just  than  to  require  that
laws be equal in operation.”

In  Justice  Jackson’s  view,  a  requirement  of  generality  helps  to
flush out illegitimate reasons. If the law is imposed on  some but not
all, it may be based on  prejudice. Perhaps  the  law  is a means  of  op-
pressing a particular group; if it cannot  be passed unless it is partial,
we may suppose that  it is undergirded by something  other  than  the
articulated justification. Perhaps it is a form  of  rent-seeking,  or sup-
ported solely by private pressure.

There  is much  good sense here. A system of  law  should require
public-regarding justifications for the  denial  of  benefits  or  the  im-
position  of  burdens.  Moreover,  the  requirement  of  generality  can
bring  into  effect  political checks that  would  otherwise  be too  weak
to prevent oppressive legislation from going forward.

But how  are  we  to  know  that  a  seemingly  narrow  enactment
must be applied generally? Is it illegitimate (for example) to exempt
labor unions from the antitrust laws, electric cars from the Clean Air
Act,  insane  people  from  the  ordinary  operation  of  the  homicide
laws, or small businesses from occupational safety and health  regula-
tion? Is it illegitimate to say that  blind  people cannot  receive drivers’
licenses, or that felons cannot vote?

Rules and Rulelessness

29

To  know  whether  generality  is  required,  we  have  to  know
whether  there  are  relevant  similarities  and  relevant  differences  be-
tween  those  burdened  and  those  not  burdened  by  legislation.  No
one thinks that  “generality” should be required when  there are rele-
vant differences. No one supposes that the speed limit laws are unac-
ceptable because they  do not  apply to police officers and ambulance
drivers operating within  the  course  of  their  official  duties.  Indeed,
Justice Jackson did not vote to invalidate the  New  York law.  “[T]he
hireling may be put in a class by himself  and may be dealt with  dif-
ferently than those who act on their own.”

We  should  conclude  that  any  requirement  of  equal  treatment
depends on a substantive theory establishing whether  there are rele-
vant differences between the cases to which a law  is  applied and the
cases to which  it  is  not.  Sometimes  the  necessary  theory  is  readily
available. If  a law  says that  in  order  to  receive  federal  employment,
everyone who is not  white  must take certain tests, we  can  easily see
that  the  grounds  for  the  distinction  are  illegitimate,  and  Justice
Jackson’s analysis seems unimpeachable. But sometimes  the  plea for
generality  is  based  on  controversial  grounds.  In  such  cases,  the
requirement  of  generality  hides  a  range  of  substantive  judgments,
and those judgments cannot be supplied by the requirement itself.

With  all this, we  have come far from  rules and the  rule of  law.
In  deciding  whether  a  plausible  ground  for  discrimination  and
hence  selectivity  is  a  permissible  one,  we  are  not  merely  requiring
generality, but  second-guessing  judgments  about  who  is  similar  to
whom. The rule of  law,  by itself, does not  have the  resources to re-
solve the resulting debates. The requirement of  rule-bound decisions
has numerous virtues; but we should be careful not to overstate  what
it requires.17

B. Is the Rule of Law Associated With Free Markets?

These points provide reason to doubt Friedrich Hayek’s influen-
tial discussion of rules and the  rule of law.  Hayek identifies the  rule
of  law  with  a  norm  of  “impartiality.”  Its  antonym  is  a  system  of
“planning,”  in  which  the  state picks winners  and  losers.  Hayek  as-
sociates  the  requirement  of  generality  with  that  of  impartiality.
Because  the  rule  of  law  does  not  pick  out  particular  winners  and
                                                                                                               

17See also Raz, The Rule of Law and Its Virtue, supra note 5.

30

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

losers,  it  does  not  play  favorites,  and  in  this  sense  it  is  impartial.
Hayek  therefore  concludes that  there  is a close association  between
the rule of law and free markets, both of which require generality.

But what does the requirement of  generality forbid? Hayek  does
not  disapprove of much  that  is done in  the  name  of  the  regulatory
state. Government  provision of  public services is on  his view  unob-
jectionable.18  Nor  does  he  disapprove  of  “general  rules  specifying
conditions  which  everybody who  engages in  a certain  activity  must
observe.”  This  category  includes  regulations  of  production,  maxi-
mum hour  laws, laws banning  dangerous products, or laws protect-
ing  conditions  in  the  workplace. Hayek thereby accepts,  at  least  in
principle, much of what is done by the modern administrative state.
What,  then,  is  prohibited?  Hayek  is  concerned  about  those
measures  that  “involve  arbitrary  discrimination  between  persons.”19
This category includes most importantly “decisions as to who is to be
allowed to provide different  services or commodities, at  what  prices
or in what quantities—in other words, measures designed to  control
the access to different trades and occupations, the  terms of  sale, and
the amounts to be produced or sold.”20

Here  Hayek appears to be speaking of  the  related  requirements
of  generality, impartiality, and  equality;  his  argument  is  very  much
like that  of  Justice Jackson.  Certain  measures  violate  these  require-
ments  because  they  make  arbitrary  distinctions.  But  how  do  we
know whether a distinction is arbitrary? How  do we  know  whether
the state can “control the access to different trades and occupations”?
It  is not  impermissible for the  state  to  require  taxi  drivers  to  show
that  they  have  good  eyesight,  or  to  ban  people  from  practicing
medicine without  meeting  certain requirements of  medical  compe-
tence.

Hayek  himself  emphasizes  that  the  state  may  impose  occupa-
tional  qualifications.21 It  therefore  emerges that  the  state is  banned
from  imposing qualifications only when  they are truly arbitrary. To
decide this question, it is necessary to develop a theory of  appropriate
                                                                                                               

18Friedrich Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty 223 (1960).
19Id. at 224.
20Id.
21Id. at 226.

Rules and Rulelessness

31

qualifications. But the rule of law, standing by itself, does not  supply
that theory.

What  about  price  controls?  It  is  possible  to  imagine  a  system
that  imposed stable price minima  and maxima, as in  the  minimum
wage laws or various regulations governing agricultural requirements.
So long  as the  set prices are stable, these requirements seem consis-
tent  with  the  rule of law  (which  is of  course  not  at  all  to  say  that
they  are good policy). Hayek  is  concerned  that  any  prices  must  be
constantly  adjusted, but this is an  uncertain  empirical claim.  Hayek
also thinks  that  since  they  abandon  the  touchstone  of  supply  and
demand, any governmentally-fixed  prices “will not  be  the  same  for
all sellers” and that  they  will  “discriminate  between  persons  on  es-
sentially arbitrary grounds.”22  His  conclusion  is  that  all  controls  of
prices and quantities “must be arbitrary.”

Of  course  government  controls  of  prices  and  quantities  are
usually harmful  or  even  disastrous,  and  much  of  what  can  be  said
against  them  relates  to  their  rejection  of  the  forces  of  supply  and
demand. But insofar as he is invoking the rule of law,  Hayek’s claim
is obscure. Price controls can satisfy all of the  requirements described
above; if the  controls are stable,  public,  general,  and  so  forth,  they
are  consistent  with  the  rule  of  law.  The  judgment  that  they  are
“arbitrary” stems not from the notion of the rule of law, but from  an
independent  theory, grounded in  ideas about  efficiency  and  liberty,
to the effect  that  the  appropriate prices and quantities of  goods and
services are set by the market. That is a reasonable judgment, but it is
not part of the  rule of law.  It  is an  independent  point  requiring in-
dependent defense.

It  might  be  tempting  at  this  point  to  suggest  that  much  of
Hayek’s discussion is simply confused, and  that  the  rule  of  law  has
nothing  to do with  markets at all.  What  can  be  said  on  behalf  of
markets, or against price controls, is different  from  what  can  be  said
about rule-free government.  But this conclusion  would  be too sim-
ple. There are at least three  common  features. First, the  rule of  law
does not make ex post adjustments. Rules operate prospectively; they
take the  ex ante  perspective. The  same is true for  markets.  Second,
there is a sense in which both rules and markets are “no  respecter of
persons.” For advocates of the  rule of law,  government,  like  justice,
                                                                                                               

22Id.

32

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

should  be  “blind.”  Markets  are  similarly  blind.  Third,  and  perhaps
paradoxically,  Hayek  is  concerned  to  ensure  against  measures  that
impose inappropriate informational demands on government.  Price-
fixing is especially objectionable because it requires government to do
something that it lacks information to  do well.  The  same argument
can be invoked on behalf of (at least many) rules. By setting out rules
of  the  road,  or  requirements  for  the  transfer  of  land,  government
can  appropriately allocate informational  burdens  between  itself  and
others.

On the other hand,  all of  the  laws that  Hayek finds compatible
with the rule of law do, in a sense, pick winners and losers. Certainly
this is true for minimum  wage  laws and for maximum hour  laws; it
is also true for the  provision of  governmental  services.  And  though
the  common  law  may not  pick winners  and  losers, it is often  quite
predictable who will be favored and who will be disfavored under the
ordinary rules of property, tort, and contract. It is likely, for example,
that  disabled people are unlikely to do well  in  a  market  system  run
under the common law.

Finally,  it  is  at  least  a  theoretical  possibility  that  a  system  of
planning  could comply with  the  rule  of  law,  at  least  if  the  “plans”
were  announced  in  advance  and  if  expectations  were  firmly  pro-
tected. Probably most real-world systems of  planning  must shift  too
rapidly to conform  to these requirements.  This  may  in  the  end  by
Hayek’s  point:  To  produce  equality  or  other  social  goals,,  and  to
counteract  the  outcomes  of  markets,  planners  must  interfere  with
markets so frequently and on such an  ad hoc  basis, or displace them
so  completely,  that  predictability,  protection  of  expectations,  and
control  of  official  discretion  become  difficult  or  impossible.  This
point  seems both  true and important.  It  is part of  the  enduring  ar-
gument against certain forms of socialism. But Hayek seems to  have
something else in mind,  having  to do with  the  way  in  which  plans
play favorites. The notion  that  plans play favorites is parasitic on  an
unarticulated understanding of fair processes and distributions. That
understanding has nothing to do with the rule of law.

These  points cast doubt not  only Hayek’s view but also and  for
the  same  reasons  on  Marxist-inspired  attacks  on  the  rule  of  law.
Consider Morton Horwitz’ suggestion that “[u]nless we are prepared
to succumb to Hobbesian pessimism ‘in this dangerous century,’ I  do
not  see how  a Man  of  the  Left  can  describe the  rule  of  law  as  ‘an

Rules and Rulelessness

33

unqualified human good! It  undoubtedly restrains power,  but it  also
prevents  power’s  benevolent  exercise.  It  creates  formal  equality—a
not  inconsiderable virtue—but it promotes substantive inequality  by
creating  a  consciousness  that  radically  separates  law  from  politics,
means from ends, processes from  outcomes. By promoting  procedu-
ral justice it enables the  shrewd,  the  calculating, and the  wealthy  to
manipulate its forms to their own  advantage. And  it ratifies and le-
gitimates  an  adversarial,  competitive,  and  atomistic  conception  of
human relations.”23

There is much to be said about this passage. For present  purposes
the  key  point  is  that  the  passage  takes  the  rule  of  law  to  require
much  more  than  in  fact  it  does.  Does  the  rule  of  law  forbid  the
pursuit of  substantive equality through,  for example,  progressive  in-
come  taxes,  welfare  and  employment  programs,  antidiscrimination
laws, and much more? Like Hayek, Horwitz  appears to identify the
rule of law  with  (a particular conception  of)  market  ordering.  The
identification is unwarranted.

I  conclude that  the  rule of law  does  not  have  the  features  that
Hayek  understands  it  to  have.  A  familiar  challenge  to  rules—that
they are connected with merely formal equality—is therefore  unper-
suasive. Rules could provide that no person may have more than  one
dollar more  than  anyone  else,  or  that  the  average  income  of  men
and women must be the same, or that all racial groups must have the
same proportional wealth.  There  is no  association between  rules on
the  one  hand  and conservatism,  free  markets,  or  inequality  on  the
other.

V. Against Rules, II: Are Rules Feasible?

A. Challenges

Some  people deny the  feasibility of  rules  and  the  rule  of  law.24
Usually they  focus on  the  internal  point  of  view—on  how  lawyers
and judges, operating within  the  legal system, figure out what  rules
mean. If rules are really understood as full ex ante  allocation of  legal
rights,  it  is  said,  rules  are  impossible.  Encounters  with  particular
                                                                                                               
23Morton  Horwtiz,  The  Rule  of  Law:  An  Unqualified  Human  Good.  86

Yale LJ 561 (1977).

24Duncan Kennedy, Legal Formality, 2 J Legal Stud 335 (1973).

34

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

cases will confound the view that things really have been fully settled
in advance. In  this view, the  need for interpretation,  and the  likeli-
hood of competing  interpretations founded on  disagreements about
the good or the right, defeat the project of following rules.

A central  point  here is that  because  of  the  nature  of  language,
legal rules will leave a variety of gaps and ambiguities, and even when
the meaning of  a legal term is clear in  the  abstract or in  the  dictio-
nary, uncertainty may break out at the point of application. If we  are
fanatical  about limiting  interpretive discretion, we  will  be  disturbed
to find  that  laws that  apparently amount  to  rules  call  for  moral  or
political judgments  by  interpreters  at  the  point  of  application.  But
perhaps this is not  a decisive problem with  a system of  rules.  Some
laws that appear to be rules are really standards; they  invite moral or
political  judgments,  and  laws  that  use  words  like  “equal”  or
“reasonable” or “carcinogen” may fall in this category. To this extent,
such  rules  do  not  qualify  as  rules  at  all,  for  they  do  not  specify
outcomes in  advance. A more fundamental  objection  to the  project
of  rule-following  is  that  in  order  for  rules  to  be  interpreted,  there
need be no clear invitation for moral or political judgments  from  the
text  of  the  rule  itself,  or  from  the  people  who  wrote  the  rule.
Perhaps laws  that  appear confining,  and  quite rule-like, will  require
interpreters  to  give  them  content  at  the  point  of  application.
Perhaps the interpretation  of  rules always requires substantive judg-
ments  of  some  kind—not  only  the  substantive  judgment  to  be
bound by law itself, but also substantive understandings that  go into
the  reading  of  legal  terms.  If  this  is  so,  a  degree  of  law-making,
through  encounter  with  particular  cases,  is  inevitable.  Even  appar-
ently rigid rules do not fully allocate entitlements ex ante.

To  outline the  argument  in  advance:  The  very  fact  that  a  rule
has at least one  exception, and the  very fact  that  the  finding  of  an
exception is part of ordinary interpretation, means that  in  every case,
a judge is presented with  the  question whether  the  rule  is  best  in-
terpreted  to  cover  the  application  at  hand.  Any  judgment  on  this
matter depends on  a moral  or  political  claim  about  relevant  differ-
ences  and  relevant  similarities.  Hence  the  interpretation  of  rules
means  that  legal entitlements  have not  been  fully allocated ex  ante.
A degree of contingent, ex post allocation is inevitable.

In short, substantive claims may lie behind all claims about what
the law is. When the meaning of law seems to be a simple matter of

Rules and Rulelessness

35

fact, it is not  because there  has been  no  resort  to  substantive  argu-
ment,  but  because  people  agree  on  what  substantive  argument  is
persuasive  under  the  circumstances.  This  is  so  not  merely  in  the
sense that  people agree that  as a moral matter, they  ought  to  apply
the law. It is so in the more fundamental sense that their view about
what the law means  has an  important  moral or political dimension.
The  positivist project of identifying  the  law  by reference  (solely)  to
its  sources  runs  afoul  of  the  fact  that  interpretation  inevitably  de-
pends on something other than sources of  law.25 And  if this is true,
ex post judgments are unavoidable.

B. Substantive Ex Post Judgments Everywhere?

If  contexts  over  substance  are  unavoidable,  the  project  of  rule-
following and (a certain  understanding  of)  the  rule of law  may well
be threatened.  At least this is so if such contests involve  moral  and
political issues in particular cases, for if they do, the  meaning  of rules
is determined by moral and political judgments at the point  of  appli-
cation.

Let us turn to an example. Language will never, or almost never,
be  interpreted  so  as  to  reach  applications  in  a  way  that  would
produce  absurdity  or  gross  injustice.  There  is  an  old  maxim,  from
Chief  Justice  Coke:  Cessante  rationae,  cessat  ipsa  lex.  Suppose,  for
example,  that  a  law  forbids  people  from  driving  over  55  miles  per
hour  on  a certain street. Jones goes 75 miles per  hour  because  he  is
driving  an  ambulance,  with  a  comatose  accident  victim,  to  the
hospital; Smith  goes 90  because  she  is  a  police  officer  following  a
fleeing  felon;  Wilson  goes  80  because  he  is  being  chased  by  a
madman  with  a gun.  In  all these cases, the  driver  may  well  have  a
legally acceptable excuse, even if there  is no  law  “on  the  books”  al-
lowing an exception in  these circumstances. If  rules have exceptions
in cases of palpable absurdity or injustice, the  denial of  an  exception
depends on a moral or political judgment  to the  effect  that  the  par-
ticular result is not palpably absurd or unjust.

In short,  the  mere possibility of  an  exception or an  excuse in  all
or almost all cases involving  rules—excuses found  as such through  a
                                                                                                               
25Some  prominent  advocates  of  positivism  make  this  very  point.  See
Joseph Raz, The Authority of Law 47  (1986); Joseph  Raz,  Ethics  in  the  Public
Domain ch. 13 (1994).

36

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

familiar interpretive route— means  that  there  is  a  possibility  of  an
exception  or  an  excuse  everywhere.  It  means  that  even  the  most
well-specified rules do not  offer  a full  ex  ante  specification  of  legal
rights. When  an  excuse is found  insufficient—when  Collins  is  not
allowed an  exemption from  the  speed limit law  because he  was  late
for work—it is not only because of the text, but also because of  some
judgment (usually tacit and rarely made in advance of the actual case)
whether the application of the statute is absurd or grossly unjust. So
long  as we  say that  absurd applications will  not  be permitted,  it  al-
ways remains possible to urge, in the context  of  a case, that  the  par-
ticular application is absurd.

My conclusion  is  that  when  interpretation  of  rules  seems  me-
chanical,  a judgment  is really being  made to the  effect  that  the  ap-
plication is not  bizarre or unjust. Judgments  of this kind are usually
tacit and obvious—usually so extremely obvious that  they  take  place
very quickly and do not  appear to be judgments  at all. But  they  are
nonetheless ex post judgments.

Turn  now  to a case that  involves more  than  one  rule.  Suppose
the  Supreme  Court  says  that  in  the  face  of  interpretive  doubt,
statutes should be construed to as not  to apply outside the  territorial
boundaries of  the  United States, and also that  in  the  face  of  inter-
pretive doubt, statutes should be interpreted in  accordance with  the
views  of  the  administrative  agency  charged  with  enforcing  them.
Suppose that a case arises in which the agency  charged with  enforc-
ing  a  civil  rights  law  concludes  that  the  law  applies  outside  the
United States. What should a court do when  faced with  two  inter-
pretive rules that  conflict?  A legal system  may  contain  no  rule-like
answer to this question. If it does not,  disputes may break out at the
point  of  application,  when  judges  exercise  discretion  so  as  to  ac-
commodate  the  two  rules, or to develop principles for  harmonizing
them.  If  judges or  others  are  concerned  to  ensure  that  the  system
really is one of rules, they may come up with rules of  priority, so that
conflicts between rules can be resolved by reference to rules.

In short: We should acknowledge that  the  meaning  of  rules is a
product of substantive judgments, often at least partly moral in  char-
acter. I think that this point is decisive against approaches that  insist
that  from  the  internal  point  of  view, it  is  possible  to  say  what  the
law is without  making  some ex post judgments  about what  the  law
should be.

Rules and Rulelessness

37

C. The Rule of Law Chastened But Mostly Intact

How damaging is this to the project of following rules, or to the
rule of law? Certainly it suggests that  for judges and administrators,
the  project of  interpreting  law  solely  by  reference  to  ex  ante  judg-
ments and sources will be incomplete. The sources may leave gaps to
be filled at the point of application. But this is not  as damaging  as it
seems. Almost all real-world cases involving the meaning of rules are
very easy.

In particular, the contestable, ex post, substantive judgments that
underlie readings  of  rules  are  often  widely  shared,  or  supported  by
good  reasons  whether  or  not  widely  shared.  Usually  the  literal
application of  statutory language  does  not  produce  absurdity.  Rules
of  priority, laid  down  ex  ante,  are  sometimes  available  when  more
than  one  rule applies. These  points are enough  to allow  the  rule of
law to survive as an entirely practical project.

In any  case it is often  feasible to rely on  the  literal or dictionary
definition  of  legal terms, and courts  could  do  this  even  in  cases  in
which  such reliance leads to apparently unreasonable  applications.26
Probably we  must acknowledge  that  a good legal system  will  allow
exceptions to rules  in  cases  of  absurdity  or  gross  injustice;  but  it  is
feasible not to do allow exceptions, and the category of  exceptions, if
it exists, might be reserved for the most bizarre cases. In this way  the
category of exceptions might be made exceedingly small; in principle,
the  category  might  not  exist  at  all.  Literalism  might  be  urged  for
pragmatic purposes, indeed for some of  the  same pragmatic  reasons
that  support  ruleness  in  general—as  a  means  of  promoting  pre-
dictability and limiting judicial discretion at the point of application.
It  is important  to appreciate the  fact  that  if judges  cannot  look
into  the  reasonableness of  the  application, some unfortunate  results
will  follow  in  particular cases; but we  might  believe that  the  results
will  be superior, in  the  aggregate, to those that  would  follow  from
allowing  judges  to  apply  rules  literally  only  in  cases  in  which  the
application  makes  sense.  We  might  distrust  a  situation  in  which
judges felt free to explore the  justification for the  rule  and  the  rea-
sonableness of  the  application when  deciding whether  to  apply  the
rule.
                                                                                                               

26Frederick Schauer, Playing By The Rules (1989).

38

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

Read literally, rules are often over- and under-inclusive if  assessed
by reference  to  their  purposes.  There  is  always  a  gap  between  the
justification of  a rule—usually  taking  the  form  of  a  standard—and
the  rule itself. Indeed, there  is  a  plurality  of  justifications  for  every
rule, with  some very specific (“to  ensure  that  the  park  is  quiet”)  to
some very general  (“to  make  the  world  better”).  The  gap  between
justification and rule is part of a familiar argument  against rules, and
perhaps an argument for an  approach to rule-interpretation that  al-
lows exceptions in cases of absurdity or injustice. But it is not  an  ar-
gument that literal readings are not feasible.27

Courts might  even seek  to  interpret  words  literally  in  all  cases,
and thus  to avoid making  any  exceptions  at  all.  This  would  be  an
odd interpretive strategy in  light  of  the likely existence of  at  least  a
few truly compelling cases for exception. But the  strategy is feasible.
Recall here that a principal purpose of rules is to specify outcomes in
advance of actual decisions, and note that mandatory rules are  differ-
ent from rules of thumb precisely because mandatory rules do not tell
their interpreters and  their  objects  to  look  at  the  rationale  for  the
rule in particular cases.

Whether literal readings, when feasible, are reasonable or right  is
a complex issue, having to do with our faith in interpreters, our faith
in those who make rules in the first place, the aggregate risk of error,
and the  possibility of  legislative corrections of absurd results  in  par-
ticular cases. The choice between literal meanings and exceptions for
absurdity is itself a decision about the  appropriate nature  of law.  But
this is not a point about feasibility.

We have concluded, then, that rules cannot be interpreted with-
out shared understandings of various sorts, and usually without resort
to  substantive  ex  post  arguments  of  certain  kinds.  We  have
concluded as well that  a degree of law-making  power  is exercised at
the point of application, at least in a system in which literal language
will  not  be understood  to  produce  absurdity  or  gross  injustice,  and
when (as is inescapable) such language leaves ambiguities or gaps. In
this  way  the  case  for  rules  must  be  chastened  and  sometimes
cautious. If we define rules as full ex ante  allocations of  legal rights,
we are unlikely to have many  legal provisions that  always operate as
rules.  But  this  does  not  make  it  impossible  to  decide  cases  by
                                                                                                               

27See Schauer, supra note 26.

Rules and Rulelessness

39

reference  to  rules.  Whether  rule-bound  decisions  are  preferable  to
the alternatives is another question; it is to that  question that  I  now
turn.

VI. Against Rules, III: Are Rules Obtuse?

In many spheres of law, people do not rely on rules at all. A rule-
book for telling  jokes  may  be  helpful;  perhaps  people  who  rely  on
such books are funnier than they  would  otherwise  be; but if  you re-
ally tried to tell jokes by following  clear rules laid down  in  advance,
you probably would  not  be very funny.  There  are no  clear  rules  for
dealing with friends  in  distress. Doctors are familiarly said to follow
rules, and surely they often do; but some illuminating  accounts  treat
medicine as largely a matter of casuistry, in which experienced people
do not follow rules, but instead build up judgments  analogically and
from experience with past cases. They  rely on  rules of  thumb  rather
than mandatory rules.28 They make judgments at the point  of  appli-
cation.

A. Rules are both  over-  and  under-inclusive  by  reference to  the  reasons

that justify them.
If  strictly  followed,  rules  often  produce  significant  error  and
hence arbitrariness in particular cases. As we have seen, the  justifica-
tions  that  underlie  the  rules  will  not  support  all  applications  to
which  they  apply  by  their  terms.  More  generally,  experience  will
turn up considerations or contexts that make it odd or worse to apply
the rule to the particular case. For this reason it is sometimes  ineffi-
cient  to  make  decisions  by  rule,  because  any  rule  that  people  can
generate  will  produce  too  much  inaccuracy  in  particular  cases.
Perhaps any rule now  available would  produce inefficient  outcomes,
and perhaps particularized decisions would be better on this score.

Consider, for example, the case of college admissions. We  might
think that any  simple rule would  produce too  many  errors from  the
standpoint  of  the  goal  of  obtaining  a  good  student  body.  Even  a
complex formula, allowing  several factors to count  but also weight-
ing  them  and  hence  minimizing  discretion,  might  produce  many
mistakes. The  social security grid is sometimes said to produce con-
                                                                                                               

28See Katherine Hunter, Doctor’s Stories (1989).

40

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

spicuous injustice in  individual  cases,  and  at  least  in  principle,  it  is
possible  that  the  aggregate  error  rate  would  be  lower  with
individualized  decisions.  Or  consider  the  matter  of  criminal
sentencing.  While  open-ended  discretion  has  been  persuasively
criticized, it seems  clear  that  the  range  of  relevant  variables  is  very
wide,  and  that  rigidly  rule-bound  decisions  could  produce  much
error and injustice.

In  modern  regulatory  law,  this  problem  is  associated  with  the
pervasive phenomenon  of “site level unreasonableness.”29  This  phe-
nomenon  occurs  when  a  general  rule  is  applied  to  situations  in
which  it  makes  no  sense.  Consider  a  requirement  that  all  eating
places  have  two  fire  exits,  or  that  all  places  of  employment  be
equipped with ramps as well as staircases, or that all pollution sources
use  certain  expensive  antipollution  devices.  (Many  more  examples
could be added.) The  general  rule  can  produce  enormous  costs  for
few benefits in the  particular site or in  many  particular sites; yet ad-
ministrators often insist on mechanical compliance with  the  general
rule. Perhaps  it would  be best to dispense with  rules and instead  to
allow firms to comply by showing adequate performance  under a set
of factors, a process to be overseen by flexible inspectors.

B. Rules can be outrun by changing circumstances.

Rules are often shown to be perverse through new  developments
that  make  the  existing  rules  anachronistic.  Those  who  issue  rules
cannot  know  the  full  range  of  particular  situations  to  which  the
rules will  eventually be applied,  and  in  the  new  circumstances,  the
rules  may  be  hopelessly  outmoded.  Consider  the  regulation  of
banking  and telecommunications.  With  the  development  of  auto-
mated teller machines,  prohibitions on  branch  banking  make abso-
lutely no sense; with  the rise of  cable television, a regulatory frame-
work  designed for three  television networks  is  built  on  wildly  false
assumptions. Even  well-designed rules  in  the  1970s  may  be  utterly
inadequate for the  1990s. In  the  face  of  rapidly  changing  technol-
ogy, rules for regulation of  telecommunications  will  become entirely
ill-suited to contemporary markets. For this reason it may be best to
                                                                                                               

29Eugene Bardach & Robert Kagan, Going By The Book (1983).

Rules and Rulelessness

41

avoid rules altogether, or at least to create a few  simple rules that  al-
low room for private adaptation.30

C. Abstraction and generality sometimes mask bias.

When  people  are  differently  situated,  it  may  be  unfair  or  oth-
erwise wrong  to treat them  the  same, that  is, to apply the  identical
rule to them.  If  everyone must use stairs, people in  wheelchairs  will
face special disadvantages. If  everyone  must  pay  to  enter  museums,
people  without  money  will  be  unable  to  go  to  museums.  If  every
employee must lack the  capacity to become pregnant,  most  women
will be frozen out of the workforce.31

By  ignoring  individual  circumstances,  general  rules  can  harm
identifiable groups with  distinctive characteristics, and in  that  sense
reflect bias despite or even because of their generality. A familiar un-
derstanding  of  equality  requires  the  similarly  situated  to  be  treated
the  same; a less  familiar  but  also  important  understanding  requires
the  differently situated to be treated differently, also  in  the  interest
of  equality. General rules might  abridge equality  to  the  extent  that
they do not allow people to speak of relevant differences.

D. Rules drive discretion underground.

When  rules  produce  inaccuracy  in  particular  cases,  people  in  a
position of authority may simply ignore them. Discretion is exercised
through a mild form of civil disobedience, and it is hard to police or
even to see. Thus in Woodson  v.  North  Carolina,32 the  Court invali-
dated the  mandatory death penalty in  part on  the  ground  that  the
mandatory rule could not  possibly be mandatory in  practice. In  fact
juries would refuse to sentence  people to death, but for reasons that
would not be visible and accessible.

“Jury nullification” of broad and rigid rules is a familiar and often
celebrated phenomenon.  Similarly, administrative agencies can  sim-
ply refuse to enforce  statutes when  they are too rule-like  in  nature.
The Clean Air Act’s severe provisions for listed pollutants, operating
                                                                                                               
30See Richard Epstein, Simple Rules for a Complex World (forthcoming).
31See the  illuminating  discussion  of  human  differences  and  capabilities  i n
Amartya  Sen,  Inequality  Reexamined  79-87  (1993).  Sen’s  discussion  of  the
crudeness  of  primary  goods  (if  we  attend  to  human  diversity)  is  related  to  a
characteristic challenge to rules (if we attend to the purposes of those rules).

32428 US 280 (1976)

42

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

in  rule-like  fashion,  led  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  to
stop  listing  pollutants  at  all.  Thus  “the  act’s  absolute  duties  to  re-
spond to danger prompted officials not  to recognize the  dangers  in
the first place.”33

E. Rules allow evasion by wrongdoers.

Because rules have clear edges, they allow people to “evade” them,
by engaging in conduct that is technically  exempted but that  creates
the same or analogous harms. Rules, in  short, are under-inclusive as
well  as over-inclusive, if we  refer to their  background  justifications.
And  a problem with  rules is that  if judges cannot  proceed  by  anal-
ogy, and extend the  rule where  the  justification  so  suggests,  people
will be able to engage in harmful conduct  because of  a mere techni-
cality. Here is another source of inefficiency via rules.

F. Rules can be dehumanizing and procedurally unfair;  sometimes  it  is

necessary or appropriate to seek individualized tailoring.
One conception of procedural justice—embodied in the due pro-
cess clause—grants people a hearing  in  order to show  that  a statute
has been  accurately applied. Thus,  for example, the  Supreme  Court
has  held  that  someone  who  is  deprived  of  welfare  benefits  has  a
right  to  a  hearing  to  contest  the  legitimacy  of  the  deprivation.34
This  understanding  of due process fits well  with  a  system  of  rules.
The whole point of the  hearing  is to see whether  the  rule has been
accurately applied. The hearing fortifies the rule.

But another  conception  of due process urges that  people should
be allowed not merely to test the  application of  law  to fact, but also
to urge that their case is different from  those  that  have gone  before,
and that someone in  a position of  authority ought  to be required to
pay heed to the  particulars of  their  situation.  On  this  view,  people
affected by the  law  ought  to be permitted to participate in  the  for-
mulation of the very principle to be applied to their case.

VII. Factors

When  rules fail, judges may rely on  standards,  or  they  may  in-
stead proceed through  analogies, in  which  we  do not  know,  in  ad-
                                                                                                               

33David Schoenbrod, Power Without Responsibility 76 (1993).
34Goldberg v. Kelly,  397 US 254 (1970).

Rules and Rulelessness

43

vance, whether we will have rules, standards, or something else. The
problems with rules can  push participants in  law  in  the  direction of
standards, analogies, or some combination of the two.

Often judges and others who reject rules rely on  instead on  a set
of factors, and I will be using judgments based on factors as the basic
way  to approach and evaluate rulelessness. Like analogies  and  stan-
dards, factors reveal some of  the  vices and virtues  of  rulelessness;  in
their opposition to  rules, they  much  overlap  with  judgments  based
on standards or analogies. But judgments based on factors have some
distinctive features as well, and these are of considerable independent
interest.

The  line between  rules and factors is one  of  degree rather  than
of kind. It should now be clear that rules are rarely or never unbend-
ing; their interpretation involves a measure of  discretion; it is best to
speak of  degrees of  rule-ness rather than  of  rules  or  not.  Similarly,
factors  are  not  open-ended  grants  of  discretion.  Often  they  have
rule-like  features  insofar  as  they  impose  constraints  on  what  may
happen at the point of application. We can be clearer about decision
by factors after exploring a few examples, and also after seeing why  a
system of  factors is often  thought  to be a superior method  of  deci-
sion—required, sometimes, by the Constitution  itself. The  law  gov-
erning the death penalty is the best place to start.

A.  Examples

In  Furman  v.  Georgia,35  the  Supreme  Court,  following
Papachristou,  held  that  a  rule-free  death  penalty  violated  the  due
process clause—not because it was excessively barbaric for the state to
take life, but because the  states allowed undue discretion in  the  in-
fliction of the ultimate penalty of death. The problem with  the  pre-
1970 death penalty was therefore procedural. States did not  limit the
discretion of juries deciding who deserved to die.

North Carolina responded to Furman by enacting a “mandatory”
death penalty, eliminating  judge  and  jury  discretion.  Under  North
Carolina law,  a  mandatory  death  penalty  was  to  be  imposed  for  a
specified category of homicide offenses. No judge and no  jury would
have  discretion  to  substitute  life  imprisonment  in  cases  falling
within that category. No judge and no jury would  have discretion to
                                                                                                               

35408 US 238 (1972).

44

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

decide  who  would  live  and  who  would  die.  In  this  way,  North
Carolina attempted to apply sharp rule of law  constraints  to the  area
of death sentencing.

In  Woodson  v.  North  Carolina,36  the  Supreme  Court  held,
strikingly,  that  a  mandatory  death  sentence  was  unconstitutional
because it was a rule. Invoking the need for  individuation, the  Court
said that “The belief no longer prevails that every offense in a like le-
gal category calls for an  identical punishment  without  regard to the
past  life  and  habits  of  a  particular  offender.”  According  to  the
Supreme  Court,  a  serious  constitutional  shortcoming  of  the
mandatory death sentence

is its failure to allow the particularized  consideration  of rele-
vant aspects of the  character  and  record  of each  convicted  de-
fendant before the  imposition  upon  him  of  a  sentence  of
death. . . . A process that  accords  no  significance  to  rele-
vant  facets  of  the  character  and  record  of  the  individual
offender  or the  circumstances of  the  particular offense  ex-
cludes  from  consideration  in  fixing  the  ultimate  punish-
ment  of  death the  possibility of compassionate or mitigat-
ing  factors  stemming  from  the  diverse  frailties  of  hu-
mankind. It treats  all  persons  convicted  of  a  designated  of-
fense  not  as  uniquely  individual  human  beings,  but  as
members of a faceless,  undifferentiated  mass  to  be  subjected  to
the blind infliction of the penalty of death.

What  ultimately  emerged  from  Woodson  is  a  system  in  which
the death penalty is generally decided through the consideration of  a
set of  specified  factors,  in  the  form  of  aggravating  and  mitigating
circumstances.  It  is  this  system  of  capital  sentencing  that,  in  the
current  Court’s  view,  walks  the  constitutionally  tolerable  line  be-
tween  unacceptably mandatory rules and unacceptably broad discre-
tion.  Of  course some justices, most recently Justice Blackmun,  have
contended that the line is too thin—that  there  is no  possible system
of  capital sentencing  that  adequately  combines  the  virtues  of  indi-
vidualized  consideration,  required  by  Woodson,  with  the  virtues  of
non-arbitrary decision, required by Furman.
                                                                                                               

36428 US 280 (1976).

Rules and Rulelessness

45

Woodson arose in  an  especially dramatic setting,  but  the  Court’s
preferred method—factors rather than rules—can be found  in  many
areas of the both life and law. For example, the Court offers no  rules
for deciding how  much  in  the  way  of  procedure  is  required  before
the  state may take liberty or property.37 Any  “rules,” the  Court sug-
gests, would  be too inaccurate and too insensitive  to  individual  cir-
cumstance.  Instead  the  Court  requires  an  assessment  of  three  fac-
tors: the  nature  and  weight  of  the  individual  interest  at  stake;  the
likelihood of  an  erroneous determination  and the  probable  value  of
additional  safeguards;  and  the  nature  and  strength  of  the  govern-
ment’s  interest.  This  somewhat  open-ended  multifactor  balancing
test  is  quite  different  from  what  is  anticipated  in  Papachristou.  It
sacrifices  predictability  for  the  sake  of  accuracy  in  individual  cases.
This is a pervasive choice in Anglo-American legal systems.

B.  Factors  Without  Rules

What are the features of a system based on factors?
1. Multiple and diverse relevant criteria.
It  is obvious that  in  a  system  of  factors,  decisions  are  based  on
multiple and diverse criteria. No  simple rule or principle can  be  ap-
plied to the case.

2. Difficulty of describing relevant factors ex ante.
In  a system of  factors,  it  is  often  impossible  to  describe  exactly
what is relevant in advance. People know too little to be able to  say.
Because of the  informational  burdens faced by those  who  lay down
the list of factors, two  outcomes are likely. First, the  relevant terms,
as they are identified in  advance, may be too general and abstract to
contain sharp limits on what can  be considered. The  legal terms are
exhaustive  but  vague. They  have to be specified to  be  made  opera-
tional, and it is in the specification that  a more complete account  of
the  factors will  be provided. The  specification is unlikely to  exclude
other possible specifications in other settings. A significant degree of
law-making power can be found at the point of application.

The second possibility is that the relevant factors will  be listed at
a high level of specificity, but there  will  be some proviso at the  end,
factors  as  are  deemed
including,  for  example,  “such  other 
                                                                                                               

37See Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 US 319 (1976).

46

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

relevant”—to show  that  new  factors may come  up. The  legal terms
are specific  but  nonexhaustive. Both  of  these  strategies  are  pervasive
in American law.

3. Absence of a clear, a priori sense of the weight of the criteria.
It is typical of this procedure that  the  relevant criteria cannot  be
assigned weights in advance. In  deciding how  much  of  a hearing  is
required before someone may be deprived of something, for example,
we  do not  know  how  much  weight  to give to the  government  in-
terest in efficiency, or how  much  weight  to assign to the  individual
interest in ensuring against mistaken deprivations. Answers  to  ques-
tions of weight  are offered in  the  context  of  concrete  controversies,
and cannot be  given in  advance. As we  will  soon see, this notion  is
related to the problem of commensurability.

4. Attentiveness to (much of) the whole situation.
The  rule of law  is abstract in  the  sense that  it attends to only  a
small part of  a complex situation. If  people  are  admitted  to  college
only on the basis of test scores, we have a rule. (I  put to one  side the
case of  complex rules or formulas.) But a system of  factors  tends  to
look closely at a wide range  of  particulars. In  the  college  admission
setting, for example, officers might  examine not  just test  scores, but
also grades, extracurricular activities,  family  background,  geography,
race, gender, and much  more. In  the  area of  capital sentencing,  ju-
ries and judges look to a wide range  of  variables relating  to  the  of-
fender and the offense.  In  voting  rights  cases, courts sometimes ex-
plore many aspects of the context in order to test for discrimination.
On the other hand, it would be a mistake to  say that  a system of
factors is attentive to all aspects  of  the  situation.  There  is  no  such
thing  as attention  to “all”  particulars.  Human  and  legal  perception
are inevitably selective.  Even  in  a discretionary admissions  program,
for example, the authority is not expected to care about an applicant’s
initials or foot size. Similar constraints are imposed on the context of
capital sentencing.  The  set  of  relevant  factors  is  disciplined  by  the
context in which the assessment occurs.

These  points suggest that  a  system  based  on  factors  attends  to
much  of  the  whole  situation but certainly not  to all of  it.  And  be-
cause decision by factors entails attention  to much  of  the  whole  sit-
uation, and thus to a range  of  particulars, it is familiar to see people

Rules and Rulelessness

47

arguing  that  their  case  is  relevantly  different  from  those  that  have
come  before.  A  litigant  in  case  A  can  always  say  that  in  some
particular way, his case is relevantly different from case B.

5.  Attentiveness  to  particulars;  avoidance  of  abstractions.
In decision by reference to factors, courts are highly  attentive to
particulars.  Their  decisions  do  not  necessarily  govern  other  situa-
tions; they are often said to be “fact-bound.” Abstractions and  broad
principles are generally avoided. They may be too broad, contentious,
sectarian, divisive, and confusing.  A special  fear  is  that  abstractions
will  be  both  over-inclusive  and  under-inclusive.  A  prime  goal  of
decision by reference to factors is the  avoidance of  error through  in-
sufficiently  considered  rules  or  principles—insufficiently  considered
in  the  sense of  insufficiently  attuned to the  full  range  of  particular
cases.

6. Attention to precedent; analogical reasoning.
Rules provide consistency; but a system  based  on  factors  aspires
to do the same. Such a system aspires to ensure that  all similarly sit-
uated people are treated similarly. A must be treated the  same  as  B,
unless there is a principled reason to treat them differently.

In a system of factors, the relevant consistency is sought  through
comparison  with  previous  cases.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  full
trial-type hearing has been required before someone may be deprived
of afdc benefits. The question then arises whether a similar hearing
is  required  before  someone  may  be  deprived  of  social  security  dis-
ability benefits. Perhaps this case is different  because many  social se-
curity recipients are not poor, or because disability determinations do
not turn heavily on issues of credibility. Hence  a full trial-type hear-
ing is not required; but the social security recipient is entitled at least
to some opportunity to counter  the  government’s  claims in  writing.
Then  the  question arises what  kind of  hearing  is  required  before  a
grade-school student may be suspended from school for misconduct.
Here  the  individual  interest  seems  weaker  still,  and  here  the  gov-
ernment  can  invoke the  distinctive  interest  in  avoiding  undue  for-
mality  in  student-teacher  relations.  Through  routes  of  this  sort,  a
system based on  factors can  generate a complex set of  outcomes, all
rationalized  with  each  other.  Analogical  reasoning  will  therefore
produce local coherence.

48

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

7. Diversely valued goods and problems of commensurability.
Usually the  factors at work  in  the  decisions I  have  in  mind  are
valued in qualitatively different ways. Moreover, those factors  cannot
be placed on  a single metric; they are  not  commensurable.  To  un-
derstand these claims, something must be said about diverse kinds of
valuation and about the difficult problem of incommensurability.

a. The  factors  involved  in  legal  decisions  are  often  qualita-
tively  different  from  one  another.  It  does  seem  clear  that  human
beings value goods, things,  relationships, and states of  affairs  in  di-
verse ways; all goodness is goodness-of-a-kind.38 There is of  course a
distinction  between  instrumental  and  intrinsic  goods.  We  value
some things  purely or principally for use; other  things,  like  knowl-
edge or friendship, have intrinsic value. But the  distinction between
intrinsic and instrumental  goods captures only a part of the  picture.
Intrinsically  valued  things  produce  a  range  of  diverse  responses.
Some bring  about wonder  and awe;  consider a mountain  or certain
artistic works.  Toward  some people, we  feel respect; toward  others,
affection;  toward  others, love. People worship  their  deity.  Negative
valuations are similarly diverse. To  lose  money  is  to  lose  an  instru-
mental  good  (though  one  that  might  be  used  for  intrinsic  goods,
like the  preservation of  human  life). To  lose  a  friend  is  a  different
matter. So  too, our responses to intrinsic  bads are diverse.  Many  of
the relevant distinctions play a role in law,  as when  beaches must be
compared  with  dollars,  or  protection  of  racial  equality  measured
against associational freedom. It is to be sure possible that  the  use of
a single metric, treating goods as relevantly the same, may have some
pragmatic  advantages;  cost-benefit  analysis  is  based  on  this  judg-
ment.  But decisions based on  factors tend  to involve goods that  are
understood to be valued in qualitatively diverse ways.

b. The relevant factors to be assessed by the  legal system may
not  be  commensurable.  Return,  for  example,  to  the  idea  that  the
Constitution requires such hearings  as are justified by an  assessment
of three factors: the individual interest at stake; the  likelihood of  er-
ror and the probable value of  additional safeguards; and the  govern-
ment’s  interest,  pecuniary  and  nonpecuniary,  in  avoiding  complex
                                                                                                               
38See  Elizabeth  Anderson,  Value  in  Ethics  and  Economics  (1993);
Amartya  Sen,  Plural  Utility,  Proceedings  of  the  Aristotelian  Society  83  (1982-
83).

Rules and Rulelessness

49

procedures. It would be odd to say that  this assessment can  be made
through  lining  up  the  relevant  variables  along  any  single  metric.
There is no scale by which it makes sense to weigh  these matters. If
we devise a scale, we will have to recharacterize the relevant goods in
a way that changes their character and effaces qualitative differences.
Perhaps this is justified for pragmatic reasons, but something  will  be
lost as well as gained.

As  I  understand  the  notion  here,  incommensurability  occurs
when  the  relevant  goods  cannot  be  aligned  along  a  single  metric
without  doing  violence  to  our  considered  judgments  about  how
these goods are best  characterized.  By  our  considered  judgments,  I
mean  our  reflective  assessments  of  how  certain  relationships  and
events should be understood, evaluated, and experienced. The notion
of a single metric should be understood quite literally. By this I mean
a standard of valuation that  (1) operates at a workable level of  speci-
ficity,  (2)  fails  to  make  qualitative  distinctions,  and  (3)  allows
comparison along  the  same dimension.  In  deciding cases  according
to factors, there  is often  no  such metric.  Decisions  nonetheless  are
made, and they  can  be justified or criticized on  the  basis of  reasons.
But those reasons do not amount to a single scale of value. Of  course
rules  are  often  developed  on  the  basis  of  an  assessment  of
incommensurable goods.

These  are  brisk  and  inadequate  remarks  about  a  complex  sub-
ject.39  For  the  moment  my  claim  is  simple:  The  factors  that  are
typically at stake in law are valued in different ways, and these factors
are not commensurable along any scale.

VIII. Choices, Positive and Normative

All  this  leaves  two  questions.  Under  what  circumstances  is  it
appropriate to rely on factors rather than rules? And under what  cir-
cumstances might  a legal system be expected to do one  rather  than
the other?

It is unlikely that we will  be able to generate a reliable and gen-
eral positive theory on this topic. Legislation is a complex product of
legislative self-interest, private influence,  and public-spirited motiva-
                                                                                                               
in  Cass  R.  Sunstein,

39More  detailed  discussion  can  be  found 

Incommensurability and Valuation in Law, 92 Mich L Rev 779 (1994).

50

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

tions on the part of  both  legislators and those who  influence  them.
Judicial choices between rules and factors are at least equally difficult
to attribute to a single behavioral influence, or a set of behavioral in-
fluences.  It  is  hard  to  imagine  a  simple  testable  hypothesis  that
would not be falsified by many results in the world.

We  are  likely  to  do  far  better  by  identifying  mechanisms  by
which certain choices might  be made, rather than  law-like general-
izations  by  which  choices  are  usually  made.40  Moreover,  the
occasional  role  of  public  spirit  in  legislative  deliberations—from
legislators themselves or  from  people  who  influence  them—means
that  the  normative and the  positive cannot  be so  sharply  separated.
Normative  views  about  what  makes  best  sense  will  undoubtedly
affect  outcomes. The  same is  true  of  others  faced  with  the  choice
between rules and rulelessness, including judges and bureaucrats.

It is still possible to offer  some rough-and-ready generalizations.
Most broadly, we can suggest that rules will be avoided (1) when  the
lawmaker  lacks information  and  expertise,  so  that  the  information
costs are too high  to produce rules, (2) when  it is difficult to decide
on rules because of political dissensus within the  relevant institution,
so that  the  political costs of  rules  are  too  high  to  justify  them,  (3)
when people in position to decide whether  to have rules do not  fear
the bias, interest, or corruption of  those  who  decide cases, (4) when
those who make the law do not  disagree much  with  those  who  will
interpret the law, and hence when the law-makers do not need rules
to discipline administrators, judges, or others, and (5) when  the  ap-
plications of the legal provision are few  in  number  or relevantly dif-
ferent from one another. Rules  might  thus  be chosen  when  the  er-
ror rate with the particular rules is relatively low, when  the  error rate
for rulelessness is high, and when the number of cases is large.

Of  course  there  can  be  a  considerable  ex  ante  investment  in
rulemaking, at least in  the  nonobvious cases, and at least if we  seek
rules that have some degree of accuracy. On the  other  hand,  the  ab-
sence of  rules may produce significant  costs at the  stage  when  par-
ticular  decisions  are  made.  One  question  is  who  bears  these  costs,
and how  much  power  they  have  to  minimize  them.  High  invest-
ments  in  choosing  the  content  of  the  law  must be made by  people
                                                                                                               
40See  Jon  Elster,  Nuts  and  Bolts  for  the  Social  Sciences  (1989),  making

this  claim  much  more  generally.

Rules and Rulelessness

51

deciding on the  particular applications; they  must not  only find  the
facts but also find  the  law.  Consider, for  example,  the  problems  of
deciding whether airline pilots over the  age of  60 are still able to do
their jobs competently. Such decisions will be time-consuming,  may
produce unequal treatment,  and may create a lot of error under  the
pressure of the moment (mistaken  stereotypes about people over 60,
or  misplaced  sympathy  for  discharged  employees).  Such  decisions
may also impair predictability and thus  create  high  costs  for  people
trying to order their affairs under law.

Where those who  make the  law  are not  the  same as those who
interpret and enforce it, there will be complex pressures. On  the  one
hand, the lawmakers may distrust the interpreters and enforcers, and
may therefore seek to impose rules. If everyone is aligned in  interest,
the  costs  of  rulelessness  will  be  diminished,  since  the  lawmakers
need  not  fear  that  interpreters  and  enforcers  will  have  agendas  of
their own.  On  the  other  hand,  a  split  between  lawmaking  on  the
one  hand  and law-interpreting/law-enforcement  on  the  other  can
create  some  pressure  to  avoid  rules.  Here  is  the  key  point:  When
law-making  is  split  from  law-interpretation  and  law-enforcement,
many of  the  costs of  producing clarity ex ante  will  be faced by law-
makers themselves, whereas many of the costs of producing clarity ex
post will  be faced by others. A law-making  body that  does not  en-
force law  can  “export”  the  costs  of  rulelessness  to  those  who  must
enforce whatever provisions have been enacted. There may be politi-
cal  and  other  advantages  in  doing  this—though  as  we  have  seen,
there are countervailing pressures too.

The  odd and perhaps counterintuitive result is  that  a  system  of
separated  powers  imposes  at  least  some  pressure  toward  avoiding
rules. A system of  unified powers does  not  impose  similar  pressure,
since in  such a system people who  refuse to make rules ex ante  will
face  the  costs  of  rulelessness  ex  post.  The  rise  of  administrative
agencies combining  traditionally  separated  powers  helps  counteract
the difficulty.

As I  have said, the  benefits for law-makers  of  refusing to  make
rules may,  in  a  system  of  separated  powers,  be  countered  by  other
factors. The  failure to make rules may be punished  by  the  interests
that fear the  outcomes within  another  branch  of  government;  or it
may fit poorly with  the  representatives’  own  political  commitment
or electoral self-interest. Similar considerations apply to a decentral-

52

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

ized, hierarchical judiciary. In  such a system, there  will  be some in-
centive for the  Supreme Court to avoid making  rules and to  export
the costs of rulelessness to others. But the incentive can be overcome
by other considerations. I return to these points below.

B. Notes on England and America

Some of these speculations are borne out by comparing  the  legal
system in England  with  that  in  the  United States.41 English  law  is
far  more  rule-bound  than  American  law.  The  Parliament  is  less
likely  to  delegate  discretionary  authority  to  judges.  For  their  part,
English judges  treat statutes as rules, interpreting  them  literally and
generally refusing to investigate whether the particular application of
the rule makes sense as a matter of policy or principle. In  England,
law-making and law-interpretation are far  more rule-bound than  in
the  United States, where  law-making  often  takes place in  the  pro-
cess of confrontation with particular cases.

How might this be explained? It is notable that laws in England
are drafted by an  Office  of  Parliamentary  Counsel, a highly  profes-
sional  body  that  consists  of  skilled  authors  of 
laws.  The
Parliamentary Counsel brings about a uniform style of  drafting.  It  is
also  closely  attuned  to  the  methods  of  English  judges,  and  the
Counsel drafts legislation with  close knowledge  of  literalism and of
the  prevailing canons  of  construction.  The  judges’  practice  is  itself
uniform  and relatively  simple.  In  a  parliamentary  system,  the  gov-
ernment  and the  legislature are allied, and the  high  degree of  party
control means that there is a level of homogeneity in England at the
law-making  stage.  Moreover,  and  critically,  Parliament  revisits
statutes with some frequency, and it fixes mistakes that are  shown  as
such when particular cases arise.

The situation in  the  United States is very different.  There  is no
centralized drafting body, and hence  no  uniformity  in  terminology,
and little professionalization. In  America, the  drafters of  legislation
are multiple and uncoordinated. The  party system has largely disin-
tegrated,  and  the  executive  and  legislature  are  hardly  aligned.
Congress appears only intermittently  aware of  the  judges’  interpre-
                                                                                                               
41I  draw  in  this  section  on  the  extremely  illuminating  discussion 
i n
Patrick Atiyah and Robert Summers, Form and  Substance  in  Anglo-American
Law (1987).

Rules and Rulelessness

53

tive practices, which  are themselves not  easy to  describe  in  light  of
the sheer size of the federal judiciary and the existence of sharp splits,
on  just  this  point,  in  the  Supreme  Court.  Congress  does  overrule
statutory decisions to which it objects. But it is not in the business of
responding rapidly and regularly  to  particular  cases  in  which  literal
interpretations misfire. Hence  both  law-making  and law-interpret-
ing practice are very different from what they are in England.

This brief description connects well  with  the  contextual sugges-
tions offered  above.  There  tends  to  be  more  dissensus  in  America
than in England at the law-making stage. The quality of drafting  ex
ante  is  lower,  as  is  the  possibility  of  legislative  correction  ex  post.
None of this suggests that England or America has the optimal level
of  rules in  light  of its  own  institutional  characteristics.  But  it  does
suggest that the two legal systems are highly responsive to distinctive
contextual features.

IX. Reform  Strategies

How can a legal  system minimize the  problems posed by unrea-
sonable generality on  the  one  hand  and those  of  potentially abusive
discretion  on  the  other?  The  best  approaches  involve  (a)  highly
contextualized inquiries into  the  likelihood of  error  and  abuse  with
either  rules  or  rulelessness,  and  hence  an  “on  balance”  judgment
about risk; and (b) a presumption in favor of a particular kind of  rule,
that is, the privately adaptable rule that  allocates initial entitlements
and  does  not  specify  outcomes.  But  there  are  other  possibilities  as
well.

A.  Bentham  and  Acoustic  Separation

Jeremy Bentham  favored  clear  rules,  laid  down  in  advance  and
broadly communicated.  In  at least some of  his writings,  he  also  fa-
vored adjudicative flexibility, allowing judges to adapt the rules to the
complexities of individual cases. Bentham was aware that  rules could
misfire as they  encountered  particular controversies,  especially  if  we
understand the notion  of  misfiring in  utilitarian terms. In  courts of
law,  he  concluded, the  rules would  not  be fully  binding.  This  sug-
gests  a  paradox:  How  could  someone  advocate  clear  rules  without
asking judges to follow them? Bentham’s  ingenious  answer  involved
the  different audiences  for law. The  public would  hear  general  rules;

54

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

the  judges would  hear individual cases.42 This  is the  important  idea
of  an  “acoustic  separation”  for  legal  terms,  justified  on  utilitarian
grounds. There is such a separation in  many  areas of  law,  including
tax law and the law relating to excuses for criminality.

Following this idea, we might suggest that legislatures should lay
down  rules, but that  interpreters should feel free to ignore  them  in
contexts  where  they  produce  absurdity.  In  some  ways  this  is  the
American legal practice. Of course it is equally important  to develop
subsidiary principles to discipline the  general idea of  “absurdity”  and
to  give  it  concrete  application  in  the  modern  regulatory  state.
Modern  agencies,  more  than  courts,  might  be  entrusted  with  the
job of adapting general rules to particular circumstances.

There  are, however,  two  large difficulties  with  the  Benthamite
strategy. The  first involves the  right  to  democratic  publicity—more
particularly,  the  right  to  know  what  the  law  is.  The  Benthamite
strategy  appears  to  compromise  that  right.  The  rule  of  law  and
democratic values might  well  be jeopardized if the  law  is  not  what
the  statute  books  say  that  it  is.  Benthamite  approaches  might
therefore  be  unacceptable  to  the  extent  that  utilitarian  judgments
about acoustic separation run into liberal principles of publicity.

The  second  problem  with  the  Benthamite  strategy  is  that  the
strategy fails to take account of the fact that general rules can  be un-
acceptable precisely because general rules can  create bad  private  in-
centives  as  compared  with  more  fine-grained  approaches.  The  se-
crecy of the Benthamite approach—the distinction between  the  law
as it is known  and the  law  as it operates  in  courts  of  law—will  do
nothing at all about the problem of poor incentives from crude rules.
Indeed,  publicizing  the  exceptions,  and  telling  everyone  about  the
possibility of  close judicial attention  to  the  particulars  of  your  case,
may well be a good idea if we seek optimal incentives. At least this is
so if people would not  react to the  presence of  exceptions by believ-
ing that they can do whatever  they  want  and that  the  rule does not
exist at all.

We  might  conclude that  too  often,  the  Benthamite  strategy  is
neither  democratic nor  efficient.  But there  is still a place  for  a  ver-
sion  of  it.  A  legal  system  might  sometimes  provide  that 
in
exceptional cases, interpreters  should  be  permitted  to  change  rules,
                                                                                                               
42See Gerald Postema, Bentham and the Common Law Tradition (1986).

Rules and Rulelessness

55

by exploring whether their justifications create  absurdity or injustice,
if the particulars of the case so suggest. We  might  even see a judicial
(or administrative) power of this kind as part of the  interpretation  of
rules,  not  as  an  authority  to  change  rules.  This  power  should  be
publicly known—a  fully disclosed aspect of  interpretation.  In  some
contexts,  of  course,  the  possibility  of  changing  rules,  or  of
interpreting  them  with  close reference to  whether  they  make sense
in particular circumstances, might be too damaging to the  project of
having  rules. But this contextual judgment  cannot  be  made  in  the
abstract.

B. Pragmatic Judgments

Often  a legal system should make the  choice  between  rules and
rulelessness on  the  basis  of  a  contextual  inquiry  into  the  aggregate
level of likely errors and abuses. I have suggested that when judges or
other interpreters are perceived to be ignorant,  corrupt, or biased, or
in  any case when  they diverge in  their  judgments  from  the  people
who make rules, a legal system will  proceed with  rules. Even  a poor
fit, in  the  form  of  over- and under-inclusive rules,  can  be  tolerated
when individual decisions will be inaccurate as well.  Thus  we  might
find  factors when  there  is  no  special  reason  to  distrust  those  who
will assess them. So too, individualized decisions are likely to be dis-
pensed with when it is possible to come up with rules that fit well.

The choice between rules  and rulelessness might  be seen as pre-
senting  a principal-agent problem. The  legislature, as the  principal,
seeks to control  the  decisions of  its agents.  A problem with  rules  is
that the agents might be able to track the principal’s wishes better or
best if they  are given the  freedom to take account  of individual cir-
cumstances.  Any  rule  might  inadequately  capture  the  legislature’s
considered judgments about particular cases. The costs of rulelessness
might be acceptable if the  legislature does not  believe that  the  court
or  other  interpreter  is  likely  to  be  untrustworthy,  perhaps  because
there is a basically shared view of relevant problems.

On the  other  hand,  without  rules the  agent  might  become un-
controllable. This is so especially in light of the  fact  that  a system of
factors  allows  the  agent  to  weigh  each  factor  as  he  chooses.  The
result  is  that  a  system  of  rules  might  be  adopted  as  the  best  way,
overall, to control the agent’s discretion, at least if there  is a measure
of distrust of some or all agents.

56

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

It is also true that rules tend to make sense and to be adopted in
the face of social consensus within the lawmaking body; decisions by
factors are more probable when  there  is dissensus. It  is not  hard  to
obtain  a  ban  on  racial  discrimination  when  people  agree  that  this
form  of  discrimination is illegitimate; it is much  harder to  obtain  a
similar ban  on  discrimination  against  the  handicapped,  where  bal-
ancing tests are pervasive. Consider the fact that Congress often  del-
egates discretionary power  to an  agency  when  it  is  unable  to  agree
on  the  appropriate rule, because of  social dissensus,  and  therefore  it
tells the  agency  to  act  “reasonably.”  Examples  include  the  areas  of
broadcasting  regulation  and  occupational  safety  and  health.  This
route  is  followed  partly  because  factors,  more  conspicuously  and
regularly than  rules, drive discretion underground. The  costs of  lay-
ing  down  rules are increased in  the  face of  dissensus  on  their  con-
tent, and this consideration increases the  likelihood that  we  will  see
factors instead.

Sometimes  it  is  impossible  to  come  up  with  rules  in  a  multi-
member  body.  Often  participants  in  a  dispute  begin  discussion  by
attempting  agreement  on  “principles” rather  than  concrete  rules,  as
in controversies over the Middle East. So too people are able to agree
on a set of relevant factors, or perhaps on  some particular outcomes,
without being able to agree on a rule, or on  the  general reasons that
account for particular outcomes. Sometimes  people agree on  general
principles but disagree on particular cases. Sometimes  the  opposite is
true. When rules do not emerge from legislatures, it may well  be be-
cause it is impossible to get agreement  from  a  heterogeneous  body.
Return  here to the  fact  that  legislatures that  delegate  broad  discre-
tion  can  internalize two  large benefits  of  rulelessness:  economizing
on  information  costs and on  the  political  costs  of  specificity.  They
can  simultaneously  externalize  the  costs  of  rulelessness,  which  are
faced by administrators. It  is administrators who  must compile rele-
vant  information  and  face  the  political  heat  of  making  hard  and
specific choices.

It follows that we tend to find rules where one group of interests
is well-organized or otherwise powerful, and when its adversaries are
not.  In  circumstances of  this sort,  the  well-organized  interests  can
press  the  governmental  body  in  the  direction  of  rules.  A  well-
organized group is unlikely to allow  itself to become at risk through
factors when  it need not  do so (unless, perhaps, it believes that  it is

Rules and Rulelessness

57

even  more  likely  to  be  successful  with  bureaucrats  or  judges).
Consider  laws  governing  the  regulation  of  agriculture,  which  are
often  highly  specific,  in  part  because  the  farmers’  lobby  is  well-
organized, and because the opponents of such laws are not.

Factors are more likely to be the  basis for decision when  oppos-
ing interests have roughly equivalent power  in  the  lawmaking  body,
and when  they are willing  to take their chances  with  a bureaucracy
or a judge. This may be so because they are both highly organized, or
because they are  both  weak  and  diffuse.  A  possible  example  is  the
Occupational Safety  and Health  Act, which  is quite  vague,  in  part
because  its  opponents  and  adversaries  are  both  powerful.  On  the
other  hand,  two  well-organized  groups  might  produce  rules  when
compromise is possible and when  there are, to  both  groups,  special
risks from relying on an agency or a court.

This  may  be  the  case  when,  for  example,  the  regulated  class
needs  to  know  what  the  rule  is,  so  that  it  can  plan  its  affairs.
Perhaps it is better to have fairly bad rules than no rules at all. When
such planning  is made possible by clear rules, members of  the  regu-
lated  class  may  have  it  within  their  power  to  avoid  (some  of)  the
costs of inaccurate rules. Perhaps they can alter their conduct so as to
avoid triggering the rule in  cases in  which  the  rule is over-inclusive.
On the other hand, this avoidance may itself be an undesirable social
cost.  Return  to  the  problem  of  site-level  unreasonableness,  where
application of an overbroad rule forces employers to make workplace
changes that produce possibly little gain, and at possibly high cost.

Rules are also more likely to be unacceptable when  the  costs  of
error in particular cases are very high. The  enormous  danger of error
can make the over- and under-inclusiveness of rules intolerable. It  is
one thing to have a  flat rule that  people under the  age of 16 cannot
drive; the  costs of  the  rule—mistaken denials of  a license—are rela-
tively low.  It  is quite another  thing  to  have  a  flat  rule  that  people
falling in a certain class will be put to death. It is for this reason  that
rule-bound  decisions  are  unacceptable  in  inflicting  capital  punish-
ment,  and  to  some  extent  in  criminal  sentencing  generally.  (But
here we must believe not only that rules make for error, but also that
case-by-case decisions will make for less error.)

The  point  also  helps  explain  the  dramatic  difference  between
criminal liability, which  is  generally  rule-bound,  and  criminal  sen-
tencing, which is generally based on factors. Part of  the  story is that

58

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

specificity is needed at the liability stage, so that  people can  plan ac-
cordingly, and so that the discretion of  the  police is sharply cabined.
Both  interests  are  far  weaker  at  the  sentencing  stage.  Planning  is
not so insistently at stake. The discretion of  the  sentencing  judge or
jury is less prone to abuse than the discretion of the police officer.

I  have noted  that  rules  are  less  acceptable  in  the  face  of  sharp
limits in information  and experience. When  information  is lacking,
or can be obtained only at high cost, officials will avoid them. At the
same time, rules—once they  are  in  place—economize  on  informa-
tion costs at the  point  of  application. For example, there  was  a dra-
matic shift  from  adjudication to rulemaking  in  American  adminis-
trative  agencies  in  the  1960s  and  1970s,  partly  on  the  theory  that
rules could resolve many  cases at once,  and  limit  the  informational
costs,  biases,  and  errors  of  case-by-case  judgments.  But  because  of
the  informational  demands faced by people who  make  rules  in  the
first  instance,  rules  are  now  exceptionally  difficult  to  promulgate,
and there  has  been  a  shift  in  the  other  direction,  toward  decision
without rules. In  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  for exam-
ple, it takes over a year and a half  to prepare a rule internally; half  a
year more to receive the  legally-required public  comments;  and  six-
teen more months to analyze the  comments  and issue the  rules.43 It
is not  at all surprising that  the  result is to shift  agencies away  from
rulemaking and toward less costly options.

Rules are also less acceptable  when  circumstances  are  changing
rapidly. When circumstances are changing,  rules are likely to be in-
accurate. Consider, for example,  a  congressional  decision  to  issue  a
statutory  standard  for  permissible  emissions  levels  for  coal-fired
power plants. Surely any such standard will be out of  date in  a short
time because of  technological  change.  In  these  circumstances  rules
will  become  obsolete  very  quickly,  and  it  may  be  best  to  delegate
decisions to institutions  capable  of  changing  them  rapidly,  or  per-
haps to allow case-by-case judgments based on relevant factors.

When  numerous  decisions  of  the  same  general  class  must  be
made, the  inaccuracy of rules becomes far more tolerable. Consider,
for example, the requirement that all drivers must be over the  age of
16, or the  use  of  the  social  security  grid  to  decide  disability  claims.
                                                                                                               
43See  Stephen  Breyer  &  Richard  Stewart,  Administrative  Law  and

Regulatory Policy 107 (3d ed. 1993).

Rules and Rulelessness

59

Frustrating bureaucratic insistence on  “the technicalities” may result
simply because so many  decisions must be  made,  and  because  indi-
vidualized inquiry into whether technicalities make sense in  particu-
lar cases is too time-consuming. Similarly, rules can be avoided when
few decisions need to be made, or when  each case effectively stands
on its own.

There  is  a  general  conclusion.  The  choice  between  rules  and
rulelessness cannot itself be made on  the  basis of  rules. That  choice
is itself a function  of  factors. It  would  be obtuse to say that  one  or
another  usually makes sense, or is justified in  most settings. To  de-
cide between  them,  we  need to  know  a  great  deal  about  the  con-
text—the  likelihood  of  bias,  the  location  and  nature  of  social  dis-
sensus, the stakes, the risk of  over-inclusiveness, the  quality of  those
who  apply  the  law,  the  alignment  or  nonalignment  of  views  be-
tween  lawmakers and others, the  sheer number  of  cases.  It  follows
that  a  well-functioning  legal  system  should  be  suspicious  of  two
trends in  recent  writing—extravagant  enthusiasm  for  rules  and  ex-
cessive  focus  on  the  possibility  of  achieving  accurate  outcomes
through fine-grained encounters with particulars.

C.  Privately  Adaptable  Rules

A  more  ambitious  strategy  might  emerge  from  distinguishing
between  two  sorts  of  rules.44  Some  rules  allocate  initial  entitle-
ments—they  unquestionably  count  as  rules—but  at  the  same  time
they maximize flexibility and minimize the  informational  burden on
government,  by  allowing  private  adaptation  to  determine  ultimate
outcomes. Consider the rules of  the  road; taxes imposed on  danger-
ous  workplaces;  rules  allocating  property  rights  and  thus  creating
private  property;  or  rules  governing  entry  into  agreements.  These
might  be  described  as  privately  adaptable  rules.  By  contrast,  some
laws do not  merely allocate entitlements,  but  also  minimize  private
flexibility by mandating  particular end-states or outcomes. Consider
price controls, or specified technology  for new  cars, or flat  bans  on
the  presence  of  carcinogens  in  the  workplace.  Rules  that  specify
                                                                                                               
44Related  discussion  can  be  found  in  Friedrich  Hayek,  The  Constitution
of  Liberty  (1960), distinguishing  between  “laws”  and  “commands.”  This  is  a
highly  illuminating  but  also  confused  discussion;  I  have  drawn  on  some  of
Hayek’s ideas but tried to reduce the level of confusion.  

60

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

end-states  are  common  in  modern  regulation,  in  the  form  of
“command  and  control”  regulation  that  says  exactly  what  people
must do and how they must do it.

The line between these sorts of laws is one of degree rather than
one of  kind. What  I  am describing is a characteristic of  some rules,
not a  crisp category of  rules. Notably, all rules allocate entitlements,
and the  allocation may well  have an  effect  on  both  preferences and
distributions, and hence  on  end-states  as  well.45  It  is  insufficiently
appreciated  that  government  cannot  avoid  the  task  of  allocating
entitlements  and  of  doing  so  through  rules.  Laissez-faire  is  a
chimera; what is  familiarly described as laissez-faire is actually a par-
ticular set of  legal rules. Our rights,  as  we  live  them,  do  not  come
from nature. They depend on law.46

We  own  property  only  because  the  legal  system  has  allocated
property rights to us. In  this sense, property rights  are anything  but
natural. Freedom of  contract,  as we  understand and enjoy  it, is  not
part of nature. It is a function of legal rules creating and constituting
that  form  of  freedom.47 The  rules  of  private  property  and  freedom
of contract are rules, and they are legal in character. What  I  want  to
emphasize here  is  that  these  rules  are  distinctive  in  the  sense  that
they  allocate  initial  entitlements,  allow  private  adaptation,  and  do
not specify end-states.

Most generally, freedom to act is itself in  important  part a  func-
tion  of  the  legal  system,  which  says,  often,  that  people  can  do  as
they wish without  public or private interference,  and with  public or
private  protection.  If  all  this  is  right,  there  can  be  no  system  of
laissez-faire  (short  of  anarchy); 
legal  rules  are  pervasive  and
inevitable,  indeed  coercive  in  their  own  way,  even  in  the  most
                                                                                                               
45Hence the Coase theorem will sometimes be  wrong  insofar  as  it  predicts
the  initial  allocation  of  the  entitlement  will  not  affect outcomes.  See  Cass  R.
Sunstein,  Endogenous  Preferences,  Environmental  Law,  22  J  Legal  Stud  217
(1993).

46See  the  instructive  discussion  of  how  cooperation  must  precede  compe-
tition in Jules Coleman, Risks and Wrongs 60-62 (1992). This  was  a  important
theme in the New Deal era. For general discussion, see  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  The
Partial Constitution ch. 2 (1993).

47Some qualifications emerge from  Robert  Ellickson,  Order  Without  Law

(1992).

Rules and Rulelessness

61

market-oriented  of  free  market  systems.48  (People  in  Eastern
Europe, now undertaking the difficult task of creating markets, have
seen  this  all  too  well.)  Government  can  hardly  avoid  the  task  of
creating rules allocating rights.

The  claim on  behalf  of  privately adaptable rules is not  that  lais-
sez-faire is a possibility for law. It is instead that law can choose  rules
with certain  characteristics—rules that  will reduce the  risks of  rules,
by allowing private adaptation and by harnessing  market and private
forces in  such a way  as to minimize the  informational  and  political
burden imposed  on  government.  The  ultimate  project,  then,  is  to
favor rules that specify and allocate initial entitlements,  and to disfa-
vor rules that specify outcomes. Hence the rules that constitute  mar-
kets are entirely acceptable insofar as their rule-ness usually does not
produce the risks that tend to accompany rules.

A key feature of privately adaptable rules is their association with
free  alienability  of  rights.  Ownership  rights  are  of  course  freely
alienable,49 and in this way they attend to the  fact  that  owners  (and
purchasers) know how valuable the relevant rights are to them.  The
informational  burden on  government  is  therefore  minimized.  The
surrounding rules do not operate as personal orders. They allow  large
room for individual maneuver. They are coercive, to be sure. The law
of  property is itself coercive insofar as it prevents  non-owners  from
claiming  what  they  would  otherwise  claim  and  doing  what  they
would  otherwise  do.50 The  virtue of  privately  adaptable  rules  is  not
that  they  are not  coercive and not  that  they are “natural”; it  is  that
                                                                                                               
48See  Friedrich  Hayek,  The  Road  to  Serfdom  38-39  (1944):  “The  func-
tioning of a competition . . .  depends,  above  all,  on  the  existence  of  an  appro-
priate legal system.  .  .  .  In  no  system  that  could  be  rationally  defended  would
the state just do nothing. An effective competitive system needs an  intelligently
designed and continuously adjusted legal framework as much as any  other.”  See
also  Amartya  Sen,  Poverty  and  Famines  165-66  (1983): “Finally,  the  focus  on
entitlement  has  the  effect of  emphasizing  legal  rights.  Other  relevant  factors,
for  example  market  forces,  can  be  seen  as  operating  through  a  system  of  legal
relations  (ownership  rights,  contractual  obligations,  legal  exchanges,  etc.).  The
law stands between food availability and food entitlement. Starvation deaths  can
reflect legality with a vengeance.”

49To  be  sure,  restrictions  on  free  alienability  might  be  justified  for  many
reasons,  including  collective  action  problems,  externalities,  difficulties  with
commodification, and so forth. I cannot discuss these issues here.

50Cf. Sen, supra note 48.

62

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

they  reduce the  costs  of  rule-making  and  harness  private  informa-
tion and preferences51 in the service of outcomes that  are themselves
not identified ex ante.

People who favor privately adaptable rules, and who distrust rules
that  specify  end-states,  are  often  known  as  critics  of  the  modern
regulatory  state.52  The  distinction  between  the  two  sorts  of  rules
might  easily be harnessed in  the  service of  an  argument  for  private
property, freedom of contract, simple rules of  tort law,  and relatively
little else. The  same insights  might,  however,  be used on  behalf  of
reform strategies that  take the  modern  state  as  an  important  social
good.  Many  current  regulatory  rules  are  dysfunctional  not  because
they  promote the  goals of  the  modern  regulatory state,  but  because
they unnecessarily specify end-states. In so doing, they  produce  both
injustice and inefficiency, in  the  form  of  over-inclusiveness and un-
der-inclusiveness, replicating all of  the  problems  typically  associated
with a refusal to make inquiries at the point of application.

A prominent  example is command  and control  regulation,  per-
vasive in  the  law  of  environmental  protection; this  form  of  regula-
tion has been largely unsuccessful because of the pathologies of  rules.
It  makes  no  sense  to  say  that  all  industries  must  adopt  the  same
control  technology,  regardless of the  costs and benefits of  adoption
in the  particular case. Command-and-control  should be replaced by
more  flexible,  incentive-based  strategies,  which  could  use  privately
adaptable  rules.  Instead  of  saying,  for  example,  what  technologies
companies must use, the  law  might  impose  pollution  taxes  or  fees,
and then allow private judgments about the best means  of achieving
desirable  social  goals.  Government  might  also  allow  companies  to
buy and sell pollution licenses, a system that  would  create  good  in-
centives  for  pollution  reduction  without  imposing  on  government
the  significant  informational  burden  of  specifying  means  of  pollu-
tion  reduction. The  familiar economic  argument  for incentives  is  a
key part of the argument for privately adaptable rules.

Or consider the area of telecommunications, an area that  has for
too long  been  burdened by unduly rigid rules. For much  of  its  his-
tory, the Federal Communications Commission has been faced with
                                                                                                               

51Subject to the qualification in supra note 45.
52See Hayek, supra note 44; Richard Epstein, Simple Rules  for  a Complex

World  (forthcoming  1995).

Rules and Rulelessness

63

the  task of  deciding  to  whom  to  allocate  licenses.  In  making  this
decision, it has alternated between rules and factors. In using factors,
the  fcc  has  referred  to  local  ownership,  minority  ownership,
participation  by  owners  in  public  affairs,  broadcast  experience,  the
adequacy of technical facilities, the  background and qualifications of
staff, the  character of  owners,  and more.  The  problems  with  both
rules and factors are entirely predictable—inaccuracy through  exces-
sive rigidity on  the  one  hand,  and discretionary, ad hoc,  costly,  po-
tentially abusive judgments on  the  other.  It  is no  wonder  that both
approaches have largely failed.

What alternatives are possible? In  a famous early article, Ronald
Coase argued that  the  government  should  allocate  broadcasting  li-
censes through what I  am calling  privately adaptable rules53— based
on  property rights and market transfers, as we  do (for  example)  for
ownership  of  newspapers and automobiles. In  the  last year the  fcc
has experimented with auctions, and the  experiments have  produced
surprisingly  good  results.  Now  there  is  an  obvious  objection  to
Coase’s  proposal.  Perhaps  broadcasting  licenses  should  not  be  re-
garded as ordinary property; perhaps the  criterion of private willing-
ness to pay is an  inadequate basis for awarding  licenses. The  objec-
tion  contains  a  real  point.54  Broadcasting  protects  a  range  of
“nonmarket” values, captured in  the  aspiration to promote attention
to  public  affairs,  diversity  of  view,  and  high-quality  programming.
But the  objection  is not  a justification  for  departing  from  privately
adaptable rules in favor of command  and control  regulation via rules
or factors. Instead the rules for license auctions might be designed so
as  to  ensure  auction  credits  for  those  applicants  who  promise  to
promote  nonmarket  values.  Th  e  example  shows  that  privately
adaptable rules  might  well  be  used  not  to  oppose  regulatory  goals,
but  instead  to  harness  market  forces  in  the  interest  of  those  very
goals.
                                                                                                               
53See Ronald Coase, The Federal Communications  Commission,  2  J.  Law

& Econ. 1 (1959).

Problem of Free Speech (1993).

54I  try  to  support  this  view  in  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Democracy  and  the

64

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

D.  Abolition

Sometimes  both  rules  and  factors  are  intolerable;  sometimes
market forces cannot or should not be harnessed. Having  eliminated
both  rules  and  factors,  the  law  might  use  a  lottery  instead.  (Of
course the decision to hold a lottery is supported by a rule.) This  is a
characteristic  approach  to  the  military  draft,  where  rule-bound
judgments  seem too  crude,  and  where  judgments  based  on  factors
are too obviously subject to discrimination and caprice. Lotteries are
used in  many  other  areas as  well.  Of  course  lotteries  have  an  arbi-
trariness of  their own,  and for this reason, they  may  be  an  inferior
approach.

Alternatively, the legal system, having  found  both  rules and fac-
tors  inadequate,  might  abolish  the  relevant  institution  itself.  (The
abolition must of  course be  accomplished  by  rule.)  Hence  the  best
argument  for  abolition  of  the  death  penalty  takes  the  following
form. Rules are unacceptable because they eliminate the possibility of
adaptation to individual circumstances. Rule-bound  death sentences
are excessively impersonal. But factors are unacceptable too,  because
they allow excessive discretion, and create a  risk that  irrelevant or il-
legitimate  considerations  will  enter  the  decision  to  impose  capital
punishment.  When  judgments  are to be made about who  is to  live
and who  is to die, a high  degree of  accuracy is necessary, and errors
based on confusion, variable judgments,  bias, or venality are intoler-
able. The problem is that human institutions cannot  devise a system
for making capital decisions in a way that sufficiently diminishes the
risk of  error. Rule-bound  system  create  errors;  so  too  with  systems
based on factors.

The strongest argument against the death penalty is not that the
penalty of death is too brutal, but that it cannot be administered in  a
sufficiently accurate way.  Suppose  it  could  be  shown  that  through
individualized consideration in  the  form  of  factors, the  rate of  error
is high, at least in the sense that irrelevant or invidious factors play a
large role in the ultimate decision of life or death. Suppose that  rules
are the only way to eliminate the  role of  such factors, but that  rules
are objectionable in  their own  way,  because they  do not  allow  con-
sideration  of  possible  mitigating  factors.  Perhaps  evidence  to  this
effect  would  not  be  sufficient  to  convince  most  people  that  the
death penalty is unacceptable. But if it is possible to persuade a range

Rules and Rulelessness

65

of people of this conclusion, the sources of the argument lie, I think,
in evidence of this sort.

Conclusion

A system committed to the  rule of law  is committed  to limiting
official discretion; but it is not  committed  to making  every decision
according  to  judgments  that  have  been  fully  specified  in  advance.
Nonetheless,  rules are an  admirable device for  obtaining  agreement
on the content  of  law,  and also for reducing discretion at the  point
of  application. Often  people can  agree on  rules when  they  disagree
about general theory; they can  agree that  the  rules are binding,  that
the  rules  are  good,  and  that  the  rules  have  a  certain  identifiable
meaning.  Frequently a lawmaker  adopts  rules  because  rules  narrow
or even eliminate the  range  of  disagreement  and  uncertainty  faced
by people attempting to follow or to interpret the law.  This  step has
enormous virtues in  terms of  promoting predictability and planning
and of reducing both costs and risks of official abuse.

Rules are sometimes thought to be associated with merely formal
equality; but the  association is misconceived. Hayekian  understand-
ings of the rule of law, identifying rules with free markets, introduce
into that notion  further  ideas that  should be distinguished and that
require an independent defense.

Rule-skeptics say that  rules are not  what  they  appear  to  be.  In
their view, full ex ante  specification of  outcomes is  a  chimera.  The
need  for  interpretation,  during  encounters  with  concrete  cases,
means  that  ex post assessments of  some sort are an  inescapable part
of  law.  There  is  some  truth  in  this  claim.  Almost  any  judgment
about meaning will partake of substantive ideas of a sort. It  is almost
inevitable that some case can eventually  arise that  will  confound  the
attempt to use rules to specify all outcomes in  advance. These  claims
are chastening. But they do not  defeat the  project of  those who  are
enthusiastic  about  rules.  Usually  the  question  of  meaning  is  easy;
often ex ante specification is possible for most  cases. A form  of  rule-
following is therefore feasible.

Rules have many goals, but as they operate in law,  they  are often
simple summaries of  good decisions in  individual  cases.  In  carrying
out this task, they reduce costs, ease choice, limit the  errors encoun-
tered in  particular decisions, produce coordination,  and make it un-

66

Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics

necessary to debate issues of  value and fact  every time someone  does
something  having  social  consequences.  Because  of  their  ex  ante
character, rules will  usually be over-inclusive and  under-inclusive  by
reference  to  the  arguments  that  justify  them.  They  will  often  be
outrun  by changing  circumstances.  Usually the  crudeness of rules  is
tolerable, and most of the  resulting inefficiency  and injustice can  be
controlled  through  means  short  of  abandoning  rules.  But,  some-
times the crudeness of rules counts decisively against them.

their 

factors 

rules  and 

in  which  both 
crudeness  and 

Some  of  the  most difficult issues in  law  involve  the  choice  be-
seem
in  cases 
tween 
unacceptable—rules,  because  of 
their
insensitivity  to  particulars  that  confound  them;  factors,  because  of
the likelihood of arbitrariness and discrimination in application. The
Benthamite strategy calls for ex ante rules for the  public and ex post,
case-by-case particularism for judges. I  have questioned this strategy
on  both  economic  and democratic grounds; but sometimes  flexible,
contextual  interpretation  of  rules,  adapting  the  general  to  the
particular, can bring about something like the best of both worlds.

More generally, the choice between  rules and rulelessness might
well be based on a highly  pragmatic, contextualized inquiry into  the
costs of the two approaches in the particular area at hand.  Moreover,
privately  adaptable  rules  are  a  promising  effort  to  minimize  the
problems  of  excessive  generality,  by  opting  for  rules  that  harness
private ordering and thus reduce the informational  costs imposed on
government.  Some  people  who  favor  such  rules  intend  their
arguments  to be a critique of  regulation and a  basis  for  approval  of
unrestricted  (though  rule-governed)  free  markets.  But  privately
adaptable  rules  may  enjoy  an  important  rebirth  in  the  context  of
government regulation—in the creation of rules that are designed to
accomplish regulatory goals, but that do so by specifying initial enti-
tlements rather than final outcomes,  and that  harness market forces
in the interest of socially chosen ends.

Rules and Rulelessness

67

This  Working  Paper is a preliminary version of  an  article  that  will
be  published  in  1996,  The  Tanner  Lectures  in  Human  Values.
Readers with comments should address them to:

Cass R. Sunstein
Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence
The Law School
The University of Chicago
1111 East 60th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics
(Second Series)

1.  William  M.  Landes,  Copyright  Protection  of  Letters,  Diaries
and Other  Unpublished Works:  An  Economic  Approach  (July
1991).

2.  Richard A. Epstein, The Path to  The  T. J. Hooper: The  Theory

and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991).

3.  Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism  (Septem-

4.  Richard  A.  Posner,  Blackmail,  Privacy,  and  Freedom  of  Con-

ber 1991).

tract (February 1992).

5.  Randal  C.  Picker,  Security 
Common Pools (February 1992).

Interests,  Misbehavior,  and

6.  Tomas  J. Philipson  & Richard  A. Posner,  Optimal  Regulation

7.  Douglas  G.  Baird,  Revisiting  Auctions  in  Chapter  11  (April

of aids (April 1992).

1992).

8.  William M. Landes, Sequential  versus Unitary Trials:  An  Eco-

nomic Analysis (July 1992).

9.  William  M.  Landes  &  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Influence  of

Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992).

10.  Alan  O. Sykes, The  Welfare Economics  of  Immigration  Law:
A  Theoretical  Survey  With  An  Analysis  of  U.S.  Policy
(September 1992).

11. Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing  Contracts

12. Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January

(November 1992).

1993).

13. J. Mark  Ramseyer,  Credibly  Committing  to  Efficiency  Wages:

Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993).

14. Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental  Law

(April 1993).

15.  Richard  A.  Posner,  What  Do  Judges  and  Justices  Maximize?

(The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993).

16. Lucian Arye Bebchuk  and Randal  C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules,
Managerial Entrenchment,  and  Firm-Specific  Human  Capital
(August 1993).

17. J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons  for Implicit  Contracts:  The
Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993).
18. William M. Landes and Richard  A. Posner,  The  Economics  of

Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993).

19.  Kenneth  W.  Dam,  The  Economic  Underpinnings  of  Patent

Law (September 1993).

20.  Alan  O.  Sykes,  An  Introduction  to  Regression  Analysis

21.  Richard  A.  Epstein,  The  Ubiquity  of  the  Benefit  Principle

22.  Randal  C.  Picker,  An  Introduction  to  Game  Theory  and  the

23.  William  M.  Landes,  Counterclaims:  An  Economic  Analysis

24.  J.  Mark  Ramseyer,  The  Market  for  Children:  Evidence  from

Early Modern Japan (August 1994).

25. Robert H. Gertner  and Geoffrey P.  Miller, Settlement  Escrows

26.  Kenneth  W.  Dam,  Some  Economic  Considerations  in  the
Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994).

27. Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness (October 1994).

(October 1993).

(March 1994).

Law (June 1994).

(June 1994).

(August 1994).

