 Table of Contents A New Deal is necessary for speech, one that would parallel the New Deal provided to property rights during the 1930s. 1 The goal of the New Deal should be to promote attention to public issues and diversity of view, and, in this way, to diminish the influence of money over the content of broadcasting. 3. Robert L. Hale, Force and the State: A Comparison of "Political" and "Economic" While these remarks may seem uncomfortably abstract or unconventional, they have a clear foundation in no lesser place than New York Times Company v. Sullivan,10 one of the defining cases of modern free speech law. The Sullivan Court concluded that a public official could not bring an action for libel unless he could show "actual malice," that is, knowledge of, or reckless indifference to, the falsity of the statements at issue.1 Sullivan is usually taken as the symbol of broad press immunity for criticism of public officials. Even more, Sullivan is often understood to reflect the conception of freedom of expression advocated by Alexander Meiklejohn-a conception of selfgovernment connected to the American principle of sovereignty. 12 What is striking about Sullivan, however, is that the lower court held that the common law of tort, and more particularly libel, was not state action at all, and was therefore entirely immune from constitutional constraint. 3 A civil action, according to the lower court's view, involved a purely private dispute. The Supreme Court quickly disposed of this objection, as seems obviously right. The Court's rationis ale was that conspicuously state action.14 What is interesting is not the Supreme Court's rejection of the no state action argument, but the fact that such an argument could be made by a state supreme court as late as the 1960s. How could reasonable judges perceive the rules of tort law as purely private? the use of public to punish speech tribunals The answer lies in the persistence of pre-New Deal understandings in which the common law simply implements existing rights, or private desires, and does not amount to "intervention" or "action" at Consider, for example, the issues raised when people claim a right of access to the media, or seek controls on broadcasting in general. May broadcasters be required to be common carriers of local programming, as the 1992 Cable Act says?17 Suppose that most broadcasters deal little or not at all with issues of public importance, restricting themselves to stories about movie stars or sex scandals. Suppose, too, that there is no diversity of view on the airwaves, but instead a bland, watered-down version of conventional morality. tem of free expression is the governmental grant of legal protectionrights of exclusive use-to institutions having huge resources with which to provide communication. 8 This grant of power-sometimes through the common law, sometimes through statute-is usually taken not to be a grant of power at all, but instead to be purely "private." Thus the exclusion of people and views from the airwaves is immunized from constitutional constraint on the theory that the act of We might apply this understanding to current problems. If the First Amendment is regarded as an effort to ensure that people are not prevented from speaking, especially on issues of public importance, then the commitments that currently dominate free speech law seem ill-adapted to current conditions. Above all, the concept of government regulation turns out to misstate important issues and sometimes to disserve the goal of free expression itself. With broadcasting, the form of the exclusion is rights of exclusion that prevent certain people from speaking, and that do so through law. The second point is that the distinction between negative and positive rights fails even to explain current First Amendment law. There are two obvious counter examples. The Supreme Court has come very close to saying that when an audience becomes hostile and threatening, the government is obligated to protect the speaker. Under current law, reasonable crowd control measures are probably constitutionally compelled, even if the result is to require a number of 21. To say this is not to say that the distinction itself is untenable. We can understand a positive right as one that requires for its existence some act by government, and a negative right as one that amounts merely to an objection to some such act. There is nothing incoherent about this distinction. The argument in text is directed against the view that an objection to rights of exclusive ownership is a call for a positive right; in fact that objection is mounted against something that government is actually doing. Cases of this sort reveal that the First Amendment, even as currently conceived, is no mere negative right. It has positive dimensions as well. Those positive dimensions consist of a command to government to take steps to ensure that the system of free expression is not violated by legal rules giving too much authority to private persons. In the hostile audience case, government is obliged to protect the speaker against private silencing; in the libel cases, government is obliged to do the same thing, that is, to provide an extra breathing space for speech even though one of the consequences is to infringe on the common law interest in reputation. as far as the First Amendment is concerned those who are licensed stand no better than those to whom licenses are refused. A license permits broadcasting, but the licensee has no constitutional right to be the one who holds the license or to monopolize a radio frequency to the exclusion of his fellow citizens. There is nothing in the First Amendment which prevents the Government from requiring a licensee to share his frequency with others and to conduct himself as a proxy or fiduciary with obligations to present those views and voices which are representative of his community and which would otherwise, by necessity, be barred from the airwaves.28 Thus the Court emphasized that the people as a whole retain their interest in free speech by radio and their collective right to have the medium function consistently with the ends and purposes of the First Amendment. It is the right of the viewers and listeners, not the right of the broadcasters, which is paramount. It is the purpose of the First Amendment to preserve an uninhibited marketplace of ideas in which truth will ultimately prevail, rather than to countenance monopolization of that market, whether it be by the Government itself or a private licensee. It is the right of the public to receive suitable access to social, political, aesthetic, moral, and other ideas and experiences which is crucial The Red Lion Broadcasting vision of the First Amendment stresses not the autonomy of broadcasters (made possible only by current ownership rights), but instead the need to promote democratic self-government by ensuring that people are presented with a broad range of views about public issues. I do not mean to defend the fairness doctrine itself, about which we need not be enthusiastic. But in a market system, basic democratic goals may be compromised. It. is hardly clear that "the freedom of speech" is promoted by a regime in which people are permitted to speak if and only if other people are willing to pay enough to allow them to be heard. A core insight of Red Lion Broadcasting is that the interest in private autonomy from government is not always the same as the interest in free speech through democratic self-governance. To immunize broadcasters from legal control may not promote quality and diversity in broadcasting. In fact, it may be inconsistent with the First Amendment's own commitments. The question, then, is what sorts of regulatory strategies have the most beneficial effects for the system of free expression. 29. Id. at 390 (citations omitted, including a reference to the Brennan article referred to earlier). Note, however, that the Constitution forbids any "law... abridging the freedom of speech. '33 Consequently, we must examine whether the fairness doctrine is such a law. To its defenders, the fairness doctrine promotes "the freedom of speech," by ensuring diversity of views on the airwaves, diversity that the market may fail to bring about. In response, the FCC's attack asserts, without a sufficiently full look at the real-world consequences of different regulatory strategies, that the doctrine involves governmental interference with an otherwise purely law-free and voluntary private sphere.34 This response is far from adequate. A market will of course make it unnecessary for government officials to oversee the content of speech in order to assess its value. The fact that a market removes official oversight surely counts strongly in its favor. The restrictions of the market are content-neutral, in the sense that the content of the speech is not directly relevant to the application of property law. But the restrictions of the fairness doctrine, or any similar alternative, are content-based in the sense that any such doctrine would have to be applied with government attention to the content of the speech. the stuff of science fiction, rather than self-government. It would be especially perverse insofar as it would ensure that dissident speechexpression for which people are often willing to pay-would be foreclosed. But in many respects, this is precisely what a competitive system would produce, and indeed it is the system we now have to the extent that it is competitive. Broadcasting licenses and speech opportunities are allocated very much on the basis of private willingness to pay. Much information has now been compiled on local news, which began, incidentally, as a direct response to the FCC's fairness doc During a half-hour of news, no more than eight to twelve minutes involves news at all.39 Each story that does involve news typically ranges from twenty to thirty seconds.' Even the news stories tend not to involve issues of government and policy, but instead focus on fires, accidents, and crimes. Government stories are further de-emphasized during the more popular evening show. And even coverage of government tends to emphasize not the content of relevant policies, but instead sensational and often misleading "human impact" anecdotes. In addition, there has been greater emphasis on "features"dealing with popular actors, or entertainment shows, or even stories focussing on the movie immediately preceding the news. Economic pressures seem to be pushing local news in this direction even when reporters would prefer to deal with public issues in a more serious way. With respect to network news, the pattern is similar. In 1988, almost sixty percent of the national campaign coverage involved "horse race" issues-who was winning, who has momentum-while only about thirty percent involved issues and qualifications.42 In the crucial period from January to June 1980, there were about 450 minutes of campaign coverage, of which no less than 308 minutes dealt with the "horse race" issues. 43 It is notable in this regard that for presidential candidates, the average block of uninterrupted speech fell from 42.3 seconds in 1968 to only 9.8 seconds in 1988."4 A statement of more than ten seconds is therefore unlikely to find its way onto the major networks. There is little sustained coverage of the substance of candidate speeches. Instead, attention is placed on how various people are doing. [a] lot of what we used to do is report on the back and forth of where we stood against the Russians. But there is no back and forth anymore. I mean nobody is talking about the bomb, so you have to fill the time with the things people ARE talking about.4X Note the problem of circularity here: What people are talking about is in part of function of what sorts of things are presented on the popular media. Educational programming for children sometimes cannot acquire sponsors. It is for this reason that such programming can be found' 45. J. Max Robins, Nets' Newscasts Increase Coverage of Entertainment, VARIETY, July Shortly thereafter, network programming for children dramatically decreased, and programs based on products took its place.6 ° Thus, children's television became "a listless by-product of an ex Most of the resulting shows are quite violent, and the violence increased in the period after deregulation. Statistical measures will of course be inadequate, but it is at least revealing that before 1980, there were 18.6 violent acts per hour for children's programs, whereas after 1980, the number increased to 26.4 acts per hour.' Children's daytime weekend programs, have been consistently more violent than prime-time shows. Few of these shows have educational content. IV Potential Correctives-and the First Amendment Regulatory strategies cannot solve all of these problems. But they could help with some of them. Some such strategies should not be treated as abridgements of the freedom of speech. There are several answers. First, and most simply, we may have a situation of natural monopoly or "bottleneck control" over stations, at least with respect to cable. If government is responding to such a situation in a viewpoint-neutral manner, usually there should be no constitutional problem. Much the same is true of information, especially with respect to public affairs. The benefits of a broad public debate, yielding large quantities of information, accrue simultaneously to many or all people.7" Once information is provided to one person, or to some of them, it is also provided to many others too, or it can be so provided at minimal cost. The production of information for one or some person thus yields large additional benefits for other people as well. But-and this is the key point-the market provides no mechanism to ensure that these benefits will be adequately taken into account by those who produce the information, in this case the newspaper and broadcasting industries. So much for the public good issue. The third problem with reliance on the large number of outlets is that sheer numbers do not explain why there is a constitutional objection to democratic efforts to increase quality and diversity by ensuring better programming on individual stations. Even with a large number of stations, there is far less quality and diversity than there might be. Of course people can change the channel. But why should the Constitution bar a democratic decision to experiment with new methods for achieving their democratic goals? Fourth, it is important to be extremely cautious about the use, for constitutional and political purposes, of the notion of consumer sovereignty. Consumer sovereignty is the conventional economic term for the virtues of a free market, in which goods are allocated through consumer choices, and these goods are measured by how much people are willing to pay for things. Those who invoke the notion of free choice insisting on consumer sovereignty. But in markets are really Madison's conception of "sovereignty" is the relevant one.72 That conception has an altogether different character. 71. It might be thought that the distinctive characteristics of the broadcasting market provide at least a partial solution. Because advertisers attempt to ensure a large audience, viewers are commodities as well as, or instead of, consumers. In these circumstances, it is not as if individual people are purchasing individual pieces of information. Instead, advertisers are aggregating individual preferences in seeking popular programming and, in that sense, helping to overcome the collective action problem. laws frequently In a democracy, those ocratic polity. judgments, or what might be described as the aspirations of the public as a whole. Those aspirations can and often do call for markets themselves. But they might also call for intrusions on markets-a familiar phenomenon in such areas as environmental law, protection of endangered species, social security, and antidiscrimination law. Democratic liberty, then, should not be identified with "consumer sovereignty." And in the context at hand, the people, acting through their elected representatives, might well decide that democratic liberty is more valuable than consumer sovereignty. it is worthwhile to emphasize that the Constitution is itself a precommitment strategy, and that this strategy includes the First Amendment itself. though it is not easy to draw up an adequate standard. I have not argued that government should be free to regulate broadcasting, whether network or cable; however it chooses. There remain hard policy and legal questions. At the legal level, regulation designed to eliminate a particular viewpoint would of course be out of bounds. All viewpoint-discrimination would be banned. Government could not say that feminists or the religious right must be represented; it must be neutral on this count. Must-carry rules are neutral in this