 Panel II: Public Versus Private Environmental Regulation Cass R. Sunstein, Fourth Panelist* I have to tell you I am a little discouraged with my topic, which is the defense of democratic approaches to environmental protection. In preparation for this, I really wanted to get a hold of the Vice President's report on reinventing the government.' So I called the Regulatory Affairs Office in the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and they said the person to call was the Public Affairs Office at OMB. I called them and they said the person to call was the Vice President's office. I called them and they said the person to call was the Government Printing Office. It sounded very depressing. But I thought, well, maybe that will work. So I went ahead and called the Government Printing Office, and they said they could have it to me probably within the month. (Laughter.) I have heard subsequently that part of the Gore report says that the Government Printing Office will have to compete with private enterprise, and that may explain their reluctance to send it out. (Laughter.) Undaunted, I am going to try to defend the democratic approach to environmental problems. Much of what I have to say about private remedies and public remedies will be through a democratic lens. It might be more accurate to say that it is a republican approach, republican in the sense of what James Madison said in his theory of governto foster public ment, designed deliberation. to Let me begin with a bill of particulars indicting common law approaches to environmental protection. This is just an effort to abstract a bit from the familiar failures of private law. I guess this is a criticism, a partial criticism at least, of free market environmentalism. It is familiar that there are collective action problems with individually small but, on aggregate, very large injuries, which a common law or private market system will fail to address. So in cases in which there are lots of people injured a little bit, the environmental damage may be very high, but the common law will be unable to respond. In addition, it is very hard to get an adequately coordinated system by using the common law, and this is potentially disastrous in the environmental area. Litigation is focused on too few aspects of a problem. It lacks the comprehensive overview that one would need, for example, to come to terms with water pollution. Litigation is also fortuitous in its timing. It is random and ex post. If you like the current law of products liability, then you would love common law approaches to environmental protection, where the problems will probably be even worse. spent $900 billion for pollution control since 1972. I think $1000 billion is actually a trillion, but I was not entirely sure of that, so I took a lower end of the estimate. $900 billion. (Laughter.) And many estimates suggest that we could have achieved the same environmental benefit at one-quarter of the cost. 4 Not only is there great inefficiency in our command-and-control system, but there is also democratic failure, above all in the influence of well-organized factions over the regulatory machinery. It may be that ethanol is really, really great and that governmental specification of ethanol as the automobile motoring substance of choice would be a good idea. But there is no doubt that the power of the ethanol lobby-the farmer's lobby-has played a role in occasional governmental enthusiasm for ethanol. Now to make a very simple argument, this discussion suggests that the problems of the common law-lack of coordination, lack of economic efficiency, lack of real application of expertise, and lack of democratic deliberation-are just what we have now. I think it would be difficult to contend that we would be better off under the common law system. But certainly it would not be hard to argue that we are not tremendously better off under the system we now have than we would be under the common law system. ronmental problems should be disclosure of information. Regulation should be the secondary remedy if there is a reason why information does not work. Information first, regulation second. What we have done over the past generation is the opposite. Centralized governmental regulation has been the first option, and information has been disclosed only if the regulatory option has been rebutted. Thus, my suggestion is disclosure as the preferred remedy and an overview entity that collects information, dispenses information, and ensures sensible priority setting. That is what I mean by information. You have heard a bit about economic incentives. What I want to suggest right now is that economic incentives not only promote efficiency, but, equally importantly, have a democracy-reinforcing feature. From the democratic point of view, this makes economic incentives much better than the command-and-control system. nomic incentives is not only economic, but also, more fundamentally, democratic.