 Decisions of individuals relating to homosexual conduct have been subject to state intervention throughout the history of Western civilization. Condemnation of those practices is firmly rooted in Judeo-Christian moral and ethical standards .... Blackstone described "the infamous crime against nature" as an offense of "deeper malignity" than rape .... concurring). Unexpectedly, discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation has become one of the most important equality issues of the 1990's. The development is unexpected because Bowers v. Hardwick,' the Georgia sodomy case, had been thought to resolve most of the issues as a matter of constitutional law. But, a range of new questions has emerged. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. This Article consists of a revised version of the Harris Lecture, delivered in February, 1994 at the Indiana University School of Law-Bloomington. I am extremely grateful to the faculty and students of the law school for their graciousness and help on that occasion. In applying the Constitution to issues involving homosexuality, there is a range of options. I discuss them briefly here. It is perhaps most tempting to apply the right of privacy-a form of "substantive due process"-to sexual autonomy in homosexual relations. As a practical matter, however, this route has been foreclosed by Bowers. Bowers is of course much maligned. But for at least two reasons, the outcome in that case has at least a degree of plausibility. 1. Equality in General Because the Equal Protection Clause was designed as an attack on traditions, it is a far more promising source of new constitutional doctrine than the right to privacy. Most generally, the Due Process Clause is associated with the protection of traditionally respected rights from novel or short-term change.' It is largely Burkean and backward-looking. By contrast, the Equal Protection Clause is self-consciously directed against traditional practices. It was designed to counteract practices that were time-honored and expected to endure. It is based on a norm of equality that operates as a critique of past practices.6 Because opposition to homosexuality has deep historical roots, 7 the Equal Protection Clause is the more sensible source of constitutional doctrine. Under the Equal Protection Clause, the Supreme Court has invalidated certain forms of discrimination on the ground that they are irrational or unconnected with any legitimate public purpose. 8 This idea is connected with an interesting conception of democracy: the distribution of benefits or the imposition of burdens must reflect a conception of the public good. The Court has also disqualified, as justifications of legislation, certain ideas on the ground that they reflect "prejudice" or "hostility." A statute based on "prejudice" cannot qualify as rational.9 We should think of the category of "prejudice" as a placeholder for a complex moral argument; the term is usually a conclusion masquerading as an analytic device. But in some important cases, lower federal courts have said that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation can indeed be irrational because it is a simple product of prejudice or irrational fear. Thus, for example, some courts have said that the exclusion from the military of people with homosexual "orientation"-unaccompanied by homosexual acts-is irrational and therefore unconstitutional under the Equal Protection Clause. ' In the important ruling in Steffan v. Aspin," the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit held that it was irrational to exclude from military service people of homosexual orientation, short of a demonstration of homosexual conduct. In the court's view, homosexual orientation alone was not a legitimate basis for discharge because it was unconnected with any plausible government interest. The court did not address the question whether homosexual conduct could be a basis for discharge. Two district courts reached the same conclusion, finding exclusion from the military to be unconnected with any legitimate public goal." These cases represent an unusual step in the law. The legislature is usually given the benefit of every doubt against claims of irrationality because judges lack factfinding capacity and a democratic pedigree."3 Moreover, discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is based on widespread moral convictions and debated empirical claims. Some people think that homosexual conduct is immoral, though it is not clear what status this argument should have. Others think that sexual orientation is often chosen, not a product of genetics or early family influence, and that the state can therefore channel people toward heterosexuality. 14. Steffan was probably an egregious case since it involved orientation alone. Perhaps it should be argued that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is analogous to discrimination on the basis of race or sex and therefore should be invalidated except in the rarest of circumstances. This is a highly plausible argument, though a great deal would have to be said in order to make it fully. The argument has also attracted some favorable attention from lower courts. In Jantz v. Muci," a district court held that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation "is inherently suspect," and a panel of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit agreed, though its opinion was vacated.' 8 The Supreme Court has granted "heightened scrutiny" that discriminate against certain identifiable groups likely to be at particular risk in the ordinary political process. 9 When the Court grants heightened scrutiny, it is highly skeptical of legislation, and the burden of every doubt therefore operates on behalf of groups challenging the relevant laws. to In deciding whether to grant heightened scrutiny, the Supreme Court has not been altogether clear about its underlying rationale. The Court appears to have looked most carefully at the likelihood that the group in question will be subject to prejudice, the existence of past and present discrimination, and the group's lack of political power.20 In this way, it has moved well beyond the defining case of discrimination against blacks to include discrimination against women, illegitimate children, and, at times, aliens.2' The Court has not yet decided how discrimination against homosexuals should be treated. Homosexuals may well be politically powerless in the constitutionally relevant sense. They often have difficulty in making alliances with other groups by virtue of the existence of widespread prejudice and hostility directed against them. Precisely because they are often anonymous (that is, not known to be homosexual) and diffuse (that is, not tightly organized), they face large barriers to exerting adequate political influence.23 For this reason, it is probably not decisive that homosexuality-unlike race and gender-can be concealed. The ability to conceal can actually make things worse from the standpoint of exercising political power. This problem, severe in itself, is heightened by the fact that people who challenge discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation are often "accused" of being homosexual themselves, which may have harmful consequences for their reputations.24 The existence of widespread hostility against homosexuals can thus make it difficult for homosexuals and heterosexuals alike to speak out against this form of discrimination. Some states have enacted or are considering constitutional amendments that would forbid laws prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Colorado's Amendment Two, for example, says that no state law may ban discrimination against homosexuals. 26 Are these measures constitutional? The constitutional challenge to such measures is quite different from the arguments described thus far. The challenge involves a claim about interference with protected rights, not merely about group status. In several cases, the Supreme Court has invalidated laws that seem to impose special political barriers to well-defined groups. Thus, in Hunter v. Erickson,27 the Court invalidated an amendment to the Akron city charter barring the City Council from implementing any ordinance dealing with discrimination in housing without voter approval. This "explicitly racial classification treating racial housing matters differently from other racial and housing matters" involved the political process and could not survive strict scrutiny.28 Similarly, in Washington v. Seattle School District No. I,29 the Court struck down a law forbidding any school board from requiring a student to attend a school other than the school geographically nearest the student's place of residence. According to the Court, governments may not restructure political processes "by explicitly using the racial nature of a decision to determine the decisionmaking process."3 ° The Colorado Supreme Court built upon Hunter and Washington, suggesting that when a law imposes special barriers to political participation by "an identifiable group," there has been a violation of the Equal Protection Clause.3' But both of the United States Supreme Court precedents are distinguishable; they were written and understood as race cases. A statute that explicitly or implicitly allocates political benefits and burdens along racial lines should of course be presumed unconstitutional.32 By contrast, in the context of an amendment forbidding laws banning discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation, there is no racial issue. It could therefore be concluded that states may allocate their own internal authority as they like-imposing supermajority requirements in some cases or allowing state-level decisions or local autonomy in others-so long as race and sex discrimination are not involved. In general, this proposition seems unexceptionable. This is not a simple test; it remains to say exactly what sorts of democratic barriers are constitutionally suspect. But the test would have the beneficial characteristic of narrowness. Without deciding that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is generally suspect, or generally irrational, courts might well conclude that no state may impose special barriers to democratic deliberation about this subject. I suggest that though the precedents do not require this result, the Equal Protection Clause should forbid special constitutional barriers to laws that prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. To approach the possibility of a link between discrimination on the basis of sex and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, consider Chief Justice Burger's striking concurrence in Bowers. There, the Chief Justice offered an approving reference to Blackstone's suggestion that sodomy is "an offense of 'deeper malignity than rape,' a heinous act, 'the very mention of which is a disgrace to human nature,' and 'a crime not fit to be named."'' 35 It might be worthwhile to linger for a moment over the suggestion that consensual sexual relations among men are of "deeper malignity than rape." How could this possibly be so? Why did both Blackstone and the Chief Justice think it worthwhile to compare the two crimes, and to assert the comparatively greater malignity of consensual sodomy? I think that the answer closely links the problem of discrimination on the basis of sex with that of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Rape has often seemed far less violative of human nature than sodomy, and this says a good deal about the character of sex discrimination and sex differences. Chief Justice Burger's comment inadvertently helps explain why Loving v. Virginia36 is a good precedent for the subject under discussion. But were not substantial enough to sustain a law that would harm illegal aliens). At the origin, the central target of the Fourteenth Amendment was not irrational distinctions on the basis of race, but the system of racial caste."7 For those who ratified the Civil War Amendments, the problem was that the law had contributed to a system of caste based on race, thought to be a morally irrelevant characteristic. Those who framed and ratified these amendments were aware that the system of racial hierarchy had often been attributed to nature. Thus, in the aftermath of the American Civil War, it was expressly urged, "God himself has set His seal of distinctive difference between the two races, and no human legislation can overrule the Divine decree."3" In the same period, anti-discrimination law was thus challenged squarely on the ground that it put the two races in "unnatural relation ... to each other." 9 The Civil War Amendments were based on a wholesale rejection of the supposed naturalness of racial hierarchy. The hierarchy was thought to be a function not of natural difference but of law, most notably the law of slavery and the various measures that grew up in the aftermath of abolition. The animating purpose of the Civil War Amendments was an attack on racial caste. So distinctive and so separated was the aristocracy from ordinary folk that many still thought the two groups represented two orders of being.... Ordinary people were thought to be different physically, and because of varying diets and living conditions, no doubt in many cases they were different. People often assumed that a handsome child, though apparently a commoner, had to be some gentleman's bastard offspring. idea behind an anticaste principle, broadly speaking Rawlsian in character, is that without very good reasons, social and legal structures ought not to turn differences that are irrelevant from the moral point of view into social disadvantages. They certainly should not be permitted to do so if the disadvantage is systemic. A difference is morally irrelevant if it has no relationship to individual entitlement or desert. Race and sex are certainly morally irrelevant characteristics in the sense that, in general, skin color and gender are not appropriate grounds for the distribution of social benefits and burdens. A systemic disadvantage is one that operates along standard and predictable lines in many important spheres of life and applies in realms that relate to basic participation as a citizen in a democracy. The anticaste principle means that, with respect to basic human capabilities and functionings, one group ought not to be systematically below another.42 Self-respect and its social bases ought not to be distributed along the lines of race and gender. 43 An important aspect of a system of caste is that social practices produce a range of obstacles to the development of self-respect, We are now in a position to make some general observations about the important and vexing matter of sex "differences"; these will bear directly on the issues raised by homosexuality. It is often said that women and men are different and that the differences help both to explain and to justify existing social and legal inequality. 4 It is often claimed, for example, that women are different from men and that different treatment in law is therefore perfectly appropriate. Indeed, in many legal systems, including that in America, the basic social and legal question is: Are women different from men? If not, have they been treated similarly?" However widespread, this approach will not do. The question for decision is not whether there is a difference-often there certainly is-but whether the legal and social treatment of that difference can be adequately justified. Differences need not imply inequality and only some differences have that effect. When differences do produce inequality, it is a result of legal and social practices, not the result of differences alone. Since they are legal and 47. See MAcKINqON, FEMINISM UNMODIFIED, supra note 46, at 32-45. 1 phrase the point tentatively because ultimately this is a historical question on which there is now insufficient evidence for firm judgments. I now examine the relationship between sex discrimination and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. As I have noted, the ban on same-sex marriages is not now thought to raise a problem of sex inequality under the American Constitution. But might the legal ban (and the social taboo) not be a product of a desire to maintain a system of gender hierarchy, a system that same-sex marriages tends to undermine by complicating traditional and stillinfluential ideas about the "natural difference" between men and women? It is possible to argue that in terms of their purposes and effects, bans on same-sex marriage have very much the same connection to gender caste as bans on racial intermarriage have to racial caste.49 I am speaking here of the real-world motivations for these bans, and I am assuming, as does current law, that impermissible motivations are fatal to legislation. The claim of neutrality may be implausible in this context for exactly the same reason that it was implausible in Loving.5" To say this is not to say that the ban on same-sex marriages is necessarily unacceptable in all theoretically possible worlds. But here, the ban is like a literacy test motivated by a discriminatory purpose or a veteran's preference law designed to exclude women from employment. In 1958, Richard Loving, a white man, and Mildred Jeter, a black woman, were married in the District of Columbia.52 Soon thereafter, they returned to their home in Virginia and were promptly indicted. Their crime was to have married in violation of Virginia's prohibition on interracial marriage. They pleaded guilty to the charge and were sentenced to a year in jail. The trial judge suspended the sentence on the condition that the Lovings leave Virginia and not return for twenty-five years. The judge said: "Almighty God creates the races white, black, yellow, malay and red, and he placed them on separate law on constitutional grounds, claiming that the law deprived them of the "equal protection of the laws. 54 Thus was born the most aptly titled case in the entire history of American law, Loving v. Virginia. The legal issues before the United States Supreme Court in Loving were relatively straightforward. In 1954, the Court had decided Brown v. Board of is Education." There, constitutionally unacceptable and that "separate but equal" is not equal.56 The Brown Court held that under the Constitution, the government could not discriminate against blacks. This was the issue in Loving: Was the ban on racial intermarriage a form of discrimination in the relevant sense?57 On this question, there was sharp dispute. Virginia thought that the answer was "Clearly not." Virginia's lawyers argued that anti-miscegenation laws punished whites and blacks equally. They claimed that there was no discrimination against blacks. The only relevant discrimination was against people who sought to participate in mixed marriages, and such people were racially diverse. Unlike in Brown, where racial separation marked racial inequality, here separation was truly equal. Discrimination against people who seek to participate in mixed marriages is not "racial discrimination" at all. It does not draw a line between blacks and whites. It is a form of discrimination to be sure-but not the form that justifies special judicial skepticism under the Constitution. Because blacks and whites were treated exactly alike, that kind of skepticism was unwarranted. Now let us imagine a hypothetical case. Two women seek to marry. They are prevented from doing so by a law forbidding same-sex marriage. They argue first that the relevant law violates their right to be free from sex discrimination. This seems to be a good strategic choice on their part. It is of course well-established that laws discriminating on the basis of sex will be subject to careful judicial scrutiny and will generally be invalidated.59 By contrast, it also seems clear-at least for the time being-that laws discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation will be subject to deferential judicial scrutiny and will generally be validated.60 Our hypothetical couple would therefore do very well to argue that they are subject to discrimination on the basis of sex, not sexual orientation. They might try to establish this argument by saying what seems clearly true, that if one of them were a man, there would be no barrier to the marriage. The law therefore seems to contain explicit discrimination on the basis of sex. It treats one person differently from another simply because of gender. It is therefore a form of sex discrimination. The State concedes that the statute prohibits men from doing what women may do, namely, engage in sexual activity with men. However, the State argues that it likewise prohibits women from doing something which men can do: engage in sexual activity with women. We believe it applies equally to men and women because it prohibits both classes from engaging in sexual activity with members of their own sex. Thus, there is no denial of equal protection on that basis.62 It will readily appear that this response is the same answer offered by the State of Virginia in the Loving case.63 To the extent that Loving is now believed inapposite, it is because a law forbidding racial intermarriage is now seen as an effort to promote White Supremacy. The separation of the races, especially in matters of sexuality and marriage, was part and parcel of the subordination of blacks to whites. Undoubtedly, this separation was part of the creation of a fixed category of racial differences. No one really denies this. It seems clear that if racial mixing were common, no one would know who is black and white; indeed the categories would lose much of their meaning. (It even seems reasonably clear that issues of sex discrimination are at work in this context, since the availability of black women to white men was common, and since the miscegenation laws seem especially inspired by the effort to prevent black men from having relations with white women.) The effort to promote "white purity" was conspicuously intended to prevent the various results that would come about from racial mixing. The Supreme Court's reference to "White Supremacy" was thus both necessary and sufficient to defeat Virginia's argument, and it was readily shown that the miscegenation laws were connected to that constitutionally unacceptable social institution." For participants in the current legal system, it is much harder to say that bans on same-sex relations are connected to a similarly unacceptable social But perhaps this argument goes by too quickly. It is indeed true that some people are black, in the sense that they have African-American ancestors, and others are white, in the sense that they do not. Very plausibly, this is no less true, or less "factual," than the division of humanity into men and women. The question is what society does with these facts. It is possible to think that the prohibition on same-sex marriages, as part of the social and legal insistence on "two kinds," is as deeply connected with male supremacy as the prohibition on racial intermarriage is connected with White Supremacy. Perhaps same-sex marriages are banned because of what they do to-because of how they unsettle-gender categories. Perhaps same-sex marriages are 65. Note also that miscegenation laws attempt to keep blacks and whites apart, while bans on samesex relations attempt to keep men and women together. If the argument below is correct, however, this difference does not make a difference, since the effort to keep blacks and whites apart was an effort to maintain a caste system based on race, just as the effort to keep men and women together is-by preventing same-sex relations-part of a system of sex-role stereotyping. HeinOnline -- 70 Ind. L.J. 20 1994-1995 banned because they complicate traditional gender thinking, showing that the division of human beings into two simple kinds is part of sex-role stereotyping, however true it is that women and men are "different." This is not merely a philosophical or sociological observation. It is highly relevant to the legal argument. It suggests that, like the ban on racial intermarriage, the ban on same-sex marriages may well be doomed by a constitutionally illegitimate purpose. The ban has everything to do with constitutionally unacceptable stereotypes about the appropriate roles of men and women. In this space, I will not be able fully to defend this thesis, on which much work remains to be done. Certainly the thesis is not belied by the fact that some "macho" cultures do not stigmatize male homosexuality as much as (say) the United States.67 Even in such cultures, a sharp distinction is drawn between passivity and activity in sexual relations, and cultural understandings of passive and active operate in gendered terms." Thus, the passive role is both stigmatized and identified with femininity, whereas the active role is socially respectable and identified with masculinity. In such cultures, sex-role distinctions have somewhat different manifestations, but sex discrimination is fully operative in thinking both about men and women and about sexuality. 69 My claim about the reasons behind the ban on same-sex marriages is in part an empirical one; and it has suggestive empirical support in psychological studies. For example, one social psychologist, capturing much of the general view, finds that "a major determinant of negative attitudes toward homosexuality is the need to keep males masculine and females feminine, that is, to avoid sex-role confusion. ' 7 ' The evidence taken as a whole suggests that the prohibition on homosexual relations is best seen as an effort to insist on and to rigidify so-called natural difference, in part by crisply separating gender roles. 71 This occurs largely by ensuring that there are firm and clear lines, 66. Cf Rich, supra note 49 (arguing that anti-lesbian views not only stigmatize lesbians apart from other homosexuals but harm heterosexual women as well). Characteristics of Those Who Hold Positive and Negative Attitudes Toward Homosexuals, 1 J. HOMOSEXUALITY 9, 19 (1974)); see also Marc A. Fajer, Can Two Real Men Eat Quiche Together? Storytelling Gender-Role Stereotypes, and Legal Protection for Lesbians and Gay Men, 46 U. MIAMI L. REv. 511, 617 (1992); Bernard E. Whitley, Jr., The Relationship of Sex-Role Orientation to Heterosexuals 'Attitudes Toward Homosexuals, 17 SEX ROLES 103 (1987) (examining the relationship between traditional sex-role beliefs, sex-role self-concept, and sex-role behavior pattern on the one hand and attitudes toward homosexuals on the other). 71. Koppelman, supra note 49, at 159 n.86. routinely accused, explicitly or implicitly, of being lesbian."). Abraham Lincoln always insisted that slavery was wrong. On the basic principle, Lincoln allowed no compromises. No justification was available for chattel slavery. But on the question of means, Lincoln was quite equivocal-flexible, strategic, open to compromise, aware of doubt. The fact that slavery was wrong did not mean that it had to be eliminated immediately, or that blacks and whites had to be placed immediately on a plane of equality. In Lincoln's view, the feeling of "the great mass of white people" would not permit this result.80 In his most striking formulation, he declared: "Whether this feeling accords with justice and sound judgment, is not the sole question, if indeed, it is any part of it. A universal feeling, whether well or ill-founded, can not be safely disregarded.""' In the area of sex discrimination, such managerial issues are not necessarily is present. Suppose, for example, challenged on equal protection grounds. Here, ongoing judicial supervision of complex institutions is not really at issue. Nonetheless, there is reason for great caution on the part of the courts. An immediate judicial vindication of the principle could well jeopardize important interests. It could galvanize opposition. It could weaken the anti-discrimination movement itself. It could provoke more hostility and even violence against gays and lesbians. It could jeopardize the authority of the judiciary. It could well produce calls for a constitutional amendment to overturn the Supreme Court's decision.85 At a minimum, courts should generally use their discretion over their dockets in order to limit the nature and the timing of relevant intrusions into the political process. Courts should also be reluctant to vindicate even good principles when the vindication would clearly compromise other important interests, including ultimately the principles themselves. 85. Compare the decision of the Hawaii Supreme Court in Baehr v. Levin, 852 P.2d 144 (Haw. 1993). An advantage of a federal system is that it allows successful experiments in constitutional law at the state level. broadly than courts). In the 1990's, discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation promises to be one of the most important issues in constitutional law. Most of this discrimination is constitutionally troublesome in its own right because it is based on simple prejudice and hostility. There is even a connection between discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and discrimination on the basis of sex. In the long run, I suspect, the ban on same-sex relations will be seen as having much the same relationship to male supremacy as did the ban on mixed marriages to White Supremacy. Loving is therefore a key case for those seeking to use the Constitution to counteract both sex discrimination and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. cases and also invalidate measures that combine restrictions on the democratic process with discrimination. Broader rulings should be avoided. Elected officials, including the President, have somewhat more flexibility in carrying out their own independent constitutional responsibilities.