 Lawrence Lessig* and Cass R Sunstein** * Assistant Professor of Law, University of Chicago Law School. ** Karl N. Llewellyn Professor ofJurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. We are grateful to Akhil Amar, Bruce Ackerman, Steve Calabresi, David Currie, Dan Kahan, Abner Greene, Harold Krent, Alan Meese, Richard Ross, and Peter Strauss for helpful comments. Cyrus Amir-Mokri provided exceptional research assistance. For financial support, we are grateful to The Russell Baker Scholars Fund and The James H. Douglas,Jr. Fund for the Study of Law and Government. Some believe that this conception of unitariness derives from something that the framers decided-that the framers constitutionalized a strongly unitary executive, and that anyone following the original design must follow this structural pattern. 4. The metaphor of translation has been used by many people, though in somewhat different ways. See, e.g., Paul Brest, The Misconceived Quest for the Original Understanding, 60 B.U. L. Rev. 204, 218-22 (arguing for nonoriginalist constitutional interpretation using a historical interpreter as translator); MichaelJ. Perry, The Authority of Text, Tradition and Reason: A Theory of Constitutional "Interpretation," 58 S. Cal. L. Rev. 551, 599 (1985) (discussing Robert Bennett as translator); H. Jefferson Powell, Rules for Originalists, 73 Va. L. Rev. 659, 672 (1987)("[tlo converse with the founders, you need a translator") (emphasis deleted); Terrance Sandalow, Constitutional Interpretation, 79 Mich. L. Rev. 1033, 1067-69 (1981) (arguing that no inflexible "core" of the founders' values exist but that instead each generation must interpret these values itself); Cass R. Sunstein, Interpreting Statutes in the Regulatory State, 103 Harv. L. Rev. 405, 494-95 (1989) (discussing effect of changed circumstances in interpreting old texts); Mark V. Tushnet, Following the Rules Laid Down: A Critique of Interpretivism and Neutral Principles, in Interpreting Law and Literature 193 (Sanford Levinson & Steven (comparing neutral principle and interpretivist approaches to Mailloux eds., 1988) interpreting the Constitution). The notion of course was not born with Brest. Perhaps its most creative pre-Brest appearance was in an extraordinary piece by Felix Cohen, which linked the process of interpretation across contexts to the theory of relativity, to suggest that "[t]he achievements of modem mathematics and physics... give ground for hoping that we shall some day achieve a powerful new organon for mutual understanding,-a theory of translation." Felix S. Cohen, Field Theory and Judicial Logic, 59 Yale LJ. 238, 272 (1950). Most recently, James Boyd White has discussed the notion of reading as translation in James B. White, Justice as Translation: An Essay in Cultural and Legal Criticism (1990). Much earlier, Francis Lieber may have captured much of the sense of translation in his distinction between "interpretation" and "construction." See Francis Lieber, Legal and Political Hermeneutics 11, 44 (St. Louis, F.H. Thomas & Co., 3d ed. 1880) ("Interpretation is the art of finding out the true sense of any form of words," while "[c]onstruction is the drawing of conclusions respecting subjects that lie beyond the After outlining the debate over the origins of a unitary executive in Part I, this Article goes on to make two basic points. The first, set out in Part II, is historical. Conventional wisdom insists (1) that the framers believed in a hierarchical executive branch, with the President in charge of all administration of the laws,5 and (2) that we must also ensure a hierarchical executive branch, at least if we are to be faithful to the framers' constitutional design.6 We think that the conventional wisdom is wrong on both counts. There is no historically sound reading of the Constitution that compels anything like the first claim. Any faithful reader of history must conclude that the unitary executive, conceived in the foregoing way, is just myth. implementation or execution of legislative enactments. 6. See infra notes 19-32 and accompanying text. In these two sentences could be found the basic wisdom about the relationship between the President and administrative agencies. Some unsettled questions remained. But it appeared that those questions would be answered through accommodations, formal and informal, between Congress and the President, and not as a matter of constitutional law. to assert hierarchical control over the bureaucracy,' 7. See especially the various opinions in Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52 (1926); see also, e.g., Nathan -D. Grundstein, Presidential Power, Administration and Administrative Law, 18 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 285, 300 (1950) (discussing debate over extent of autonomy that executive has in appointing and removing administrators); Miller, supra note 1, at 52-58 (laying out pragmatic and neoclassical approaches to separation of powers debate); Peter L. Strauss, The Place of Agencies in Government: Separation of Powers and the Fourth Branch, 84 Colum. L. Rev. 573, 599-600 (1984) (noting that the Convention was "ambivalent" about the President's relation to those who would actually administer the laws). perienced a minor revolution. Sharp new battle lines were drawn. In several cases, the Supreme Court limited congressional efforts to insulate administration of the laws from presidential control. 12 These cases seemed to suggest that the whole idea of independent administration could no longer be sustained-a change in understanding that, if accepted, would dramatically alter the framework of American government. This shift in the Court-toward greater solicitude for presidential control over implementation-inspired an even greater shift in the academy. Scholars began to assert more forcefully that the conventional view of the executive power-in particular, the idea that Congress could create independent agencies-was constitutionally unfounded.'8 Perhaps the Court could eventually be persuaded to conclude that the Constitution prohibited Congress from creating "independent agencies." But in several more recent cases the Supreme Court unambiguously committed itself to the idea that Congress may, at least sometimes and at least to some extent, make administration independent of the President. 14 Indeed, the Court has allowed Congress to go beyond independent "quasilegislators" and "quasijudges" and create independent prosecutors1 5-an innovation from the previous cases that appears to expand congressional authority. orders); Peter L. Strauss & Cass t Sunstein, The Role of the President and OMB in (describing Informal Rulemaking, 38 Admin. L. Rev. 181, 185-97, 202-03 (1986) President Reagan's executive orders and arguing that their application can and should be extended to independent agencies). President Reagan's efforts should be seen as the culmination of a long historical trend, beginning with President Nixon. See, e.g., Harold H. Bruff, Presidential Management of Agency Rulemaking, 57 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 533, 546-52 (1989) (reviewing evolution of presidential management programs beginning with President Nixon). 16. See, e.g., Memorandum on Reducing the Burden of Government Regulation, 28 Weekly Comp. Pres. Doc. 232 (Jan. 28, 1992) (asking executive and independent agencies to refrain from issuing new regulations during 90 day period, and to review existing regulations with goal of minimizing economic impact); Memorandum on Implementing Regulatory Reform, 28 Weekly Comp. Pres. Doc. 728 (Apr. 29, 1992) (extending moratorium for another 120 days). President Bush also formed the Council on Competitiveness on March 31, 1989, to exercise power granted by Reagan's executive orders. See supra note 11. 19. This account draws on a recent statement of the modem position. See Calabresi & Rhodes, supra note 1; see also Saikrishna B. Prakash, Note, Hail to the Chief Administrator. The Framers and the President's Administrative Powers, 102 Yale LJ. 991 (1993) (building on the work of Calabresi & Rhodes). creat[es] a hierarchical, unified executive department under the direct control of the President. ... [Thus,) the President alone possesses all of the executive power and .. . he therefore can direct, control, and supervise inferior officers or agencies who seek to exercise discretionary executive power. The practical consequence of this theory is dramatic: it renders unconstitutional independent agencies and counsels to the extent that they exercise discretionary executive power. Finally, the modem unitarian rejects textual clues that may suggest a structure somewhat the Constitution contemplates some though appointments being vested (and hence some loyalty engendered) in heads of departments, and not the President, and though the framers oddly (for the unitarian) felt it necessary to make explicit that the President could get reports from his officers, the contrary. Thus, unitary executive theorists reject the contention that Congress's power to vest the appointment of inferior officers in the "Heads of Departments" necessarily modem unitarian's view, the Constitution constitutionalizes a single organizational value-unitariness-at the expense of other possible governmental values-such as disinterestedness or independence. The conclusion is that any organizational structure that violates unitariness violates the Constitution. insulates these officers from presidential control. Rather, these theorists contend, this Clause was an insignificant housekeeping provision added at the last minute. Unitary executive theorists also deny that the President's explicitly delineated power to "require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive Departments" implies that the President has no inherent power to tell principal officers what to do. Unitarians contend that the Opinions . Clause represents too slender a reed to support this qualification of the substantial grant of power embodied in the Article II Vesting Clause. On this view, the founders imagined a hierarchical 29 executive branch, with the President operating at the head of that hierarchy. From this structure, certain limitations on the power of Congress naturally flow-limitations on Congress' power to restrict or control the extent of the President's authority over subordinates who execute the laws. It follows that the so-called independent agencies are in conspicuous violation of the Constitution."° It also follows that the Independent Counsel Act, 1 like all other efforts to separate the President from the administration, is unconstitutional under Article 11.32 One could approach the question whether the Constitution embodies the strong version of unitariness from at least two perspectives, one labeled broadly "originalist," the other not.3 3 We understand originalism to require the interpreter to ask whether the modem unitarian's limitations on Congress' power were indeed understood as such by those who ratified the Constitution. AsJustice Scalia has stated the test, the originalist would ask whether (1) the text standing alone contains strong unitarian limitations, or (2) whether strong unitarian limitations were so well method of originalism that we will employ here. How can we know whether the framers believed in a strongly unitary executive branch? Many originalists would approach this question through a (by now) standard formula-by considering almost mechanically the key sources of interpretation, "text, structure, and history," as the basis for uncovering the Constitution's original meaning.3 7 And so, beginning with the framers' text, we could read in Article II that "the executive power" is to be "vested in a President" who shall "take Care that the laws be faithfully executed." This is quite likely to yield (for us) a very strong conception of the President's power-after all, it says "the executive power," not "some" executive power, and "all" this executive power is vested in "a" President.3 8 There are of course other bits of text added to this core-text that defines some additional power and a few minor duties 3 9-but in the main, the document might appear quite clear. Any question about this clarity is easily resolved by considering the second originalist step-structure. Article II's Vesting Clause is less conditional than Article I's: Article I vests legislative power "herein granted," while Article II vests "the executive power" without such a qualification. And so with text and structure, we quite quickly come to a conception of the executive that fits well with a familiar picture of the modem presidency-a strong, constitutionally empowered "chief-administrator" of the executive branch. 40 But we might ask up front how well this method can serve us in this setting. For when we "begin" with an old text, we are likely also to begin with a range of modem presuppositions about the meaning of that textmodem, not founding, presuppositions. The text is not self-interpreting, and the presuppositions with which we begin will color our reading of the words, possibly more than they illuminate the world the words were meant to construct.4 1 "Executive power" means to us all power not legislative and not judicial; but we might ask, was this its meaning for the framers? "A President" is for us the center of national policymaking, both such a limitation should be understood to follow from the best understanding of the framers' design. On this question, we remain agnostic. Finally, as we suggested above, see supra note 3, it may be that an understanding of this form of "nonoriginalism" is the best way of understanding what "originalism" should be. For further discussion of this point, see infra Part III. recover original meaning, we cannot rely on text "alone." foreign and domestic; was this who he was at the start of the nation?42 A power to "take Care" that the laws be faithfully executed yields for us an implied power to control and direct all those in the executive branch who administer the law; would the framers have understood this to follow? The Opinions Clause 43 (giving the President the power to demand written opinions), the Commission Clause" (requiring the President to commission officers), and the Inferior Officers App6intment Clause 45 (allowing Congress to vest the appointment of some officers somewhere else) all for us read plainly, but for the most part insignificantly; were they also unnecessary scribbles for the founders? It is our suspicion that much of the conventional reading of Article II's text is informed by very modern ideas, and this leads us to adopt a distinctive interpretive strategy. Rather than beginning with text or structure alone, we begin with history. Our aim is to dislodge modem preconceptions about the nature of the President and executive power by contrasting these conceptions with those of the framers and with the actual theory and practice of the early Congress. It is an important truism that the framers were quite skeptical of broad executive authority, a notion that they associated with the tyrannical power of the King.46 Their skepticism about executive authority-their rejection of the monarchical legacy-at least raises doubts about the idea that the President was to be entrusted with control over all of what we now consider administration. We rely, however, not on general ideas about the executive, but on a more particular examination of how well the strongly unitarian claim fits with the founding vision. We begin with three puzzles presented by the original practice. In each, we compare the actual historical practice of the framers and the early Congresses with what the unitarian would predict that same practice would be. The practice is important, even if not decisive, because it is relevant to an assessment of the original understanding.47 While the practice does not prove the original understand 42. On the question of policymaking alone, consider President Washington's self conception of his role in the legislative process: "Motives of delicacy," [President Washington] once wrote, "have uniformly restrained the Pfrom introducing any topick which relates to Legislative matters to members of either house of Congress, lest it should be suspected that to influence the question before it." He would not permit he wished congressional committees to solicit his opinion, but intimated his willingness to express his views, "when asked," to a friend. ing, an original practice widely inconsistent with a proposed original understanding should draw that understanding into doubt. As we suggest, in every case the original practice conflicts sharply with the practice predicted by the modem unitarian's theory. Together, we suggest, the three puzzles force us to ask whether there is a different model of the original executive that better captures the original design. We conclude that there is. Prosecution We begin with the narrow but revealing question of criminal prosecution, as presented in the contest over the independent counsel and resolved in Morrison v. Olson. 48 The Ethics in Government Act of 1978, 49 enacted in the wake of Watergate, established the office of the independent counsel to investigate and prosecute offenses against certain officers of the administration. 50 Without exploring the details of the Act, suffice it to say that under certain circumstances, the statute vested in the special counsel full prosecutorial authority for some limited period of time, uncontrolled by the President except to the extent that the Attorney General could discharge the special counsel for "good cause."5 1 The claim of Theodore Olson (the prosecuted) was that the power of Alexia Morrison (the prosecutor) was power from "the executive power," and hence "vested" in the President alone. For Justice Scalia, writing in dissent,52 the case was quite straightforward: The Constitution vests execu So much certainly follows as a matter of modem unitarian theory; but what about the framers' actual practice? At the core ofJustice Scalia's argument was an implicit claim about that practice. In defining the scope of "executive power," Justice Scalia wrote: In what other sense can one identify "the executive Power" that is supposed to be vested in the President (unless it includes everything the Executive Branch is given to do) except by reference to what has always and everywhere-if conducted by government at all-been conducted never by the legislature, never by the courts, and always by the executive .... Governmental investigation and prosecution of crimes is a quintessentially executive function. This is a textually plausible claim. To many modem readers, it seems certainly correct. But has "the executive Power" "always and everywhere" been so understood? In answering this question, again, we proceed in two steps. First, does the constitutional text in its original context speak to the question at issue? Second, if the text does not squarely answer the question, does the original practice reveal an understanding uniformly shared by the framers that itself resolves the question?5 5 The text of course does not say whether prosecution is within the term "executive Power."56 So the originalist must turn to the second step, and ask whether despite textual ambiguity, the framers clearly understood prosecution to be within the term "executive Power." If the framers' and early Congresses' actual practice is any indication of their original understanding, then they did not understand prosecution to be within the notion of "executive Power" exclusively, and therefore did not understand it to be within the exclusive domain of the Second: The first centralized federal prosecution was outside the direct control of the President. Within the Department of the Treasury, Congress established the office of the Comptroller, and in 1797 charged him with the power "to institute suit for the recovery of" a "sum or balance reported to be due to the United States, upon the adjustment of any [revenue officer's account]."66 This power was expanded in 1817, giving the Comptroller the power "to direct suits and legal proceedings, and to take such measures as may be authorized by the laws to enforce prompt payments of all debts to the United States."67 But the Comptroller himself was not directly within the President's control, and most commentators understood the Comptroller to be "relatively independent."6 8 So special was the Comptroller's position that it led Madison, who ordinarily supported an absolute removal power by the President over executive officers, to comment that "there may be strong reasons why an officer of this kind should not hold his office at the pleasure of the Executive branch of the Government."6 9 At one point in the debate, Madison argued that the Comptroller should hold his office for a fixed tenure. 70 64. Note that during this period the Secretary of the Treasury reported to Congress. 71. The Act contained a general removal clause that stated: "if any person shall offend against any of the prohibitions of this act, he shall be deemed guilty of a high misdemeanor,... and shall upon conviction be removed from office." Act of Sept. 2, 1789, ch. 12, § 8, 1 Stat. 65, 67. Compare this with the-Temoval provision for the Secretary, which stated simply "[t]hat whenever the Secretary shall be removed from office by the President," without providing any limitations on the President's removal power. § 7, 1 Stat. at 67. Congress vested jurisdiction in state courts over actions seeking penalties and forfeitures, granted concurrent jurisdiction to state courts over some criminal actions, and assigned state officials auxiliary law enforcement tasks. Thus, Congress assigned law enforcement responsibility to state officials who were far removed from control of the executive branch.76 Even when actions were criminal, "[t]he decisions whether to sue and what punishments to seek remained in the discretion of individuals outside the Executive's control."77 The original practice thus violated the unitarian's plan, even in its most minimal form.78 Here at least, some federal prosecution was exercised that was clearly beyond the President's control. 76. Krent, supra note 57, at 303. Krent's very careful analysis makes three distinct points: (1) "Congress limited the Executive's effective control over law enforcement by dispersing supervisory responsibility among various executive officials," id. at 286; (2) Private actions constituted prosecution outside the executive's control, see id. at 290-303; (3) States exercised some federal prosecutorial authority, see id. at 303-10. The last two points are discussed below, see infra text.accompanying notes 77, 81-83. For an example of a statute giving control of prosecution to state officials, see Act of July 6, 1798, ch. 66, § 2, 1 Stat. 577, 577 (respecting alien enemies); see also Thomas Sergeant, Constitutional Law 269-70 (Philadelphia, Abraham Small 1822). Finally, one should note that there is an important difference between vesting executive authority in a state official and vesting executive authority in a federal official not directly responsible to the President. Only the latter is subject to the machinations of Congress, and hence the former might be considered constitutionally distinct. We do not address that difference, pointed out to us by Alan Meese, in the analysis that follows. 77. Krent, supra note 57, at 304. 78. One should ask what the appropriate baseline is for evaluating unitariness, or alternatively, the extent of original executive control. For obviously one cannot carry over modem conceptions, built upon modem capacity and technology, to'the eighteenth century world. What may appear to us to be lax control may have, in context, appeared quite centralized. And indeed, as Charles Thach argues, against the background of state executives, and the continental executive, Article II's executive was quite strong. See Charles C. Thach, Jr., The Creation of the Presidency 1775-1789: A Study in Constitutional History, Johns Hopkins University Studies in Historical and Political Science, No. 4 1922, at 1, 77. It would remain possible for the modem unitarian then to argue that compared to the degree of control existing before 1787, the new Constitution was a more centralized and unitarian structure. Nonetheless, that it was more centralized would not entail a present understanding of it as fully centralized. Together, these bits of history are devastating to the modem unitarian's originalist claims about prosecution.8 4 Contrary to the unitary model, not all federal prosecution was vested in officers answerable (whether directly or not) to the President. Although Justice Scalia is technically correct that "always and everywhere-if conducted by government at all-[the prosecutorial authority has] been conducted never by the legislature, never by the courts, and always by the executive,"8 5 this does not mean it has always and everywhere been the domain of the President. Sometimes government did not prosecute (private citizens did), and sometimes the federal executive did not prosecute (state executives did 8 6). And if we put standing issues to one side,87 nothing in principle would have stopped the framers from assigning the decision to prosecute someone to a federal official not subject to presidential removal (as Madison argued the Comptroller should have been8 8), or to state officials clearly outside federal control, or indeed to private citizens prosecuting qui tam actions (as every Congress since the founding has allowed 89). In short, the decision "who should prosecute whom" was a decision the early Congresses at least thought far more subtle and complex than do the believers in a strongly unitary executive. 90 Perhaps it remains for the modern unitarian to insist on the implied control over prosecution reserved to the President through the pardon power. As the President has the power to pardon either before or after conviction,9' he retains throughout prosecution a practical control over the effects of prosecution. Thus one could say that, in effect, the President does retain ultimate control over the executive function of prosecution, even if prosecutorial power is vested elsewhere. Notably, this argument would mean that Morrison was rightly decided and indeed that Congress could place prosecutorial power wherever it chooses, so long as the President retains the authority to pardon. Thus far, then, we have seen that the original practice does not suggest a presidential monopoly over the power of prosecution. In a number of settings, enforcement of the criminal law was placed beyond the control of the President. Prosecution constitutes the first puzzle with the unitary model. But it is left to the modem unitarian to respond that perhaps the framers did not understand prosecution to be a "core" executive function. 93 Perhaps prosecution was an anomaly;9 4 perhaps the framers thought that this function was a distinctive one entitled to a unique exemption from the general principle of presidential control over administration of the laws. We suggest that, on the contrary, the story of prosecution suggests a need for a much more fundamental rethinking of the framers' understanding of what the executive was. The second puzzle presented by the original practice confirms the need for reevaluation. structure-departments 92. Historically, it has not always been clear whether control over prosecution derives from the pardon power, from the "take Care" power, or from executive power generally. Indeed, the first real exercise of executive control over prosecution suffered from this ambiguity. Jefferson's power to dismiss Sedition Act prosecutions was at times explained as flowing from the pardon power, see Letter from ThomasJefferson to judge Spencer Roane (Sept. 6, 1819), in 15 Lipscomb, Writings of Jefferson, supra note 75, at 212, 214, and sometimes from the power to "take Care that the laws be faithfully executed," see Letter from Thomas Jefferson to Edwin Livingston (Nov. 1, 1801), in 8 Ford, Writings of Jefferson, supra note 75, at 57-58. We can test that theory against the framers' actual practice by examining the structure of the original executive departments. According to the modem unitarian, that structure should make manifest the President's exclusive power to control and direct department heads in the exercise of their discretionary functions. But, in fact, the authors of the original practice embraced no such single structure. Interestingly, they created a variety of structures, not a single one. More important, they did not give the President plenary control over all of the institutions that they created. However strong a statement of the unitarian's vision, Taft's claims show some relative modesty. The Myers Court offered three important qualifications to the modem unitarian's view. First, it said that the Civil Service Act, immunizing inferior officers from plenary presidential control, did not offend Article II and the unitariness of the executive branch. 0 2 Second, the Court agreed that officers with adjudicative duties could be immunized from presidential influence, even if those officers operated within the executive branch: "[T ] here may be duties of a quasijudicial character imposed on executive officers and members of executive tribunals whose decisions after hearing affect the interests of individ-. uals, the discharge of which the President can not in a particular case properly influence or control."10 3 Third, it said that Congress might be The commentary on the Myers opinion, and on its terse partial rejection merely eleven years later in Humphrey's Executor v. United States,'0 9 is of course vast." l0 What we want to emphasize here is the Myers Court's failure to present the complete story of the Decision of 1789. We can move quickly through what is essential for our purposes. Everyone agrees that this debate is crucial for understanding the framers' conception of the executive; but unlike some who have relied upon Taft's opinion,"' states: In theory, all the Executive officers appointed by the President directly or indirectly are his subordinates, and yet Congress can undoubtedly pass laws definitely limiting their discretion and commanding a certain course by them which it is not within the power of the Executive to vary. Fixing the method in which Executive power shall be exercised is perhaps one of the chief functions of Congress.... Congress may repose discretion in appointees of the President, which the President may not himself control. The instance I have already given is one of these, in which the Comptroller of the Treasury has independent quasijudicial authority to pass on the question of what warrants are authorized by appropriation acts to be drawn by him on the funds of the Treasury. not play a direct role in removal of purely executive officers). Beginning in May of 1789, Congress considered the original organization of the new government. Representative Boudinot proposed that the House itself into a committee of the whole, and Representative Benson proposed the establishment of three departments: Foreign Affairs (which was changed to the Department of State in September 1789112), War, and the Treasury. 113 The committee of the whole took up deliberations initially on the Department of Foreign Affairs. Those deliberations show that distinctive organizations were thought to warrant distinctive treatment. The details of this complex debate are not essential here. For what has been too quickly overlooked is a more fundamental fact of the debate, and one that is not subject to any similar ambiguity. Whatever dispute there may be about the removal power of the President over the Secretary of Foreign Affairs and similar officers, 119 there is no ambiguity 115. For a full account of the four positions in the debate, see Letter from James Madison to Edmund Randolph (June 21, 1789), reprinted in James Hart, The American Presidency in Action 1789, at 156-58 (1948); Gerhard Casper, An Essay in Separation of Powers: Some Early Versions and Practices, 30 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 211, 234-35 (1989). 116. See Casper, supra note 115, at 237. As Casper reports, the decision in the house was "sealed in an evenly split Senate, with the Vice President casting the decisive vote." Id. at 237. Following the debate on the power of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Congress considered the power of the Secretaries of War and Treasury. treated the departments differently The relevant difference is manifest in two important ways. First, in their formation. Congress Congress established the Departments of Foreign Affairs and War as "executive departments," l 2' with little detail, and with secretaries who were obligated to "perform and execute such duties as shall from time to time be enjoined on or intrusted to [them] by the President of the United States." 122 But the treatment of the Department of the Treasury was wholly different. Unlike with Foreign Affairs and War, the enacting Congress (1) did not denominate Treasury an "executive department,"12 3 (2) did specify in detail the offices and functions of Treasury, (3) did the impose on the Treasurer specific duties, and (4) did shield Comptroller (an office within Treasury) from presidential direction.' 2 4 Casper: The real decisions of 1789 are those embodied in the statutes establishing the "great departments" of government. These statutes are of considerable interest beyond the fact that they recognized a presidential removal power. Three departments-Foreign Affairs, War, and Treasury-were established that to those of the Continental Congress. The were the direct successors departments of Foreign Affairs and War were denominated "executive" departments, and thus were placed squarely within the executive branch. Although areas of responsibility were spelled out, the secretaries were subjected . . The initial organization of the explicitly to presidential directions . . departments was skeletal, with only a chief clerk named expressly. As Professor White describes, "Congress at first believed the Treasury Department should be closely associated with it .... occupying a status different from that of State and War."125 These differences in structure reveal one sense in which the first Congress considered the organizational form of the government to be mixed rather than unitary. 126 And this, we suggest, has enormous implications. Some thought that entities whose duties bear a strong affinity to the judiciary need not be subject to presidential supervision alone. 127 Madison, for example, stated and believed that Congress had considerable authority over entities that have 'judicial qualities."128 Many agencies, both executive and independent, are now engaged in adjudicative tasks. It appears to have been Madison's conviction that Congress has the authority to immunize such agencies from presidential control and indeed that Congress should exercise that authority.129 Madison's view was not shared by all. But at a minimum, we can say that the framers were not of one mind about the proper organizational structure and responsibility for these different departments. More likely, they had different conceptions about the proper structures, depending on the nature of the department at issue. Where from the nature of the office it was "proper" for an office holder to be subject to the control of Congress, or insulated from the influence of the President, the Constitution empowered Congress so to provide. But where it was not proper in this sense, it did not. Again, Madison's writings suggest this understanding: Whatever... may be my opinion with respect to the tenure by which an executive officer may hold his office according to the meaning of the constitution, I am very well satisfied, that a modification by the legislature may take place in such as partake of the judicial qualities, and that the Legislative power is suffi could be made only by the Treasurer, upon warrants signed by the Secretary, countersigned by the Comptroller, and recorded by the Register. But the Post Office followed the opposite pattern. The statute creating the Post Office in 1789 did make the Postmaster General "subject to the direction of the President of the United States in performing the duties of his office."' 3 2 But Congress did not denominate the Post Office an "executive department" as it did the Departments of State, War, and the Navy.' 33 Moreover, the original act was clearly provisional, explicitly contemplating its replacement within the year,'3 4 and when Congress reorganized the office in 1792, Congress gave the Postmaster the authority to enter contracts and make appointments, and permitted the Post Office to operate from postal revenues.' 3 5 When this change occurred, Congress removed the language making the Postmaster General subject to the direction of the President. 3 6 The purpose of this change was to avoid the The framing Congress thus followed two basic tracks when establishing the departments we now consider departments of the executive. For some departments (Foreign Affairs, War, and Navy), Congress granted the President plenary power over the affairs of agents within those departments-they were truly his agents. For the remaining departments (Treasury and Post Office), Congress granted the President no clearly stated or implied authority over the affairs of the relevant officers, and did not hesitate to articulate the full range of departmental structures and officers, complete with a full specification of the duties such officers had. Some departments the framing Congress treated as purely executive, and others not; where the departments were not purely executive, Congress did not hesitate to create a degree of independence from presidential will. the first true challenge to executive supremacy. See infra Part II.G. 142. For a discussion of the modem analog, the Federal Reserve, see HaroldJ. Krent, the Unitary Executive: Congressional Delegations of Administrative Fragmenting Authority Outside the Federal Government, 85 Nw. U. L. Rev. 62, 84-85 (1990). In that essay, Krent discusses a different aspect of the limitations on executive power, limitations created by delegations of power outside the executive. We do not address this important dimension of the unitary executive question here. Anomalies surrounding presidential control over prosecution suggested similar anomalies surrounding organization of departments more generally, and these constituted the second puzzle about the original practice. Before we attempt a resolution of these two puzzles, consider finally a third. No doubt, standing alone in the face of clear evidence that the framers were adopting the strongly unitary conception, this clause would be a slender reed, and a redundancy. What possible reason could there be for providing the President with a constitutional power to demand written reports from officers over whom he already had an inherent power of control? But the question we are asking here is whether the framers adopted the strongly unitary conception, and for that purpose, the clause is certainly relevant for choosing among the competing views. Although standing alone the clause would not support our rejecting a strongly unitarian view of the Constitution, at least it raises an enormous puzzle.' 5 3 And this should lead us to ask what the history of the clause does suggest. What does the clause say about the inherent power of the President over the affairs of the executive branch? While an unambiguous reading is impossible, some hints do emerge. It seems clear that the framers thought the legislative branch possessed an inherent authority to demand reports-while there is no opinions clause in Article I, the first Congress had no difficulty instructing the Secretary of the Treasury to report on matters within his domain. 15 6 Does this history suggest that it makes sense to read the same understanding about inherent authority in Article II? Did the framers, as do the unitarians, believe that the President has an inherent power to demand written reports? We believe that they did not. Instead, we suggest two quite different readings of the Opinions Clause, both of which would make sense of the clause as something more than a redundancy, and each of which entails a vastly narrower conception of the President's inherent authority. We begin with the more limited of the two readings, relying on the framers' consideration, and eventual rejection, of an opinions clause for the Supreme Court. 154. See 2 Farrand, supra note 137, at 334, 336-37. The clause gave the President power over the also proposed "Council of State." The Council of State was to be a constitutionally specified council of department heads. Later drafts of course dropped the constitutional enumeration of executive departments, the establishment of departments. leaving Morris-Pinckney proposal). But this reading still reads "departments" in a unitary fashion, as if the President's power to demand opinions would be the same for all types of departments. To support the argument that, for the framers, all departments were not the same, there must be a second way of reading the Opinions Clause-a way that is ultimately more radical. 158. At least, the President would not have this power by constitutional necessity. This would not limit the departments' right to do so voluntarily, or limit Congress' power to direct the heads of departments or principal officers to respond to the President's requests. Add to this curiosity the particular language of the Opinions Clause-that the President "may require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive Departments."163 And finally, add again the only reference to "Heads of Departments" in the Constitution, the Inferior Officers Appointment Clause, which provides that "Congress may by Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments."'6 These distinctions in language raise a number of questions. Why does the Opinions Clause speak only of "executive" departments? Are there other kinds of departments? And why speak of "Heads of Departments" in clause 1 of section 2, but "principal Officers" in clause 2? Perhaps these puzzles are not terribly probative. Certainly the usage of the framers in debate is not wholly inconsistent.1 6 5 But clearly nothing in the modem unitarian's conception-that the framers imagined just one kind of department-could easily explain such different usages. If all departments were the same, there would be no reason to speak of the heads of Foreign Affairs and War any differently from the head of the Treasury, or the Post Office. If all departments were the same, there might be no reason to qualify the power of the President to demand written opinions by saying that he had that power over principal officers of the "executive" departments. If all departments were the same, and all equally under the President's directory control, there would be little reason to give Congress the power to vest appointments in "Heads of Departments," as the President would have the power both to direct the heads of departments to make appointments and to remove those they have appointed.' 66 But consider these same bits of text against the background of another conception of the original understanding-one that imagines that the framers conceived of departments differently, and contends that the President would, by the Constitution, have directory power over only some of those departments. If there were in effect two kinds of "departments" rather than just one, then we could understand the Opinions Clause to extend to the President the power to demand written opinions powers in the Courts of Law. How would this help explain the Inferior Officers Appointment Clause? As with the Opinions Clause, many have considered this clause in part a redundancy of its own-if the President has an inherent authority to direct the departments, what function could there be in giving Congress the power to vest appointment in someone the President already controls? At most, the clause (so understood) is a convenience, possibly useful as clarification, but certainly not essential to any overarching separation of powers design. posits that: since it presumably had a purpose, it may be ventured as an hypothesis that "departments" and "heads of departments" were the generic terms applicable to all three of the departments first created; and that "executive departments" and "principal officers" were included only those departments created to act as administrative arms of the President in the exercise of his constitutional executive powers. 169. See supra note 156 and accompanying text. 170. This again was Hart's reading. See supra note 168. The question whether "principal officers" are a subset of, or distinct from, "Heads of Departments" is important, but one we do not need to resolve here. Again, if "principal Officers" are a subset of "Heads of Departments" then it follows that they could be given the inferior officer appointment power; if they are distinct, it follows that only the President could be given the appointment power for officers inferior to the "principal Officers." Supporting the suggestion that "principal Officers" were not to be considered "Heads of Departments" is Chief Justice Marshall's discussion the President's duty to commission officers, and his power of appointment. Marshall says these are distinct powers, because the "Heads of Departments" clause makes it possible that someone could be appointed whom the President would not want appointed. Nonetheless, the Commission Clause requires him to commission this unwanted officer. This supports reading heads of departments as distinct from principal officers since it is unlikely that the framers conceived of principal officers in executive departments as independent of the President. See Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 154-56 (1803). Finally, it should be clear that, at the least, this historical usage draws into doubt the Court's opinion in Freytag v. Commissioner, 111 S. Ct. 2631 (1991). There the Court determined that the "tax court" could not be considered a "department" for purposes of the Inferior Officers Appointment Clause, since, as the Court held, "department" in that clause, like "department" in the Opinions Clause, refers to "cabinet-level" departments, and a tax court was not a cabinet-level department. See id. at 2643. But, however broadly one reads "departments," it seems clear at least that the original usage undermines an argument that treats the usage in the Opinions Clause as equivalent to the usage in the Inferior Officers Appointment Clause. For as just noted, the usage suggests the framers and the first Congress were speaking of entities of a different kind. We do not want to make too much of these textual differences, nor do we claim that there is decisive evidence in favor of any particular interpretation. But whether one adopts the more conservative understanding of the Opinions Clause, or the more radical, it is enough here to remark that both make clear the oddity in the idea that the framers imagined the President to have inherent authority to direct executive officers by virtue of the Vesting Clause of Article II alone. If that were so, there was no need to enact the Opinions Clause in any form, and plausibly little purpose in giving Congress the power to vest appointment of inferior officers in "the Heads of Departments." No doubt, standing alone the Opinions Clause does not dispose of the matter: there may be many possible reasons for the dropping of the Supreme Court opinions clause, and these might allow the clause to be considered a redundancy. 17 2 But the clause does suggest a serious puzzle for those who believe that the executive power to direct or supervise all administration. includes an D. Original Understandings: Rethinking Executive Versus Administrative The modem unitarian would predict that the founders would have vested a function as executive as "prosecution" exclusively in the control of the President; they did not. The modem unitarian would predict that the original departments would follow a single organizational design, with the President recognized as the head of all discretionary authority within those departments; the original departments did not follow this pattern. The modem unitarian would predict that a power as small as the power in the Constitution's unitary scheme; but for it was not unnecessary. to order written the framers, In each case, the model of the modem unitarian bumps up against an inconsistent practice of the framers. We are naturally led to the question: Are we missing something? Is there something about the world in which the framers lived that we no longer see and that explains the widespread contemporary misunderstanding of the original constitutional theory and practice? We suggest that there is. Together these puzzles perhaps do not prove that the unitary conception of the framers' design is false, but they 171. Congress could always grant the power by statute. Cf. the statutory "heads of The functions of a chief executive of a sovereign State are, generally speaking, of two kinds-political and administrative. In different countries, with different governmental forms, the emphasis laid respectively upon each of these functions varies. In some, the powers and influence of the executive head are almost wholly political. In others, as for example in Switzerland, the political duties of the executive are so fully under legislative control that its chief importance is upon the administrative side.173 For most constitutionalists, resolving issues of what we call "executive" power means deciding two different sets of questions. The first set relates to who performs the political functions of an executive-the power to conduct foreign affairs, for example, or the power to act as head of state. The second set of questions relates to who directs the administrative functions of an executive-in parliamentary systems, who controls the government. description of the functions of government: [T] here are two distinct functions of government, and their differentiation results in a differentiation ... of the organs of government provided by the formal governmental system. These two functions of government may for purposes of convenience be designated respectively as Politics and Administration. Politics has to do with policies or expressions of the state will. Administration has to do with the execution of these policies. There are at least two ways to understand this claim that the framers did not intend to vest in the President control of all administrative functions. The distinction between these two ways connects with the second misunderstanding we have described above-that is, it connects with how we understand how they understood these categories of governmental power. One understanding would be that the framers had in their heads clear categories of "executive power" (or in many cases equivalently "political power") and "administrative power," and by constitutionally 174. See Arend Ljphart, Democracies: Patterns of Majoritarian and Consensus 177. Indeed, the modern sense of "administration" is quite new. See John A. Fairlie, Public Administration and Administrative Law, in Essays on the Law and Practice of Governmental Administration 3, 24 (Charles G. Haines & Marshall E. Dimock eds., 1935) (asserting that statutory and judicial recognition of the term "administration" did not begin until 1874). The preceding review of the existing institutions of American government and of the body of textual, contextual and interpretational constraints bearing upon them should cast doubt on the idea that our Constitution requires that the organs of government be apportioned among one or another of three neat "branches," giving each a home in one and merely the possibility of relations with the others. 180. More particularly, we focus on the view of three nineteenth century scholars, Westel Woodbury Willoughby, William Franklin Willoughby, and Frank Goodnow, and perhaps unjustifiably, take these three as standards for what we will call the nineteenth century view. The Willoughbys were twin brothers, born in 1867, and like Goodnow, influential in the political science movement begun atJohns Hopkins. Goodnow was one of the founders of the study of administration, and the first president of the American Political Science Association. A central focus of his early work was the attempt to make representative democracy work in the context of growing administrative functions. See FrankJ. Goodnow, Politics and Administration: A Study in Government chs. 6-9 (1900). This, Goodnow believed, required the creation of expert bodies to implement the will of the people. See FrankJ. Goodnow, The American Conception of Liberty and Government 58-59 (1916). More importantly, it required that administrative law reflect changes in the political and economic context. See FrankJ. Goodnow, Comparative Administrative Law 59-60, 71-74 (New York, Putnam, student ed. 1893). The Willoughbys can be seen to carry on from Goodnow's work. See Essays in Political Science in Honor of W.W. Willoughby 355-64 (John M. Mathews &James Hart eds., 1937) (considering the work of Westel Woodbury Willoughby); Grundstein, supra note 7, at 289-94 (discussing work of William Franklin Willoughby). The three we focus on are of course not the only relevant theorists. Nathan Grundstein discusses two additional theorists: The main contours of the concept of the unity of the executive power as it has developed in relation to the national administration are delineated in the early literature on administrative law, particularly in the writings of Freund and Wyman.... Constitutional interpretation was to strive to secure for the President a control over administration that would exhibit the attributes set forth by Freund and Wyman as characteristic in a fully integrated administrative hierarchy-unity, through the subordination of the officers constituting the administration; central direction of the exercise of official powers; discretionary authority and the complete integration of official discretion; and the actual or symbolic vesting of all authority in the head of the administration, whose status as chief executive was coordinate with that of the legislature. One thought would be a firm sense of distinction between the categories of executive and administrative power. And indeed, that is precisely what the late nineteenth century theorists claimed the framers had. As they saw it, to the framers this distinction (even if to us apparently naive' 8 2) was a crucial one, which Grundstein describes as having had "the stature of a first principle" even if it "today [is] on the verge of obliteration."' 8 3 As one of the leading nineteenth century theorists described it: Owing to the fact that the President at the present time in fact exercises large administrative powers and is in appearance the head of the administrative departments the popular opinion prevails that the framers of the constitution employed the term executive as including what are now known as administrative powers and that it was their intention that the President should be the head of the administration. This is a mistake. There can be no question but that they used the term executive in its technical sense as covering only the political duties of the titular head of the nation. "[I]t was undoubtedly intended, " writes W. W. Willoughby .... "that the President should be little more than a political chief, that is to say, one whose function should, in the main, consist in the performance of those political duties which are not subject to judicial control." 184 181. See, e.g., Miller, supra note 1, at 43. But see Geoffrey P. Miller, The Unitary Executive in a Unified Theory of Constitutional Law: The Problem of Interpretation, 15 Cardozo L. Rev. 201, 201-02 (1993) ("The President's Constitutional powers over the administrative state should . . . be determined in light of a careful assessment of the particular functions involved."). which we no longer share. See infra text accompanying notes 388-392. If one understood these notions as "naturally" distinct, then as these theorists suggested, it would also seem natural to see that while the framers had assigned "executive" power to the President, this assignment entailed no judgment about where Congress must assign administrative power, and more importantly, about who gets to control the administrative power. Again, these theorists suggested, the question was left to Congress under the Necessary and Proper Clause.' 8 5 In this way, the nineteenth century theorists picked up the understanding, apparently clear (to them) in the text, that Congress had broad authority to structure the administration of government institutions as it saw fit-so long as such structures were both "necessary and proper."' 8 6 To these commentators, then, the question whether the President has a right to direct or control the actions of his agents turns upon whether the agents are exercising "executive" or "administrative" power. If executive, the President would have such a right; if administrative, he would not have this right (at least not by virtue of the Constitution). If the power exercised by the agents was administrative power, the Constitution would not require Congress to vest such control in the President. to the President of the executive power had for its effect that the President was to have military and political power rather than administrative power. The meaning of the words 'executive power' is explained by the specific powers granted to the President by the constitution."); id. at 78 ("[P]erusal of the early acts of Congress organizing the administrative system of the United States will show that the first Congress did not have the idea that the President had any power of direction over any matters not political in character."). For President Wilson's account, see Woodrow Wilson, Constitutional Government in the United States 59 (1908) ("The makers of the constitution seem to have thought of the President as what the stricter Whig theorists wished the king to be: only the legal executive, the presiding and guiding authority in the application of law and the execution of policy."). 187. See for example the character of the discussion in Leonard D. White, The An initial question is whether the text of Article II supports the idea that the framers contemplated two kinds of (what we consider) executive functions. One immediately apparent argument that it does not, presented by the modem constitutionalists, rests on the Vesting Clause. As Calabresi and Rhodes recently argued, Article II's Vesting Clause appears to vest executive power beyond those powers enumerated in the balance of Article 11.190 For unlike the Vesting Clause in Article I (which provides, "All legislative power herein granted"191), the Vesting Clause of Article II ("The executive power"19 2) does not limit its power to the enumerated powers listed in Article I1.193 Therefore, the argument goes, the framers did not understand the executive power to be limited to the particular powers enumerated; and if not limited to the enumerated powers, it would follow that one cannot divide executive functions from "administrative" functions, at least for constitutional purposes.' 9 4 that think this argument if the Constitution vests all executive power in the President, there is now enough reason to question whether all executive power as then understood includes all executive power as now understood. As we conceive it, the framers intended the Vesting Clause to vest constitutionally little more than the enumerated executive powers. 195 It says who has the execu is unpersuasive. Even It is true, that the Constitution declares that the executive power shall be vested in the President; but the first question which then arises is, What is executive power?... Executive power is not a thing so well known, and so accurately defined, as that the written constitution of a limited government can be supposed to have conferred it in the lump.198 Four arguments support this conclusion. First, if the Vesting Clause were read in the way that Calabresi and Rhodes would read it, it would have the effect of rendering superfluous much of the balance of Article 11,199 since much of the balance of Article II merely articulates what Calabresi and Rhodes would say is implied in the Vesting Clause.20 0 There is reason to seek a reading that can eliminate this redundancy.20 1 There is good reason as well to minimize the significance of this distinctive language in Article II-"herein granted." For the addition of "herein granted," relied upon by Calabresi and Rhodes, 20 2 was made at the last moment by the Committee on Style, a committee without the authority to make substantive changes. 203 The change induced no debate at all; this 579, 640-41 (1952) (Jackson, J., concurring). That nothing more than the enumerated powers are vested does not entail that those powers are to be understood narrowly. In particular, this does not determine the scope of the Take Care Clause, see infra Part II.D.4. All we mean is that the Vesting Clause does nothing more than show who (a President) is to exercise the executive power, and not what that power is. grant powers beyond those enumerated). suggests that the framers saw it as having an effect as slight as we argue it should have.20 4 Second, not even Hamilton described the Vesting Clause as an independent source of substantive executive power, though he was in general quite eager to define a strong executive. In his catalog of the executive powers, contrasting the American executive with the British monarch, nowhere does he discuss a general executive power arising from the Vesting Clause.2 0 5 Third, while the federal constitution certainly constituted a more unitary executive than most state constitutions, the same language vesting executive power in state constitutions had been understood at the time of the framing not to mark an inherent power, but to describe an authority Hamilton, Gouverneur Morris, Madison and King "to revise the stile of and arrange the articles which had been agreed to by the House." This work was entrusted to Morris.... Positively with respect to the executive article he could do nothing. But he could do much by leaving the vesting clause as it stood. When the report of the committee of style was submitted it was found that the legislative grant now read: "All legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress." ... Whether intentional or not, it admitted an interpretation of executive power which would give to the President a field of action much wider than that outlined by the enumerated powers. in Finally, and perhaps most interesting for our purposes, is an argument resting on the other vesting clause similar to the Vesting Clause of Article II and more explicit than the Vesting Clause of Article I: that is Article III's clause which provides that "[t] he Judicial Power... shall be vested." If the difference between Article II and Article I entails broad inherent power in the President, does it entail the same broad grant of inherent power in Article III? Forjust like Article II, and unlike Article I, Article III vests "[t]he judicial power" (and not just the judicial power "herein granted") in "the Supreme Court." But does this mean that the judicial branch has a wide range of inherent and (legislatively) unregulable judicial authority beyond that enumerated and granted by Congress, drawn from English practice? Can the Supreme Court claim a range of implied authority to decide any issue of a judicial matter, or does the subsequent specification of "cases and controversies" exhaust that authority? It is at least clear how an originalist should answer this structural question. For the originalist is quick to point to Justice Iredell's argument in Chisolm v. Georgia208 for the proposition that the Constitution granted no inherent judicial power to create judicial remedies where 206. For an extraordinary record of this, see Field v. People ex rel. McClernand, 3 Ill. (2 Scam.) 79 (1839), in which the Illinois Supreme Court, reading a similar vesting clause in its own constitution, concluded, "[t]his clause... is a declaration of a general rule; and the same remarks are applicable to this, as a grant of power, that have been made in Id. at 84. No doubt, as Thach reference to them. It confers no specific power." comments, the aim of the framers was to create an executive more powerful than state executives, see Thach, supra note 78, at 52, but that is not enough to conclude the President is to have unlimited inherent power. However, one can rely on state experience only with caution. As Gerhard Casper remarks, "No clear-cut state precedents were available to the members of the House of Representatives as they faced the task of interpreting the provisions of the United States Constitution with respect to the tenure of executive officers." Casper, supra note 115, at 234; cf. Daniel Webster, Speech in the Senate (May 7, 1834), in 7 Writings and Speeches of Webster, supra note 197, at 125 (noting that even in state constitutions, there were no perfectly drawn lines between the powers of each department). I conceive, that all the Courts of the United States must receive, not merely their organization as to the numbers of Judges of which they are to consist; but all their authority, as to the manner of their proceeding, from the Legislature only. This appears to me to be one of those cases, with many others, in which an article of the Constitution cannot be effectuated without the intervention of the Legislative authority. There being many such, at the end of the special enumeration of the powers of Congress in the Constitution, is this general one: 'To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing Powers, and all other powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any department or officer thereof.' None will deny, that an act of Legislation is necessary to say, at least of what number the Judges are to consist; the President with the consent of the Senate could not nominate a number at their discretion. The Constitution intended this article so far at least to be the subject of a Legislative act. Having a right thus to establish the Court, and it being capable of being established in no other manner, I conceive it necessarily follows, that they are also to direct the manner of its proceedings. Upon this authority, there is, that I know, but one limit; that is, 'that they shall not exceed their authority.' 20 9 We believe that what Iredell says here about Article III power applies to Article II powers as well. Article III gives certain courts "the judicial power," which power "extend[s]" to certain "cases and controversies"; nonetheless, Iredell argues, this does not yet imply any power of the court to decide cases or grant remedies unless Congress has acted to confer such jurisdiction.2 10 The same should hold for executive power. Article II gives the President "the executive power," which is defined to include a catalog of powers in section 2, and some in section 3, and at least one specified in 209. Id. at 432-33 (Iredell, J., dissenting) (emphasis deleted). It would in general be quite odd to rely upon a dissenting opinion to help establish the original intent (though some would say that Justice Harlan's view of the Fourteenth Amendment in Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537,552-64 (1896) (Harlan,J., dissenting), was closer to the truth than Justice Brown's), but Iredell's position (in part) was subsequently ratified by the Eleventh Amendment. See Vicki C. Jackson, The Supreme Court, the Eleventh Amendment, and State Sovereign Immunity, 98 Yale LJ. 1, 8 (1988). These arguments together suggest an understanding of the nineteenth century theorists' two-function view: if "executive power" extends to just those powers enumerated, then the "administrative power" spoken of by the nineteenth century scholars would extend to departments and agencies created by Congress independent of these Article II powers.2 12 And it would follow that any constitutional limit on Congress' power would track just these powers enumerated as the President's. One would test limitations on other powers granted by Congress-for example, limitations on the control over aspects of the administration unrelated to the enumerated powers-not by any Article II consideration, but instead by the reach of the Necessary and Proper Clause. Executive power signified to Blackstone, as it did to the American framers, those powers of decision and action that can be exercised by a chief executive, or in his name, simply by virtue of the authority granted directly to him by the constitution or the laws. Though the executive may ultimately be held responsible-by impeachment or by the repudiation at the pollsfor executive decisions made or executive actions carried out, executive powers themselves are almost by definition discretionary, and therefore capable of being exercised without the necessity of submitting a proposed course of action to prior legislative deliberation and approval.2 1 4 The point is stated succinctly in the following account of present-day English constitutional practice: "For the exercise of a prerogative power the prior authority of Parliament is not reParliament may criticize Ministers for the consequired .... quences which the exercise of prerogative; Parliament too may abolish or curtail the prerogative by statute; but in regard to the exercise of the prerogative Parliament has no right to be consulted in advance."2 1 5 result from What marks a power as executive (within the framers' language) is that the decision whether and how that power is to be exercised lies within the discretion of that person designated as the executive. Under this conception, an executive need no more consult others before exercising executive power than the legislature need consult others before exercising its powers. 2 16 214. Arthur Bestor, Separation of Powers in the Domain of Foreign Affairs: The Constitutional law since 1789 has distinguished between executive officers performing "political" functions, and executive officers performing other functions, and it has rejected the notion that such non-"political" functions must be under the President's exclusive direction. In the "political" realm, the President must direct all; in the non-"political" realm, Congress may make an officer independent of presidential control, and instead may subject the officer solely to the direction of the law. If we can use this bit of contextual understanding, if executive powers are political in this early sense of that word, and finally, if the Vesting Clause is limited in the sense we describe, then there is an entirely obvious sense in which one can distinguish "executive" functions from other functions contingently exercised by the executive. If executive powers are those granted the President under the Constitution, then the nineteenth century's "administrative" powers are those given the President or officers of the government by Congress. And while Congress has only questionable power to condition the constitutional grant of executive powers, 217 Congress has clear authority to limit the exercise of administrative powers as a condition to its grant of these powers to any officer of the government.2 18 In the original conception, what constrains Congress when creating administrative power is principally the requirement that it be necessary and proper; beyond that limitation, the Constitution does not speak. navy, the direction of the operations of war-these, and other matters of a like nature, constitute what seems to be most properly understood by the administration of government. For our purposes, we can focus on one crucial aspect to the Court's dictum. Central to Marshall's analysis is a distinction between two kinds of authority or power under which the Secretary of State may act-one that he calls "political" authority and the other authority derived from law (the same distinction we have traced). As Marshall explained: By the constitution of the United States, the President is invested with certain important political powers, in the exercise of 220. Reconsider the Decision of 1789 in this light, discussed supra text accompanying Thus far then, Marshall sounds like a believer in a strongly unitary executive, at least to the extent that he is pointing to an absolute power in the President to exercise control over subordinates, and the unreviewability of their acts pursuant to that authority. Marshall then immediately links this power to a department we have just reviewed. Says Marshall, The application of this remark will be perceived by adverting to the act of congress for establishing the department of foreign affairs. This officer, as his duties were prescribed by that act, is to conform precisely to the will of the President. He is the mere organ by whom that will is communicated. The acts of such an officer, as an officer, can never be examinable by the courts. 22 6 Thus, Marshall conceived the foreign affairs department to flow from this power that Marshall calls "political" and that we have been calling executive. In this way, Marshall sounds very much like ChiefJustice Taft, writing in Myers.2 2 7 When an officer exercises the (executive) power, which this department has by virtue of its tie to the constitutional grant of this executive power to the President, his acts "can never be examin [ed]" by a court. But Marshall goes on to qualify this sea of unreviewability in a crucial way: But when the legislature proceeds to impose on that officer other duties; when he is directed peremptorily to perform certain acts; when the rights of individuals are dependent on the performance of those acts; he is so far the officer of the law; is amenable to the laws for his conduct; and cannot at his discretion sport away the vested rights of others. 229 Thus, an executive officer is either an agent of the President (a "political officer") or an "officer of the law." He can serve either the President or the lawmakers (Congress), but when he serves Congress' will (as expressed in law), his performance under that will is, Marshall asserts, subject to the review by the courts. The power of nominating to the senate, and the power of appointing the person nominated, are political powers, to be exercised by the President according to his own discretion. When he has made an appointment, he has exercised his whole power and his discretion has been completely applied to the case. If, by law, the officer [appointed] be removable at the will of the President, then a new appointment may be immediately made, and the rights of the officer are terminated. But as a fact which has existed cannot be made never to have existed, the appointment cannot be annihilated; and consequently if the officer is by law not removable at the will of the President; the rights he has acquired are protected by the law, and are not resumable by the President. They cannot be extinguished by executive authority, and he has the privilege of asserting them in like manner as if they had been derived from any other source. 233 230. See id. 231. Id. 232. The steps to this conclusion are not essential here, though they are somewhat complex. Signing the commission, Marshall said, was the last act in the appointment, since it was a public act manifesting the completion of the appointment; the act of signing was, however, distinct from the appointment. The commission was just the evidence of the appointment. See id. at 155-58. So far, then, the modem unitarian view appears to be both coherent and consistent with what we have quoted. But it is not entirely consistent with how the framers and the Court in Marbuiy understood things. The believers in a strongly unitary executive say that whenever an exercise of authority is discretionary, the Constitution permits the President to control such an exercise; but the original view would suggest that what the framers meant was that whenever it is a political power, derived from the Constitution, or a legal discretion granted by Congress, the President must have the power to direct the exercise of this discretion. Nothing in this entails that where Congress directs otherwise-by vesting in an officer a discretionary power beyond the President's review-the President nonetheless has power to direct or even to interfere with the exercise of that power. The modem unitarian confuses the source of the power to act (the Constitution versus laws of Congress) with the type of power acted upon (discretionary versus ministerial). the Constitution or from law; power may be ministerial or discretionary. As we understand the founding view, Congress had a measure of authority to structure what modem observers consider to be executive with respect to power deriving from law, whether ministerial or not. All this suggests a sharp distinction between (a) the acts that the President may control and (b) the acts that Congress may regulate. This distinction flows from the nature of the source of the authority to act (Article I's Necessary and Proper Clause versus Article II) rather than from the nature of the act (discretionary versus ministerial). The point is not unambiguous in Marbuy itself, there it is merely suggested. But the point emerges clearly from another case that many believers in a strongly unitary executive take to stand for precisely the opposite point, Kendall v. United States ex rel. Stokes.23 5 Postmaster Amos Kendall refused to pay a claim made by a William B. Stokes (and others), who had contracted with the Post Office to deliver the mall. Congress had by law directed that the Postmaster make the payment; Kendall, at the urging of President Jackson, refused. At issue 234. See supra note 106. The exception is in cases where the executive believes the underlying law unconstitutional. See, e.g., Lear Siegler, Inc. v. Lehman, 842 F.2d 1102 (9th Cir. 1988) (executive refusing to enforce law viewed as unconstitutional), Kendall is often understood to stand for the proposition that where the action enjoined upon the executive is "ministerial," then the executive can be directed by law to perform it, which suggests (wrongly we believe) that if the action is "discretionary," then the executive cannot be directed by law to perform it. But this implication follows neither in logic nor from the opinion. What is crucial to the opinion (and conceded by the dissenting justices as well) is that the authority at issue in Kendall derives from law,238 and not from the constitutionally committed executive powers; and since derived from law, the executive could not control it.239 The argument for the Court follows precisely the distinction drawn by Chief Justice Marshall: "The executive power is vested in a President; and as far as his powers are derived from the constitution, he is beyond the reach of any other department, except in the mode prescribed by the constitution through the impeaching power."240 Thus, where the source of the President's power is the Constitution, 241 he is free from the control of the courts or Congress. Note here the unqualified nature of Congress' power. Congress has the power to impose upon any executive officer "any duty they may think proper" so long as this is not repugnant to "rights secured by" the Constitution. A duty may be ministerial or nonministerial (discretionary or nondiscretionary). With regard to ministerial duties, all that Kendall says is: "And this is emphatically the case, where the duty enjoined is of a mere ministerial character."243 236. The Marbury mistake was not to be made again. This time the mandamus action was brought in a court with the power to hear the claim within its original jurisdiction. constitutional powers. The grounds for this point were made even more clearly by Chief Justice Taney in dissent (note again: the dissenters agreed with the Court that Congress could give the courts mandamus power over an executive; the dispute among them was over whether Congress had given the courts such power): is not created by the The office of postmaster general constitution; nor are its powers or duties marked out by that instrument. The office was created by act of congress; and wherever congress creates such an office as that of postmaster general, by law, it may unquestionably, by law, limit its powers, and regulate its proceedings; and may subject it to any supervision or control, executive or judicial, which the wisdom of the legislature may deem right. There can, therefore, be no question about the constitutional powers of the executive or judiciary, in this case. The controversy depends simply upon the construction of an act of congress. As Taney and the Court affirmed, the judgment about how to control the department was Congress', so long as Congress exercised that judgment according to law. Once expressed by law, the duty of the President is plain: The Constitution directs him to "take Care" that the laws be faithfully executed, and "[tio contend that the obligation imposed on the President to see the laws faithfully executed, implies a power to forbid their execution, is a novel construction of the constitution, and entirely inadmissible."247 when working for the Department of Justice: It is in our view extremely difficult to formulate constitutional theory tojustifr a refusal by the President to comply with a Congressional directive to spend. It may be argued that the spending of money is inherently an executive function, but the execution of any law, is by definition, an executive function and it seems an anomalous proposition that because the Executive Branch is bound to execute the laws, it is free to decline to execute them. [T] he executive ought to have this power, because it is executive in its nature. The executive is fitted to execute it, and armed with means to execute it. It can always execute it... promptly, uniformly, and in the time and manner that the public interests may require; and as its means may enable it.248 But whether the "executive ought" or not, as every Justice in Kendall affirmed, the Constitution allowed the President only those powers of execution given by Congress. We do not claim that Marbuiy and Kendall dispose of the debate over the nature of the unitary executive. There are many ambiguities in the opinions. But the language and spirit of the opinions seem to fit better with the approach we have offered here. not discuss here. 251. See, e.g., 3 Willoughby, supra note 120, at 1474. Tiefer suggests that it was intended as a clause "to preclude presidential claims of super-legal authority, not to confer positive authority to override legislative acts." Tiefer, supra note 21, at 90 n.151. 254. We do not claim that the argument was entirely unheard of by the framers. Representative Ames, for example, argues the point in the Removal Debate, see 1 Annals of Cong. 492, 561 (Gales & Seaton eds., 1834), as does Madison, see id. at 516. Neither, however, advances the position as strongly as the modem unitarians. That strong claim reaches back to President Jackson. Something like this argument was relied upon by Jackson in his removal of funds from the Bank of the United States. See infra Part II.G. Webster's response to this claimed authority is telling: I will never agree that a President of the United States holds the whole undivided power of office in his own hands, upon the theory that he is responsible for the entire action of the whole body of those engaged in carrying on the government and executing the laws. Such a responsibility is purely ideal, delusive, and vain. There is, there can be, no substantial responsibility, any further than every individual is answerable, not merely in his reputation, not merely in the opinion of mankind, but to the law, for the faithful discharge of his own appropriate duties. This was May 29, 1787. It was not until June 1 that the convention, now convened as a Committee of the Whole, turned to consider the executive power. Madison suggested that the committee first consider the scope of the executive power, before it decide the central questionwhether there would be one or more "executives." As Madison outlined it, the President (whether a single person or a plurality) was to have three powers: [the] power to carry into effect the national laws; to appoint to offices in cases not otherwise provided for, and to execute such other powers not Legislative norJudiciary in their nature as may from time to time be delegated by the national Legislature. 261 Note the last of these three powers-the power to execute "such other powers not Legislative nor Judiciary in their nature as may from time to time be delegated by the national Legislature."262 To someone who believes that the Constitution recognizes just three powers, executive, legislative, and judicial, what could be powers "not Legislative norJudiciary in their Nature" be, such that the executive would not in any case possess them? For if the only powers are powers legislative, judicial, and execu (1900) [hereinafter Documentary History]. 263. We can say only "presumably" because there was no clear vesting clause yet, so it is conceivable these three would have been exclusive. Congress, but this point we discuss below. See infra text accompanying notes 279-282. whether it would not be necessary, before a Committee for detailing the Constitution should be appointed, to determine on the means by which the Executive is to carry the laws into effect, and to resist combinations [against] them. Is he to have a military force for the purpose, or to have the command of the Militia, the only existing force that can be applied to that use? As the Resolutions now Stand the Committee will have no determinate directions on this great point.2 69 James Wilson agreed that something more should be specified, and Rufus King assured the convention that the Committee on Detail would address the matter.270 Just about a week later, the Committee of the Whole finally approved the "resolution respecting the national executive,"27' and on July 26, 1787, the proceedings of the Committee of the Whole were sent to the Committee on Detail. After the Committee on Detail was finished, then, the Constitution granted Congress the power to define just how these powers, which, Pinckney argued,2 74 included powers that we would call administrative, were to be executed. And the Constitution instructed the President to take care that he follow Congress' instructions. In this way the convention chose between a relatively broad grant of executive power to the President to select the means of executing federal law, and a relatively (1) To make all laws that shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers [Congress' powers]; (2) To make all laws that shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof 2 75 Chief Justice Marshall, in McCulloch v. Mayland,2 76 of course made famous the first half of this crucial clause-the vertical dimension to the Necessary and Proper Clause-allowing Congress to determine the implied powers necessary to give effect to its enumerated powers. 277 But for our purposes, what is far more crucial is the second half of the clause-the horizontal dimension to the Necessary and Proper Clause. 278 In as clear a textual commitment as possible, it is Congress that is granted the power to determine the means for specifying how powers-and again, all powers-in the federal government are to be exercised. 279 And a dictum of ChiefJustice Burger notwithstanding,280 if the clause extends the enumerated powers of Congress, by suggesting a scope for implied powers, it also vests the judgment about the extent of any implied power anywhere in the government in Congress alone.2 8 ' 275. See U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, c. 18. 276. 17 U.S. (4 Wheat.) 316 (1819). 277. See id. at 415. 278. For the most important presentation of this argument, see William W. Van Alstyne, The Role of Congress in Determining Incidental Powers of the President and of the Federal Courts: A Comment on the Horizontal Effect of the Sweeping Clause, Law & Contemp. Probs., Spring 1976, at 102, 111; see also Lawson & Granger, supra note 178. Lawson and Granger argue persuasively that the framers imagined the Necessary and Proper Clause to be a real constraint on congressional power. While we do not agree that the clause is a limitation on Congress' power (rather than a grant of power), we do agree that the constraints of "propriety" are real constraints on Congress. It is time to conclude. The history of the Take Care Clause, and the text of the Necessary and Proper Clause, further support the claim that the framers viewed executive power less uniformly than the modem unitarians now view it. This section has shown that the framers toyed with a clause that appears to imagine Congress delegating something other than executive power; that they at first seemed to decide in favor of a structure Van Alstyne, supra note 278, at 111. Van Alstyne also makes the obvious point that the current understanding of neither the President nor the Judiciary is consistent with this original understanding. As he says: The most obvious current illustration of an implied executive power is that of 'executive privilege.' Presidents have taken the view that just as Congress may make provision for all things it not unreasonably deems necessary and proper in aid of its own enumerated powers granted in article I of the Constitution, so also may the President in aid of the enumerated executive powers granted in article II .... legislative powers, and not executive, because Again, we think it is clear that the incidental powers which may be necessary and proper to carry into effect the powers vested in the Executive Department by the Constitution are the seventeenth [sic] clause of the eighth section of the first article gives to Congress the power-the legislative power-to supply the means necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers vested in the Executive Department. It would seem indeed that while the express powers vested in the President are not in any degree within the control of the legislative power, yet where an executive power needs co-efficient means for carrying it into execution, those means are not executive powers at all, but are to be supplied by the legislative powers of Congress. The modem unitarian imagines one category of executive functions. It says that the President must have plenary power to direct and control the administration of the laws. The nineteenth century view imagines two categories of executive functions-one executive, one administrativeonly one of which the President has a constitutional right to direct and control. If we had to choose between these two models, which makes more sense of the historical data? Which better solves the three puzzles of the early period? 1. Puzzle 1: Prosecution. - As illustrated above, modem unitarians cannot easily explain the actual practice of prosecution at the founding.28 5 In particular, they cannot explain how, in some cases, effective control over prosecution was taken away from the President. Can the nineteenth century conception explain the original practice any more completely? The history is fully consistent with the nineteenth century theorists' conception. Prosecution is not among the list of enumerated executive powers; indeed, at the framing the-e was a long history of nongovernmental prosecution, 28 6 and this history would have made it odd to conceive of the powers as exclusively the government's at all. According to the nineteenth century conception, prosecution is a power incidental to Congress', and Congress may vest such authority wherever "proper." Most of the time, it may be proper to vest it with the executive though whether it is proper turns on a range of factors that are particular to the type of prosecution at hand. For example, in conditions like those of the founding, it made little sense to vest in the President centralized control over district attorneys, given their distance from the center, and it would be fully understandable that they would function relatively independently of the President. Under other conditions, it may be constitutionally required that Congress vest control over prosecution in the executive. But even in these conditions sometimes (say, prosecution of high-level executive officials), it may be proper to vest such power in someone other than the President-or at least, it is within the power of Congress to decide so. The decision whether or not to vest control in the President turns on its propriety, and under the nineteenth century picture of the executive branch, the factors that determine whether a vesting is proper are more than the single factor of unitariness. In this diversity, then, the early Congresses reveal again the wide range of values that affect whether a particular structure should be considered proper. In answering the question, is this a proper structure, they considered not only the value of unitariness, but also the values of disinterestedness, efficiency, accountability, and others.2 8 9 Applying the nineteenth century vision as mechanically as possible to some modern developments,2 90 we think that Congress could not constitutionally make the Department of Defense into an independent agency; but it could allow at least a degree of independence for such modem institutions as the National Labor Relations Board and the Federal Communications Commission. 287. Indeed, as Susan Bloch argues, the first Congress showed some fear in getting at all close to regulating these departments. Modem constitutionalists think of just one thing when reading the Vesting Clause of Article II: executive power. Nineteenth century constitutionalists thought of two: executive and (what we are calling) administrative. Here, as elsewhere, believing is seeing. Because modem readers believe that there is just this single thing (the executive), they do not see the implications that flow from a distinction between executive and administrative. Because nineteenth century constitutionalists see executive control through Opinions Clause). But as we suggested at the start, the view of the nineteenth century constitutional theorists is misleading in one important respect, and it is time now to distance our ultimate view about the framers' design from the filter of the nineteenth century view. The modem unitarian argues that there is one clear category of executive power. To the extent that the nineteenth century constitutional theorists argued that there is more than one type of executive function, that argument seems certainly correct. But to the extent that the nineteenth century constitutional theorists argued that rather than one, there were just two clear categories of executive power-executive and administrative-the argument is misleading. While there is good evidence to suggest that the framers thought the structure of executive power far more complex than the single dimension offered by the modem unitarians, there is no good evidence to suggest that the framers thought the structure of executive power was as simple as the nineteenth century constitutional theorists believed. The mistake, that is, is notjust in seeing one category where there were two; the mistake is also in seeing clear categories and defining judgments when the framers offered no such vision.295 294. See supra text accompanying notes 184-186. 295. Woodrow Wilson points to another quite colorful presuppositional difference in criticizing the framers' theory of checks and balances. As Wilson wrote: The government of the United States was constructed upon the Whig theory of political dynamics, which was a sort of unconscious copy of the Newtonian theory In our own day, whenever we discuss the structure or of the universe. development of anything, whether in nature or in society, we consciously or unconsciously follow Mr. Darwin; but before Mr. Darwin, they followed Newton. Some single law, like the law of gravitation, swung each system of thought and gave it is principle of unity. Every sun, every planet, every free body in the spaces of the heavens, the world itself, is kept in its place and reined to its course by the attraction of bodies that swing with equal order and precision about it, themselves governed by the nice poise and balance of forces which give the whole system of the universe its symmetry and perfect adjustment. Rather than constitutionalizing everything, from the top level governmental functions down through the bottom level administrative details, the framers thought it enough to draw a few clear lines and leave the balance to Congress. 29 6 They thought it enough not only because they thought flexibility a virtue, but also because they had no clear models of separation to follow. Their (from our perspective) confusion, their mixing of functions at the administrative level, their failure to remark what to our eyes appears plainly wrong-headed conflations-all are evidence that the lines between the branches had not yet been drawn, either in the framers' heads, or in the text of their document. The framers were politicians-pragmatic even if principled-and their first task was rescuing a revolution from disaster. They did not have a sufficiently developed conception of the distribution of national powers to allow for clear and authoritative legal judgments about who would direct what we now call administration. On these points, their understanding was far murkier. One example makes clear the framers' (from a modem perspective) confusion and mixture of functions at the administrative level. In March 1792, Congress enacted the "Invalid Pensions Act,"2 97 designed to provide relief to veterans from the Revolutionary War. The details of this statute are quite telling for one who pictures the framers either as the modem unitarians do or as the nineteenth century constitutional theorists did.298 Congress did not establish a commission or agency to administer this program. Indeed, given the constraints of geography, and the absence of any substantial federal presence throughout the nation, such a bureaucracy would have been exceptionally expensive.2 99 Instead, circuit courts were to receive and process applications, and submit to the Secretary of War a list of pensioners, which the Secretary of War could change if he suspected "imposition or mistake."3 00 In a wholly pragmatic sense, this division of labor made perfect sense-circuit courts could whatever theories may be thrown across its track. Living political constitutions must be Darwin in structure and practice. But when did the Invalid Pensions Act become a constitutional howler? In an age when the Court has invalidated twenty-five acts of Congress in the past twenty years,3 02 we are quick to accept the judgment that Congress has gone wrong constitutionally. But this is the second Congress, not the one hundred and second. While five of the six justices may have thought the statute unconstitutional, at least forty of the sixty voting members of the House did not.3 03 Moreover, nowhere in the debate in Congress is there a suggestion of this constitutional concern. Nor did President Washington indicate that there was anything problematic about the statute as written. 301. The advisory opinions are collected in 1 American State Papers, Miscellaneous Nor were modem administrative/judiciary borders the only borders that the framing generation crossed. We have already mentioned the lack of any centralized control of the prosecutorial power in the original republic.3 0 6 This decentralized structure led Jefferson, when attempting to stop prosecutions under the Alien and Sedition Acts, to ask his Postmaster General to instruct the local district attorney (the equivalent of today's U.S. Attorney) to cease prosecution. Obviously Jefferson here trades on more than mere authority when he requests the district attorney to stop prosecution,3 0 7 and we should take this small clue about the nature of executive authority as a reason to look at a structure of authority without our modem bureaucratic categorical divisions. 305. For a description of the mixture of functions in colonial practice, see Goebel & Bloch describes it: But while history cannot provide definitive answers, it offers an instructive approach to constitutional interpretation. The framers of the Constitution and the early legislators understood they were creatingm"constituting"-a dynamic organism. They created a unitary Presidency, but did not mandate complete presidential control over all administrative offices that Congress might establish. Their approach to questions of control was neither rigid nor doctrinaire. On the contrary, it was remarkably subtle and pragmatic. The simplified model of separation of powers assumed by many modem discussants misses the nuances the framers and early legislators appreciated. descriptions. Bloch writes: Nonetheless, this early history, used judiciously, can guide and inform modem analysis. In particular, the experiences in establishing the principal offices of government, including that of the Attorney General, are important for what they suggest about constitutional interpretation. The drafters of the Constitution established the framework of the government and created the major institutions of President, Congress, and Supreme Court. But they left the implementing details to Congress. They anticipated that Congress would create departments and imposed some requirements ... but, for the most part, the specifics were left for Congress. And the First Congress's exercise of that power is instructive. In particular, we can learn from the early legislators' approach toward the question of presidential control of the various offices they created, an approach that was distinctively functional and pragmatic. Although it is unlikely that anyone in the 1790s anticipated precisely the questions raised by modem-day interbranch disputes, the framers and early legislators were sensitive to the difficult issues of control and approached them without rigid rules or formulas, an approach from which we can profitably learn. Chief Justice John Jay... indicated what everyone's approach should be: "[W]ise and virtuous men," he declared, "have thought and reasoned very differently respecting Government, but in this they have at Length very that its Powers should be divided into three, distinct, unanimously agreed ... So much then about the framers' constitution, and the world within which they authored that text. There is no question that along many dimensions, the framers' world has radically changed, and along with that change, so too have shifted conventional views about the presidency. We all now quite firmly believe that the President retains a strong and inherent authority to direct a wide range of executive and administrative actions, and in the second half of this Article, we address the question of whether one can derive that authority from a faithful interpretation of the Constitution. But let us first complete our description of the original practice of executive power. One final piece of evidence helps reveal the boundaries of this vision; it also marks the first successful claim by an executive of a power more expansive than what we claim the founders understood to exist. This is the confrontation between Jackson and the Bank of the United States, and Jackson's insistence that his Secretary of the Treasury remove funds from the Bank contrary to the Secretary's best judgment. independent Departments .... But how to constitute and ballance [sic] them in such a Manner as best to guard against Abuse and Fluctuation, & preserve the constitution from Encroachments, are Points on which there continues to be a great Diversity of opinions, and on which we have all as yet much to learn." Marcus, supra note 298, at 270 (quotingJohnJay's Charge to the GrandJury of the Circuit Court for the District of NewYork (Apr. 12, 1790) (JohnJay Papers, Columbia University)) (footnotes omitted). text following note 186. The statute challenged byJackson's action plainly raises the problem of unitariness that we are discussing, for it undertook to vest a discretionary authority in the Secretary of the Treasury. The statute required that the Secretary of the Treasury deposit all funds of the United States in the Bank of the U.S. Jackson ground his argument in the familiar claim that "the executive power" plus the "take Care" duty meant the President must have inherent authority to supervise the decisions of all subordinates. See id. initial complaint attackedJackson's "assumption" of a discretion vested in his Secretary of State-and more particularly, the use of his removal power to sap from the Secretary any discretion at all.3 2 4 The argument against Jackson was that the President had no authority to usurp the properly vested discretion of the Secretary. impeachment, but Congress had not followed Defending the Senate's action condemning Jackson three years earlier were two of the nation's most prominent statesmen, Daniel Webster and Henry Clay.3 27 It is Clay's characterization of the events leading up to the resolution againstJackson that captures perhaps our last glimpse of the framers' conception of the President's power. Clay began his defense by remarking on the special character of the Treasury--a character we have already seen discussed above. 328 As he said, Now, Sir, it is precisely this which I deem an assumption of power not conferred by the Constitution and laws. I think the law did not give this authority to the President, nor impose on him the responsibility of its exercise. It is evident that, in this removal, the Secretary was in reality nothing but the scribe; he was the pen in the President's hand, and no more. Nothing depended on his discretion, his judgment, or his responsibility.... This, Sir, is what I call assumption of power. The design of the law was then clear-to keep separate "sword and purse" the President was not to have control over the funds save through the check of his (relatively) independent Secretary of the Treasury. 30 Independence notwithstanding, Jackson defeated this design, resting his claim on an inherent power of superintendence, all following from the now familiar claim to the power of removal. Again, we can hear Jackson's argument in Clay's rebuttal: But [even] if the power of dismissal was as incontestable as it is justly controvertible, we utterly deny the consequence deduced from it. The argument is that the President has, by implication, (Expunging Debate). For Webster's similar account in response toJackson's protest against the resolution condemning his action, see Daniel Webster, Speech in the Senate (May 7, 1834), in 7 Writings and Speeches of Webster, supra note 197, at 103-47. the power of dismissal. From this first implication another is drawn; and that is, that the President has the power to control the officer, whom he may dismiss, in the discharge of his duties in all cases whatever; and that this power of control is so comprehensive as to include even the case of a specific duty expressly assigned by law to the designated officer. How is it with the President? Is he powerless? He is felt from one extremity to the other of this vast republic. By means of principles which he has introduced and innovations which he has made in our institutions, alas! but too much countenanced by Congress and a confiding people, he exercises uncontrolled the power of the State. In one hand he holds the purse, and in the other brandishes the sword of the country. Myriads of dependents and partisans, scattered over the land, are ever ready to sing hosannas to him and to laud to the skies whatever he does. He has swept over the Government, during the last eight years, like a tropical tornado. Every department exhibits traces of the ravages of the storm. 33 2 Whatever the presidency had become by the end of Jackson's reign, it was a different presidency from that of the founders. As we have tried to argue, we often miss this crucial fact, in part because we have been raised on the image of the presidency Clay and Webster so passionately feared. 333. There are two possible qualifications on this plenary power: (1) substantive statutory provisions must be respected and (2) it may have been possible for Congress to say that the President cannot make the ultimate decision, but that he can fire an official who refuses to do what he wants. See supra note 106 and accompanying text. Of course some statutes would involve constitutionally granted authority, and here the President must be allowed to control his subordinates. The founding generation did not believe that all those who engage in what we now think to be "executive" activities must operate under the control of the President. But is this decisive for current constitutional law? Does history entail the conclusion that Congress has free rein to allocate administrative tasks to people immune from presidential supervision? For some originalists,3 3 5 the answer must be yes. The framers did not constitutionalize anything like the single value of unitariness; it follows (from one version of originalism) that neither can we. (2d ed. 1988). Second, shortly after the New Deal President Roosevelt attempted to assert broad authority over the administration via the Reorganization Act of 1939, ch. 36, 53 Stat. 561. After a prolonged debate, involving many of the issues discussed here, Congress rejected Roosevelt's efforts. See Barry D. Karl, Constitution and Central Planning- The Third New Deal Revisited, 1988 Sup. Ct. Rev. 163, 187-88. Whether and how these developments should bear on constitutional interpretation raises complex issues that are beyond the scope of this Article. Within the American constitutional tradition, most practices of constitutional interpretation can be described as practices of fidelity-practices in which the commitments of the framers have a prominent place in finding and preserving constitutional meaning.33 7 "Originalism" is the paradigm within this tradition. For the originalist, the commitments of the framers are the exclusive source of constitutional authority, unless subsequently changed by constitutional amendment. 337. An alternative view, seeing constitutionality as a common law process concerned with case-by-case decisions over time, is defended in Harry Wellington, Common Law Rules and Constitutional Double Standards: Some Notes on Adjudication, 83 Yale LJ. 221 (1973); David Strauss, Constitutional Interpretation and the Common Law (1993) (unpublished manuscript, on file with the Columbia Law Review). Other originalists will noLan 9 Instead, these latter originalists simply locate a meaning that the document originally had, and apply that meaning "in the same way" today, without regard to how the context today may have changed.3 40 Let us now consider those who (1) are committed to interpretive fidelity and (2) follow or track the changes in both the foreground text and background context. For such people, it follows that particular applications of a constitutional text may change over time as the context of application changes-all consistent with the command of fidelity. Brown v. Board of Education 41 is a famous example.3 42 In Brown, the Court changed the application of the Equal Protection Clause (as compared with Pessy v. Frguson3 43) in large part because of a change in the social context since Pessy.344 Perhaps it could be said that in Pessy's context, state-run schools were so insignificant as to make state-imposed segregation constitutionally legitimate under the Equal Protection Clause. In the context of Brown, however, state-run schools were of central importance, and this change was highly relevant to interpretation. Public schools had assumed an entirely different role. This change required a different interpretation of whether school segregation violated the commitment to equal protection of the laws. No longer could the harm of segregationto the underlying constitutional principle-be legitimately ignored, even, or perhaps especially, if our concern was to respect the original constitutional principles.3 45 Or perhaps it was possible to think that at the time of PMessy, the view that segregation stigmatized blacks was a product not of the law of segregation, but of the "construction" placed on it by black people. This understanding of the facts, explicit in Pessy itself,3 4 6 was not sustainable by the time of Brown. to be Judge Bork's expansive reading of the First Amendment). In other words, the application of the Equal Protection Clause changed because understandings of the background facts had changed. The first is a mildly stylized history of the Commerce Clause, granting to Congress the power to "regulate Commerce... among the several States."3 51 As originally understood, the clause gave to Congress a power that fell far short of plenary authority over the national economy.3 52 In changes associated with the New Deal. See Sunstein, supra note 336, ch. 2. The Court eventually settled on the latter approach, in a way similar to the Court's own description of what happened between Plessy and Brown.355 Did fidelity require the Supreme Court to understand the twentieth century Commerce Clause to extend no further than the framers believed in the eighteenth? We do not believe so. In light of the changes in circumstances, fidelity to the original design properly allowed an extended commerce power, translated into the new context. The text of the clause reaches all interstate commerce, and that category had greatly enlarged by the twentieth century. The original purpose was to (holding that Commerce Clause reaches completely intrastate activities that would frustrate interstate regulation); NLRB v.Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp., 301 U.S. 1, 30-37 (1937) (holding that Commerce Clause extends to all activities that have a "close and substantial" relation to interstate commerce, even if activities are entirely intrastate). Of course we do not claim that all of the modern commerce cases were rightly decided. Nor do we suggest that the translative issue is simple or clear. Lost in translation of the early cases at least was any understanding of the federalist component (if there was such) to the original federal limitation. One argument that might justify the changed reading of the text of the First Amendment-again, a reading plainly inconsistent with the text-might go something like this: The limitation of the First Amendment to Congress was based on a set of distinctive assumptions about the background-most important, the assumption that de facto and de jure lawmaking power would be exercised primarily or perhaps even exclusively by Congress. In the context of the founding, the executive branch posed little or no threat to free speech because its regulatory authority was sharply limited. Any executive (or administrative) intrusions on expression would occur pursuant to a law that plainly called for such intrusions. Now let us turn to the question of presidential authority. Begin with the constitutional text. As we have argued, two principal questions are relevant to the constitutionality of a particular condition or limit on presidential power over administration of the laws. First, we have to know whether "executive" power (in the constitutionally relevant sense) is at stake. Second, we have to know whether the limit on that power is both "necessary and proper" to carry into execution the President's power or other powers in the national government. should now be deemed executive that was originally not so categorized, and precisely because of changed conditions and understandings. To answer all these questions fully would be to enter debates far beyond the scope of this Article. For our purposes here, a few observations will suffice. First, like any number of other clauses in the Constitutionthe Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause,36 1 the Due Process the Vesting Clause 364 Clause, 3 62 the Equal Protection Clause3 3-both and the Necessary and Proper Clause 365 have a degree of openendedness, at least on their face. 66 We might understand the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause, for example, to require the interpreter to look at least in part to a current society's "standards of decency" 6 7 to determine the scope of the clause's reach. Of course, an interpreter could simply look to the world that the framers saw when filling in the meaning that such clauses leave open. One could, that is, look to what was considered cruel and unusual at the framing,368 or to the process then considered due, 6 9 or to the government structures then considered proper, and test a particular punishment, or procedure, or government structure against those standards. 370. Of course the whole enterprise of "preservation" is a constructive task. There is no preinterpretive "it" out there that is being translated, either in literary translation itself, or in its metaphorical application here. All one can do is make a best effort at making sense of a past understanding, by understanding how it would fit within a current world. That it is constructive, that it has no firm limits, that it is not mechanical-all this is acknowledged. We are concerned with the task of preserving initial constitutional commitments in light of changes in the constitutional context. In what follows, we first outline some relevant initial commitments, and then sketch two types of contextual change that make new applications necessary if these old commitments are to be maintained. From these distinct values we can draw together two that are for our purposes central. First is a value in accountability-where no special reason existed to separate responsibility from the President, the pattern of original executive structures strongly supports the conclusion that the President remains accountable for the actions of government officers. 3 "T Of course, the general idea of accountability is embodied not only in the allocation of executive power, but also in the grant of legislative power to Congress, accompanied by a ban on open-ended delegations of legislative power.3 78 Second is a value of avoiding faction.37 9 This goal is, of course, at the center of the constitutional structure, and it helps explain the system of checks and balances in general.38 0 Accountability and avoidance of factionalism, then, are two central values of the framers' original executive. Let us focus now on two sorts of 373. The structure of the Departments of War, Navy, and Foreign Affairs (State) regarding the Comptroller, supra text in the institutional framework of American public law was entirely unanticipated by the framers, and it fundamentally altered the original constitutional design. We do not contend that administration was itself unanticipated, or that at the founding period it was trivial. On the contrary, the original period contained a precursor of the modern administrative state.3 8 2 But what we do now is not what was done then. General managerial functions were not within the domain of the national government, much less the President. Much of the organization of the national economy was left to state courts. 383 By contrast, the national government restricted itself largely to national improvements, subsidies, tariffs, patents, tonnage, and the disposal of public lands.3 8 4 Whether or not Articles I and II were designed for "congressional dominance," 38 5 it seems clear that the early presidency involved little policymaking role in domestic affairs. 381. This change is discussed pointedly in TheodoreJ. Lowi, The Personal President is necessary because some agencies had considerable policymaking authority and a large degree of discretion as well. Consider the Department of the Treasury and the Bank of the United States. See supra text accompanying notes 123-125, 139-143. Now consider the character of the modem presidency. In the aftermath of the New Deal, administrative agencies carry out a wide range of highly discretionary policymaking tasks in the domestic arena. Because of delegations of discretionary authority to administrative agencies, 3 96 the functions of those who execute the law have dramatically altered.3 9 7 Because of this discretionary authority, these agencies are now principal nalawmakers, both through tional policymakers-in practice, crucial 393. Control in this context means at least that the President has the power to discharge at will. It is acceptable to constrain the power to make the ultimate decision. See the discussion of Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52 (1926), supra text accompanying notes 98-108. The same is true for officials that Congress has seen fit to place under the President. the example of President Monroe. As he writes: Monroe not only believed that the President should allow Congress to make up its own mind on domestic matters without influence from the Chief Executive; with an occasional exception he put his theory into practice. The greatest political issue of his day was the admission of Missouri and the status of slavery in Louisiana Territory. During all the bitter debates, he remained silent and abstained from interference in the struggle. 396. Some post-1960 delegations are far less broad, and embody closer congressional judgments about policy. See Cass R. Sunstein, Constitutionalism After the New Deal, 101 Harv. L. Rev. 421, 478-83 (1987). But the aggregate level of discretionary authority is extraordinarily high, and this is all that is necessary for our purposes. In short, in a period in which administrators exercise a wide range of discretionary authority, the very meaning of immunizing them from presidential control changes dramatically.40 1 When fundamental policy decisions are made by administrators, immunizing them from presidential control would have two significant consequences: first, it would segment fundamental policy decisions from direct political accountability and thus the capacity for coordination and democratic control; and second, it would subject these institutions to the perverse incentives of factions, by removing the insulating arm of the President, and increasing the opportunity for influence by powerful private groups. 40 2 Neither of these consequences was favored by the framers. Indeed, both problems were specifically what the framers sought to avoid. For both these reasons are permitted by law to delegate). agencies than traditional administrative agencies). Administration... was the realm of the professional, the scientist and the neutral technician, in the affairs of government,... set.., apart from "Politics" in the sense that while the latter had "to do with policies or expressions of the state will" administration had to do with their execution.404 But the post-New Deal view questions the very presupposition of this nineteenth century model-the presupposition that the political can be so sharply separated from the administrative. To be sure, many insist on technocratic rationality-on the importance of expertise in helping people to make informed judgments about the relations between means and ends.405 This is an enduring theme in administrative law. We do not mean to disparage the importance of expertise in providing the foundation for sound public judgments. On the contrary, the absence of expertise, or the distortion of expert judgment through anecdote and interest 403. The classic account isJames M. Landis, The Administrative Process (1938). For a modem appreciation of the progressive faith, see Bruce A. Ackerman & William T. Hassler, Clean Coal/Dirty Air 4-7 (1981). If we examine the public problems brought up for discussion in the President's message it will be seen that they are pre-eminently industrial or commercial in character and that they are technical rather than popular. The numbers and importance of this class of public problems are growing by leaps and bounds,--a fact which necessarily brings into greater prominence the executive as the expert branch of government. * group power, is an important obstacle to a well-functioning system of regulatory law.40 6 But there has been an unmistakable and we believe fully warranted diminution in the progressive era's faith in the ability of expertise to solve regulatory problems on its own. This diminution has brought about a significant shift. As noted by (it is reported) Judge Scalia in the per curiam decision of a three judge district court striking a portion of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act, These cases reflect considerable shifts over the course of time, not only in the Supreme Court's resolutions of particular issues relating to the removal power, but more importantly in the constitutional premises underlying those resolutions. It is not clear, moreover, that these shifts are at an end. Justice Sutherland's decision in Humphrey's Executor, handed down the same day as A.L.A. Schecter Poultry Corp. v. United States, 295 U.S. 495 (1935), is stamped with some of the political science preconceptions characteristic of its era and not of the present day.... It is not as obvious today as it seemed in the 1930s that there can be such things as genuinely "independent" regulatory agencies, bodies of impartial experts whose independence from the President does not entail correspondingly greater dependence upon the committees of Congress to which they are then immediately accountable; or indeed, that the decisions of such agencies so clearly involve scientific judgment rather than political choice that it is even theoretically desirable to insulate them from the democratic process.40 7 In a world where administration is conceived as apolitical,40 8 granting administrators relatively independent authority could be thought to raise few constitutional issues. If the administrators are simply executing a technical skill, there is little reason to make theirjudgment subject to the review of the President. In such a world, the grant of authority to independent commissions could build directly on two precedents provided in the framing period-ministerial duties, which by definition do not involve discretion, and the quasi-adjudicative Comptroller. The Supreme Court accepted this highly technocratic conception of administration in Humphrey's Executor v. United States,40 9 the heyday of the progressive model within the judiciary. On progressive assumptions, Humphrey's Executor builds quite directly on framing premises and precedents insofar as the Court emphasized quasi-legislative and quasi-adjudicative functions-an discussed in Part II. See supra text accompanying notes 187-189. But once this view bf administration changes-once one sees the nature of administration as fundamentally political-new questions are raised about the extent to which courts may permit this power to be independent of the President. Currently, a fundamental premise of administrative law is the lawmaking ingredient of practically every executive act, including, in Chevron U.S.A. v. NRDC,41 the act of interpretation itself. In such a period, the whole notion of independent political bodies becomes highly problematic, especially in light of founding commitments. The presupposition behind independent administration-what made it capable of drawing on analogies like the Comptroller General and the Postmaster in the founding period-is no longer sustainable. The question for interpretation is how to accommodate this fundamental change in understanding. with respect to control over the purse. See supra text accompanying notes 121-143. A structural argument for a unitary executive, then, comes down to this: Where the framers allocated a power that they thought of as political, that power was allocated to people who were themselves politically accountable. This was part of the fundamental commitments to account This argument also stresses the need to maintain fidelity with the original constitutional design. It too is an argument of translation. But it takes the post-New Deal developments as a reason for more rather than less caution about unitariness in administration. The new circumstances mean that unitariness is a far greater threat than it once was-not that unitariness is a constitutionally compelled solution.4 24 More particularly, this view fears that the new delegations have threatened to confer excessive power on the executive branch-to create an "imperial presidency." The changed circumstances argue in favor of a narrow reading of "executive power" and for broad congressional authority under the Necessary and Proper Clause, precisely in the interest of maintaining the original commitment to a system of checks and balances.4 25 On this view, congressional power to insulate administration from presidential control is a necessary quid pro quo for the exercise of discretionary lawmaking power by people other than legislators. 426 The rise of lawmaking by nonlegislative bodies-most especially, the downfall of the nondelegation doctrine 427-makes it especially necessary to insist on congressional prerogatives under the Necessary and Proper Clause, in order to prevent an aggregation of powers in the presidency. In short, Greene urges, the post-New Deal developments mean that modern interpreters should place less value on unitariness than did the framers, because of the need to maintain fidelity with the commitment to the diffusion of power.4 28 This argument is hardly without force. It shows that there is no algorithm for deciding how to maintain fidelity with past instructions in the face of changed circumstances. But we do not believe that the argument The original diffusion of power was supposed to protect liberty, in large part by limiting the authority of factions. 431 The rise of a large bureaucracy immunized from presidential control tends to endanger rather than promote that original goal.4 32 Through concentrating power in bureaucracies that combine lawmaking and law-executing authority, we do not promote a healthy system of checks and balances, but instead aggravate the relevant risks to liberty.4 33 The insulating arm of the President is not free from risk. But because the President has a national constituency-unlike relevant members of Congress, who oversee independent 429. Jerry Mashaw argues legislative policymaking discretion, see Jerry L. Mashaw, Prodelegation: Why Administrators Should Make Political Decisions, 1 J.L. Econ. & Org. 81, 81-82 (1985); but the argument depends crucially on the assumption of presidential direction of bureaucracy. rather than 430. See Bernstein, supra note 390, at 291-97 (concluding that independent agencies "have proved to be more susceptible to private pressures, to manipulation for private purposes, and to administrative and public apathy than other types of government agencies"); Cass R Sunstein, Paradoxes of the Regulatory State, 57 U. Chi. L. Rev. 407, 426-28, 439-40 (1990) (arguing that independent agencies have been "highly susceptible to the political pressure of well-organized private groups"). 431. See The Federalist Nos. 47-51 (James Madison). 432. See supra note 429. 433. See Bernstein, supra note 390, at 293. Barry Weingast and Mark Moran have independent agencies by congressional discussed committees, noting that committees are not the same as Congress. Weingast argues that there is too simple a slippage from legislative control to committee influence. See Barry R. Weingast & MarkJ. Moran, Bureaucratic Discretion or Congressional Control? Regulatory Policymaking by the Federal Trade Commission, 91 J. Pol. Econ. 765, 777-79, 788-92 (1983) [hereinafter Weingast & Moran, Bureaucratic Discretion]; Barry R. Weingast & Mark J. Moran, The Myth of Runaway Bureaucracy. The Case of the FTC, Regulation, May/June 1982, at 33, 33-34 [hereinafter Weingast & Moran, Runaway Bureaucracy]; see also INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919, 946-48 (1983). agencies with often parochial agendas-it appears to operate as an important counterweight to factional influence over administration. 43 4 Perhaps Congress can point to the need to limit presidential authority in order to support some isolated efforts to prevent concentration of power in the President. We will offer some examples below. But it seems clear that the changed circumstances do notjustify the immunization of all or most bureaucratic power from the President. This is because it is hard to identify how independent administration is a realistic solution to the constitutional problems caused by changed circumstances. Indeed, independent administration would sacrifice many values the founders saw as essential. In this section, we briefly discuss the implications of our approach on the resolution of current issues involving the relationship between the President and the administration. Our goal is not to reach final conclusions about these questions, many of which would require far more elaborate treatment than we can provide here. We are concerned principally with a general approach, not with specific solutions. We are attempting to see how the argument from translation might bear on contemporary disputes, a surprisingly large number of which are unsettled. We have noted that the 1980s saw a surprising rebirth of contestation about the issue of presidential control over administration of the laws. 43 5 It is clear from the recent cases that the so-called independent agencies are constitutional-at least in the sense that Congress has the power to provide that some administrative officers do not serve at the pleasure of The relevant history suggests that Congress may indeed immunize some specific functions from the President, and nothing in subsequent circumstances should draw this conclusion into question. As we have seen, the framers did not believe that prosecutorial authority need be concentrated the Attorney General. 44 ' Moreover, our argument based on changed circumstances does not lead to the conclusion that the Independent Counsel Act is unconstitutional. We have emphasized the need to promote accountability and to limit factionalism by ensuring that large-scale domestic policymak the President operating through in 440. Consider in this regard the large number of agencies enforcing environmental policy and the importance of a coordinating presidential role in order to produce rational regulation. See generally Al Gore, From Red Tape to Results: Creating a Government that Works Better & Costs Less (National Performance Committee, 1993) (concluding that helpful method to eliminate waste would be to give the President greater power); see also Breyer, supra note 189, at 10-29 (cataloguing problems in lack of coordination and systematization of policy). There is a further consideration. As in the case of the Federal Reserve Board, a special structural justification applies to the independent prosecutor. The structural consideration lies in the notion, of course familiar to the framers, that no person should be judge in his own cause.44 4 It is at least unseemly4 45 to say that the prosecution of highlevel executive branch officials will be controlled by other high-level executive branch officials. Congress could reasonably decide that the appearance or reality of favoritism requires an independent prosecutor for such officials. If the congressional judgment is reasonable on this point, courts should defer, especially in light of the complexity and delicacy of the underlying questions. To be sure, many people have offered plausible objections to the Independent Counsel Act,446 but these objections raise issues of policy, not of constitutional obligation, at least in light of the Constitution's structural commitment to preventing self-dealing by government officials. 442. See supra text accompanying notes 401-402. 443. To say this is not to deny that the independent counsel has discretion, or to say that the Act is desirable as a simple matter of policy. Note too that the statute upheld in Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654 (1988), allowed the Attorney General to discharge the counsel for "good cause," a provision that meant the counsel is not truly independent, and that therefore makes the constitutional issue simpler. See infra text accompanying notes 465-466. (1935) (distinguishing Myers on grounds that office of postmaster is purely executive, unlike a commissioner of FTC). C. What Does "Good Cause" Mean? In Morrison, the Attorney General was able to discharge the independent counsel for "good cause," and the Court emphasized this point in upholding the (for this reason misnamed?) Independent Counsel Act. 453 But the Court has not said what "good cause" means. The Court has also failed to define "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office"-the ordinary standards for presidential removal of members of the independent commissions. 45 4 Nor does anything in Humphrey's Executor speak to the particular issue, notwithstanding some casual dicta suggesting a high degree of independence. 455 This is an extremely important matter. There is no controlling judicial decision on how "independent" the independent agencies and officers can legitimately claim to be. If the statutory words allow for considerable presidential removal (and hence supervisory) power, the notion of independent administration of the laws can be solved simply as a matter of statutory construction. Perhaps Congress has not, in fact, created any truly independent administrators. The words governing congressional power over the Comptroller General and presidential power over independent agencies are substantially the same. If those words have the same meaning in these admittedly different contexts, the President turns out to have considerable power over the commissioners. If the words have the same meaning, the narrowly all delegated powers that may curtail citizens' right to travel). Suppose that the independent counsel could never be removed by the Attorney General, even "for good cause." Or suppose that Congress amended the statute governing the FTC so as to provide that the commissioners are independent of both Congress and the President, in the sense that they could be removed by the President only for "high crimes and misdemeanors" or "gross misconduct amounting to criminality." Would such statutes be constitutional? Nothing in the relevant cases clearly decides these questions. Probably the best answer is that the independent counsel must be removable for "good cause" in order to qualify as an "inferior officer" (and thus be appointable, as the current law provides, by judges465). The notion of "inferior" implies the existence of a superior, and a truly independent counsel-that is, one not at all controllable by the Attorney General or the President-would have no superior. We may therefore infer from the Morrison Court's emphasis on the "good cause" provision that some sort of control by the Attorney General (or otherwise through the chain of command headed by the President) is a constitutional imperative for "inferior officers."466 Nothing we have said here is inconsistent with this understanding. (Scalia, J., concurring) (agreeing that ChiefJudge of Tax Court is a "head of a department"); see also FTC v. Ruberoid Co., 343 U.S. 470, 487 (1952) (Jackson, J., dissenting) ("[Administrative bodies) have begun to have important consequences on personal rights.... They have become a veritable fourth branch of the Government, which has deranged our three-branch To be sure, true independence in administration does not create the distinctive dangers of encroachment and aggrandizement; 46 9 but it does threaten the core constitutional commitments to political accountability, expedition in office, and coordinated policymaking. If our argument from changed circumstances is persuasive, Congress cannot properly immunize such officers from the President without violating the Vesting Clause of Article II and thus exceeding its power under the Necessary and Proper Clause. Here we arrive at a crucial innovation in the post-1980 cases-the distinction between encroachment and independence. The cleanest line between Bowsher and Chadha on the one hand and Mistretta and Morrison on the other is that in the first two cases Congress attempted to give itself a degree of ongoing authority over the administration of the laws. 474 The Court has firmly set itself against such aggrandizement. In the Court's view, independence in administration is one thing; congressional encroachment into the administrative process is quite another. "Aggrandizement" and "encroachment" are defining constitutional evils. Separation of administration from the President and Congress does not involve either aggrandizement or encroachment, and is far less objectionable. Second, the prohibition on congressional participation operates as a check against open-ended delegations of power. If Congress may not delegate administrative authority to its own agents, it is likely to be clearer in delegating policymaking authority in the first instance. We can understand the Court's hostility to encroachment as having roots in the structural commitment against open-ended delegations of authority, a commitment with clear connections to the goal of providing a kind of accountability. 478 Congress may be content not to set out law in advance if it knows that it may control implementation decisions on a case-by-case basis. Even if the Court will not play a large role in enforcing the nondelegation doctrine directly, mostly for institutional reasons, 4 79 it can discipline the prospect of delegation through institutionally acceptable devices that impose incentives on Congress to limit the scope of delegation. Morrison upholds cross-branch appointments,48 0 but the Court was properly cautious about the basic idea, which could produce many oddities. Suppose, for example, that Congress said that judges would henceforth appoint the Assistant Secretaries of State and Defense and the Assistant Attorneys General. In such cases, there would have to be an implicit structural limit on Congress' power under the Inferior Officers have a kind of constitutional status, not in the sense that courts should mandate them, but in the sense that they grow out of constitutional commitments. Both Mistretta and Morrison allow certain officials exercising important governmental responsibilities to be immunized from plenary presidential control.48 3 But it is surely true that some employees must serve at the will of the President. Without offering a detailed analysis of the complexities here, we suggest that there are four distinct categories of cases, and that the categories should be treated differently. The framers did not constitutionalize presidential control over all that is now considered "executive"; they did not believe that the President must have plenary power over all we now think of as administration. The textual argument to the contrary uses twentieth century understandings to give meaning to eighteenth century terms. 486. See supra text accompanying notes 103, 126-130, 236-248 (discussing original view that ministerial functions, and also those involving adjudicative powers, could be immunized from the President). particular issues that might arise through assertions of presidential authority. m o cn w v o o tm w oo cts o