Your use of the J STOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Cond itions of Use, available at . http://www.j stor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . J STOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about J STOR, please contact support@j stor.org. http://www.j stor.org 
The Michigan Law Review Association is collaborating with J STOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Michigan Law Review. 
This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on S at, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM 
All use subject to J STOR Terms and Cond itions 
Cass R. Sun stein* 
It is sometimes suggested that there is a sharp opposition between "liberty" and "equality."' If the law forbids racial discrimination in employment, it may promote equality, but perhaps it will simultaneously interfere with liberty. If the law requires wealthy people to transfer some of their income to poor people, it may promote equality, but it may also undermine liberty. If a health care program ensures universal access to health care, it may promote equality, but it could also raise serious doubts from the standpoint of liberty. The tension between liberty and equality often appears deep, and it plays a large role in American political and legal thought. 
But before accepting the alleged opposition between liberty and equality, we should observe that there are many possible understand ings of liberty and equality. These understand ings reveal not disputes about dictionary definitions but diverse substantive judgments that need to be identified and assessed. Different conceptions of the two values will lead to different views about their relationship. For example, the term equality could refer to freedom from desperate cond itions, in the form of minimum welfare guarantees; to a ban on discrimination on certain specified grounds; to the idea that every citizen should have the same power over political outcomes, as in the one-person, one-vote rule; to similar starting points or basic opportunities for every citizen; to similar in comes or wealth; to similar in comes unless disparities can be justified as beneficial for all; or to much more. 
The same is true for liberty. That capacious term could refer to the basic political rights of free speech and free elections. It could include the guarantees of a fair system of criminal justice, in which rules are laid down in advance and a defendant has a right to a fair 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Un iversity of Chicago. - Ed. This essay develops some ideas contained elsewhere. See C ASSR. SUN STEIN T,HE PARTIAL CONSTITUTION 338-46 (1993). The essay greatly benefited from comments by Ak hil Amar, Martha Mi now, and others at a conference on equal citizenship held at Brown Un iversity in March and Susan Moller Ok in. 
upon which I draw here. 
2410 trial before an independent judge. It could entail social respect for the outcomes of processes in which citizens pursue their various conceptions of the good, given market forces, existing common law rules, existing preferences, and existing distributions of wealth. The term liberty could refer to a system that ensures autonomy in the formation of preferences and beliefs by providing a decent education for all and by counteracting unjust background cond itions. It could refer to much more. 
We can readily see that some conceptions of equality are quite compatible with - indeed identical to - some conceptions of liberty. For example, libertarians, who may appear to oppose equality, insist on equality of an important kind; they want to ensure that all citizens have an equal right to pursue their own ends.2 An understand ing of equality lies at the heart of the libertarian creed. 
Freedom from desperate cond itions, often treated as an egalitarian idea, is an understand ing of liberty as well. Those who emphasize autonomy in the formation of preferences are speaking of both equality and liberty; they want to ensure that unjustified inequalities - inequalities based upon wealth, race, or sex, for example do not limit the free development of individual personality. 
In these circumstances, it is important to be quite careful before seeing any tension between equality and liberty. Tension exists only when we specify conceptions of these broad terms that cannot peacefully coexist. Perhaps such incompatible conceptions cannot be defended. Perhaps the best conceptions of equality are entirely compatible with the best understand ings of liberty. 
In this essay, I seek to defend a particular understand ing of equality, one that is an understand ing of liberty as well. I call this conception "the anti caste principle."3 Put too briefly, the anti caste principle forbids social and legal practices from translating highly visible and morally irrelevant differences into systemic social disadvantage, unless there is a very good reason for society to do so. On this view, a special problem of inequality arises when members of a group suffer from a range of disadvantages because of a group based characteristic that is both visible for all to see and irrelevant 
others"). 
LAW? 16-21 (2 d ed. 1988), and Owen M. F is s, Groups and the Equal Protection Clause, 5 PHIL.& PUB. A FF. 107. 147-70 (1976). There are, however, important differences between these approaches and what I defend here, partly because of my understand ing of the equality principle, and partly because I suggest that the principle is for legislative rather than judicial enforcement. Many such differences will emerge in the course of the discussion. from a moral point of view. This form of inequality is likely to be unusually persistent and to extend into multiple social spheres,indeed into the interstices of everyday life. 
I do not claim that this is the only valid understand ing of equality. On the contrary, there are many such understand ings. Our Const itution's equality principle is plural rather than singular. It has numerous manifestations; a unitary conception of equality would not exhaust the term as it operates in American legal and political discussion. Consider political equality and principles disallowing discrimination on the basis of religious conviction or prejudice. These conceptions of equality warrant support, and they have considerable grounding in our const itutional traditions.
I emphasize the anti caste principle, not because it exhausts the concept of equality, but because it captures an understand ing that has strong roots in American legal traditions, has considerable independent appeal, is violated in many important parts of American life, and fits well with the best understand ings of liberty. In other words, the anti caste principle is an important and perhaps insufficiently appreciated part of the lawyer's conception of equality under the American Const itution.6 
In describing the anti caste principle, I also offer some information about racial and gender disparities in the United States. I do so because it is hard to have a sense of the world of discrimination without having a good sense of the data. Legal discussions about equality are too often and too exclusively conceptual, attempting to offer perspicuous descriptions of discrimination or inequality without a sufficient discussion of the facts that underlie either the problem or the solutions.7 I will not offer much detail about solutions here, but I do hope that my presentation of information about existing inequalities will help to illuminate the problem. 
I emphasize as well that enforcement of the anti caste principle is mostly for legislative and executive officers and only secondarily for cour ts. Sometime in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, there was a large-scale transformation in the substance of the const itutional equality principle. This is a long and as-yet-untold 
infra section II.B.2. 
(unpublished manuscript, on file with author) (discussing the need for data and mid level solutions in feminist reform of criminal law). story. A set of amendments originally designed at least in part to eliminate social caste eventually became a requirement that legislation be reasonably related to legitimate state interests- a requirement whose original home was the Due Process Clause.8 The transformation makes some sense if we think about the limited capacities of the judiciary. Taken seriously, a full-blown anti caste principle is beyond judicial competence. But if the Const itution speaks to non judicial actors as well, the broad commitments of the Four teenth Amendment have a different meaning outside the cour troom. It is possible, in short, to insist on the continuing importance of one of the great unused provisions of the Const itution, Section 5 of the Four teenth Amendment: "The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article."9 
I. FALSE STARTS 
In this Part, I discuss three understand ings of the equality principle. All three have played a major role in public and sometimes legal debate. The first stresses the advantages of free markets. The second relies on respect for existing preferences. The third and most important sees the equality principle as a ban on unreasonable distinctions between social groups. As we will see, the difficulties with each of these understand ings help lay the foundation for the anti caste principle. 
A. 
Markets? 
In light of the extraordinary recent outburst of international enthusiasm for free markets, it should not be surprising to find a resurgence of the view that all invidious discrimination on the basis of race and sex will be eliminated by laissez faire.10 On this view, the appropriate approach for law would be to eliminate constraints on market ordering and to rely solely on property rights, voluntary arrangements, and freedom of contract to produce equality. 
(1897) (striking down a Louisiana law limiting the right of out-of-state insurance companies to do business in Louisiana as an infringement on liberty of contract not justified by the law's purpose). 

(conceding that discrimination of some sort will persist in markets because such discrimination is "rational"). I focus on race and gender equality, with occasional reference to disability. Other forms of inequality raise additional issues that I cannot take up here. See infra section II.B.4. 
In many ways, free markets are indeed connected with equality on the basis of race and sex. Legal barriers to female and black employment are a form of government intervention in the market, and they have often been an effective and severe hindrance to equality. Anti female and anti black cartels, especially when government-sponsored, can drive down both wages and employment for women and blacks. In a free market, by contrast, all people should succeed to the extent that they are able to perform their respective functions - as employers, employees, co-workers, and customers. 
It is unnecessary to stress that women and blacks often perform as well as or better than men and whites. Once disc rim in at ory laws are eliminated, free markets may therefore accomplish a great deal in breaking down a system of inequality. In South Africa, for example, it is most doubtful that the system of apartheid could have survived under free markets. Too many employers would have found it desirable to hire blacks; too many companies would have found it in their economic interest to serve people on a non disc rim in at ory basis. 
The point can be made through a simple example. Suppose that an employer prefers to hire only men; suppose he believes that women belong in the home. This employer should face severe obstacles to continued profitability and, in the end, might even be driven out of the market. An employer who restricts himself to one social group will be placed at a serious disadvantage; it would be as if he refuses to hire people whose last names begin with a particular letter. If the employer is sexist or racist, his "taste" for discrimination operates as an implicit tax on the operation of his business. To say the least, self-imposed implicit taxes are self-defeating in a compet itive market. 
Much the same can be said for a company that prefers to serve only whites or men. Such a company will artificially restrict its business to one social group, and it will thus impair its own economic interests by reducing its market and the corresponding demand for its product. An employer who hires and serves women as well as men should do much better in market compet ition. 
As a complete solution, however, free markets will be inadequate if used to remedy sex and race discrimination. There are several reasons.11 First, a market system allows disc rim in a tori ly motivated third parties to impose costs on people who agree to treat men and women, or blacks and whites, equally.12 Customers, co-workers,and others sometimes with draw patronage and services from non disc rim in at ory employers. For example, a law firm that hires female lawyers might find itself punished in the marketplace. 
A grocery store that hires blacks might find it harder to attract customers. Under these circumstances, market pressures do not check discrimination but instead increase the likelihood that it will continue. Ironically, the failure to discriminate operates as a tax on the employer's business, rather than vice versa. A non disc rim in at or could face the equivalent of a self-imposed tax by virtue of coworker or customer reactions. 
The phenomenon is hardly unusual. Consider, for example, a shopkeeper whose customers do not like dealing with blacks or women; a commercial airline whose patrons react unfavorably to female pilots; a university whose students and alumni prefer a primarily white faculty;a hospital whose patients are uncomfortable with female doctors or black nurses. The persistence of private segregation in major league baseball is a familiar example. The latter finds a modern analogue in studies of the prices of baseball cards, which show a race-based premium for white players.13 We may speculate that in some athletic compet itions customers prefer white athletes, and these preferences play a role in some market decisions. In cases of this kind, market pressures create rather than prevent discrimination.14 
Of course, third parties do not have uniform preferences. Many and perhaps most whites and men are not disc rim in at ors.In any case third-party preferences are sharply divided,and for this reason we should expect a wide range of diverse views and practices,each gaining and losing influence in different times and places.15 My point is only that in some important sectors, and for important lengths of time, the existence of third-party discrimination can en 
woeful tales, in AN EC ONOMIST'S BOOK OF TALES 23, 31-43 (1984). 
for Memorabilia: The Case of Baseball, 105 Q.J. EC ON.575 (1990). 
hurt by their taste. Sometimes they will be; an employee who prefers not to work with women may find himself with a worse job. But sometimes the third parties will not suffer compet itive injuries in markets because they are not competing in markets - consider people who prefer not to fly in airplanes piloted by blacks - and sometimes the harm inflicted by a disc rim in at ory taste will operate like any other harm inflicted by a taste, for example, the taste for color television or high-quality ice cream. Prices will go up, but the relevant goods will not be driven from the market. 
sure that inequality persists even in free markets. The extent of the effect is of course an empirical question. 
Thus far, then, we have seen that co-worker and customer discrimination may lead markets to perpetuate discrimination. A second problem with relying on markets to produce equality is that race and sex discrimination can be a successful and indeed ordinary market response to generalizations or stereotypes that, although over broad and perhaps in one sense even invidious, provide an economically rational basis for market decisions.16 If stereotypes are economically rational, the market will not operate against them. 
Stereotypes and generalizations are of course a common ingredient in market decisions. There are information costs in making distinctions within categories, and people sometimes make the category do the work of a more individualized and perhaps more costly examination into the merits of the particular employee. 
Many categorical judgments are not only pervasive but also legitimate. We all rely on them every day. Employers rely on proxies of various kinds, even though the proxies are over broad generalizations and far from entirely accurate. Test scores, level of education, and prestige of college attended are all part of rational employment decisions. Despite their imprecision, such categorical judgments might well be efficient as a cost-saving device and thus persist in free markets; but they might also d is serve the cause of equality on the basis of race and gender. 
This is so especially in light of the fact that race and gender are so highly visible and thus so cheaply used as a proxy for other things.17 Different characteristics - for example, educational attainment - might be more accurate as proxies but less efficient to use because the cost of gaining accurate information is higher. 
We might compare statistical generalizations of the sort I am describing with the category of prejudice. Perhaps we can understand that controversial term to include a continuum of unnecessary or inefficient categorical judgments, in clu ding, for example, (i) a belief that members of a group have certain characteristics when in fact they do not, (ii) a belief that many or most members of a group have certain characteristics when in fact only some or a few do, and (iii) a reliance on fairly accurate group-based generalizations when 

REV. 659 (1972). 
characteristic should be highly visible in order to be part of a caste system. See infra text accompanying notes 70-75. more accurate and reasonably cheap classifying devices are available, or, in other words, when there is a more efficient classifying device. Statistical discrimination is quite different. It occurs when the generalization,though inaccurate,is less costly to use than any sub classifying device, even though sub classification w sould be more accurate in particular cases. Under plausible assumptions about the cost of acquiring information,statistical discrimination might well be efficient. 
Reliance on race-or sex-based generalizations maybe a product of prejudice,but this need not be the case. Generalizations about race and gender may well be over broad,but no more so than generalizations that are typically and un problematically used in many areas of decision. Note that "college attended"might well be used in the employment market,despite its considerable imprecision as a classifying device. Moreover,in the area of sex discrimination,an employer might discriminate against women, not because he hates or devalues them, but because he has found from experience that women devote more time to childcare than do men, or that women are more likely to take leave for domestic duties. For this reason sex discrimination might be based on genuine facts, not irrational prejudice- although those facts may themselves be a product of discrimination elsewhere, particularly within the family.18 This form of statistical discrimination- judgments based on statistically reasonable stereotyping- need not be a form of prejudice. 
My point here is not to celebrate or to condemnstatistical discriminationbut instead to say that economically rational decisions can ensure that inequality will persist for women or blacks,even or perhaps especially in free markets. In various ways, blacks differ from whites and women differ from men. In light of these differences, it is fully possible that in certain settings,race- or sex-based generalizations are sufficiently accurate as proxies for certain characteristics. The conclusion is that free markets will not drive out discrimination to the extent that discrimination is an efficient use of generalizations that, whi le inaccurate in some ways,have sufficient accuracy to persist as class if ica tory devices. 
This point suggests that there is no sharp discontinuity between laws calling for affirmative action and laws embodying the anti discrimination principle,at least if the outlawed discrimination is a form of statistical discrimination.The ban on statistical disc rim in a 
the family as currently const ituted "raises psychological as well as practical barriers against women in all other spheres"). tion shows that the law does not just forbid irrational bigotry or prejudice. Instead, the most elementary anti discrimination principle singles out one kind of economically rational stereotyping and condemns it, on the theory that such stereotyping has the harmful long-term consequence of perpetuating group-based inequalities. 
Along this dimension, the distinction between affirmative action and anti discrimination is thin in principle.19 It is thin because the law does not only ban discrimination rooted in prejudice or hostility; it also bans discrimination in the form of statistical generalizations of the sort that employers, customers, and others rely on all the time. The ban on statistical discrimination is based on many of the reasons that support affirmative action. I do not contend that the two are the same thing. 
Thus far, then, we have seen that markets are unlikely to bring about equality on the basis of race and sex when third parties are in a position to impose costs on nondisc rim in at ors and when statistical discrimination is rational. The third problem with relying on laissez faire to eliminate discrimination is that in free markets, people who are subject to discrimination may fail to attempt to overcome their unequal status because they will fail to invest in "human capital" the time and effort, in terms of education and experience, needed to produce economically valued characteristics. They may fail to do so simply because of current social practices and a disc rim in at ory status quo. Suppose, for example, that there is current sex discrimination in a certain field for any number of reasons - employers themselves prefer to hire male employees, or third parties impose pressures in disc rim in at ory directions, or employers engage in statistical discrimination. These disc rim in at ory phenomena will affect the decisions of women with regard to education or training in the relevant field and indeed may affect their aspirations in general. As market participants, women might well invest less than men in training to be, for example, doctors or technicians, if these professions discriminate against women and thus reward their investments less than those of men. The decision to invest less would be fully rational as a response to the practices of employers.20 
that insistence on non discrimination in fact amounts to affirmative action when racial classifications are accurate). 
investments in human capital will produce external i ties. See Shelly J. Lund berg & Richard Start z, Private Discrimination and Social Intervention in Compet itive Labor Markets, 73 AM. 
EC ON.REV.340 (1983) (producing a model in which workers with similar initial capabilities end up with different amounts of human capital according to how much employers are willing to pay different groups of workers). 
Of course the same would be true in the racial context. If law firms are less likely to hire blacks than whites, blacks will, other things being equal, be less inclined than whites to go to law school. 
If shops are less likely to hire blacks than whites, blacks will be less likely than whites to acquire the skills necessary to work in shops. 
In every sector of the market that contains discrimination, the behavior of prospective black employees will be affected, in the sense that blacks will scale back their investments in acquiring the requisite training and skills. 
The result of these various factors can be a vicious circle or even a spiral. Because of existing discrimination, members of the relevant groups will invest less in human capital. Because of this lower investment, the discrimination may persist or even increase, because its statistical rationality increases. Because of this effect, the disc rim in at ory tastes of employers and customers may well increase. Because of this effect, investments in human capital will decrease still further, and so on. 
These considerations suggest that although free markets can often help further the cause of race and gender equality, they are not a panacea. Discrimination can persist because of the effects of third-party disc rim in at ors, because of statistical discrimination, and because of adverse effects on investment in human capital.21 If discrimination is to be reduced,22 markets are not enough; supplemental legal controls will be necessary. Empirical questions are very important here, and we cannot get a full handle on the subject without knowing a great deal about the facts. For example, in some imaginable contexts, third-party prejudice will be too weak to promote much discrimination, and in some imaginable contexts, prejudice will be a spur to further investments in human capital. What I am suggesting here, based on highly plausible assumptions and supported by recognizable phenomena in the United States, is that free markets can fail to undermine race and sex inequality. 
I turn now to an influential claim about the relationship between discrimination and law. The claim is that the legal system should take preferences as a given rather than attempt to alter discrimination, and of course I am describing possibilities, not certainties. To see the effects of free markets on race and sex equality, a good deal of empirical data is necessary. 
which reliance on free markets does not itself provide. them. This claim seems especially important for sex equality, though it bears on race equality as well. In many different nations, and in some places in the United States,women frequently say that they are content with the sexual status quo. Legal efforts might therefore be thought to represent an unacceptable form of paternalism. If women themselves are content, on what basis can the legal system intervene? Is not legal intervention an illegitimate interference with the right to liberty or autonomy?Thus some people suggest,for example,that abortion cannot possibly raise problems of sex equality because many women are opposed to abortion.23 
These questions raise some complex issues; I deal with them only briefly here.24 The basic response is that a social or legal system that has produced preferences,and has done so by limiting opportunities unjustly,can hardly justify itself by reference to existing preferences. The satisfaction of private preferences,whatever their content and origins,does not respond to a persuasive conception of liberty,welfare,or autonomy. The notion of autonomy should refer instead to decisions reached with a full and vivid awareness of available opportunities,with relevant information,and without illegitimate or excessive constraints on the process of preference formation. When there is inadequate information or opportunity, decisions and even preferences should be described as unfree or non autonomous. 
Private preferences often do adjust to limitations in current practices and opportunities.Consider here the story of the fox and the sour grapes.25 The fox does not want the grapes because he considers them to be sour,but his belief that the grapes are sour is based on the fact that they are unavailable. One cannot therefore justify the cessation of the fox's efforts to get the grapes by reference to the fox's preferences. Mary Wollstonecraft'As Vindication of the Rights of Women 26 applies this basic idea to the area of discrimination on the basis of sex. Wollstonecraft writes,"I will venture to affirm,that a girl, whose spirits have not been damped by inactivity,or innocence tainted by false shame, will always be a romp, and the doll will never excite attention unless confinement 
ELIZABETH ANDERSON V,ALUEINETHICSANDEC ONOMICS(1993); JON ELSTER S,OUR GRAPES(1983); SEN,supr a note 1, at 53-55. Post on ed., Norton & Co. 1975) (2 d ed. 1792). allows her no alternative."27 Mill makes the same points in his work on sex equality.28 
Amartya Sen offers an especially vivid real-world example from India. In 1944,the All-India Inst itute of Hygiene and Public Health surveyed widows and widowers about their health. About 48.5%of the widowers said that they were "ill" or in "in different"health, whi le only 2.5% of widows gave the same response.29 In these circumstances it would seem odd to base health policy on subjectively held views about health cond itions. Such an approach would ensure that existing discrimination would be severely aggravated. 
One goal of a legal system is, in short,to ensure autonomy not merely in the satisfaction of preferences but also and more fundamentally in the processes of preference formation. The view that freedom requires an opportunity to choose among alternatives finds a natural supplement in the view that people should not face unjustifiable constraints on the free development of their preferences and beliefs. 
This discussion does not at all mean that government should feel free to reject existing views of the citizenry,or that such views are irrelevant to anti discriminationpolicy. For purely prudential reasons, it is important for government to be cautious about intruding on widespread current views even if it seems clear that they are wrong. A system of government al reforms that does not connect with public convictions is likely to be futile or self-defeating. Moreover, government is itself vulnerable to the same distortions that affect private preferences.30 There is no reason to think that the judgments that underlie government action are systematically less susceptible to distortion than the judgments that underlie private action. In addition,there is certainly some relation between private desires and individual and social welfare,and for this reason private desires should generally count in deciding on appropriate policy. 
For all these reasons government should be modest in its willingness to revisit private desires and beliefs;certainly it should be cautious before proceeding against apparently widespread public judgments. All I suggest here is thatprivate preferencesare an un 27. Id. at 43. 
(writing against the claim that the existing desires of women are a product of consent). 
RAZ, ETHICS IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN 169-72 (1994). 
perceptions). promising foundation for anti discrimination policy to the extent that such preferences can be shown to be a product of unjust background cond itions. 
C. Irrational or Unreasonable Distinctions? 
Much of equality law has proceeded by asking whether similarly situated people have been treated differently. On this view, blacks can be treated differently from whites only when they are different from whites; the same is true of differential treatment between women and men. At least implicitly, legal doctrines in the area of discrimination allow differences in treatment when people really are different and ban differences in treatment when people really are the same.31 
It will readily appear that the notion that the similarly situated must be treated similarly is purely formal. To become workable, that notion requires a substantive theory explaining what sorts of similarities and differences are relevant. Blacks and whites, for example, are differently situated along many dimensions; so too are women and men. The government could not justify a racially disc rim in at ory law enforcement policy on the ground that blacks are disproportionately involved in crime, even if such a policy could be justified by reference to actual racial differences with respect to participation in crime. What is necessary is a theory to explain when differences will be treated as relevant. By itself the "similarly situated" test cannot supply that theory. From this we might conclude that the problem with the theory is that it is empty, not that it is wrong.32 
As a reaction to the "similarly situated" test in the abstract, this conclusion seems right. But from Supreme Cour t jurisprudence over the last few decades, we can construct a general understand ing registration on the grounds that "[m]en and women, because of the combat restrictions on women, are simply not similarly situated for purposes of a draft"); Michael M. v. Superior Cour t, 450 U.S. 464, 476 (1981) (plurality opinion) (upholding a statutory rape law applying only to underage females because "the statute ... reasonably reflects the fact that the consequences of sexual intercourse and pregnancy fall more heavily on the female than the male"); Calif a no v. Webster, 430 U.S. 313, 317-18 (1977) (upholding a statute that treated men and women differently with respect to social security benefits because Congress acted to compensate women for past employment discrimination); Calif a no v. Gold far b, 430 U.S. 199, 216-17 (1977) (plurality opinion) (striking down a statute that treated men and women differently with respect to social security benefits in part because Congress did not enact the scheme "to remedy the arguably greater needs of women"). 
(arguing that equality is meaningless without a separate standard for judging whether people are the same or different). of what the test means, and this understand ing is not merely formal. On that understand ing, blacks must be treated the same as whites to the extent that they are the same as whites; women must be treated the same as men to the extent that they are the same as men. But these ideas also seem unhelpful. To what extent are blacks the same as whites, and to what extent are women the same as men? The law has answered this question largely by saying that blacks and whites should almost always be taken to be the same, and that women should be taken to be the same as men unless there is (i) a physical difference associated with reproduction,33 (ii) a legally constructed difference not itself in dispute,34 or (iii) a difference closely associated with past discrimination for which the law in dispute operates as a remedy or compensation.35 In all other cases, distinctions based on race and gender should be struck down as irrational, as stereotypical, or as based on hostility and prejudice.36 It follows that the law operates as a ban on formal inequality of the sort that prohibits most explicit distinctions between men and women or blacks and whites. 
There is much to be said on behalf of invalidating formal distinctions on the basis of race and gender. Wholesale disparagement of the pursuit of formal equality makes little sense. In the racial context, formal inequality is often associated with second-class citizenship for blacks. Sometimes the same has been true for gender as well, as in the exclusion of women from the jury and from the practice of law. Many formal distinctions do help produce inequality in the form of second-class status, and many of them are based on prejudice. Even if some formal distinctions between blacks and whites or men and women can be justified, a strong presumption against such distinctions might be defended as being well adapted to the limited capacities of cour ts. Individualized inquiry into the legitimacy of formal distinctions might produce too many errors in particular cases. Perhaps a flat ban on race and sex distinctions could be justified as a way of producing results that make sense in the aggregate and that allow errors that are few enough in number to be acceptable in light of the risks that would be produced by more individualized inquiry. In addition, formal inequalities tend 
women but not men between the ages of 18 and 20 to purchase 3.2% beer); see also cases cited supr a note 31. to encourage people to think in terms of race and gender, and a broad prohibition on laws containing such inequalities therefore has a desirable e ducat ive or expressive effect. 
Similar ideas could help justify a judicial refusal to test carefully laws that discriminate in fact but that do not embody formal inequality.37 Careful scrutiny of laws that discriminate in fact but not on their face might lead cour ts to face issues that are beyond their competence and best assessed legislatively. Consider the extraordinary difficulties that would be raised by asking whether a veteran's preference law would be adopted in a world of sex equality, or whether it could be adequately justified in light of its disc rim in at ory effects.38 
These considerations might form the basis for a justification of the Supreme Cour t's current equality jurisprudence, casting it as reasonable in principle and sensibly adapted to the cour ts' modest role. But there is a problem with this project. It is not at all simple to come up with a sensible theory of equality that would map on to, or adequately account for, the existing approach. On what possible theory would the Const itution ban all explicit race and sex distinctions and allow all other laws to stand? There are two problems here. 
First, some deviations from formal equality might well promote equality as that term is often or best understood. Consider, for example, a decision of a local police department to furnish special police protection for women who are traveling alone at night, and suppose that the decision was based on a recent outbreak of sexual violence in the area. It is at least unclear that this decision is inconsistent with equality as it is best understood. Perhaps it promotes equality by counteracting social cond itions that subject women to disproportionate risks.39 From this example it may follow that some laws that treat women differently from men are acceptable and indeed promote the goal of equality, rightly understood. Calif a no v. Webster,40 upholding formal sex discrimination in the benefit formula under social security law, is an explicit and unusual reflection of this point. Perhaps a maternal deference rule could be 
REV. 935, 1000-03 (1989). 
a sex disc rim in at ory statutory rape law on the ground that nature already deters women from engaging in sexual intercourse by imposing the penalty of pregnancy, something to which men are not subject). 
justified during child custody proceedings;perhaps alimony determinations should be required to consider domestic work, which is closely correlated with gender.41 
Alternatively,some laws raise equality concerns even if they do not violate formal equality. Consider a law that forbids pregnant women from appearing in public. Perhaps no man can be similarly situated to a pregnant woman, and perhaps there is no problem, from the standpoint of formal equality,in these circumstances.But from the standpoint of sex equality, does this make any sense? Surely problems of inequality are raised by a law that penalizes a physical capacity limited to one gender.42 Or suppose that the law forbids women from having an abortion, or excludes pregnancy from a disability program. Under current const itutional law, there is apparently no issue of sex discrimination.43 Men cannot get pregnant;women and men are to that extent not similarly situated. A law that restricts abortion or excludes pregnancy therefore raises no equality problem. But this is an odd way to think about equality. If the law takes a characteristic limited to one group of citizens and turns that characteristic into a source of social disadvantage,it may well violate the equality principle,best conceived.44 
Let us push this argument further. Sometimes equality requires the similarly situatedto be treated similarly.But sometimes people who are differently situated ought to be treated differently,precisely in the interest of equality.45 In the area of disabilities,for example,the use of stairs denies equality to people who are bound to wheelchairs,and the use of oral communication creates a problem for people who cannot hear. Legislative changes have often been based on an understand ing that people who are different must Child Custody, 1 S. CAL.REV.L. & WOMEN'STUD.133,203-23 (1993), and Mary E. Becker, Prince Charming: Abstract Equality, 1987 Sup. CT. REV. 201, 219-22. 
(holding that"the disfavoring of abortion... is not ip so facto sex discrimination"G); edu l dig v. Aiello, 417 U.S. 484, 494-96 & n.20 (1974) (holding that excluding pregnancy coverage from a statedisability programdoes not violate the Equal Protection Clause absent an intent to discriminate e,ven though"it is true that only women can become pregnant"). 
striking appearance of arguments involving sex discrimination in Planned Parenthood v. Casey,112 S. Ct. 2791,2807,2809,2830-31(1992)(joint opinion of O'Connor,Kennedy,& Souter,JJ.);112 S. Ct. at 2842(Stevens,J., concurring in part and dissenting in part);112 S. Ct. at 2846-47(Black mun,J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). 
Dominance: On Sex Discrimination, in FEMINISM UNMODIFIED 32 (1987). 
area may necessitate inequality in another area). be treated differently if they are to be treated equally.46 Of course, the expense of the adaptation is relevant to the question of what, exactly, ought to be done. But const itutional doctrine has rarely recognized that differences in people's situations might justify a claim for differential treatment in the interest of equality. 
We can connect this issue to the broader failure of American law to do as much as it might have about existing inequalities on the basis of both sex and race. In many areas there has been much progress; women cannot be excluded from professions, and most laws that build on or ratify sex-based stereotypes are forbidden.47 But if we look at the basic indicators of social welfare, it is not clear how much difference the law has made.48 The relative labor market status of women has not changed much in the aftermath of judicial decisions.49 The difference between the earnings of women and of men was greater in 1980 than it was in 1955, even though the key Supreme Cour t decisions were in the 1970 s.50 Women continue to face occupational segregation in the workforce, and the result is that women disproportionately occupy low-paying positions traditionally identified as female.51 Thus Gerald Rosenberg's influential study concludes that "[c]our t action contributed little to eliminating discrimination against women. Cases were argued and won but, litigants aside, little was accomplished."52 
This conclusion is probably too blunt. It is hard to measure the real-world effects of Supreme Cour t decisions, and the ban on unequal treatment by government may well have made an important difference for many women, even if it is hard for social scientists to tie real-world changes to judicial decisions. A degree of agnosticism makes good sense here. But it is highly revealing that the requirement of formal equality cannot be easily associated with large scale changes in the social welfare of women. 
No. 101-336, 104 Stat. 328 (codified as amended at 42 U.S.C. ?? 12101-12213) (Supp. IV 1992). 

HOLLOW HOPE 207-12 (1991) (con clu ding that "[l]it ig ation has failed to end [sex] discrimination"); Mary E. Becker, Politics, Differences, and Economic Rights, 1989 U. Cm ii.LEGAL F. 169, 172-74 (arguing that whi le anti discrimination laws have produced progress for women, they have not made women economically equal to men). 

Ironically,some existing inequalities may be partly a product of contemporary equality law. After divorce,women's economic welfare goes sharply down, whereas men's goes sharply up.53 Legal rules,not nature,assure this result by generally refusing to take account of domestic contributions and by refusing to regard the husband's success in the employment market as a joint asset. The relevant rules might well be subject to legal attack. 
Certainly some existing inequalities stem from laws that do not violate formal equality. Consider veterans' preference laws, sex based in effect if not in intent. Such laws are immune from attack under the formal equality standard,but they can have enormous effects on state employment.54 Perhaps more important is the existence of a social security system that was designed for and that benefits male breadwinners,whi le helping women much less because women do not follow conventional male career paths.55 The failure to provide adequate protection against rape, sexual harassment, and other forms of sexual assault and abuse might also raise equality issues;these failures raise no problems under the formal equality approach. 
Now we are in a position to make some general observations about the question of race and sex differences. The question for decision is not whether there is a difference- often there certainly is - but whether the legal and social treatment of that difference can be adequately justified. Differences need not imply inequality, and only some differences have that implication.When differences do have that implication,the implication is a result of legal and social practices,not the result of differences alone. Because they are legal and social, these practices might be altered even if the differences remain.56 Existing law recognizes this point insofar as formal discrimination on the basis of race and sex is prohibited even if based on differences that are "real"in the sense that as a matter of simple fact, blacks are not similarly situatedto whites and women REVOLUTION 337-40 (1985). 
Massachusetts law giving absolute lifetime preferences to veterans for civil service positions does not violate the Equal Protection Clause even though the law "operates overwhelmingly to the advantage of males"). 
consequences of structural discrimination in the social security system). 
on gender dominance, not gender difference); see also JOHN RAWLS A, THEORY OF JUSTICE 107-08 (1971) (stressing how the social structure affects the naturally unequal distribution of talents and privileges). are not similarly situatedto men.57 But existing law stops shortinsofar as it does not allow attacks on disc rim in at orybut facially neutral practices based on an unequal status quo.58 
An analogy may be helpful here. The problems faced by disabled people are not a function of disability"alone"(an almost impenetrable idea - what would current disabilities even mean in a different world?) but are instead the result of the interaction between physical and mental capacities on the one hand and a set of human obstacles made by and for the able-bodied on the other. It is those human obstacles,rather than the capacities taken as brute facts, that create a large part of what it means to be disabled. One could not defend, for example,the construction of a building with stairs and without means of access for those on wheelchairs on the ground that those who need wheelchairs are different. The question is whether it is acceptable,or just, to construct a building that excludes people who need an unusual means of entry. That question may not be a simple one, but it cannot be answered simply by pointing to a difference. 
We might conclude that there are two fundamental problems with the "similarly situated"idea. The first is that the idea cannot be made operational without a theory of some kind. The second is that the implicit theory behind the current approach seems hard to justify or even to describe. The best defense would suggest that the approach is adapted to a reasonable understand ing of equality,or several reasonable understand ings w,hi le at the same time being uniquely well suited to judicial administration.This defense is far from implausible,but it suggests that a full justification of the const itutionalequality principleremainsto be offered. 
II. THE ANTI CASTE PRINCIPLE 
I suggest that in American const itutional law, an important equality principle stems from opposition to caste. This principle grows out of the original rejection of the monarchical legacy 59 and discrimination in social security even though men are less frequently dependent on their spouses than are women); see also J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B., 114 S. Ct. 1419, 1427 n.l 1 (1994) (stating that peremptory challenges are forbidden even if women's perceptions really are different from men's); 114 S. Ct. at 1432 (O'Connor, J., concurring) (emphasizing that law does not always take real differences into account). 

(1992) (discussing consequences of the attack on monarchical heritage). private choices, as in the selection of dancing partners. When I speak of the im permissibility of turning morally irrelevant factors into a systematic source of social disadvantage, I do not mean to deny that in many settings morally irrelevant factors may well be used. But even this point leaves numerous open questions. We do not have anything like a full account of what sorts of differences are relevant to legitimate official judgments. Can such an account be provided here? 
For lawyers, at least, many of the political and moral complexities can be bracketed. Perhaps those involved in the legal system can build on the general understand ing that race and gender are irrelevant from the moral point of view without making complex and perhaps sectarian claims about moral relevance in general. Indeed, one happy feature of legal thinking is that participants in legal disputes can often bracket large-scale claims about the right and the good and build in completely theorized agreements about particular issues.78 There is general public or judicial agreement that race and sex are morally irrelevant in the sense that the distribution of social benefits and burdens ought not to depend on skin color or gender. This agreement is founded on good reasons, because both of these are accidents of birth, because accidents of birth should not produce second-class citizenship, and because it is hard to imagine an account that would justify lesser benefits or greater burdens by reference to these particular accidents.79 To say this is not to say that social roles must have nothing to do with gender; many people think that roles and gender cannot be entirely separated. But it is to say that social disadvantage cannot be justified by reference to race or sex alone, and that point is sufficient for my purposes here. 
Nor, for lawyers, is the notion of moral irrelevance a new one. The anti caste principle has distinctive historical roots. Recall that the Const itution forbids t itles of nobility and that an important part of the founding creed involved the rejection of the monarchical heritage, largely on the ground that monarchy made caste distinctions LECTURES ON HUMAN VALUES (forthcoming 1995); it has an obvious resemblance to the idea of "overlapping consensus" as found in RAWLS P,OL IT ICAL LIBERALISM su,pra note 67, at 133-72. 
ability to produce products that the market rewards. These accidents may be entangled with non accidental factors; promoting them brings about desirable incentives and also is associated with a range of valuable social goals, like increased productivity. Of course it would be possible to say that when people do not like people of certain races, there is a productivity loss from forbidding them to indulge their "taste" - sometimes this may even be true - but this productivity loss seems inadequate to overcome the basic case offered in the text. among fundamentally equal human beings.80 The Civil War Amendments were rooted in a judgment about the moral irrelevance of race, formerly taken to be relevant because of nature. In the aftermath of the American Civil War a high U.S. official stated, "God himself has set His seal of distinctive difference between the two races, and no human legislation can overrule the Divine decree."81 In the same period, anti disc rim in a tio n law was challenged squarely on the ground that it put the two races in "un natura rl elation" to each other.82 
The Civil War Amendments were based on a wholesale rejection of the supposed naturalness of racial hierarchy.The hierarchy was thought to be a function not of natural difference but of law, most notably the law of slavery and the various measures that grew up in the aftermath of abolition. An important purpose of the Civil War Amendments was the attack on racial caste.83 Thus Senator Howard explained that the purpose of the Four teenthAmendment was to "abolish[] all class legislation in the States and [do] away with the injustice of subjecting one caste of persons to a code not applicable to another."84 The defining case of the Black Codes, placing special disabilities on the freedmen's legal capacities,exemplified the concern with caste legislation.85 Thus Justice Harlan, dissenting in Plessy v. Per gus on,86 wrote one of the greatest sentences in American law: "There is no caste here."87 Contemporary understand ings of sex inequality build on this basic idea.88 
I do not contend that the anti caste principle,as I describe it here, can be understood as a mechanical reflection of pre- and post Civil War aspirations. The rat if i ers did believe that caste or class legislation was forbidden;but they did not fully unpack the category. They understood that legislation always made distinctions anti-Federalists disagreed as to how privileged the government leaders needed to be, both opposed monarchical hierarchy based on heredity alone). 

2 STAN.L. REV.5 (1949) (arguing that the framers of the Four teenth Amendment intended to forbid discrimination against blacks at the state level). 

1385, 1413 (1992) (explaining how Black Codes were used to prevent blacks from enjoying a wide variety of social and legal privileges available to whites, in clu ding testifying in cour t and owning property). 
among persons,and they thought the category of caste or class legislation was a small subset of legislation, involving illegitimate grounds for differential treatment. In seeing what counted as illegitimate grounds,they looked not to theory but to slavery and the Black Codes as defining illustrations.So far there is considerable overlap between an important strand in the Civil War period and what I am urging here. But the Civil War Amendments were targeted at caste legislation,that is, at specific laws that embodied discrimination and in this way helped to create caste. This is what Justice Harlan had in mind in Plessy. There was no general understand ing that these amendments imposed on government a general duty to remove caste status or bannednon disc rim in at orylaws that contributed to caste status - even if it was understood that Congress would have the power to counteract the legacy of slavery with affirmative legislation.89 
The anti caste principle as I understand it here is more ambitious. It is not directed merely at caste legislation but more generally at a social status quo that, through historical and current practices,creates second-class status. We can understand this principle as emphasizinglegislativerather than judicial duties and as reading the Civil War Amendments through the lens of the New Deal, which reflected an understand ing that social practices are often a creation of law,at least in part,andthatgovernment is legitimately made responsible for practices that produce social evils, in clu ding pervasive deprivation.90 Reading the Civil War Amendments through the lens of the New Deal,91 we might see a const itutional problem not only with particular caste legislation but with lower-caste status in general. 
Thus far I have emphasized social consensus and history. Perhaps lawyers can build on these sources,but an adequate account of the subject of caste and moral irrelevance could not rest content with social agreement and with the past. I cannot offer that account here, but a few observations maybe helpful. If the notion of moral Four teenthAmendment, 71 VA. L. REV.753, 796-97 (1985). 
the Lo chner Cour t and the New Deal as attempts to synthesize a coherent framework of rights out of existing sources of legal doctrine, in clu ding the Civil War Amendments); SUN STEIN,supr a note *, at 40-67 (arguing that New Deal jurisprudence recognized that social practices determining ownership rights, labor rights, and civil rights were themselves products of the legal regime). 
that Brown v. Board of E ducation, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), reinterpreted Four teenth Amendment equal protection requirements in light of post-Plessy social developments). irrelevance involves a lack of connection to either ent itlement or desert, we might think that a wide range of differences among people are indeed morally arbitrary, in the sense that such differences do not by themselves justify more resources or greater welfare. In a market economy, those morally irrelevant differences are quite frequently translated into social disadvantages. Consider educational background, intelligence, physical strength, and existing supply and demand curves for various products and services. Certainly someone does not deserve more goods and services merely by virtue of the fact that many people want what he is able to provide. Consider an especially fast run from one side of a tennis cour t to another, or a book about a murder that is especially entertaining to read. For good instrumental reasons, in clu ding the production of desired commodities, we may well want to reward people who can provide widely valued goods; but the relationship between that talent and desert or ent itlement is obscure. 
In a market economy, many factors - strength, intelligence, and educational background - affect resources and welfare, and most of these factors are arbitrary from the moral point of view. Is someone really ent itled to more money because he was born into a family that stressed education, or because of his intelligence, or because he happened to produce a commodity that many people like? Markets do reward qualities that are irrelevant from a moral point of view. But it would be difficult indeed to justify a principle that would attempt, through law, to counteract all or most of the factors that markets make relevant. The reason is that in general, the recognition of such factors is inseparable from the operation of a market economy, and by and large, a market economy is a source of many important human goods, in clu ding individual freedom, economic growth and prosperity, and respect for different conceptions of the good. Any legal solutions that call for major intrusions on markets must be evaluated in light of the effects on various possible human goods that those alleged solutions will compromise. If legal remedies produce more unemployment, greater poverty, and higher prices for food and other basic necessities, they are, to that extent, a bad idea. 
The implementation and reach of any anti caste principle should depend on considerations of this kind. The point is not that human equality should be "traded off" against the seemingly sterile and abstract notion of market efficiency. I do not claim that otherwise unjustified inequality can be supported by some intrinsic good called "efficiency." Efficiency is an instrumental good, though no less important for that. I argue only that intrusions on markets may defeat valuable human goals and that this is important to keep in mind. 
To be more precise: The use of the factors that ordinarily underlie markets is at least sometimes, though of course not always, in the interest of the most disadvantaged, certainly in the sense that lower prices and higher employment are especially valuable to the poor. When this is so, any government initiative that would bar use of those factors - intelligence, production of socially valued goods, and so forth - seems perverse.92 Moreover, a principle that would override all morally irrelevant factors would impose extraordinary costs on society, both in its implementation and administrative expense and in its infliction of losses on a wide range of people. The anti caste principle seems to have greatest appeal in discrete contexts in which gains from current practice to the least well-off are hard to imagine; in which second-class citizenship is systemic and occurs in multiple spheres and along easily identifiable and sharply defined lines; in which the morally irrelevant characteristic is highly visible; in which there will be no major threat to a market economy; and in which the costs of implementation are most unlikely to be terribly high. 
Ideas of this sort do not justify a judgment that poor people const itute a lower caste. For one thing, poor people represent a broad, amorphous, not easily identified, and to some degree shifting group. When people are poor, we cannot say that social and legal practices turn a highly visible and morally irrelevant characteristic into a systemic source of social disadvantage. Of course human deprivation creates a significant problem of justice, and a recognizable const itutional understand ing tries to provide all people with freedom from desperate cond itions.93 I mean here to identify a separate understand ing - one that supports a legal assault on the caste like features of the status quo with respect to race, sex, and disability. It is relevant here that the benefits of anti discrimination fail to justify many of the inequalities that markets introduce, since many of those inequalities do not benefit the least well-off. But a less rigid set of understand ings, allowing inequalities that benefit most people, in clu ding many of the disadvantaged, would justify reliance on markets, especially in light of the government's ability to use greater aggregate wealth to help disadvantaged people and to provide a basic floor. See the intriguing finding in NORMAN F ROH LICH& JOE A. OPPENHEIMER, CHOOSING JUSTICE 58-60 (1992), suggesting that in experimental studies most people choose average utility with a welfare floor, rather than the difference principle. 
law do seem substantial,and the negative effects on the economy 
Originally the Four teenthAmendmentto the Const itution was understood as an effort to eliminate racial caste emphatically not as a ban on distinctions on the basis of race.95 A prohibition on racial caste is of course different from a prohibition on racial distinctions. A ban on racial distinctions would excise all use of race in decision making.By contrast,a ban on caste might well draw some measures having disc rim in at oryeffects into question, and it would certainly allow affirmative action programs.96 
Originally,Congress,not the cour ts,was to be the principal inst itution for implementing the Four teenthAmendment. The basic idea was that Congress would transform the status of the newly freed slaves by engaging in a wide range of remedial measures.97 It was not at all anticipated that federal jud ges responsible for the which established slavery as a const itutional right then-recent and highly visible Dred Scott v. Sanford 98 decision, would be enforcing the Amendment. Indeed,the notion that jud ges would play a major role in helping to bring about equality under law was entirely foreign to the d rafters and rat if i ers of the Civil War Amendments. 
At some stage in the twentieth century, there was a dramatic change in the legal culture's understand ing of the notion of equality under the Const itution. The anti caste principle was transformed Concepts of Equality, 92 MICH.L. REV. 2583, 2600-01 (1994) (this issue) (describing anti discrimination laws as correcting market imperfections to some extent); James J. Heck man & Brook S. Payne r, Determining the Impact of Anti discrimination Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks: A Study of South Carolina, 79 AM. EC ON.REV. 138 (1989) (con clu ding that federal anti discrimination law may account for increased wages and employment among blacks in the South Carolina textile manufacturing industry). 
appears in his dissenting opinion in Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537, 559 (1896), in the sentence immediately preceding his famous assertion that "[o]ur Const itution is color-blind." 163 U.S. at 559. See the excellent discussion in T. Alexander Ale in ik off, Re-Reading Justice Harlan's Dissent in Plessy v. Ferguson: Freedom, Anti racism, and Citizenship, 1992 U. ILL.L. REV. 961 (maintaining that Justice Harlan's dissent in Plessy can be read to support race conscious programs that combat subordination). 
attack on affirmative action). 
provide a const itutional basis for An Act To Establish a Bureau for the Relief of Freedmen and Refugees, ch. 90, 13 Stat. 507 (1865) [here in after Freedmen's Bureau Act]). into an antidifferentiation principle.99 No longer was the issue the elimination of second-class citizenship. The focus shifted instead to the entirely different question whether people who were similarly situated had been treated similarly - a fundamental change. This shift in focus remains one of the great untold stories of American const itutional history. 
So long as the cour ts were to be the inst itution entrusted with enforcing the Equal Protection Clause, the shift was fully intelligible, notwithstand ing its problematic relationship with the original understand ing of the Four teenth Amendment and with the best understand ing of what race and sex inequality really are. The judiciary simply lacks the necessary tools to implement the anti caste principle. The transformation in the conception of equality is therefore understandable in light of what came to be, under the Four teenth Amendment, the astonishing inst itutional importance of cour ts and the equally astonishing inst itutional insignificance of Congress. But the transformation of an anti caste principle into a prohibition on racial differentiation has inadequately served the const itutional commitment to equal protection of the laws.100 It has meant that too little will be done about the second-class citizenship of blacks, women, and the disabled. 
If the legal culture is to return to the roots of the const itutional commitment and to a better understand ing of equality, the legislative branch should take the lead. The anti caste principle, if taken seriously, calls for significant restructuring of social practices. For this reason legislative and administrative bodies, with their superior democratic pedigree and fact-finding capacities, can better implement the principle than can the cour ts.101 
Of course there are difficult issues of strategy, timing, and implementation. Some legal interventions may not be fruitful; they may even be counterproductive. Some may breed confusion and resentment. Others may be unintelligible. Still others may disrupt a society's basic organizing frameworks in a way that does great harm and little good. Outsiders - and insiders too - will often know too little, and both must be careful about introducing legal 388 U.S. 1 (1967), with its reference to "White Supremacy." 388 U.S. at 11. The triumph of the antidifferentiation idea can be found in Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229 (1976), and City of Richmond v. J.A. Cro son Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989). 
I mm unities Clause would be a better source of the equality principle of the Four teenth Amendment. 
the way of social reform). principles that do not cohere with cultural norms. Context will therefore matter a great deal. But these issues concern quite different matters from the issue of principle that I am now discussing. 
What is the relationship between the anti casteprincipleand the familiar idea that some classifications are "suspect,"in the sense that the cour ts will be hostile to discrimination against certain groups? We can start by observing that the Supreme Cour t has granted heightened scrutiny to laws that discriminate against certain identifiable groups thought likely to be at particular risk in the ordinary political process.102 When the Cour t grants heightened scrutiny,it is highly skeptical of legislation,and the burden of every doubt operates on behalf of groups challenging the relevant laws.103 
The difference between the two ideas can be described in the following way: The notion of suspect classifications is based on a fear that illegitimate considerations are likely to lie behind legislation, whereas the anti casteprincipleis designed to ensure against second-class statusfor certain social groups. The two ideas overlap, because lower castes may well be subject to legislation grounded on illegitimate considerations. But the two ideas are nonetheless distinct, because illegitimate considerationsmay lie behind legislation discriminating against groups that do not count as lower castes, and because the anti casteprincipleimposes duties on government that go well beyond a ban on illegitimately motivated legislation. 
In deciding whether to grant heightened scrutiny,the Cour thas not been altogether clear about its underlying rationale. The Cour t appears to have examined a set of factors - above all, the relevance of the group characteristic to legitimategovernment alends, the likelihood that the group in question will be subject to prejudice, the immutability of the characteristic t,he existence of past and distinctions)C;le burne v. Cleburne Living C tr.,473 U.S.432,440-42(1985)(refusing to apply strictscrutiny to legislation distinguishing the mentally retarded because of the lack of a legal tradition disadvantaging this group);Craig v. Bore n, 429 U.S. 190, 204 (1976) (applying heightened scrutiny to legislation using gender distinctions). 
context,and "intermediate scrutiny,"used in the context of sex discrimination A.n interesting development is the Cour t's recent suggestion that it has failed to determine whether genderclassifications are inherentlysuspectandthuswhetherintermediate scrutinyor strict scrutiny should apply in gender cases,see J.E.B.v. Alabama ex rel.T.B., 114 S. Ct. 1419,1425 n.6 (1994)(deciding a gender discrimination case without mentioning the difference between intermediate and strict scrutiny),though it is not clear that there is muchdifference between the two standards. present discrimination, and the group's lack of political power.104 In this way, it has moved well beyond the defining case of discrimination against blacks to include discrimination against women, illegitimate child ren, and sometimes aliens.105 
Most of these factors have yet to be fully analyzed. They purport to involve a quasi-factual investigation into real data, but they actually depend on controversial and usually unidentified normative judgments. For example, we cannot know whether a characteristic is "relevant" just by looking at facts. Often race and sex are relevant to employment decisions, in the sense that profits depend on them. We cannot know whether a group has historically been subject to "discrimination" without knowing whether the unequal treatment was justified; discrimination is of course a value-laden category. 
Similarly, a major problem with the key issue of political powerlessness is that relevant judgments are based not simply on facts about political influence. They also depend on some controversial and usually un articulated claims about how much political power is appropriate for the group in question and about the legitimacy of the bases for legislative judgments on matters affecting the group. The claim that a group is politically weak in the const itutional test is thus a product of controversial and rarely articulated claims. 
For example, blacks may have a good deal of political power; they can influence elections, even elections of the President. The same is true of women, who of course can affect elections a great deal. The potentially large electoral influence of both groups does not exclude them from the category of groups ent itled to particular protection against discrimination. The reason is that even if they can wield political influence, prejudice in the const itutionally relevant sense is likely to operate against both blacks and women in the political process. Blacks may be subject to hatred or devaluation; women may be subject to stereotypes about their appropriate role that affect their political power and even their own aspirations. The conclusion is that the category of political powerlessness looks like an inquiry into political science, but it really depends on some judgments about the legitimacy of the usual grounds for government action classifying on the basis of race and sex. The real question is whether legislation disadvantaging the relevant group is peculiarly 
U.S. 365 (1971) (illegitimate child ren); Trimble v. Gordon, 430 U.S. 762 (1977) (aliens). likely to rest on illegitimate grounds. Heightened scrutiny is a way of testing whether it does. 
This discussion should show that the basic features of the Cour t's analysis - the history of discrimination,the category of prejudice,the inquiry into whether the relevant characteristic is immutable - can be analyzed in the same way. These ideas are designed to help determine if illegitimate considerations typically underlie legislation classified on the relevant basis. As noted, a judgment that there has been a history of discrimination depends on a theory of appropriate distribution,at least of a general sort. We rarely say that criminals have suffered a history of discrimination, and if we do say so, it is not because they are punished for criminal conduct. To say that there has been prejudice is to say that the usual grounds for discrimination are impermissible, even though those grounds may represent good-faith moral convictions. Consider,for example,the widely held view that women and men should occupy different social roles - a view that,despite its popularity,may not be used to support legislation. Moreover,immutability is neither a necessary nor a sufficient cond ition for suspect class status. Blind people are not ent itled to the heightened scrutiny accorded legislation targeting suspect classes,even though the cond ition of being blind is usually immutable. And if new drugs or technology allowed blacks to become whites, or vice versa, and made sex-change operations feasible and cheap,wouldcour tsabandon their careful scrutiny of race and sex discrimination?Surely not. 
My major point here is that the anti casteprincipleis quite different from the anti discrimination principle. We might therefore think that undercurrent doctrine,discrimination against,for example, Asian Americans and Jews should be presumed invalid,without also thinking that Asian Americans and Jews count as lower castes. The inquiry into suspect classification is therefore quite different from the inquiry into caste, though the two ideas do overlap. 
The above discussion illustrates that many groups that are frequently subject to discrimination do not qualify as lower castes in the way I have understood that term. It seems reasonable to think that Asian Americans suffer from discrimination and prejudice,but it is doubtful that they qualify as a lower caste, because they do not appear to be systematically below other groups in terms of the basic indicators of social well-being. The same is true for many other groups subject to discrimination i,n clu ding,for example,homosexuals and Jews. Homosexuals are not a lower caste in the sense that they are not worse off than heterosexuals in terms of many of the usual indicators of social welfare;they cannot show second-class citizenship in this sense. But they are also subject to pervasive discrimination and prejudice,with possibly corrosive effects on self respect, and in that sense they are subject to social practices connected to the issues of caste that I have been discussing. 
Nothing I have said here is meant to legitimate discrimination againstgroups that have suffered and continue to suffer from private and public prejudice.For example,there is indeed an equality norm that is offended by discrimination on the basis of religion. Though I cannot support the point here, I think the same is true for discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. But the anti caste principle does not cover groups simply by virtue of the fact that they are often subject to illegitimate discrimination.The anti caste principle has special meanings and uses. It does not exhaust the several const itutional principles of equality. 
C. Some Data 
As I have understood the matter,the inquiry into caste has a large empirical dimension. The principle focuses on whether one group is systematically below others along important dimensions of social welfare. I offer some relevant informationhere. Needless to say, the account is far from complete. Throughout this discussion it will be useful to recall that about twelve percent of Americans are black. 
It is not surprising to find dramatic disparities between whites and blacks along nearly all dimensions of social well-being. Begin with economic measures. The per capita income of whites is nearly double that of blacks. The median income of white households is $37,783, as compared to $21,548 for black households.106 Nearly one-third of black Americans live below the poverty level, compared to about one-tenth of white Americans.107 Ten percent of whites over sixty-five live below the poverty line, as compared to about a third of blacks.108 Perhaps worst of all, 45% of black child ren live below the poverty line, as compared to 16%of white chil 106. BUREAU OF THE CENSUS, U.S. DEPT. OF COMMERCE, STATISTICAL ABSTRACT OF THE UNITED STATES 1993, at 467 t bl. 732, 462 t bl. 721 (113 th ed. 1993) [here in after STATISTICAL ABSTRACT]. 
d ren.109 About a quarter of black households earn less than $10,000 per year, compared to fewer than 10% of white households.110 
There are also striking disparities with respect to unemployment levels. In 1992, 6.5% of whites were unemployed,as compared to 14.1%of blacks.1 l Disparities of this sort persist over time. Consider the chart on the following pages: 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 [Percent; monthly data seasonally adjusted] 
BY DEMOGRAPHIC [Percent; monthly data seasonally adjusted] 
We might turn to education, longevity, and crime. Over 80% of whites have completed high school, whi le about two-thirds of blacks have their high school diplomas.113 About 23% of whites have completed a college degree, as compared to about 13% of blacks.114 The life expectancy of a white American is four years longer than the life expectancy of a black American.115 From 1970 to 1990, about ten people per 100,000 were murdered each year.116 During this same period, the annual murder rate for white men ranged from seven to ten per 100,000, compared to a range of fifty to eighty for black men.117 Similarly, the murder rate for white women was between two and three per 100,000, compared to ten to fifteen for black women.118 In 1991, thirty whites out of a thousand were subject to a crime against their person, down from thirty-two in 1973, but forty-four blacks out of a thousand were subject to such a crime, up from forty-two in 1973.119 
Consider political representation. Of the 435 members of the House of Representatives, only forty are black. In the Senate, the numbers are even more striking: of the one hundred senators, only one is black.120 There are also inequalities in political participation. About 70% of white people were registered to vote, as compared to 64% of blacks, in the 1992 elections. There are slightly higher disparities for voting itself, showing about a 10% differential in the last presidential election.121 
With respect to sex inequality, most of the numbers are far less dramatic. Women's life expectancy is higher than that of men.122 The educational attainment of men and women is about the same, especially in light of changes over the past twenty years - though white men are significantly more likely to be college graduates than white women.123 Most of the disparities between men and women involve income, wealth, and political representation. 

1994). 

The basic economic indicators show large differences. About 69.3% of women are in the labor force, as compared to 88.9% of men. The median yearly earnings of women is $24,000,compared to $35,850 for men. At every stage of educational attainment,men out-earn women by a substantial margin. The average annual income of a woman highschool graduate is about$19,000;for a man, the average is about $28,000. For a woman with some college education, the annual figure is over $22,000, as compared to over $33,000 for a man. For a woman who has at least a bachelor's degree, the annual figure is about $33,000, as compared to over $50,000 for a man.124 
The poverty rate for single-mother families is 59%.125 Note in this regard that 15,396child renundereighteen live only with their mother, compared to the 2182 who live with their father only.126 And after divorce,the average standard of living of men increases by 42%, whereas that of women decreases by 73%.127 There are 388 male representatives in the House of Representatives and forty-eight women.128 Of one hundred senators, only seven are women.129 
This is merely a brief collection of informationshowinggroup based disparities that bear on the question of second-class citizenship. As we will soon see, the information suggests a need to shift from judicial to legislative forums - and also, ironically,to use race- and gender-neutral remedies. 
III. THE FUTURE 
A. From Anti discrimination to Anti caste 
Equality law has had two principal stages. The first was concerned with preventing explicit discrimination,public or private, against blacks and women. This included the attack on American apartheid,led by Thurgood Marshall and culminating in Brown v. Board of E ducation,130 and also the attack on explicit sex discrimination,led by Ruth Bader Ginsburg.131 The legal assault on public 
general disparity is uncontroversial. 
discrimination was eventually matched by the statutory attack on private discrimination.132 The second stage consisted of challenges to public and private practices that did not involve explicit discrimination but that stemmed from prejudice or that otherwise had large and not adequately justified disc rim in at ory effects.133 This second stage built on the first. Neither has entirely run its course. 
Both of these movements for reform had substantial success, certainly in eliminating the most conspicuously unsupportable public and private practices. Both were connected with anti caste goals, and to the extent that they operated within the judiciary, they were also well adapted to the limited inst itutional capacities of the judiciary.134 On the other hand, the successes, important as they have been, have had ambiguous effects on the inequalities discussed above. From what has been said thus far, it should be clear that if the elimination of second-class citizenship is an important social goal, it would be valuable to start in new directions, some of which have not typically been associated with civil rights at all. 
If opposition to caste is a basic goal, civil rights policy should concern itself first and foremost with such problems as lack of opportunities for education, training, and employment; inadequate housing, food, and health care; vulnerability to crime, both public and private; incentives to participate in crime; disproportionate subjection to environmental hazards; and teenage pregnancy and single-parent families. Policies of this kind suggest a major shift in direction from the more narrowly focused anti discrimination policies of the past. 
This is hardly the place for a full program for legislative reform. But in resolving current problems, most of the traditional claims of civil rights law provide incomplete help. The problem is not rooted in explicitly race- or sex-based classification, nor does it lie in prejudice, at least not in any simple sense.135 It lies instead in policies and programs that contribute to second-class status, often in ex 132. See, e.g., Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. L. No. 88-352, t it. VII, 78 Stat. 241, 253-66 (codified as amended principally at 42 U.S.C. ?? 2000 e to 2000 e-17 (1988 & Supp. III 1991)). 
(codified at 42 U.S.C. ? 1973 b (1988)); Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. L. No. 88-352, t it. VII, 78 Stat. 241, 253-66 (codified as amended principally at 42 U.S.C. ?? 2000 e to 2000 e-17 (1988 & Supp. III 1991)). 
unable to improve the lot of women or blacks and that any progress achieved by these two groups usually resulted from extra judicial forces). 
this notion is hard to administer, for reasons well discussed in Strauss, supr a note 38, at 939, 988-90. treme ly complex ways involving interactions between past practices and a wide array of current policies.136 
In proposing reforms, we might look quite eclectically at a range of protections against the sorts of disparities discussed above. For example, policies promoting economic growth are an important part of equality law insofar as growth is associated with employment and the reduction of poverty. But because the association is imperfect,137 many other steps are necessary. I simply note a few possibilities here; of course a range of details would be required in order to assess any of them. 
Targeted educational policies, in clu ding efforts to promote literacy and Head Start programs, provide promising models.138 At least partial successes have resulted from parental leave and "flextime" policies.139 Certainly, employment-related policies are important insofar as job increases are closely connected with the reduction of poverty. In the area of voting rights law, the race-neutral remedy of cumulative voting might be preferable to racially explicit approaches.140 Consider as well recent initiatives designed to reduce violence generally and violence against women in particular - through education, additional government resources for crime prevention and punishment, and new legal remedies for victims of sex-related violence.141 We might compare these with President Clinton's recent executive order on environmental justice, designed to prevent disproportionate health and safety effects from the existence of environmental hazards.142 
causes of increased homelessness to a variety of in different or well-intention ed government al and social actions, such as the destruction of skid row housing and the deinst itutionalization of the mentally ill). 
to economic growth can actually fail to help the poor). 
(1987) (portraying Head Start as one of the clear success stories of the Great Society). 
Thought in the 1970's, 1989 U. CHI.LEGAL F. 9. 
Gimme Five, NEW REPUBLIC M,ar. 1, 1993, at 16. 
1133, 103 d Cong., 1 st Ses s. (1993). 

Of course there are limits to how much legal reform can do to redress these problems,at least in the short run. But there is much that law can do to help.143 
B. 
On the account I have offered, there is no const itutionalobjection to genuinely remedial race- and sex-conscious policies,at least as a general rule.144 If a basic goal is opposition to caste, affirmative action policies are ordinarily permissible. Partly this lesson stems from the history of the Civil War Amendments;if history is relevant,it is hard to support the view that affirmative action programs are invalid.145 But partly it is a lesson of logic. We have seen that in an important way the anti discrimination principleis continuous with the affirmative action principle. Insofar as statistical discrimination is outlawed,the government has singled out one form of rational categorization and subjected it to special disability. At least along this dimension,the anti discrimination principlepartakes of an affirmative action principle. 
To be sure, it may be possible to generalize from the Civil War Amendments a generalopposition to the use of skin color as a basis for the distribution of social benefits and burdens. Perhaps we should say that government ought never or rarely to consider skin color in its official decisions,because use of skin color has bad educational and expressive effects, and because it legitimates the view that people should see each other, and themselves,in racial terms. But this view is historically adventurous,14 a 6 nd it would also involve a highly intrusive role for the cour ts. Race-conscious programs occupy an exceptionally wide range. They can be found in Donohue, supr a note 94 (arguing that employment discrimination laws successfully reduced discrimination); Miller, supr a note 138 (describing the successes of the Head Start program). 
only pre textually remedial, especially in the gender context, in which purportedly remedial measures may in fact be disc rim in at ory. See, e.g., Weinberger v. Wiese nfeld, 420 U.S. 636 (1975) (striking down a social security law giving benefits to women but not to men because the provision actually reflected irrational gender stereotypes). Also, some approaches might be too crudely connected with remedial goals, see, e.g., Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. Federal Communications Com mn., 497 U.S. 547 (1991) (upholding a race-conscious approach despite its crudeness), or perhaps with rigid quotas, see, e.g., City of Richmond v. J.A. Cro son Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989). 
opposition to affirmative action programs). 
distinctions" such as affirmative action programs ignore the 130-year-old intentions expressed by Congress in the Freedmen's Bureau Act). education, employment, licensing, and elsewhere.147 They have been accepted at local, state, and federal levels and by cour ts,administrators,presidents,and legislatures;14 t 8 hey have come from people whose views sharply diverge, in clu dingconservativesand liberals a like - both Democrats and Republicans have supported them.149 In these circumstances j,ud ges should be extreme lyreluctant to say that there is anything like a flat ban on race-conscious programs. 
It might be concluded that race-and sex-conscious remedial policies are not merely unobjectionable but even mandatory under an anti casteprinciple. Perhaps such policies are necessary in order to counteract second-class status; certainly many people have so thought. But such policies have a mixed record,and in some places and ways, they have been a conspicuous failure. Some plat itudes are worth repeating: In some places, race-conscious judgments have stigmatized their purported beneficiaries,by making people think that blacks are present only because of their skin color. In some places, such judgments have fueled hostility and increased feelings of second-class citizenship.Some people who would do extreme ly well in some good inst itutions - schools or jobs - are placed by affirmative actionin programs or positions in which they perform far less well, with harmful consequences for their self respect. Ironically, affirmative action programs can aggravate problems of caste by increasing the social perception that a highly visible feature like skin color is associated with undesirable characteristics. 
In part the failures have stemmed from resistance to any remedies at all for the legacy of discrimination a,nd it would be wrong to discount the extent to which opposition to affirmative action can stem from opposition to any change in the status quo. But in part the failure has stemmed from a general conviction that skin color and gender should not matter to social outcomes. In view of both history and principle,that conviction should not be discounted or schools); Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. Federal Communications Com mn., 497 U.S. 547 (1990) (minority preferences for broadcast licenses); Wy g ant v. Jackson Bd. of E duc., 476 U.S. 267 (1986) (layoffs allocated partly by race). 
construction set-aside program); Full i love v. Klutz nick, 448 U.S. 448 (1980) (congressional set-aside program in construction grants); Regents of the Un iv. of Cal. v. Bak ke, 438 U.S. 265 (1978) (state-level university admission program). 
(discussing the overwhelming passage of the minority business enterprises program at issue in Full i love by both the Senate and the House). trivialized. It is relevant in this regard that many defenses of affirmative action programs are hard to offer in public. Often the nature of affirmative action programs is not discussed publicly because to do so would be humiliating to the supposed beneficiaries or intolerable to the public at large. 
Perhaps this is partly a product of the unfortunate rhetoric of affirmative action.150 But partly it is a result of a deep-seated resistance to "racial is m" as producing frequent unfairness in individual cases and as inconsistent with widespread convictions about the relationship between individual achievement and social reward. Elaborate arguments might be and have been offered to try to undermine this resistance and these convictions.151 But it is at least revealing that sometimes these arguments seem too elaborate to carry much weight before the very people to whom they are aimed. 
I do not mean to say that all or most affirmative action programs should be abolished. There is too much variety to allow for sensible global judgments. But we know enough to know that such programs have often failed and that race-neutral alternatives are often better. 
These considerations suggest both a presumption in favor of race- and gender-neutral policies and the need to develop legal reforms that are not gender- or race-conscious - that do not give rise to widespread fears that government is playing favorites or is subject to the lobbying pressure of well-organized private groups. And it would be possible to administer an anti caste principle in race- and gender-neutral terms. We can think of many examples, in clu ding broad-based anti crime and anti drug measures; literacy and educational programs; policies designed to protect child ren from poor health and from poverty, in clu ding neonatal care and childhood immunizations;152 and programs designed to discourage teen pregnancy and single-parent families. Policies of this kind could easily be designed in race- and sex-neutral terms, and such policies would be directed against many of the important problems faced by both blacks and women. 
130, 136-38 (Ellen Paul et al. eds., 1991); see also Thomas Hill, The Message of Affirmative Action, in REASSESSING CIVIL RIGHTS s,upr a, at 108. 
action are indistinguishable in principle). 
corresponding rates for whites. See Gaps in Infant Mortality Rate Still Widening Between Blacks, Whites, CHI. TRI B.,Apr. 30, 1994, at 19. 
These are some of the directions in which equality law might move in the future. It is ironic but true that a third stage of civil rights policy, directed most self-consciously against race and gender caste, might also be self-consciously designed - for reasons of policy and principle - so as to avoid race- and gender-specificity. 
CONCLUSION 
In this essay I have criticized three approaches to the problem of race and sex equality in law. Free markets can accomplish considerable good in the area of equality as everywhere else, but they are only a mixed blessing for race and sex equality. Reliance on existing preferences has related problems, at least to the extent that those preferences are an artifact of an unjust status quo. The notion that the law forbids unreasonable distinctions is purely formal. As often interpreted, the idea has substance behind it, and perhaps it is well suited to the inst itutional limits of the judiciary. But the substance is not simple to defend. It sometimes requires identical treatment in cases in which distinctions make sense, and ignores inequality when inequality is present. Sometimes the cause of equality requires people who are differently situated to be treated differently, and this is a major gap in const itutional doctrine. 
I have suggested that one of the prevailing const itutional norms ought to be an anti caste principle, one that forbids social and legal practices from turning highly visible but morally irrelevant differences into a basis for second-class citizenship. I have also sought to show realms in which a system with caste like features persists in modern American society; this is an area in which a good deal of information is indispensable. Partly for this reason, the anti caste principle is mostly for legislative rather than judicial enforcement. Cour ts lack the requisite fact-finding capacity and electoral legitimacy. But this does not mean that others, prominently in clu ding Congress, are relieved of an important and even const itutional duty, violated by widespread current practices, to eliminate the caste like features of American society. 
