Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://about.jstor.org/terms
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to
WELL-BEING AND THE STATE
Cass R. Sunstein*
Some people think that there is a deep opposition between "government intervention" and "free markets." But the opposition is too simple. No one is really opposed to "government intervention." Markets depend for their existence on law, which is necessary to establish property rights and to set out the rules governing contracts and tort. Short of anarchy, a system of legal entitlements, set by the state, is inevitable.1 If we are asking whether the state is an important part of the solution to current social problems, there can be only one answer: it had better be. But what is the relationship between the state and social well-being?
This question assumes special significance in light of the original aspiration of the American founders - to create a deliberative democracy.2 Public officials would be accountable to the citizenry at large, but they were also supposed to engage in deliberative tasks, and to profit from and to encourage deliberation among the people as a whole. Both the structure of the national government and the system of individual rights were intended to encourage public deliberation.
Things have not worked out as the Framers envisioned. One of the most serious problems is the public emphasis on issues and events that have little relevance to most people's lives. People lack accurate information about what is most important.3 In elections, for example, "soundbite politics" often replaces discussion about public issues.4 The problem affects day-to-day governance too. Instead of focusing on, for example, education and its improvement, public attention is often directed to sensational anecdotes, crude oversimplifications of issues,
or scandals about public officials' private lives. In these circumstances, we are likely to end up with misdirected policies or worse a form of government by faction, the evil most feared by the American founders.5 A high priority for those thinking about the role of the state should be to develop methods for focusing attention on things that matter to people's lives.
An important part of this task is to establish criteria by which to measure governmental performance. If broadly debated and wellpublicized, such criteria should promote democratic discussion and at the same time help to counteract the very problems to which they draw attention. To develop criteria of this kind, we need a theory of social well-being. To be helpful, the theory must be not only substantively plausible but also practical to apply. This constraint is a demanding one. The best substantive theory might well be abandoned because it is not administrable - because the underlying data cannot be compiled without great cost, because the theory does not allow comparisons among regions or over time, or because it is too unruly and complex.
In the United States, there are many measures of economic performance. But here and abroad, gross domestic product (GDP) is the most influential indicator of social well-being. When GDP is growing, it is often thought that a number of good things will happen employment will increase, poverty will go down, and people will be able to obtain a wide range of valuable things. Concentration on GDP has important political effects. It focuses media, public, and governmental attention in a distinctive way.
Part of my goal here is to show - what most economists do not deny - that GDP is an inadequate measure of social well-being, and that we lack an adequate alternative. GDP is too crudely connected to things that people should care about. To overcome the limits of GDP, I offer a simple proposal: Democratic governments should produce an annual "quality of life report," designed to measure their performance in producing good lives for their citizens. This report should be highly publicized and broadly disseminated. I also propose that the ingredients in the report are plural and diverse. They are not commensurable. Both the fact of incommensurability and the general attack on GDP have some important consequences for law.
I suggest as well that it is important to attend to the relationship between legal provisions and the various ingredients of individual and social well-being. Per capita GDP, for example, becomes more important if money is both necessary and sufficient for the acquisition of valuable things. We might ultimately be able to evaluate legal
S See, e.g., THE FEDERALIST No. IO, at 77-78 (James Madison) (Clinton Rossiter ed., I96I)
AND THE STATE I305
In the course of the discussion, I offer a great deal of data about social and economic trends within the United States. The failure to identify the empirical dimensions of legal disputes is a continuing weakness in the legal culture.6 While the facts identified by a "quality of life" report will not dispose of strictly legal debates, they do have implications for many legal controversies, especially those involving the criminal justice system, race and sex equality, and government regulation.
I. GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT
A. In General
One of the simplest measures of social and economic well-being, used internationally and by many nations, is gross domestic product (GDP). The term refers to the total quantity of goods and services produced, weighted by their respective prices.7 Goods and services that are not paid for are not included.
GDP is highly influential in international comparisons. It also plays a large role in the domestic sphere. To take a crude illustration, consider the astonishing fact that the words "gross national product"8 appeared in I6,055 major news stories in the last two years - and that the words "gross domestic product" appeared in 39,007 stories.9 It would be an absurd exaggeration to say that ordinary people frequently talk about GDP or GNP.10 But the numbers for GDP affect legislative deliberations, presidential judgments, media reports on the
state of the economy, professional recommendations, and much more. A different measure would focus attention on different things.
Certainly GDP is a useful figure, for it bears a relationship to important social goals. If we think of income as an all-purpose means - as something that people want regardless of what else they want - we might well attend to GDP. There are, however, a number of problems with relying on GDP as a measure of well-being. Some of these problems suggest that GDP is imperfect as a measure of purely economic goals. Some of them suggest that important social, rather than purely economic, variables are not reflected in GDP, though of course it is artificial to distinguish the economic and the social.1"
i. GDP and Economic Well-Being. - GDP's ability to measure economic well-being is doubtful for a number of reasons.
(a) Distributional Issues. - If income is unequally distributed, a high GDP may disguise the fact that many people are living bad or even desperate lives. For example, the United States has the highest per capita real GDP in the world. 12 But it also has a higher rate of children living in poverty - one in five - than does any other wealthy country in the world. The rate of children living in poverty is double that of the industrialized nations taken as a whole and four times that of Western Europe. 13 Nearly half of all black children in the United States live in poverty.14
(b) Excluded Goods and Services. - GDP does not include goods and services that are free, including some that are plausibly connected with economic well-being. For example, unpaid domestic labor is not a part of GDP.15 Many environmental amenities, such as clean air and water, are not reflected in GDP. The GDP figure thus fails adequately to measure either the benefits of a healthy environment or
11 See A.C. PIGOU, THE ECONOMICS OF WELFARE I2 (4th ed. I962) ("[T]here is no guarantee that the effects produced on the part of welfare that can be brought into relation with the measuring-rod of money may not be cancelled by effects of a contrary kind brought about in is wholly destroyed. . The real objection then is, not that economic welfare is a bad index of total welfare, but that an economic cause may affect non-economic welfare in ways that
12 See UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME, HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT
13 See Ray Moseley, Among Rich Nations, U.S. Has Highest Child-Poverty Rate, CHI.
15 See Luisella Goldschmidt-Clermont, Measuring Households' Non-Monetary Production, in REAL-LIFE ECONOMICS 265, 265 (Paul Ekins & Manfred Max-Neef eds., 1992) MARILYN
the costs of its degradation.16 There are other gaps in what GDP measures. It does not, for example, reflect changes in leisure time but it is clear that any increase in leisure is a gain. 17 Most generally, a serious problem with GDP is that the figure excludes all social costs and benefits that do not have prices.18
(c) Unclear Correlations with Other Important Economic Indicators. - GDP sometimes seems to be a general placeholder for a number of indicators of economic well-being. But in fact, it may not be closely correlated with some important indicators. Consider two major social goals: reduction of poverty and of unemployment. Of course GDP growth can be an important factor in counteracting both unemployment and poverty, and nothing I say here is inconsistent with this judgment. But it is also possible for GDP increases to be accompanied by increases in unemployment and hence poverty (which is closely correlated with unemployment) indeed, this phenomenon has often happened.
Economic growth is a function of productivity growth and employment growth, where productivity is understood as GDP divided by total employment. 19 Increases in productivity can contribute to an increase in GDP, possibly without increasing employment levels at all. For example, converting a plant to use industrial robots may
raise production levels while eliminating the jobs of hundreds of assembly workers. Increases in GDP may therefore fail to produce increases in employment levels. Because poverty is well correlated with unemployment, it follows too that when GDP goes up, poverty may not go down..
The following table shows changes in GDP, unemployment, and poverty from I970 to the present. GDP growth rates are generally correlated with changes in unemployment rates, particularly in especially high and especially low GDP growth years. There are, however, years in which the two figures are not correlated. For present purposes, a key point is that GDP rates are far from identical to unemployment and poverty rates. If we know what happens to GDP, we do not necessarily know what happens to unemployment and poverty.
GDP GROWTH COMPARED TO LEVELS OF UNEMPLOYMENT AND
2. GDP and Social Well-Being. - Even if GDP has some virtues as an indicator of economic welfare, it fails to capture important aspects of social well-being.
(a) Uncertain Relation to Valuable Things. - It is often thought that GDP serves as a good proxy.for valuable things. But the relationship between GDP and important social goals is far from clear.
Consider, for example, the likelihood of subjection to violent crime. Physical security is surely an important ingredient in well-being, but it is at best indirectly reflected in GDP. Consider also the fact that there is no inevitable connection between GDP and life expectancy. Some countries have a relatively low GDP but long life expectancy and low rates of infant mortality.21 Many countries have a high GDP but do poorly in promoting longevity.22 Education is an important part of a good life, whether or not educated people accumulate wealth but the association between education and GDP, while real, is crude.
Certainly we can speculate, with some plausibility, that wealthy people are less likely to commit crimes and better able to pay for education, and that high social wealth can and will be devoted to improving criminal law enforcement, life expectancy, and public health. But what has been said thus far should show that the connection between GDP and these other goods is unclear.
(b) Dependence on Legal and Social Practices. - The most basic point here is conceptual: The value of money depends on social and
legal practices determining what money can be used to buy. If certain exchanges are blocked - if money cannot be used to purchase valuable things - per capita GDP becomes less important. Wealth is less valuable when money cannot be used to buy votes or political power, or education, or marriage, or self-respect. Similarly, the value of money is reduced to the extent that it is unnecessary for someone to have money to obtain important goods. If education, health care, political power, and clean air are free, money is less valuable.23
In short, the value of money is largely a function of the legal regime. To understand the relationship between GDP and valuable things, it is necessary to understand the set of legal entitlements through which people are enabled to get, or are disabled from getting, things of importance to their lives. It might then be possible to "map" legal provisions onto the various ingredients of well-being.24
(c) Commensurability. - GDP is of course an aggregative measure, and it is aggregative in a distinctive sense.25 GDP is not simply an index of different values, created to allow ease of understanding and comparison. Instead, it measures diverse items through the same basic dimension of "value," defined by willingness to pay.
This approach assumes commensurability in the sense that it acts as if diverse goods can be assessed according to the same metric. This form of valuation seems wrong because it ignores qualitative differences among diverse social goods.26 Some things (like education and health) have intrinsic as well as instrumental value other things (like cash) are simply for use. Intrinsically valuable things are themselves valued in different ways.
The problem with GDP is that because it is aggregative, it effaces qualitative differences. For this reason it is a crude indicator of social welfare and an unpromising foundation for democratic deliberation. Suppose, for example, that we are told that if OSHA issues a certain occupational safety regulation, GDP will be reduced by o.ooi%. To
make a sensible evaluation, we need to know a great deal more. To what does this number refer? Does it include greater unemployment, higher inflation, and the scaled-back production of important goods? Does it mean more poverty? At least in principle, it would be much better to have a highly disaggregated system for assessing the qualitatively different goods at stake. People should be informed about the diverse potential effects and make judgments on the basis of an understanding of the qualitative differences. If all the relevant goods are aligned along a single metric, they become less visible, or perhaps invisible. 2 7
II. EXISTING MEASURES OF WELL-BEING
A. Current American Approaches
GDP is hardly the only indicator of social welfare. In the United States, over fifty indicators are now in use.28 The United Nations offers many more.29 A major problem with the current American approach is that the measures - offered in an endless and barely intelligible succession - lack organization and clarity.30 In this section, I describe some of the most important indicators.
The unemployment rate, announced every month, includes the number of people sixteen years of age or older who are actively seeking employment.3' It therefore excludes people who are not seeking work, even if they say that they would like a job and that they are not
seeking work because they do not believe that jobs are available for them.
The following tables show differences in employment along lines of race and sex these are significant because although overall unemployment may be low, it is good to know whether members of identifiable social groups are disproportionately out of work.32
TABLE 2 CIVILIAN UNEMPLOYMENT RATE BY DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTIC33
(Percent monthly data seasonally adjusted)
32 See supra p. I308 (showing the variation in unemployment rates over time).
33 See ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT I993, supra note 20, at 39I.
TABLE 3 CIVILIAN UNEMPLOYMENT RATE BY DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTIC34
(Percent monthly data seasonally adjusted)
The poverty level emerged from the I96I plan of the Department of Agriculture.35 Like judgments about unemployment, the judgment about who is poor is far from a simple matter of fact.36 The I96I estimate measured how much money was necessary to meet nutritional requirements, and this amount was multiplied by three to determine the total income necessary to meet all living expenses.37 Poverty thresholds have been updated every year by taking into account the consumer price index. Hence, the annual threshold for a family of four was $3I69 in I964, $ii,6ii in I987, and $I3,924 in i99i.38
The official measure of poverty does not include noncash income it therefore excludes "food stamps, Medicare and Medicaid, school lunches, and subsidized rental housing."39
Of course, there are large disparities in terms of race and sex in the percentage of persons and families living in poverty.41
The consumer price index, the most important indicator of the rate of inflation, is designed to reflect price changes for a set of goods, including housing, clothing, food and drink, medical care, entertainment, education, and tobacco products.42 Annual percentage changes show striking disparities over time:
TABLE 5 CONSUMER PRICE INDEX43 (annual percentage change)
The average weekly earnings of workers in private nonagricultural industries, calculated monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, are provided in current dollars and in constant I982 dollars.44
TABLE 6 AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS45
Income distribution is measured in terms of quintiles. Income taxes have little effect on income distribution. The following table shows changes over time with respect to income, before and after tax, in the United States:
TABLE 7 DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME: HOUSEHOLDS' SHARES46
(percent)
No official government statistics reveal the costs and benefits of government regulation. Private estimates suggest that economic regulation costs the economy about $46 billion annually, and that social regulation (principally environmental controls) costs between $78 billion and $IO7 billion.47 The benefits of economic regulation appear low, but the benefits of social regulation range between $42 billion and $i8i billion.48 No one has fully explored the effects of regulation on GDP. A I990 study suggested that between I973 and I985, the GDP growth rate fell by o.I9 percentage points as a result of environmental controls.49 This study does not, however, include the health benefits of such controls, which probably lead to productivity gains. There are significant disparities in regulatory policy, especially with respect to expenditures per life saved:
TABLE 8 COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF SELECTED REGULATIONS50
(Cost per premature death averted)
The Federal Bureau of Investigation compiles statistics showing subjection to violent crime.51 The following table reflects changes over time:
TABLE 9 SUBJECTION TO VIOLENT CRIME52
Here, then, are some of the most important indicators of social and economic well-being. It should be clear that the system for reporting and disseminating this information is quite ad hoc. There has been no democratic judgment about the ingredients of such key measures as GDP, poverty, and unemployment. There is no effort to put some or many of the indicators into a composite figure, to provide an indication of general changes over time. Nor does the government furnish reports offering a clearly accessible survey of social and economic indicators.
B. International Measures
The United Nations makes what is probably the most influential international effort to measure well-being, though there have been illuminating efforts elsewhere. I summarize several methods here. A key point is that alternative accounts often place a premium on health and education as well as per capita income.
i. Human Development Index. - The United Nations publishes an annual Human Development Report in order to facilitate comparative assessments of government performance.53
(a) Description. - The report ranks I73 countries and contains comparative information on access to health services and safe water numbers of radios, telephones, and televisions levels of child immunization and malnutrition public expenditures on education malefemale wage gaps levels of homicide, rape, and drug crimes population per doctor numbers of new AIDS cases population growth energy consumption pollution levels and much more.
The United Nations approach places particular emphasis on a "human development index" (HDI). This figure is calculated on the basis of longevity, knowledge, and income.54 "Longevity" is determined on the basis of life expectancy at birth.55 "Knowledge" is calculated by a formula based on adult literacy and mean years of schooling, with literacy weighted twice as heavily as mean years of schooling.56 To take account of the diminishing value of income, the "income" ingredient is based on an adjustment of per capita GDP.57 The UN measurement weighs the three variables equally. What follows is the ranking of the first twelve countries in the latest report:
The HDI compiles much valuable information and presents it in a revealing way. For instance, the United States ranks first in both per capita GDP and adjusted real GDP it also ranks first in mean years of schooling and in overall educational attainment. But it ranks
57 See HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I990, supra note 2i, at I2. 58 See HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I993, supra note I2, at I35, tbl. i.
sixth overall. The reason is that life expectancy at birth stands at 75.9 years, for a ranking along that dimension of sixteenth.
The UN report demonstrates that there is no necessary connection between GDP and employment levels.59 Moreover, the performance of some countries appears to be quite variable over time. Notably, the literacy rate in the United States increased from a comparatively low 96% in I985 to a very high 99% in i9go.60
An intriguing question concerns the precise relationship among the HDI's three variables of longevity, knowledge, and income. Some countries with relatively high income ranks (including Algeria, Namibia, and South Africa) have relatively low HDI ranks.61 Other countries have HDI ranks that are well above their income ranks (including China, Colombia, and Uruguay).62
A key issue is whether significant variations exist among groups within each country. In the United States, for example, whites, standing alone, rank above Japan in HDI if American whites lived alone in their own country, it would rank first in the world.63 By contrast, African-Americans rank 3ist, and Hispanics 35th.64 In addition, no nation's HDI improves after being adjusted for sex inequalities, which indicates that no nation provides as good lives for women as it does for men.65 But there are important variations. For example, women's wages are 88% of men's in France and 85% in Norway, but only 5I% in Japan and 59% in the United States.66
Many other questions involve comparative data not directly reflected in the HDI's three principal variables. Between I980 and i986, for example, there were only 3I drug crimes per ioo,ooo people per year in Japan, 25 in Israel, and 38 in the Netherlands, compared with 225 in Canada, 234 in the United States, and 403 in Australia.67 The reported rape rate in the United States is by far the highest - i i 8 per ioo,ooo women between I5 and 59.68 In Japan, the rate is only 5 per ioo,ooo, and in many countries it is somewhere between i8 and
35.69 The United States also has the highest homicide rate, at 8 per IOO,OOO, compared with I.5 for Japan and Sweden and somewhere between 2 and 3 for Canada, Switzerland, Australia, Finland, Austria, and New Zealand.70 It should not be surprising that the United States has the highest rate of prisoners, 426 per ioo,ooo, compared with 94 in Canada, 54 in Switzerland, and 77 in the United Kingdom and in Germany.7 1
(b) Difficulties. - The HDI approach has important limitations. Any "index" will be controversial, and the equal weighting of the three variables seems somewhat arbitrary. In any case, the three variables are interrelated. Income can "buy" good educational attainment and also longevity people who are poor tend to live shorter lives. So too, people who are in good health and who are well-educated have a better chance to make money. The use of the three variables is controversial partly because of these complex interrelations.72
The HDI is also insensitive to ethnic, racial, sex and regional differences. If, for example, there are important differences between men and women, people should know about this fact.73 It is also possible for a country with a high HDI score to have a number of people concentrated toward the bottom of the economic ladder and facing desperate conditions.
2. Alternatives. - Other nations, especially those in Scandinavia, have implemented interesting alternatives to HDI. The Swedish assessment of "standard of living" is more disaggregated and less mathematical than the UN approach. The assessment takes account of health and access to health care education and skills housing security of life and property (including freedom from crime) availability of recreation and cultural resources employment income and wealth and political participation.74 Of special interest is the Swedish rejection of unitary measures of well-being, and the insistence that wellbeing is not to be measured in purely subjective terms.75 A key point
here is that people may adjust their expectations in light of a status quo characterized by deprivation and injustice, and for this reason it is important to see what people can have or become, not merely what they think about their situation.
Another interesting alternative is a comparative survey of Scandinavian countries, initiated by the University of Helsinki.76 In addition to the Swedish factors, the Finnish approach emphasizes the quality of the biological and physical environment, including air and water pollution the nature of relations with other people in the local community, in the family, and within the workplace and opportunities to enjoy nature. 7 7 The comparative survey is intended to include both objective and subjective indicators of welfare.
In the same vein, UNICEF lists a wide range of basic indicators, without attempting to aggregate them. These include male and female adult literacy rates life expectancy at birth income shares of the lowest 40% and the highest 20% of the population GDP per capita and infant mortality.78 The Netherlands identifies sixteen variables involving quality of life: three each involving housing, health, spending power, leisure, and employment, combined with a single variable for education. 79 There is also an effort to combine these statistics into an aggregate number showing changes over time for different groups in the population.80 An organization in Washington, D.C. attempts to measure human suffering through a scale that takes account of income, inflation, infant mortality, nutrition, access to clean water, literacy, and personal freedom.81 Similar aggregative and separate statistics might be offered for human rights violations.82
III. POLITICS, WELL-BEING, AND QUALITY OF LIFE
All this has implications for law and policy. A high priority for both domestic and international agencies should be to compile accurate information about quality of life, to allow comparisons across time
and space, and to ensure that the relevant reports are widely disseminated.
The American government should compile an annual "quality of life" report. I cannot give a full account of the appropriate ingredients of such a report. But it seems clear that the report should include, among other things, per capita income, poverty, housing, unemployment, average weekly earnings, inflation, child mortality, longevity, subjection to violent crime, literacy, and educational attainment. The report should also specify minimum standards for such things as income, education, health, and housing. The report should allow for comparison across regions, between men and women, and among different racial and ethnic groups.
These comparisons may spur healthy competition to do well along dimensions that count. If a state knows that it ranks forty-second in, say, unemployment, there will be both local and national pressure to make things better. If a state has an especially high level of violent crime, perhaps priorities can be changed to redress the problem. And if women are doing much worse than men, or blacks much worse than whites, the public can see this fact and perhaps take corrective action.
The quality of life report should be widely disseminated to the public and, in particular, to the news media. Strong evidence indicates that the media can play a large role in counteracting social problems by focusing public and private attention and by giving government the incentives to respond.83 Instead of attending to anecdotes and sensational scandals - or offering statements about supposed trends - the news media should focus on the quality of life report and thus allow debate to be based on actual evidence. The report may well have an especially important role during elections, but it could affect deliberation and policymaking more broadly as well.
A quality of life report of the kind proposed here could produce two distinct benefits. First, the report may well have desirable social consequences by facilitating priority-setting, imposing appropriate incentives on governmental officials, and fueling public interest in redressing serious problems. Accurate and widely disseminated information can be an important check on governmental failure to redress such problems.84 Consider the striking fact that in modern times, no
country with an active, free, and democratic press appears to have suffered from famine.85
Second, the very process of compiling a quality of life report would have advantages. We have seen that any conception of what matters is a product of judgments that may be controversial. Human needs have a great deal to do with the facts - do people have jobs? do they have food or housing? - but they are not simply facts. Any conception of needs is a product of human judgments about what matters. Consider, for example, the very definitions of poverty and unemployment, or the decision whether to include comparative data about groups defined in racial, ethnic, and religious terms. The public understanding of social problems should itself be a product, at least in part, of a good process of social deliberation about how needs are best characterized.86 By using GDP as the central indicator of social welfare while publishing a wide array of unorganized and somewhat random indicators, the current system offers no such educational benefits.
To say all this is not to suggest that such a report would be simple, or that it would not create risks. But most of the information is now compiled and available somewhere its systematic presentation and dissemination should not be costly. There is of course a risk of error and bias, especially in view of the fact that the fortunes of an incumbent administration may depend on what emerges. Government manipulation of official statistics is hardly foreign to American experience. At the same time, many government agencies have established a reputation for objectivity, and there is no reason to believe that (for example) the statistics relating to literacy, infant mortality, and poverty levels reflect substantial bias.
To be sure, people have limited information-processing capacities, and these can lead to systematic errors through the use of bad heuristics. Some release of information can actually make things worse. But to some extent the confusion is a result of what has been made public, and careful presentation of the data should help overcome some of the faulty heuristics. One of the most common heuristics, for example, is that of "availability."87 People seem to think that events are more probable if an occurrence can easily be brought to mind.
Some of this effect might be counteracted by a report that catalogues a range of events, that allows comparisons, and that shows changes over time. The very need to compile the data would also give desirable incentives to government officials.88
I have suggested that both personal and social well-being are in important respects a product of law that is, they are a function of the things to which the law gives people access. The law can give such access in many ways. It may provide guarantees of certain goods (such as housing, food, medical care) it may allow people to sell their labor it may permit people to own certain things that they produce or inherit and it may say that people can freely exchange some, but not all, of what they own. People's entitlements are a function of law, and it is their entitlements that enable them to obtain much of what provides for their well-being. We lack a systematic account of the relationship between legal entitlements and the components of well-being.
These points have general implications. A homeless person, for example, is deprived of shelter in important part through the law if he tries to sleep in a place with a roof, the law will call him a trespasser and subject him to civil and criminal penalties.89 Whether someone has access to medical care depends on the bundle of legal rights that have been conferred. Property rights as we know them are not brute or natural facts, but a product of laws granting and conditioning entitlements of different kinds.90 It should ultimately be possible to link various coniponents of well-being to different legal permissions and requirements. We could begin to connect deprivations and benefits of various sorts with a range of legal provisions. A quality of life report would help initiate this endeavor.
Of course, no report can substitute for actual reform. What matters is what is done, not what is said. But in some contexts, what is done is a function of what is said. In the area of risk regulation, for example, there is evidence that disclosure of information can be an important regulatory tool, prompting corrective action by employers, employees, and governments generally.91 In any case, both citizens
