 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Cass R. Sunstein* It is sometimes suggested that there is a sharp opposition between "liberty" and "equality."' If the law forbids racial discrimination in employment, it may promote equality, but perhaps it will simultaneously interfere with liberty. If the law requires wealthy people to transfer some of their income to poor people, it may promote equality, but it may also undermine liberty. If a health care program ensures universal access to health care, it may promote equality, but it could also raise serious doubts from the standpoint of liberty. The tension between liberty and equality often appears deep, and it plays a large role in American political and legal thought. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. - Ed. This essay develops some ideas contained elsewhere. See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, THE PARTIAL CONSTITUTION 338-46 (1993). The essay greatly benefited from comments by Akhil Amar, Martha Minow, and others at a conference on equal citizenship held at Brown University in March 1994. I am also grateful for very helpful suggestions from Richard Epstein, Jane Mansbridge, and Susan Moller Okin. upon which I draw here. The Anticaste Principle trial before an independent judge. It could entail social respect for the outcomes of processes in which citizens pursue their various conceptions of the good, given market forces, existing common law rules, existing preferences, and existing distributions of wealth. The term liberty could refer to a system that ensures autonomy in the formation of preferences and beliefs by providing a decent education for all and by counteracting unjust background conditions. It could refer to much more. We can readily see that some conceptions of equality are quite compatible with some conceptions of liberty. For example, libertarians, who may appear to oppose equality, insist on equality of an important kind; they want to ensure that all citizens have an equal right to pursue their own ends.2 An understanding of equality lies at the heart of the libertarian creed. Freedom from desperate conditions, often treated as an egalitarian idea, is an understanding of liberty as well. Those who emphasize autonomy in the formation of preferences are speaking of both equality and liberty; they want to ensure that unjustified inequalities do not limit the free development of individual personality. In these circumstances, it is important to be quite careful before seeing any tension between equality and liberty. Tension exists only when we specify conceptions of these broad terms that cannot peacefully coexist. Perhaps such incompatible conceptions cannot be defended. Perhaps the best conceptions of equality are entirely compatible with the best understandings of liberty. 2. See id. at 22 (arguing that libertarians "insist[ ] on equal immunity from interference by LAW ? 16-21 (2d ed. 1988), and Owen M. Fiss, Groups and the Equal Protection Clause, 5 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 107. 147-70 (1976). There are, however, important differences between these approaches and what I defend here, partly because of my understanding of the equality principle, and partly because I suggest that the principle is for legislative rather than judicial enforcement. Many such differences will emerge in the course of the discussion. Michigan Law Review from a moral point of view. This form of inequality is likely to be unusually persistent and to extend into multiple social spheres, indeed into the interstices of everyday life. I emphasize the anticaste principle, not because it exhausts the concept of equality, but because it captures an understanding that has strong roots in American legal traditions, has considerable independent appeal, is violated in many important parts of American life, and fits well with the best understandings of liberty. In other words, the anticaste principle is an important and perhaps insufficiently appreciated part of the lawyer's conception of equality under the American Constitution.6 In describing the anticaste principle, I also offer some information about racial and gender disparities in the United States. I do so because it is hard to have a sense of the world of discrimination without having a good sense of the data. Legal discussions about equality are too often and too exclusively conceptual, attempting to offer perspicuous descriptions of discrimination or inequality without a sufficient discussion of the facts that underlie either the problem or the solutions.7 I will not offer much detail about solutions here, but I do hope that my presentation of information about existing inequalities will help to illuminate the problem. 4. In this way it is similar to most constitutional rights, which serve a number of functions. 5. Some are discussed in SUNSTEIN, supra note *, at 123-61. 6. Although this is a lawyer's conception, it is mostly for nonjudicial enforcement. See infra section II.B.2. The Anticaste Principle story. A set of amendments originally designed at least in part to eliminate social caste eventually became a requirement that legislation be reasonably related to legitimate state interests - a requirement whose original home was the Due Process Clause.8 The transformation makes some sense if we think about the limited capacities of the judiciary. Taken seriously, a full-blown anticaste principle is beyond judicial competence. But if the Constitution speaks to nonjudicial actors as well, the broad commitments of the Fourteenth Amendment have a different meaning outside the courtroom. It is possible, in short, to insist on the continuing importance of one of the great unused provisions of the Constitution, Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment: "The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article."9 In this Part, I discuss three understandings of the equality principle. All three have played a major role in public and sometimes legal debate. The first stresses the advantages of free markets. The second relies on respect for existing preferences. The third and most important sees the equality principle as a ban on unreasonable distinctions between social groups. As we will see, the difficulties with each of these understandings help lay the foundation for the anticaste principle. In light of the extraordinary recent outburst of international enthusiasm for free markets, it should not be surprising to find a resurgence of the view that all invidious discrimination on the basis of race and sex will be eliminated by laissez faire.10 On this view, the appropriate approach for law would be to eliminate constraints on market ordering and to rely solely on property rights, voluntary arrangements, and freedom of contract to produce equality. Michigan Law Review In many ways, free markets are indeed connected with equality on the basis of race and sex. Legal barriers to female and black employment are a form of government intervention in the market, and they have often been an effective and severe hindrance to equality. Antifemale and antiblack cartels, especially when government-sponsored, can drive down both wages and employment for women and blacks. In a free market, by contrast, all people should succeed to the extent that they are able to perform their respective functions - as employers, employees, co-workers, and customers. It is unnecessary to stress that women and blacks often perform as well as or better than men and whites. Once discriminatory laws are eliminated, free markets may therefore accomplish a great deal in breaking down a system of inequality. In South Africa, for example, it is most doubtful that the system of apartheid could have survived under free markets. Too many employers would have found it desirable to hire blacks; too many companies would have found it in their economic interest to serve people on a nondiscriminatory basis. 11. A more detailed discussion, with citations, can be found in Cass R. Sunstein, Why The Anticaste Principle treat men and women, or blacks and whites, equally.12 Customers, co-workers, and others sometimes withdraw patronage and services from nondiscriminatory employers. For example, a law firm that hires female lawyers might find itself punished in the marketplace. A grocery store that hires blacks might find it harder to attract customers. Under these circumstances, market pressures do not check discrimination but instead increase the likelihood that it will continue. Ironically, the failure to discriminate operates as a tax on the employer's business, rather than vice versa. A nondiscriminator could face the equivalent of a self-imposed tax by virtue of coworker or customer reactions. Of course, third parties do not have uniform preferences. Many and perhaps most whites and men are not discriminators. In any case third-party preferences are sharply divided, and for this reason we should expect a wide range of diverse views and practices, each gaining and losing influence in different times and places.15 My point is only that in some important sectors, and for important lengths of time, the existence of third-party discrimination can en 12. See GEORGE A. AKERLOF, The economics of the caste and of the rat race and other Michigan Law Review sure that inequality persists even in free markets. The extent of the effect is of course an empirical question. 16. See Edmund S. Phelps, The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism, 62 AM. ECON. The Anticaste Principle more accurate and reasonably cheap classifying devices are available, or, in other words, when there is a more efficient classifying device. Statistical discrimination is quite different. It occurs when the generalization, though inaccurate, is less costly to use than any subclassifying device, even though subclassifications would be more accurate in particular cases. Under plausible assumptions about the cost of acquiring information, statistical discrimination might well be efficient. 18. See SUSAN M. OKIN, JUSTICE, GENDER, AND THE FAMILY 110-33 (1989) (arguing that the family as currently constituted "raises psychological as well as practical barriers against women in all other spheres"). Michigan Law Review tion shows that the law does not just forbid irrational bigotry or prejudice. Instead, the most elementary antidiscrimination principle singles out one kind of economically rational stereotyping and condemns it, on the theory that such stereotyping has the harmful long-term consequence of perpetuating group-based inequalities. Along this dimension, the distinction between affirmative action and antidiscrimination is thin in principle.19 It is thin because the law does not only ban discrimination rooted in prejudice or hostility; it also bans discrimination in the form of statistical generalizations of the sort that employers, customers, and others rely on all the time. The ban on statistical discrimination is based on many of the reasons that support affirmative action. I do not contend that the two are the same thing. 19. See David A. Strauss, The Myth of Colorblindness, 1986 SUP. CT. REV. 99 (arguing that insistence on nondiscrimination in fact amounts to affirmative action when racial classifications are accurate). The Anticaste Principle Of course the same would be true in the racial context. If law firms are less likely to hire blacks than whites, blacks will, other things being equal, be less inclined than whites to go to law school. If shops are less likely to hire blacks than whites, blacks will be less likely than whites to acquire the skills necessary to work in shops. In every sector of the market that contains discrimination, the behavior of prospective black employees will be affected, in the sense that blacks will scale back their investments in acquiring the requisite training and skills. I turn now to an influential claim about the relationship between discrimination and law. The claim is that the legal system should take preferences as a given rather than attempt to alter 21. Of course women and blacks have sometimes invested a large amount to overcome discrimination, and of course I am describing possibilities, not certainties. To see the effects of free markets on race and sex equality, a good deal of empirical data is necessary. which reliance on free markets does not itself provide. Michigan Law Review them. This claim seems especially important for sex equality, though it bears on race equality as well. In many different nations, and in some places in the United States, women frequently say that they are content with the sexual status quo. Legal efforts might therefore be thought to represent an unacceptable form of paternalism. If women themselves are content, on what basis can the legal system intervene? Is not legal intervention an illegitimate interference with the right to liberty or autonomy? Thus some people suggest, for example, that abortion cannot possibly raise problems of sex equality because many women are opposed to abortion.23 These questions raise some complex issues; I deal with them only briefly here.24 The basic response is that a social or legal system that has produced preferences, and has done so by limiting opportunities unjustly, can hardly justify itself by reference to existing preferences. The satisfaction of private preferences, whatever their content and origins, does not respond to a persuasive conception of liberty, welfare, or autonomy. The notion of autonomy should refer instead to decisions reached with a full and vivid awareness of available opportunities, with relevant information, and without illegitimate or excessive constraints on the process of preference formation. When there is inadequate information or opportunity, decisions and even preferences should be described as unfree or nonautonomous. 23. See, e.g., Michael W. McConnell, How Not To Promote Serious Deliberation About The Anticaste Principle allows her no alternative."27 Mill makes the same points in his work on sex equality.28 Amartya Sen offers an especially vivid real-world example from India. In 1944, the All-India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health surveyed widows and widowers about their health. About 48.5% of the widowers said that they were "ill" or in "indifferent" health, while only 2.5% of widows gave the same response.29 In these circumstances it would seem odd to base health policy on subjectively held views about health conditions. Such an approach would ensure that existing discrimination would be severely aggravated. (writing against the claim that the existing desires of women are a product of consent). perceptions). Michigan Law Review promising foundation for antidiscrimination policy to the extent that such preferences can be shown to be a product of unjust background conditions. Much of equality law has proceeded by asking whether similarly situated people have been treated differently. On this view, blacks can be treated differently from whites only when they are different from whites; the same is true of differential treatment between women and men. At least implicitly, legal doctrines in the area of discrimination allow differences in treatment when people really are different and ban differences in treatment when people really are the same.31 It will readily appear that the notion that the similarly situated must be treated similarly is purely formal. To become workable, that notion requires a substantive theory explaining what sorts of similarities and differences are relevant. Blacks and whites, for example, are differently situated along many dimensions; so too are women and men. The government could not justify a racially discriminatory law enforcement policy on the ground that blacks are disproportionately involved in crime, even if such a policy could be justified by reference to actual racial differences with respect to participation in crime. What is necessary is a theory to explain when differences will be treated as relevant. By itself the "similarly situated" test cannot supply that theory. From this we might conclude that the problem with the theory is that it is empty, not that it is wrong.32 As a reaction to the "similarly situated" test in the abstract, this conclusion seems right. But from Supreme Court jurisprudence over the last few decades, we can construct a general understanding 31. See, e.g., Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 57, 78 (1981) (upholding men-only draft registration on the grounds that "[m]en and women, because of the combat restrictions on women, are simply not similarly situated for purposes of a draft"); Michael M. v. Superior Court, 450 U.S. 464, 476 (1981) (plurality opinion) (upholding a statutory rape law applying only to underage females because "the statute ... reasonably reflects the fact that the consequences of sexual intercourse and pregnancy fall more heavily on the female than the male"); Califano v. Webster, 430 U.S. 313, 317-18 (1977) (upholding a statute that treated men and women differently with respect to social security benefits because Congress acted to compensate women for past employment discrimination); Califano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199, 216-17 (1977) (plurality opinion) (striking down a statute that treated men and women differently with respect to social security benefits in part because Congress did not enact the scheme "to remedy the arguably greater needs of women"). The Anticaste Principle of what the test means, and this understanding is not merely formal. On that understanding, blacks must be treated the same as whites to the extent that they are the same as whites; women must be treated the same as men to the extent that they are the same as men. But these ideas also seem unhelpful. To what extent are blacks the same as whites, and to what extent are women the same as men? The law has answered this question largely by saying that blacks and whites should almost always be taken to be the same, and that women should be taken to be the same as men unless there is (i) a physical difference associated with reproduction,33 (ii) a legally constructed difference not itself in dispute,34 or (iii) a difference closely associated with past discrimination for which the law in dispute operates as a remedy or compensation.35 In all other cases, distinctions based on race and gender should be struck down as irrational, as stereotypical, or as based on hostility and prejudice.36 It follows that the law operates as a ban on formal inequality of the sort that prohibits most explicit distinctions between men and women or blacks and whites. Michigan Law Review to encourage people to think in terms of race and gender, and a broad prohibition on laws containing such inequalities therefore has a desirable educative or expressive effect. These considerations might form the basis for a justification of the Supreme Court's current equality jurisprudence, casting it as reasonable in principle and sensibly adapted to the courts' modest role. But there is a problem with this project. It is not at all simple to come up with a sensible theory of equality that would map onto, or adequately account for, the existing approach. On what possible theory would the Constitution ban all explicit race and sex distinctions and allow all other laws to stand? There are two problems here. The Anticaste Principle justified during child custody proceedings; perhaps alimony determinations should be required to consider domestic work, which is closely correlated with gender.41 Alternatively, some laws raise equality concerns even if they do not violate formal equality. Consider a law that forbids pregnant women from appearing in public. Perhaps no man can be similarly situated to a pregnant woman, and perhaps there is no problem, from the standpoint of formal equality, in these circumstances. But from the standpoint of sex equality, does this make any sense? Surely problems of inequality are raised by a law that penalizes a physical capacity limited to one gender.42 Or suppose that the law forbids women from having an abortion, or excludes pregnancy from a disability program. Under current constitutional law, there is apparently no issue of sex discrimination.43 Men cannot get pregnant; women and men are to that extent not similarly situated. A law that restricts abortion or excludes pregnancy therefore raises no equality problem. But this is an odd way to think about equality. If the law takes a characteristic limited to one group of citizens and turns that characteristic into a source of social disadvantage, it may well violate the equality principle, best conceived.44 Let us push this argument further. Sometimes equality requires the similarly situated to be treated similarly. But sometimes people who are differently situated ought to be treated differently, precisely in the interest of equality.45 In the area of disabilities, for example, the use of stairs denies equality to people who are bound to wheelchairs, and the use of oral communication creates a problem for people who cannot hear. Legislative changes have often been based on an understanding that people who are different must cessitate inequality in another area). Michigan Law Review be treated differently if they are to be treated equally.46 Of course, the expense of the adaptation is relevant to the question of what, exactly, ought to be done. But constitutional doctrine has rarely recognized that differences in people's situations might justify a claim for differential treatment in the interest of equality. This conclusion is probably too blunt. It is hard to measure the real-world effects of Supreme Court decisions, and the ban on unequal treatment by government may well have made an important difference for many women, even if it is hard for social scientists to tie real-world changes to judicial decisions. A degree of agnosticism makes good sense here. But it is highly revealing that the requirement of formal equality cannot be easily associated with largescale changes in the social welfare of women. The Anticaste Principle Ironically, some existing inequalities may be partly a product of contemporary equality law. After divorce, women's economic welfare goes sharply down, whereas men's goes sharply up.53 Legal rules, not nature, assure this result by generally refusing to take account of domestic contributions and by refusing to regard the husband's success in the employment market as a joint asset. The relevant rules might well be subject to legal attack. quences of structural discrimination in the social security system). Michigan Law Review are not similarly situated to men.57 But existing law stops short insofar as it does not allow attacks on discriminatory but facially neutral practices based on an unequal status quo.58 An analogy may be helpful here. The problems faced by disabled people are not a function of disability "alone" (an almost impenetrable idea - what would current disabilities even mean in a different world?) but are instead the result of the interaction between physical and mental capacities on the one hand and a set of human obstacles made by and for the able-bodied on the other. It is those human obstacles, rather than the capacities taken as brute facts, that create a large part of what it means to be disabled. One could not defend, for example, the construction of a building with stairs and without means of access for those on wheelchairs on the ground that those who need wheelchairs are different. The question is whether it is acceptable, or just, to construct a building that excludes people who need an unusual means of entry. That question may not be a simple one, but it cannot be answered simply by pointing to a difference. A. Definition I suggest that in American constitutional law, an important equality principle stems from opposition to caste. This principle grows out of the original rejection of the monarchical legacy59 and (1992) (discussing consequences of the attack on monarchical heritage). The Anticaste Principle the explicit constitutional ban on titles of nobility.60 The principle was fueled by the Civil War Amendments and the New Deal. The opposition should be understood as an effort to eliminate, in places large and small, the caste system rooted in race and gender. A law is therefore objectionable on grounds of equality if it contributes to such a caste system. The controlling principle is that no group may be made into second-class citizens. Instead of asking "Are blacks or women similarly situated to whites or men, and if so have they been treated differently?" we should ask "Does the law or practice in question contribute to the maintenance of second-class citizenship, or lower-caste status, for blacks or women?" I do not suggest that the caste features of current American practices are at all the same, in nature or extent, as those features of genuine caste societies. I do not suggest that dictionary definitions of caste, or caste systems as understood in, say, India, lead to the simple conclusion that there are major caste characteristics to modern American society. Certainly it is true that blacks and women have risen to most of the highest reaches of American society; certainly it is true that the most conspicuous legal barriers have fallen; and these phenomena, along with many others, suggest that we do not have anything like a genuine caste system. But the similarities between true caste systems and existing American inequalities are what make our current practices a reason for collective concern. that with respect Michigan Law Review In the areas of race and sex discrimination, a large part of the problem is this sort of systemic disadvantage. A social or biological difference has the effect of systematically subordinating members of the relevant group - not because of nature, but because of social and legal practices. This phenomenon occurs in multiple spheres and along multiple indices of social welfare: poverty, education, political power, employment, susceptibility to violence and crime, distribution of labor within the family, and so forth. My emphasis on these variables should make clear that I am not stressing economic factors alone, though these are indeed important. I am instead suggesting reference to a broad and eclectic set of social indicators. Systematic differences of this kind help produce frequent injuries to self-respect the time-honored constitutional notion of "stigma." A particular concern is that self-respect and its social bases ought not to be distributed along the lines of race and gender.67 When someone is a member of a group that is systematically subordinate to others, and when the group characteristic is highly visible, insults to self-respect are likely to occur nearly every day. An important aspect of a system of caste is that social practices produce a range of obstacles to the development of self-respect, largely because of the presence of the highly visible but morally irrelevant characteristic that gives rise to lower-caste status. Of course the law cannot provide self-respect, at least not in any simple or direct way. But group membership tends to fuel the cycle of discrimination dis is emphasized The Anticaste Principle cussed in Part I, in which employers rely on statistical discrimination, group members adjust their aspirations to this reliance, statistical discrimination becomes all the more rational, and so on.68 That is the caste system to which the legal system must respond. The system can operate largely because of the high visibility of the group characteristic. 68. See supra text accompanying notes 20-21. 69. Thus Thomas Jefferson wrote: I am conscious that an equal division of property is impracticable. But the consequences of this enormous inequality producing so much misery to the bulk of mankind, legislators cannot invent too many devices for subdividing property, only taking care to let their subdivisions go hand in hand with the natural affections of the human mind.... Another means of silently lessening the inequality of property is to exempt all from taxation below a certain point, and to tax the higher portions of property in geometrical progression as they rise. Whenever there is in any country, uncultivated lands and unemployed poor, it is clear that the laws of property have been so far extended as to violate the natural right. The earth is given as a common stock for man to labour and live on. Michigan Law Review every woman - may well be subject, some of the time, to a distinctive stigma by virtue of group membership. That stigma is part of what it means to be a member of a lower caste. 70. See Jane Mansbridge, Equal Citizenship in Everyday Life, Presentation to the Conference on Equal Protection and its Critics at Brown University (Mar. 11-12,1994) (unpublished manuscript, on file with author) (discussing daily effects of inequality). The Anticaste Principle morally irrelevant but invisible characteristic74 can raise important equality concerns as well.75 Under the principle I am describing, a history of discrimination is not a necessary condition for status as a lower caste, though in practice such a history is highly probable. No group is likely to become second class in the sense used here unless it has been subject to past discrimination. The discrimination may take the form of legal and social practices that are not discriminatory on their face but that translate certain characteristics into a systemic basis for disadvantage.76 If social and legal practices have that consequence, we have a system with castelike features and a legal response is appropriate even though the absence of intentional discrimination may make the call for response less insistent. The anticaste principle leaves many ambiguities. What is the set of morally irrelevant differences? What does it mean to say that such differences may be turned into disadvantages if the state has good reasons for doing so? And who will be doing the remedial work? The initial point is that whether it is permissible to invoke a morally irrelevant difference is determined by the context.77 As a general rule skin color should be taken to be morally irrelevant, but for some people it may be made relevant to private life, as in the selection of intimate friends; gender may play a large role in many 74. This may well be true of homosexuality. Under my definition, homosexuals do not constitute a lower caste, though discrimination against them may be illegitimate and though the caste system based on gender may lie behind discrimination based on sexual orientation. See Andrew Koppelman, Why Discrimination Against Lesbians and Gay Men Is Sex Discrimination, 69 N.Y.U. L. REV. (forthcoming May 1994) (arguing that discrimination based on sexual orientation is a form of sex discrimination). nying text. Michigan Law Review private choices, as in the selection of dancing partners. When I speak of the impermissibility of turning morally irrelevant factors into a systematic source of social disadvantage, I do not mean to deny that in many settings morally irrelevant factors may well be used. But even this point leaves numerous open questions. We do not have anything like a full account of what sorts of differences are relevant to legitimate official judgments. Can such an account be provided here? For lawyers, at least, many of the political and moral complexities can be bracketed. Perhaps those involved in the legal system can build on the general understanding that race and gender are irrelevant from the moral point of view without making complex and perhaps sectarian claims about moral relevance in general. Indeed, one happy feature of legal thinking is that participants in legal disputes can often bracket large-scale claims about the right and the good and build incompletely theorized agreements about particular issues.78 There is general public or judicial agreement that race and sex are morally irrelevant in the sense that the distribution of social benefits and burdens ought not to depend on skin color or gender. This agreement is founded on good reasons, because both of these are accidents of birth, because accidents of birth should not produce second-class citizenship, and because it is hard to imagine an account that would justify lesser benefits or greater burdens by reference to these particular accidents.79 To say this is not to say that social roles must have nothing to do with gender; many people think that roles and gender cannot be entirely separated. But it is to say that social disadvantage cannot be justified by reference to race or sex alone, and that point is sufficient for my purposes here. Nor, for lawyers, is the notion of moral irrelevance a new one. The anticaste principle has distinctive historical roots. Recall that the Constitution forbids titles of nobility and that an important part of the founding creed involved the rejection of the monarchical heritage, largely on the ground that monarchy made caste distinctions The Anticaste Principle among fundamentally equal human beings.80 The Civil War Amendments were rooted in a judgment about the moral irrelevance of race, formerly taken to be relevant because of nature. In the aftermath of the American Civil War a high U.S. official stated, "God himself has set His seal of distinctive difference between the two races, and no human legislation can overrule the Divine decree."81 In the same period, antidiscrimination law was challenged squarely on the ground that it put the two races in "unnatural relation" to each other.82 The Civil War Amendments were based on a wholesale rejection of the supposed naturalness of racial hierarchy. The hierarchy was thought to be a function not of natural difference but of law, most notably the law of slavery and the various measures that grew up in the aftermath of abolition. An important purpose of the Civil War Amendments was the attack on racial caste.83 Thus Senator Howard explained that the purpose of the Fourteenth Amendment was to "abolish[] all class legislation in the States and [do] away with the injustice of subjecting one caste of persons to a code not applicable to another."84 The defining case of the Black Codes, placing special disabilities on the freedmen's legal capacities, exemplified the concern with caste legislation.85 Thus Justice Harlan, dissenting in Plessy v. Perguson,86 wrote one of the greatest sentences in American law: "There is no caste here."87 Contemporary understandings of sex inequality build on this basic idea.88 I do not contend that the anticaste principle, as I describe it here, can be understood as a mechanical reflection of pre- and postCivil War aspirations. The ratifiers did believe that caste or class legislation was forbidden; but they did not fully unpack the category. They understood that legislation always made distinctions 80. See WOOD, supra note 59, at 254-61 (arguing that although the Federalists and the anti-Federalists disagreed as to how privileged the government leaders needed to be, both opposed monarchical hierarchy based on heredity alone). Michigan Law Review among persons, and they thought the category of caste or class legislation was a small subset of legislation, involving illegitimate grounds for differential treatment. In seeing what counted as illegitimate grounds, they looked not to theory but to slavery and the Black Codes as defining illustrations. So far there is considerable overlap between an important strand in the Civil War period and what I am urging here. But the Civil War Amendments were targeted at caste legislation, that is, at specific laws that embodied discrimination and in this way helped to create caste. This is what Justice Harlan had in mind in Plessy. There was no general understanding that these amendments imposed on government a general duty to remove caste status or banned nondiscriminatory laws that contributed to caste status - even if it was understood that Congress would have the power to counteract the legacy of slavery with affirmative legislation.89 The anticaste principle as I understand it here is more ambitious. It is not directed merely at caste legislation but more generally at a social status quo that, through historical and current practices, creates second-class status. We can understand this principle as emphasizing legislative rather than judicial duties and as reading the Civil War Amendments through the lens of the New Deal, which reflected an understanding that social practices are often a creation of law, at least in part, and that government is legitimately made responsible for practices that produce social evils, including pervasive deprivation.90 Reading the Civil War Amendments through the lens of the New Deal,91 we might see a constitutional problem not only with particular caste legislation but with lower-caste status in general. 89. See generally Eric Schnapper, Affirmative Action and the Legislative History of the The Anticaste Principle irrelevance involves a lack of connection to either entitlement or desert, we might think that a wide range of differences among people are indeed morally arbitrary, in the sense that such differences do not by themselves justify more resources or greater welfare. In a market economy, those morally irrelevant differences are quite frequently translated into social disadvantages. Consider educational background, intelligence, physical strength, and existing supply and demand curves for various products and services. Certainly someone does not deserve more goods and services merely by virtue of the fact that many people want what he is able to provide. Consider an especially fast run from one side of a tennis court to another, or a book about a murder that is especially entertaining to read. For good instrumental reasons, including the production of desired commodities, we may well want to reward people who can provide widely valued goods; but the relationship between that talent and desert or entitlement is obscure. strength, intelligence, and educational background - affect resources and welfare, and most of these factors are arbitrary from the moral point of view. Is someone really entitled to more money because he was born into a family that stressed education, or because of his intelligence, or because he happened to produce a commodity that many people like? Markets do reward qualities that are irrelevant from a moral point of view. But it would be difficult indeed to justify a principle that would attempt, through law, to counteract all or most of the factors that markets make relevant. The reason is that in general, the recognition of such factors is inseparable from the operation of a market economy, and by and large, a market economy is a source of many important human goods, including individual freedom, economic growth and prosperity, and respect for different conceptions of the good. Any legal solutions that call for major intrusions on markets must be evaluated in light of the effects on various possible human goods that those alleged solutions will compromise. If legal remedies produce more unemployment, greater poverty, and higher prices for food and other basic necessities, they are, to that extent, a bad idea. Michigan Law Review less important for that. I argue only that intrusions on markets may defeat valuable human goals and that this is important to keep in mind. 92. Rawls's difference principle, see RAWLS, supra note 56, at 60, would almost certainly fail to justify many of the inequalities that markets introduce, since many of those inequalities do not benefit the least well-off. But a less rigid set of understandings, allowing inequalities that benefit most people, including many of the disadvantaged, would justify reliance on markets, especially in light of the government's ability to use greater aggregate wealth to help disadvantaged people and to provide a basic floor. See the intriguing finding in NORMAN FROHLICH & JOE A. OPPENHEIMER, CHOOSING JUSTICE 58-60 (1992), suggesting that in experimental studies most people choose average utility with a welfare floor, rather than the difference principle. The Anticaste Principle law do seem substantial, and the negative effects on the economy appear minor.94 2. Judges and Legislators Originally the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution was understood as an effort to eliminate racial caste - emphatically not as a ban on distinctions on the basis of race.95 A prohibition on racial caste is of course different from a prohibition on racial distinctions. A ban on racial distinctions would excise all use of race in decisionmaking. By contrast, a ban on caste might well draw some measures having discriminatory effects into question, and it would certainly allow affirmative action programs.96 Originally, Congress, not the courts, was to be the principal institution for implementing the Fourteenth Amendment. The basic idea was that Congress would transform the status of the newly freed slaves by engaging in a wide range of remedial measures.97 It was not at all anticipated that federal judges - responsible for the then-recent and highly visible Dred Scott v. Sanford98 decision, which established slavery as a constitutional right - would be enforcing the Amendment. Indeed, the notion that judges would play a major role in helping to bring about equality under law was entirely foreign to the drafters and ratifiers of the Civil War Amendments. 94. See John J. Donohue III, Employment Discrimination Law in Perspective: Three Concepts of Equality, 92 MICH. L. REV. 2583, 2600-01 (1994) (this issue) (describing antidiscrimination laws as correcting market imperfections to some extent); James J. Heckman & Brook S. Payner, Determining the Impact of Antidiscrimination Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks: A Study of South Carolina, 79 AM. ECON. REV. 138 (1989) (concluding that federal antidiscrimination law may account for increased wages and employment among blacks in the South Carolina textile manufacturing industry). attack on affirmative action). Michigan Law Review into an antidifferentiation principle.99 No longer was the issue the elimination of second-class citizenship. The focus shifted instead to the entirely different question whether people who were similarly situated had been treated similarly - a fundamental change. This shift in focus remains one of the great untold stories of American constitutional history. Of course there are difficult issues of strategy, timing, and implementation. Some legal interventions may not be fruitful; they may even be counterproductive. Some may breed confusion and resentment. Others may be unintelligible. Still others may disrupt a society's basic organizing frameworks in a way that does great harm and little good. Outsiders - and insiders too - will often know too little, and both must be careful about introducing legal the way of social reform). The Anticaste Principle principles that do not cohere with cultural norms. Context will therefore matter a great deal. But these issues concern quite different matters from the issue of principle that I am now discussing. Michigan Law Review present discrimination, and the group's lack of political power.104 In this way, it has moved well beyond the defining case of discrimination against blacks to include discrimination against women, illegitimate children, and sometimes aliens.105 Most of these factors have yet to be fully analyzed. They purport to involve a quasi-factual investigation into real data, but they actually depend on controversial and usually unidentified normative judgments. For example, we cannot know whether a characteristic is "relevant" just by looking at facts. Often race and sex are relevant to employment decisions, in the sense that profits depend on them. We cannot know whether a group has historically been subject to "discrimination" without knowing whether the unequal treatment was justified; discrimination is of course a value-laden category. The Anticaste Principle likely to rest on illegitimate grounds. Heightened scrutiny is a way of testing whether it does. Michigan Law Review groups subject to discrimination, including, for example, homosexuals and Jews. Homosexuals are not a lower caste in the sense that they are not worse off than heterosexuals in terms of many of the usual indicators of social welfare; they cannot show second-class citizenship in this sense. But they are also subject to pervasive discrimination and prejudice, with possibly corrosive effects on selfrespect, and in that sense they are subject to social practices connected to the issues of caste that I have been discussing. As I have understood the matter, the inquiry into caste has a large empirical dimension. The principle focuses on whether one group is systematically below others along important dimensions of social welfare. I offer some relevant information here. Needless to say, the account is far from complete. Throughout this discussion it will be useful to recall that about twelve percent of Americans are black. The Anticaste Principle There are also striking disparities with respect to unemployment levels. In 1992, 6.5% of whites were unemployed, as compared to 14.1% of blacks.1l Disparities of this sort persist over time. Consider the chart on the following pages: [Percent; monthly data seasonally adjusted] Females Black and other or Black Year or All civilian month workers 20 years Total and over 20 years Total and over years and over 20 years and over z u [Percent; monthly data seasonally adjusted] Females Females Year or All civilian month workers 20 years Total and over 20 years and over 20 years Total and over years and over Black and other or Black g uo t i Michigan Law Review We might turn to education, longevity, and crime. Over 80% of whites have completed high school, while about two-thirds of blacks have their high school diplomas.113 About 23% of whites have completed a college degree, as compared to about 13% of blacks.114 The life expectancy of a white American is four years longer than the life expectancy of a black American.115 From 1970 to 1990, about ten people per 100,000 were murdered each year.116 During this same period, the annual murder rate for white men ranged from seven to ten per 100,000, compared to a range of fifty to eighty for black men.117 Similarly, the murder rate for white women was between two and three per 100,000, compared to ten to fifteen for black women.118 In 1991, thirty whites out of a thousand were subject to a crime against their person, down from thirty-two in 1973, but forty-four blacks out of a thousand were subject to such a crime, up from forty-two in 1973.119 Consider political representation. Of the 435 members of the House of Representatives, only forty are black. In the Senate, the numbers are even more striking: of the one hundred senators, only one is black.120 There are also inequalities in political participation. About 70% of white people were registered to vote, as compared to 64% of blacks, in the 1992 elections. There are slightly higher disparities for voting itself, showing about a 10% differential in the last presidential election.121 With respect to sex inequality, most of the numbers are far less dramatic. Women's life expectancy is higher than that of men.122 The educational attainment of men and women is about the same, especially in light of changes over the past twenty years though white men are significantly more likely to be college graduates than white women.123 Most of the disparities between men and women involve income, wealth, and political representation. The Anticaste Principle The poverty rate for single-mother families is 59%.125 Note in this regard that 15,396 children under eighteen live only with their mother, compared to the 2182 who live with their father only.126 And after divorce, the average standard of living of men increases by 42%, whereas that of women decreases by 73%.127 There are 388 male representatives in the House of Representatives and forty-eight women.128 Of one hundred senators, only seven are women.129 This is merely a brief collection of information showing groupbased disparities that bear on the question of second-class citizenship. As we will soon see, the information suggests a need to shift from judicial to legislative forums - and also, ironically, to use race- and gender-neutral remedies. A. From Antidiscrimination to Anticaste Equality law has had two principal stages. The first was concerned with preventing explicit discrimination, public or private, against blacks and women. This included the attack on American apartheid, led by Thurgood Marshall and culminating in Brown v. Board of Education,130 and also the attack on explicit sex discrimination, led by Ruth Bader Ginsburg.131 The legal assault on public general disparity is uncontroversial. Michigan Law Review discrimination was eventually matched by the statutory attack on private discrimination.132 The second stage consisted of challenges to public and private practices that did not involve explicit discrimination but that stemmed from prejudice or that otherwise had large and not adequately justified discriminatory effects.133 This second stage built on the first. Neither has entirely run its course. The Anticaste Principle tremely complex ways involving interactions between past practices and a wide array of current policies.136 In proposing reforms, we might look quite eclectically at a range of protections against the sorts of disparities discussed above. For example, policies promoting economic growth are an important part of equality law insofar as growth is associated with employment and the reduction of poverty. But because the association is imperfect,137 many other steps are necessary. I simply note a few possibilities here; of course a range of details would be required in order to assess any of them. through education, additional government resources for crime prevention and punishment, and new legal remedies for victims of sex-related violence.141 We might compare these with President Clinton's recent executive order on environmental justice, designed to prevent disproportionate health and safety effects from the existence of environmental hazards.142 136. A model discussion is CHRISTOPHER JENCKS, THE HOMELESS (1994) (tracing the causes of increased homelessness to a variety of indifferent or well-intentioned governmental and social actions, such as the destruction of skid row housing and the deinstitutionalization of the mentally ill). to economic growth can actually fail to help the poor). (1987) (portraying Head Start as one of the clear success stories of the Great Society). Michigan Law Review Of course there are limits to how much legal reform can do to redress these problems, at least in the short run. But there is much that law can do to help.143 B. Against Race Consciousness On the account I have offered, there is no constitutional objection to genuinely remedial race- and sex-conscious policies, at least as a general rule.144 If a basic goal is opposition to caste, affirmative action policies are ordinarily permissible. Partly this lesson stems from the history of the Civil War Amendments; if history is relevant, it is hard to support the view that affirmative action programs are invalid.145 But partly it is a lesson of logic. We have seen that in an important way the antidiscrimination principle is continuous with the affirmative action principle. Insofar as statistical discrimination is outlawed, the government has singled out one form of rational categorization and subjected it to special disability. At least along this dimension, the antidiscrimination principle partakes of an affirmative action principle. 143. See, e.g., CASS N. SUNSTEIN, AFTER THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION 77-81 (1990); Donohue, supra note 94 (arguing that employment discrimination laws successfully reduced discrimination); Miller, supra note 138 (describing the successes of the Head Start program). 144. A qualification is necessary here. Many race- and sex-conscious programs may be only pretextually remedial, especially in the gender context, in which purportedly remedial measures may in fact be discriminatory. See, e.g., Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld, 420 U.S. 636 (1975) (striking down a social security law giving benefits to women but not to men because the provision actually reflected irrational gender stereotypes). Also, some approaches might be too crudely connected with remedial goals, see, e.g., Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. Federal Communications Commn., 497 U.S. 547 (1991) (upholding a race-conscious approach despite its crudeness), or perhaps with rigid quotas, see, e.g., City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989). sition to affirmative action programs). The Anticaste Principle education, employment, licensing, and elsewhere.147 They have been accepted at local, state, and federal levels and by courts, administrators, presidents, and legislatures;148 they have come from people whose views sharply diverge, including conservatives and liberals alike - both Democrats and Republicans have supported them.149 In these circumstances, judges should be extremely reluctant to say that there is anything like a flat ban on race-conscious programs. Michigan Law Review trivialized. It is relevant in this regard that many defenses of affirmative action programs are hard to offer in public. Often the nature of affirmative action programs is not discussed publicly because to do so would be humiliating to the supposed beneficiaries or intolerable to the public at large. tion are indistinguishable in principle). The Anticaste Principle These are some of the directions in which equality law might move in the future. It is ironic but true that a third stage of civil rights policy, directed most self-consciously against race and gender caste, might also be self-consciously designed for reasons of policy and principle so as to avoid race- and gender-specificity. In this essay I have criticized three approaches to the problem of race and sex equality in law. Free markets can accomplish considerable good in the area of equality as everywhere else, but they are only a mixed blessing for race and sex equality. Reliance on existing preferences has related problems, at least to the extent that those preferences are an artifact of an unjust status quo. The notion that the law forbids unreasonable distinctions is purely formal. As often interpreted, the idea has substance behind it, and perhaps it is well suited to the institutional limits of the judiciary. But the substance is not simple to defend. It sometimes requires identical treatment in cases in which distinctions make sense, and ignores inequality when inequality is present. Sometimes the cause of equality requires people who are differently situated to be treated differently, and this is a major gap in constitutional doctrine.