 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Cass R. Sunstein* A. Social Differentiation B. Religion, Civic Equality, and Political Liberalism ..... C. Broadcasting and Free Speech, with a Note on Rights * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard. - Ed. Participants in workshops at the Columbia, University of Chicago, Harvard, Hofstra, New York University, and Yale Law Schools provided extremely valuable help. Bruce Ackerman, Albert Alschuler, Anne-Marie Burley, Ruth Chang, Jon Elster, Richard Epstein, Stephen Gilles, Abner Greene, Charles Larmore, Larry Lessig, Martha Nussbaum, Richard Pildes, Richard Posner, Eric Rakowski, J. Mark Ramseyer, Joseph Raz, Henry Richardson, Stephen Schulhofer, David Strauss, Lloyd Weinreb, and Steven Winter provided helpful remarks on a previous draft. For financial support I am grateful to the Russell Baker Scholars Fund and the James H. Douglas, Jr. Fund for the Study of Law and Government. Michigan Law Review F. Specific Performance, Damages, Private Law Remedies: In this article I explore two claims and discuss their implications for law. The first claim is that human values are plural and diverse. By this I mean that we value things, events, and relationships in ways that are not reducible to some larger and more encompassing value. The second claim is that human goods are not commensurable. By this I mean that such goods are not assessed along a single metric. For reasons to be explored, the two claims, though related, are importantly different. Incommensurability different kinds of valuation. With an understanding of these diverse kinds, we will be able to see why voluntary exchanges should usually be protected, and also why they should sometimes be blocked. Some otherwise puzzling anomalies in the theory of environmental protection will take on new aspects. An understanding of diverse kinds of valuation will help shed light on certain claims about the nature of sex discrimination. I suggest that a Kantian norm, having to do with appropriate ways of valuing human beings, accounts for widespread views about abortion, the distribution of labor within marriage, sexual harassment, prostitution, pornography, surrogacy, and much else besides. With an understanding of this sort, it will be possible as well to understand some features of practical reason in law, especially in the old area of analogical thinking, but also in new areas involving the theory and practice of the regulatory state. neo-Kantian value of "equal concern and respect" to various legal problems). Michigan Law Review I particularly want to show some distinctive ways in which economic analysis of law, and most forms of utilitarianism as well, miss important commitments of a well-functioning legal system. I hope also to establish that a surprisingly wide range of legal disputes can be illuminated by an understanding of incommensurability and diverse kinds of valuation. The value of this enterprise consists not in dictating particular conclusions, which depend on the details, but in enabling us to see an important basis for widespread concerns and convictions. I emphasize that to see values as incommensurable, and to say that people are really disputing appropriate kinds (not levels) of valuation, is not by itself to resolve legal disputes. It is necessary to say something about the right kind and to investigate the particulars in great detail, in order to make progress in hard cases in law. But an understanding of problems of incommensurability will make it easier to see what is at stake. This article is organized into six Parts. The first three Parts explore some foundational issues. Part I describes diverse kinds of valuation and responds to the claim that we value different things in the same way. Part II offers a working definition of incommensurability. Part III discusses an important challenge to the claims in Parts I and II. It also offers some notes on the stakes, attempting to show why these issues matter. A. Definitions and Examples Human beings value goods, things, relationships, and states of affairs in diverse ways.6 Begin with the distinction between instrumen uses the term modes of valuation to refer to the same basic idea. Incommensurability tal and intrinsic goods. We value some things purely or principally for use; consider hammers, forks, or money. But we value other things at least in part for their own sake; consider knowledge or friendship. Because it is so pertinent to law, the distinction between instrumental and intrinsic value will play an important role here. But that distinction captures only a part of the picture. Intrinsically valued things produce a range of diverse responses. Some bring about wonder and awe; consider a mountain or certain artistic works. Toward some people, we feel respect; toward others, affection; toward others, love. Peotheir deity. Some events produce gratitude; others ple worship produce joy; others are thrilling; others make us feel content; others bring about delight. Some things are valued if they meet certain standards, like a musical or athletic performance or perhaps a pun.7 Negative valuations are similarly diverse. To lose money is to lose an instrumental good though one that might be used for intrinsic goods, like the preservation of human life. To lose a friend is a different matter. So, too, our responses to intrinsic bads are diverse. We might be horrified by an act of cruelty, disgusted by an ugly scene, shocked by a betrayal of friendship or love, made indignant by a failure of respect, frightened by the prospect of loss, angered by the infliction of a wound, saddened by undeserved hardship, or frustrated by the failure of our plans. These various terms themselves include a variety of experiences that embody diverse ideas about evaluation. Not all forms of sadness - very much an umbrella term - are the same; so too with disgust compare reactions to cruelty and reactions to ugliness - and so on. STOCKER, PLURAL AND CONFLICTING VALUES 213 (1990); R.E. Chang, Irredeemabilities and Constitutive Incommensurabilities or Buying and Selling Friends (July 1993) (unpublished manuscript, on file with author). One could express the same general thought through a reference not to diverse kinds of valuation, but to diverse goods. For my purposes here, I do not believe that much is at stake between the two formulations. I refer to kinds of valuation because the term points explicitly to the interactive nature of valuation; goods are goods for reasons that human beings attribute to them. Michigan Law Review among possible kinds of valuation. Someone who does not make appropriate distinctions might be labeled odd or even weird.9 Someone who does not make enough distinctions might seem thick or obtuse. We could categorize kinds of valuation in many different ways. For purposes of law, it might make sense to focus on such things as love, affection, respect, wonder, worship, and use;10 these notions come up in many places of legal dispute. But each of these terms captures a range of qualitatively distinct kinds of valuation. Love for a parent is different from love for a child, which is in turn different from love for a friend, a spouse, a pet, or a house. We might feel wonder toward an act of selfless courage, and also toward a musical performance or a beautiful beach. We might feel awe toward an athletic performance and also toward a mountain. How, and how finely, we should categorize kinds of valuation depends on the uses to which the categories will be put. For law and politics, the number of useful categories is undoubtedly smaller than it is for literature or poetry, which may be especially concerned to offer fine-grained accounts. say, the workplace Distinctions among kinds of valuation are highly sensitive to the particular setting in which they operate. People do not value goods the prevailing acontextually. kinds of valuation might be quite different from what they are elsewhere say, the home or the ballot box. Moreover, particular goods typically do not admit of a single kind of valuation. The prevailing kind has everything to do with the relationship among the various actors. Thus a cat might be valued in a certain way by its owner, but in a different way by a landlord, and in still a different way by a government agency. Much of social differentiation stems from this perception. 1 So, too, several kinds of valuation might be directed toward a single object. A person might, for example, both love and respect a friend or a lover. Such a point of view treats concrete activities and specific interests not as worth while in themselves, or as constituents of happiness, but as mere external means to getting pleasures. The upholders of the old tradition could therefore easily accuse utilitarianism of making not Incommensurability The inadequate description will impair predictive accounts13 of human behavior. It will also impair normative judgments about ethics, law, and politics. In making this latter point, I mean to reject relativist or purely conventionalist accounts of kinds of valuation'4 and to suggest that some kinds are more appropriate than others. Judgments about what is appropriate depend of course on theories of the good or the right; from the bare fact that kinds of valuation are diverse, we have no basis for evaluating any legal or social practice. But it is important to have diverse kinds of valuation indeed we could not make sense of our lives without them - and no matter what current conventions may be, some kinds are poorly suited to some contexts because they produce inferior lives. I begin to defend these controversial claims in more detail below.15 B. Conflicts Among Kinds of Valuation, with Special Reference to Uses of Money Conflicts among diverse kinds of valuation permeate private and public choice. Suppose that Smith has arranged to have lunch with a friend today, but that he has become very busy and perhaps would like to cancel. Suppose Smith thinks in this way: if he cancels, his friend will be disappointed, because he would like Smith's company, and also a bit insulted, because it is cavalier and disrespectful to cancel lunch at the last minute. Maybe Smith should make it up to him, or provide compensation, by offering a nontrivial cash payment. This would be a hopelessly inadequate response. A cash payment would be inconsistent with the way that someone values a friend. Even if the friend would prefer $1, or $10, or $100, or $1000 to lunch with Smith even though at some point the payment would in some sense be worth far more than the lunch and be readily accepted as an alternative the offer of cash would be perceived as an insult rather than as compensation. In this context, the difference in kinds of valuation means only virtue but art, poetry, religion and the state into mere servile means of attaining sensuous enjoyments.... Michigan Law Review that a financial exchange would be inappropriate. The kind of valuation of a friend blocks the use of otherwise acceptable grounds for action.16 As we will see, the law is pervaded by principles of this kind - principles that forbid resort to reasons for action that are acceptable in other contexts. 16. See infra the discussion of exclusionary reasons in section II.C. Note in this regard the social norm requiring that, in some circumstances, gifts should not take the form of cash, which is regarded as excessively impersonal. As compared with a gift of (say) $30, a gift of (say) a tie costing $30 establishes a distinctive and often preferable relationship between the recipient and the giver - even if in some contexts $30 in cash would be worth more to the recipient than the $30 tie, and even if in some contexts a gift of $30 would be less costly, to the giver, than the gift of a $30 tie. This point is interestingly missed in Joel Waldfogel, The Deadweight Loss of Christmas, 83 AM. ECON. REV. 1328, 1336 (1993), which finds four billion dollars in annual deadweight losses from noncash gifts and which assumes that cash gifts are always more efficient and therefore generally preferable. Incommensurability know which they would choose if both were offered; even if $10 million is in some sense the right amount to invest in protection of the mountain from degradation; and even if, as seems clear, infinite valuation of the mountain would be an irrational allocation of scarce social resources. The point does not suggest that pristine areas cannot be degraded. But it does have a range of important and sometimes overlooked consequences for how people involved in the legal system might think about environmental protection.'8 It also suggests that indifference curves have quite limited purposes and that they may be misleading on some important matters. It may even suggest that we should question the whole notion of indifference curves. Some people may not be "indifferent" between two goods even though they do not think that one is better than another.19 Attention to diverse kinds of valuation casts general light on the phenomenon of exchanges that are blocked by social norms. If someone offers to pay an adult neighbor to mow his lawn, the neighbor will often regard the request as an insult, because it reflects an inappropriate valuation of the neighbor. The request embodies an improper conception of what the relationship is, or of the attitude with which neighbors render services for each other. The impropriety remains even if the offeree ordinarily would regard the offered wage as a fair price for an hour of mowing services. In an extreme case, if someone asks an attractive person (or a spouse) for sexual relations in return for cash, the same would be said even more vehemently. Because of the existence of diverse kinds of valuation, we may not be able to generalize acontextual preferences from particular decisions. The point bears on law as well. For example, decisions not to insure certain goodsfreedom from pain and suffering, the well-being of one's children need not suggest a global judgment about whether injuries to those goods deserve compensation.20 There is often a connection between blocked exchanges and ideas about equal citizenship. The exchange may be barred by social norms or law because of a perception that, while there may be disparities in social wealth, the spheres in which people are very unequal ought not 18. See infra section V.D. 19. See infra notes 91-105 and accompanying text. For challenges to utilitarianism based on rejection of the claim that goodness is always of a particular kind, see ANDERSON, supra note 1; Judith J. Thomson, Goodness and Utilitarianism, PROCS. & ADDRESSES OF THE AM. PHIL.. ASSN., Oct. 1993, at 145. Michigan Law Review to invade realms of social life in which equality is a social goal.21 Often this idea comes from the existence of a kind of valuation based on equal respect. The legal prohibition on vote trading is an example. So too with certain complex social bans on the use of wealth to buy services or goods from other people, such as a shoveled walk or a body part.22 An intricate web of norms covers the exchange of money among both friends and strangers. Some of these norms are connected with the principle of civic equality. Monetary exchange would reflect forms of inequality that are not legitimate in certain spheres. In making these points, I am disregarding many complexities, and I have not tried to justify any particular set of outcomes in hard cases. I want to suggest only a general point: the refusal to allow economic exchanges is often based on familiar notions of equality that such exchanges would compromise. 21. This theme recurs in WALZER, supra note 14. See especially his discussion of the case of complex range of considerations. See infra section V.H. Incommensurability example) sexuality or reproductive capacities on markets because economic valuation of these "things" is inconsistent with and may even undermine their appropriate kind (not level) of valuation.24 The objection is not that markets value sexuality "too much" or "too little"; it is that markets value these activities in the wrong way. Judge Posner's well-known writings on the "baby market"25 do not quite address this particular objection. A judgment about the appropriate way of valuing babies must itself be defended on some basis, and such a judgment does not automatically lead to a particular view about legal rules for adoption or the sale of young children. But the question of appropriate kinds of valuation plays a major role in these debates.26 Thus far I have dealt with cases that involve objections to the kind of valuation expressed through cash payments. But we can think of many cases not involving the issue of monetary equivalence. Imagine, for example, that John treats a beautiful diamond in the same way that most people treat friends, or that Jane values a plant in the same way that most people value their children, or that Sandy values her car like most people value art or literature. All of us know people with occasional tendencies of this sort. Indeed, all of us are people with occasional tendencies of this sort. But sometimes an improper kind of valuation seems odd, or disrespectful, or even pathological - and all these in part because it makes it impossible to sustain certain sorts of desirable social relationships. Disputes over law and social norms, which are related and sometimes mutually enforcing behavioral influences, often reflect disagreements over proper kinds of valuation, with adjectives of this sort moving to the fore. Michigan Law Review It is best taken as a recommendation of a shift in the kind of valuation of animals, accompanied by a judgment that the new kind will have consequences for what human beings do. The recommendation may be based on the view that if we see animals (and nature) in this way, we will solve collective action problems faced by human beings in preserving animal life that is important for human lives; it may be based on a noninstrumental effort to extend ideals of basic dignity to all living things.28 I reiterate that substantive judgments of this sort must be defended; by itself, the reference to diverse kinds of valuation gets us nowhere. The important point is that such judgments are a frequent, though often overlooked, part of social and legal discussion. Three major clarifications are necessary here. First, my claim about diverse kinds of valuation has largely been a claim about widespread current attitudes. I do believe that those attitudes go very deep and that it would be quite impossible to make sense of our experience 28. On intrinsic value and the sanctity of life, see RONALD DWORKIN, LIFE'S DOMINION 67101 (1993). Dworkin's claim that life is "sacred" or "inviolable" is best taken, I think, as a claim about the appropriate kind of valuation of life, and his description of certain courses of action as showing "contempt" for life is highly compatible with the account I offer here. Incommensurability without reference to diverse kinds of valuation.3' But I do not intend to offer anything like a transcendental or metaphysical claim about valuation; I am speaking about how we value, not about nature or about valuation of goods apart from human attitudes. Some of the most heated disputes about law and policy actually turn on the appropriateness of a shift from one kind of valuation to another. In labor law, for example, many important controversies involve the appropriate kind of valuation of workers.36 The dispute over at-will employment seems to turn in part on this issue. Critics of the at-will rule claim that the rule reflects an inadequate kind of valuation of workers because it subjects them to the whim of employers.37 Here too notions of equality are at work in calling into question certain vol Michigan Law Review untary exchanges.38 Much of the theory of environmental protection involves similar issues. It is not entirely accurate to say that environmentalists value pristine areas "more" than do economists. It is also important to say that environmentalists value pristine areas in a different way. Whereas economists tend to think of the environment as something for human use and exploitation,39 environmentalists tend to claim that we should view the environment with awe and wonder or value it for its own sake rather than as an instrumental good.40 The debates over pollution taxes and tradable emissions permits are partly debates over kinds of valuation.41 Of course it is unclear how these different kinds of valuation will or should affect environmental policy, a point to which I will return.42 Second, the existence of diverse kinds of valuation does not by itself have any clear implications for law, policy, or even social attitudes. There is a difference between how people should value and how law should value. I do not claim that, because people now value relationships, events, objects, or each other in certain ways, it follows that law should adopt those diverse kinds of valuation. We need not be conventionalists. If a particular kind of valuation were really superior with respect to what is appropriately valued in public or private life, the law might well adopt that kind of valuation notwithstanding its inconsistency with prevailing social norms. A good deal of constitutional law can be taken as an effort to constrain prevailing kinds of valuation; this is true both for principles of religious liberty and for antidiscrimination norms.43 Or law might embody a certain kind of valuation precisely because it is law; we might think that cost-benefit analysis is appropriate for law even if we think that it is inappropriate for spouses or parents. If we are to draw conclusions about appropriate law, policy, and norms, it is because our best account of the good or the right supports a particular constellation of kinds of valuation and because we are able to show that a particular constellation makes 38. Compare Blades, supra note 37 with Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of the Contract at Will, 51 U. CHI. L. REV. 947 (1984). This dispute implicitly involves diverse kinds of valuation. Epstein's view rests on a monistic conception of value in which workers "trade off" goods along a single metric; Blades does not directly address this question but appears to take a stand in the other direction. wholly reducible to its value to God or to humanity."). Incommensurability sense for law.44 I return to this complex issue in Part IV. D. Social Science, Economics, and Diverse Kinds of Valuation Is it useful to note that kinds of valuation are diverse and plural? Perhaps it is not. Perhaps we can make good predictions about social life simply by assuming that there is a single kind of valuation.47 On this view, a claim about diverse kinds of valuation may usefully describe people's internal lives; it may have deeper psychological truth; it may better account for how lives and choices are actually experienced. But it is fully dispensable for social scientists and lawyers, who can work with an assumption of "as if unitariness" that is, who can assume that people act as if they value all things in the same way, and who can make accurate predictions with that assumption. So long as we can model choices social scientists need not worry about what I have said here. Michigan Law Review This conclusion seems partly right. If we assume that people want to maximize one thing - utility, value, welfare, well-being - we might well be able to make good predictions of various sorts.48 We might be able to say what sorts of legislation will be enacted in what circumstances. People do make judgments among goods, and if so we need not decide whether they value these goods in the same way. Much of social science proceeds through simplifying assumptions, even with respect to nonmarket transactions. To the extent that we can make accurate predictions by assuming unitariness, we can indeed dispense with claims about diverse kinds of valuation.49 But I believe that, with the assumption of a unitary kind of valuation, We will sometimes offer inadequate predictions, explanations, and recommendations for law. The idea of "revealed preferences" is a predictive failure; to make predictions from choices, we need to offer an account of what lies behind choices,50 and that account must take into consideration what I am discussing here. Behavior is often a product of judgments about what kinds of valuation are appropriate under what circumstances. As we will see, some of the "demand" for environmental regulation is best understood as a response to claims about the need to value things in different ways.51 Much of individual conduct is best understood in similar terms. We might, for example, puzzle a great deal over the existence of social norms without apparent "maximizing" explanations.52 Consider a few examples: the norm in favor of voting, norms of dress and etiquette, norms of vengeance, 48. An influential approach comes from the idea of revealed preferences, popular within economics. On this view, we do not hypothesize any supervalue such as utility, but work instead with a rank ordering of individual preferences, based on actual choices (revealed preferences). This approach will not work. We cannot get a good sense of what people value simply from choices since choices are a function of context and since they are inarticulate - poor predictors of future behavior - without some account of what lies behind them. See Amartya Sen, Internal Consistency of Choice, 61 ECONOMETRICA 495 (1993). Sen shows that even the weakest axioms of revealed preference theory can fail. For example, it is usually assumed that if someone prefers A to B in a situation of binary choice, he should also prefer A to B if some third alternative C is introduced. But this is wrong. Someone may prefer A to B, but B to A and C, because the choice of A over B shows no global or acontextual judgment. For example, the choice of A (a medium sized piece of cake) over B (a large piece of cake) may reflect a desire to be moderate, a desire that can also justify the choice of B over A and C (a huge piece of cake). Id. at 498- 503. Thus we cannot rank order individual preferences on the basis of choices alone or without some account of what values underlie choices. See also RAZ, supra note 17, at 327; Richard H. Pildes & Elizabeth S. Anderson, Slinging Arrows at Democracy: Social Choice Theory, Value Pluralism, and Democratic Politics, 90 COLUM. L. REV. 2121 (1990). in his work on nonmarket behavior, most notably in BECKER, supra note 3. Incommensurability norms against sale.53 Some anomalies in expected utility theory might result from diverse kinds of valuation.54 There is much more to say about these complex matters. Nothing said in this paragraph refutes the possibility of complete ordinal rankings. But we can make some progress in thinking about human behavior by examining the role of diverse valuations. the legal culture. In some subjects - contracts, torts, property people often propose that something important like a risk to life or health is in some deep sense equivalent to a certain amount of cash. At this point, some participant in the conversation (perhaps a student) rejects the proposal, whereupon the original speaker suggests that the resistance must depend on a claim of infinite valuation, at which point it is clear that the original proposal was correct. But perhaps the resistance rests on a claim about appropriate kinds, not levels, of valuation.55 If so, the participant who is making this claim has a lot to explain. She has to explain how to make choices among goods that are valued in different ways. But at least we will be able to understand what she is saying. A. A Provisional Definition The subject of incommensurability raises many complexities, and I want to bracket at least some of the philosophical debate here, concentrating instead on what is particularly relevant to law.57 Begin with a 53. Many of these are subject to intriguing, but in my view incomplete, analysis on economic or utilitarian grounds. See, e.g., RICHARD A. POSNER, LAW AND LITERATURE 26-70 (discussing vengeance). infra note 219 and accompanying text. Michigan Law Review rough working definition, designed especially for the legal context: Incommensurability occurs when the relevant goods cannot be aligned along a single metric without doing violence to our considered judgments about how these goods are best characterized. Let me briefly describe the four major elements of this definition. First, by "our considered judgments," I mean our reflective assessments of how certain relationships and events should be understood, evaluated, and experienced. Such reflection involves identifying the nature and depth of various goods in our lives. Incommensurability largely because of the special importance of the metric of dollars to law. As we will see,60 the use of a single metric is often unhelpful for law, and this point has a wide range of consequences for particular legal disputes. Under this general definition of metric, many possible standards excellence, well-being, affective allegiance count as criteria, but not as metrics. Kinds of valuation love, respect, wonder, worship - embody no metric at all.61 Third, with the phrase "doing violence," I mean to suggest that the use of a single metric is inconsistent with the way certain goods are actually experienced, or tend to be experienced when people's lives are going well. The phrase is intended to show that a single metric, nominally descriptive of experience, would actually transform it, in a way that would make a great deal of difference. It would make a great deal of difference because it would elide certain qualitative differences that are important in both life and law. We might label many choices involving commensurable goods investment decisions. The decision how to invest so as to maximize expected return does indeed involve commensurable goods. Some people write as if all or most decisions have this form - as if all or most decisions are investment decisions. Some people write as if life is full of investment decisions, so that a decision made in one context will show a global, acontextual judgment about valuation.62 It is these points that I am rejecting here. If we saw all human decisions as investment decisions, we would make human ex It is quite compatible with the principle of utility to recognize the fact that some kinds of pleasure are more desirable and more valuable than others. It would be absurd that, while in estimating all other things quality is considered as well as quantity, the estimation of pleasure should be supposed to depend on quantity alone. Nothing is more curious than the absence of recognition in any of his writings of the existence of conscience, as a thing distinct from philanthropy, from affection for God or man, and from self-interest in this world or in the next .... Michigan Law Review perience barely recognizable. There is an additional point. Particular choices reflect the context in which they are made, and those choices rarely reveal a general statement, reflecting an acontextual considered judgment about valuation. in this very thin63 sense is a familiar phenomenon. Indeed it seems that it is closer to the rule than the exception. A decision whlether to vacation at the beach in the Indiana Dunes or in Florence entails no single metric. So too with the decision whether to see a movie about dinosaurs or instead about Wittgenstein. So too with a decision whether to reduce permissible exposure levels to benzene in the workplace to one part per million. 63. This sense of incommensurability is different from the sense captured in the idea that "conceptual schemes" or "paradigms" are incommensurable. Cf DONAL D DAVIDSON, On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme, in INQUIRIES INTO TRUTH AND INTERPRETAT-ION 183 (1984) (analyzing and criticizing the latter claim). Incommensurability ence, not "just" words.65 An argument on its behalf would call for a large-scale revision of current experience. It would be misleading to say that people throughout the Roman Empire believed in the "same" gods, while perhaps worshipping them in different ways, as people who live in different parts of a country see the "same" mountain from different perspectives .... Practices at opposite ends of the empire might have little but the names of the gods in common. Michigan Law Review but I am trying here to show how the two claims might be separated.) In any case some people think that there are diverse values - pleasure from a warm sun, gratitude from unexpected kindness, and so forth while also believing that these can all be reduced to a general concept like utility, happiness, or pleasure. Utilitarians need not deny the diversity of human goods, or that pleasures and pains come in different forms.68 The claim of incommensurability is that no unitary metric accounts for how we actually think and that the effort to introduce one misdescribes experience. There is a further claim (of course requiring an independent defense) that the misdescription can yield both inaccurate predictions and bad recommendations for ethics and politics.69 It would do so even if human beings also should decide, free from metrics but equipped with reasons, in favor of some relationships and events instead of others, and even in favor of Mozart over Dylan if some such judgment becomes useful.70 Recall that incommensurability, as I have defined it, does not entail incomparability. It may be, for example, that there are describable and workable criteria for finding a composer to be good, and that these criteria, while hardly algorithmic, make it possible to say that some composers are better than others. 69. Sometimes, however, it may be pragmatically valuable to construct a metric consisting of heterogeneous items. The "human development index" used by the United Nations to measure well-being by amalgamating literacy, longevity, and per capita income, provides a useful example. See U.N. DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME, HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 10 (1993). Similarly, the National Football League measures quarterback proficiency with an index based on heterogeneous qualities, including completion percentage, average gain per attempt, touchdown percentage, and interception percentage. See Dan Pierson, Harbaugh Passes the Ratings Test, CHI. TRIB., Nov. 4, 1990, at C9. The risk with both indices is that the aggregate numbers may deflect attention from important qualitative differences. Under the 1993 UNDP Report, for example, the United States ranks sixth overall, but it ranks first in educational attainment and in per capita income, and seventeenth in longevity, in part because of high rates of infant mortality and violent crime; it is this disaggregated data that is most informative. See Cass R. Sunstein, Well-Being and the State, 107 HARV. L. REV. (forthcoming 1994) (manuscript at 18-21, on file with author). Much the same could be said about quarterbacks. Incommensurability Indeed, it seems clear that this is the case. We can make similar arguments about hard cases in law, a point taken up in more detail below.71 C. Excluding Reasons for Action Some of the most intriguing instances of incommensurability arise when the relevant kind of valuation not only prevents use of a single metric, but also excludes certain reasons for action altogether.72 We need to introduce here the important notion of exclusionary reasons. 73 Sometimes social custom or law invokes a second-order reason that excludes certain first-order reasons for action, even if those reasons are perfectly legitimate in some settings. In such cases, the basic goal of the custom or laws is to prohibit people from making choices on the basis of certain identifiable considerations. Those considerations are ruled off limits; they are not merely found insufficiently weighty. ordinarily an important social goal 71. See infra Part V. 72. The treatment of incommensurability in the legal context in Warner, supra note 57, makes extensive use of this notion. See also the discussion of constitutive incommensurabilities in RAZ, supra note 17, at 345-53. Michigan Law Review evant factors - bases for decision that may not be introduced at all, however pertinent they may seem in the abstract.77 Sometimes the very admission of the relevant reasons is entirely off limits. Sometimes the reasons, though usually barred, may be introduced, but only if they are extraordinarily strong in the specific case. This is a characteristic structure of legal protection of constitutional rights under judge-made doctrine.78 I want to claim that, in both instances, we have a form of incommensurability as I understand it here.79 Consider a general example. One might think that, in constitutional law, intrusions on certain rights are acceptable only if government can generate an interest both of a certain type and of a certain strength.80 In an interesting discussion of the First Amendment, for example, John Rawls argues that the mere existence of a clear and present danger of some sort will not justify government suppression of speech.8' On his account, government must show a clear and present danger to the democratic order itself.82 As I read him, Rawls does not mean to argue that this is simply a greater degree of danger than any other; instead he means to argue that, to regulate political speech, government needs an interest of a particular sort. Whether or not the 77. See, e.g., National Resources Defense Council v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1146 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (holding that EPA may consider cost and feasibility in setting emissions standards under Clean Air Act); National Coalition Against the Misuse of Pesticides v. Thomas, 809 F.2d 875 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (holding that EPA must give greater weight to statutorily specified factors than unspecified factors in issuing pesticide regulations under the Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act); D.C. Fedn. of Civic Assns. v. Volpe, 459 F.2d 1231, 1246-49 (D.C. Cir. 1971) (treating pressure from individual congressional representatives as improper basis for approving bridge construction project). a commitment to incommensurability. See infra notes 206-10 and accompanying text. Incommensurability argument is right, it shows that we might want to impose constraints on the sorts of interests that can be invoked to justify restrictions on constitutional rights.83 The exclusion of certain reasons for action is an extreme case of the more conventional and modest sort of incommensurability I am describing here. It is of course possible to deny that two items X and Y can be aligned along a single metric while also believing that an especially large amount of X is worth more than an especially small amount of Y One might believe, for example, that a pristine area and in value, while also thinking that dollars cash are incommensurable are not excluded as reasons for action, and that one would allow degradation of a pristine area if an enormous amount of money were at stake. This is especially true to the extent that money, which is by definition only of instrumental value, can be devoted to enterprises that are of intrinsic value, like the protection of wildlife or of other environmental goods. Consider here the controversial but reasonable efforts to claim that, while OSHA may not base outcomes on costbenefit analysis (that is, trade off life for dollars), it may engage in "risk-risk" analysis (that is, compare one risk to life and health with another). On this view, OSHA may take into account the possibility that regulation that produces unemployment and poverty imposes greater risks to life and health.84 There is a further and closely related point. Many problems of incommensurability arise because of a conviction that an event, a person, or a relationship is intrinsically good, or an end in itself, rather than something properly treated as a means to some other generalized end, such as wealth or utility or maximized value.85 It is easy to use a single metric when all human events are seen as instrumental to im 83. A familiar version of this idea is the notion that "administrative convenience" cannot justify discrimination or intrusion on rights, even if the inconvenience is very great. See, e.g., Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 198 (1976) (rejecting statute establishing different legal drinking ages for males and females based on highway safety concerns); Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677, 690-91 (1973) (rejecting statute that accorded differential treatment to male and female members of armed services); Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254, 266 (1970) (holding that pretermination hearing is required before state can halt welfare benefits). Michigan Law Review provements along a unitary dimension.86 If we thought, for example, that all acts were attempts to increase social utility - defined, say, as aggregate human happiness then it would be utility that would be of intrinsic value, and all else would be instrumental to it. Analysis might therefore be greatly simplified. The same is true of some understandings of maximized wealth. Often issues of incommensurability arise because of the presence of a range of intrinsic goods that are not seen as means to some other end, particularly in law. Incommensurability D. Incommensurability and Freedom It might be tempting to think that incommensurability works as a barrier to certain forms of freedom to the use of a single metric, to certain sorts of exchange, to certain reasons for action. This is true; we have seen cases in which a recognition of incommensurability stops people from doing things. But it is also plausible to see incommensurability as constitutive of some valuable forms of freedom. These forms are not easily dispensable. The presence of incommensurability helps make possible certain relationships, attachments, and attitudes that would otherwise be unavailable.89 If friendship and cash were commensurable, or if a park and $100,000 were valued in the same way, we could not have certain attitudes toward friendship and toward parks. Indeed, if parks and $100,000 could be aligned along the same metric, parks would not be parks as we now understand them. If speech were valued in the same way as forks, we could not understand political freedom in the way that we now do. Incommensurability operates as an obstacle to certain sorts of behavior; but it constitutes others, and makes them an option for us. For this reason, both social norms and life might insist that incommensurability of various sorts is desirable as a means of maintaining attitudes and relationships that are parts of good lives. I will return to this point below.90 E. Comparability, Transitivity, and Other Definitions The definition I have offered has a relation to Joseph Raz's important and influential discussion of the problem.91 Raz offers a distinctive understanding of incommensurability. He says that "A and B are incommensurate if it is neither true that one is better than the other nor true that they are of equal value."92 To this definition, Raz adds a claim about the "mark" of incommensurability: "Two valuable options are incommensurable if (1) neither is better than the other, and (2) there is (or could be) another option which is better than one but is not better than the other."93 These statements point to an extremely puzzling state of affairs. How could one option be neither worse than, nor better than, nor Michigan Law Review equal to another? Isn't this a failure of rationality? If two options are neither better nor worse than one another, how could some third option be better than one but not better than the other? In beginning to answer these questions, Raz notes that sometimes value is a function of several diverse criteria. This is true, for example, with respect to judgments about the excellence of a novel. Our understanding of the criteria that make up excellence in a novel may impair efforts to produce a complete ranking. It could thus be wrong to say that Dickens is better or worse than Joyce, and also wrong to say that Dickens and Joyce are (even roughly) equal in value. Any of these three possibilities could reasonably be thought obtuse. Dickens and Joyce are not roughly equal in value because, on one view of their merit, the choice for either one over the other could be supported by very different and quite substantial reasons.94 Some further examples may help. Smith may have no clear preference between lunch with a friend and a fifty dollar gift; the one is neither better nor worse than the other. Nor are the two equal in value. At the same time, Smith would prefer a sixty dollar gift to a fifty dollar gift. But Smith has no clear preference between lunch with a friend and a sixty dollar gift; the one is still neither better nor worse than the other. Or there is a political initiative that seems to Jones neither better nor worse than another: a reduction in the staff of the White House by ten percent, and a new restriction on lobbying by government employees. Jones would prefer a fifteen percent reduction in the staff of the White House to a ten percent reduction. But Jones does not think that a fifteen percent reduction in the White House staff is better or worse than a new restriction on lobbying by government employees. When incommensurability occurs, Raz claims,95 there is a failure of transitivity: A is neither better nor worse than B; AI is better than A; but Al is neither better nor worse than B. If it occurs, the 94. I am therefore questioning the familiar idea that an agent is able to say, for any given pair of options, whether he prefers the first to the second, the second to the first, or is indifferent between them. An agent may not regard one option as more valuable than the other and yet also not be indifferent between them. Agents remain able to choose between them, perhaps because of reasons grounded in expressive differences, as suggested in ANDERSON, supra note 1, at 59, or because of psychological factors, as Raz suggests. See RAZ, supra note 17, at 32. It also remains possible that we can generate a utility function on the basis of choice, either retrospectively or prospectively. See infra text accompanying note 105. Incommensurability apparent failure of transitivity is troubling to many understandings about rational choice, but we can imagine many settings in which the failure seems to appear.96 It is right but not really responsive to say that, once the amounts change, assessments of these problems change as well. To be sure, Smith might unambiguously prefer $1000 to lunch with a friend, or the lunch to five dollars. It is true that Jones's uncertainty might dissipate if she is asked to choose between a fifty percent reduction in White House staff and a new restriction on lobbying. But these truths do not undermine the basic claim, which is vindicated if some apparent failures of transitivity can be found. To insist that such apparent failures occur, it is not necessary to say that people will not find large amounts of one good better than smaller amounts of another with which it is not commensurable.97 Below I will take up some of the ambiguities in this argument.98 Raz's formulation is related to the definition I have offered. If there were a metric along which all judgments could be aligned, transitivity would always be found. A problem of intransitivity can arise when the use of a unitary metric does violence to our considered judgments. Thus A might be incommensurable with B, because the two cannot be assessed along the same metric; but C might be better than A, because it can be assessed along the same metric as A, without and this is the key point - being better than the differently valued B. But the approach I am offering has some differences from Raz's formulation. Raz does not speak of metrics; he addresses a much larger problem than I identify here, and his claim is, I think, much more ambitious (and hence more controversial). One can admit the failure of metrics in the sense in which I use the term while also denying the possibility of failures of transitivity.99 Although Raz insists Michigan Law Review that incommensurability does not preclude choice,10? he identifies incommensurability with incomparability; the identification is also suggested by the use of the word better in the statement quoted above.101 Thus Raz says that incommensurability "marks the inability of reason to guide our action."'02 For Raz, we can make and even predict choices, perhaps by reference to psychological factors, even in the midst of widespread incommensurabilities, and in the absence of reason-guided outcomes.103 Choices may have causes, and hence be predictable, without reasons.104 But there is yet another possibility: goods may be incommensurable in something very much like Raz's sense without being incomparable, in the sense that we cannot choose among them for good reasons.105 There may be incommensurability between goods A and B even though there are good (nonalgorithmic) reasons for choosing one over the other, and in this sense for thinking that one is better. Options can be incommensurable in this way while still being very much subject to reasonable choice (and to evaluation and certainly to ordinal ranking). Indeed, reasonable choices among incommensurable options are the stuff not merely of law, but of everyday life. It remains to provide a description of what accounts for those choices. But we might conclude that, when incommensurability in Raz's sense occurs, reasons are likely to be available by which to choose among options. Incomparability need not be involved. This way of understanding things is supported by Elizabeth Anderson's illuminating discussion of the problem. In Anderson's view, "[t]wo goods are incommensurable with respect to some scale if one is neither better, worse, nor equal in value to the other in the respects measured by the scale."106 Anderson says that the problem of incommensurability tends to arise when three conditions are met. First, the relevant goods meet the scale's standard in quite different Incommensurability ways. Second, there are no large-scale differences in the degree to which each good meets the standard in its own way. Third, the way one good meets the standard is not categorically superior to the way the other good meets the standard.107 Possible examples include artistic excellence, individual well-being, and generosity. Picasso may be neither equal to nor better or worse than Velasquez in terms of artistic excellence. If Picasso had been a little bit better than in fact he was, this could still be the case. A decision to become a lawyer in New York may be incommensurate, in terms of individual well-being, with a decision to become an artist in a small town in Colorado. A wellknown philanthropist is neither more nor less generous than someone who does innumerable small favors for his friends; nor is it true that the two are equally generous. Michigan Law Review Unlike Raz, Anderson claims that choices among incommensurables can be based on an assessment of reasons. There are many complexities in this account, and I cannot explore them here. But I think that something like it is fundamentally correct and that it also has close parallels in hard cases in law."0 We are left at this stage with an obvious question: Does the fact of choice show that options are commensurable after all? I do not think that it does, for choice can occur among incommensurable goods. We should not identify the actuality of choice with a claim of commensurability. It is odd and unnecessary to say that commensurability necessarily "lies behind" or "justifies" all rational or irrational choices.' 1 We choose whether to take an exciting job in a new city, when the move would unsettle our family; we decide hard tort cases; we choose between work and leisure; we decide how much to spend to promote worker safety or energy conservation. These choices are based on reasons and evaluated by reference to them. Commensurability is not required for choice. 110. Cf infra section V.I (discussing the role of analogical reasoning in law). 111. Cf RAZ, supra note 17, at 327: The mistake in this thought is that it assumes that there is a true value behind the ranking of options, and that the ranking is a sort of technique for measuring this value. It is true of course that when we express a judgment about the value of options we strive to identify what is true independently of our valuation. But the ranking which determines the relative value of options is not a way of getting at some deeper truth, it constitutes the value of the options. Incommensurability other. 13 Indeed, we may say that one of the marks of a genuine cultural difference is sharp or unbridgeable distinctions in kinds of valuation. 113. This may be so in the sense that mutual understanding is impossible and hence conflicts cannot be resolved, or in the sense that some third-party observer may have a hard time in resolving their conflict in view of the difference in kinds of valuation. In this light, perhaps one of the goals of the "overlapping consensus" sought by political liberalism is to avoid a situation in which resolution must be sought amidst conditions of radical incommensurability. For a discussion of overlapping consensus, see RAWLS, supra note 81, at 133 -72; see also the discussion of the Establishment Clause, infra text accompanying notes 175-77. Of course it is possible that one participant in the discussion is wrong even if, or because, he is not subject to persuasion; he may reject reason-giving altogether or be unable to see good reasons even when they are invoked. Hence relativism is not justified by the existence of radical incommensurability. Michigan Law Review ble, even though there is still choice and even reasonable choice. Nevertheless, it is certainly plausible to say that, if the second-order goal operates at a high level of abstraction, we can generate criteria for private and public choice that do help in the assessment of diverse and plural goods. This is a promising strategy;15 but the relevant criteria cannot be fairly characterized as a metric. I will say more on these points below. 16 Some people may find claims about incommensurability, and distinctions among kinds of valuation, to be abstruse or of no practical use. Perhaps we are dealing here with a linguistic or rhetorical debate, one that has no consequences for law, ethics, or politics. Or perhaps it is possible to translate relevant descriptions into different terms without losing anything important. Regan's challenge to incommensurability, as a description of what 115. Instances of this strategy include the discussion of primary goods in RAWLS, supra note 81, at 178-90; the discussion of capabilities in Amartya Sen, Capability and Well-Being, in THE QUALITY OF LIFE 30 (Martha Nussbaum & Amartya Sen eds., 1993); and the similar discussion in Martha Nussbaum, Aristotelian Social Democracy, in LIBERALISM AND THE GOOD 203, 21740 (R. Bruce Douglass et al. eds., 1990). Mill's form of utilitarianism, with its recognition of diverse kinds of valuation and of intrinsic goods, comes close to this general view. See supra note 59. Cf MILL, supra note 2, at 90-91 ("We think utility, or happiness, much too complex and indefinite an end to be sought except through the medium of various secondary ends, concerning which there may be, and often is, agreement among persons who differ in their ultimate standard."). Incommensurability people mean, what they experience, and how they really think, seems to me unsuccessful. Let us take the example of friendship. We can certainly imagine someone who thinks that the value of friendship, or the value of a particular friendship, is just greater than the value of any sum of money. But many people do not think in this way. Some people - perhaps especially desperately poor people - might be willing to sacrifice a friendship in return for a great deal of money. In such cases, friendship does not appear "more" valuable than money. In purely quantitative terms, the friendship appears "less" valuable than the sum of money involved. Yet those who accept the trade might nonetheless find it disturbing - because, I think, the friendship is not more valuable or less valuable, but differently valuable, and we do violence to the way that it is valuable if we trade it for money straight-up. Friendship involves companionship, and it is in the very nature of companionship to be beyond purchase. Recall that some incommensurabilities are freedom-producing, because they allow certain relationships and attachments that would otherwise be impossible. 20 Or take the issue of parenthood. A parent who is asked to trade a child for some sum of money might well react with outrage and shock and regard the request as insulting. This reaction is not that of someone asked to sell something very valuable at a discount - of someone asked to sell an expensive suit for a dollar. The recipient of the offer objects not because the amount offered is unconscionably low, but because the kind of valuation is grotesquely unsuitable. The experience of parenthood is inconsistent with having an evaluative attitude that would permit consideration of dollar compensation for its sacrifice. The experience of parenthood rules that alternative off limits. It is this important point of the subject that Regan's challenge misses. Michigan Law Review areas of life or law, the renovation may be justified, all things considered. But it would be a renovation nonetheless. 122. See generally BECKER, supra note 3. 123. See Bruce A. Ackerman & Richard B. Stewart, Reforming Environmental Law. The Incommensurability aids positive and normative analysis, and that people who reject that assumption should spend their time on more important matters. There is something in this response. It should go without saying that economic descriptions of nonmarket relationships are often highly illuminating, partly because they produce testable hypotheses and usefully model how private and public choices are made amidst scarcity even without dollar exchanges. Just as it is possible to engage in social science under an assumption of "as if unitariness," so too it is fully possible for lawyers and policymakers to act on the assumption of "as if commensurability." In modeling and predicting choices among incommensurable goods, much progress can be made through the simplifying assumption that everything is aligned along a single metric. Or we might dispense with talk of metrics and simply try to rank choices. This enterprise does not seem threatened in any way by what I have said here. 126. Consider, for example, Becker's characterization of the "marriage market": [A]n efficient marriage market assigns imputed income or "prices" to all participants that attract them to suitable polygamous or monogamous marriages. Imputed prices are also used to match men and women of different qualities: some participants . . . choose to be matched with "inferior" persons because they feel "superior" persons are too expensive.... It has, however, been demonstrated that many esoteric things may be evaluated on a numerical scale: for example, the quality of wine, a musical performance, commodity testing, etc.... When we are first confronted with such numerical evaluations they look strange and unfamiliar. When we have got some experience with this type of rating, they become ingrained in our value pattern and we begin to think in those numerical terms. Hence, we do not reject the idea that more general situations may be evaluated by human beings in terms of numbers on a numerical scale .... Michigan Law Review ations of the various goods at stake - higher gross national product, lower employment, cleaner air, and so forth in stringent environmental proposals. An insistence on these points should lead to better thought about the relevant values, and it will likely lead to better outcomes as well. 128. Cf GERALD J. POSTEMA, BENTHAM AND THE COMMON LAW TRADITION 335 (1986) ("[B]ecause they do not merely ascribe properties to objects, but instruct us about how to think about them, characterizations do not leave the phenomena unchanged."). In the same vein, Bernard Williams suggests that use of the utilitarian method leads one to provide those things [susceptible to utilitarian calculus] with prestige, to give them an unjustifiably large role in the decision, and to dismiss to a greater distance those things which do not respond to the same methods. ... To regard this as a matter of half a loaf, is to presuppose both that the selective application of those techniques to some elements in the situation does not in itself bias the result, and also that to take in a wider set of considerations will necessarily, in the long run, be a matter of more of the same; and often both of those presuppositions are false. Incommensurability engagements with friends, but they do trade off a range of variables in deciding when and with whom to have lunch, and some of these variables are financial. Indeed, it would not be odd for a busy lawyer to cancel lunch with a friend, with a promise to buy lunch next time. People may not think that they are "investing" in their children, but they do allocate limited resources among, for example, leisure, consumer goods, vacation, and education for their offspring. But much depends on what the ambiguous word "implicitly" means. The fact that the trade-off is not made explicitly is hardly a matter of indifference. When the trade-off is made only "implicitly," it is not well-described as an ordinary trade-off at all. The actor may be showing a commitment to a certain set of judgments about how relationships and prospects should be valued, and if the trade-offs were made explicitly, that commitment would be undermined or even violated. The explicit trade is not equivalent to the implicit one; the absence of explicitness maintains certain social norms. In an analogous context, Holmes wrote, "[e]ven a dog distinguishes between being stumbled over and being kicked";131 the difference between a trip and a kick identical in effect but conveying very different attitudes is related to the difference between an implicit and an explicit trade. In these circumstances, it is hopelessly underdescriptive to claim that someone "implicitly" trades off (say) cash and friendship in making lunch decisions, even though this way of seeing things might be quite helpful for predictive purposes. Michigan Law Review If kinds of valuation matter to human life, judgments about such kinds will matter a great deal to law as well. And, in many areas of law, the question of commensurability occupies a surprisingly important place. A. Preliminaries The diverse kinds of valuation do not map neatly onto legal categories. We cannot say that, because people value different events in different ways, it follows that law should have a particular content. Nor can we draw lessons for law from the bare fact of incommensurability in any of the senses discussed here.134 This is so for several reasons. First, we need an account of which kinds of valuation are appropriate in order to make recommendations for law.135 We are not and should not be agnostics or skeptics about appropriate kinds of valuation; they can be evaluated on the basis of reasons.136 Nor should we be simple conventionalists, thinking that, because people value a certain thing in a certain way, the law ought to do so as well. Of course democracy has its claims; but there may be good reason to challenge any particular popularly endorsed judgment on kinds of valuation. Indeed, some aspects of constitutional law represent an effort to discipline democratic discussion by limiting possible kinds of valuation, on the ground that they are too sectarian or inconsistent with principles of civic equality.137 When there are no constitutional barriers, the democratic process is formally unconstrained, but an important part of democratic debate consists of challenges to kinds of valuation that prevail among the democratic majority. Incommensurability presumption, the state ought to allow people to value in the way that they see best. These considerations, however, do not imply that the state should remain agnostic about proper kinds of valuation. Incommensurabilities - even of the form that block certain reasons for action - are not merely freedom-reducing, but constitutive of certain sorts of freedom, for they make possible certain valuable relationships and commitments. Moreover, a state will have a hard time if it seeks to be entirely neutral about valuations. Global neutrality is impossible.139 The state has to make decisions about how to allocate rights and entitlements; it has to decide what can be traded on markets and what will be subject to politics, and these decisions inevitably will take some sort of stand on appropriate valuations. diverse conceptions of the good). For a more explicit discussion of diverse valuations, see also RAZ, supra note 17, at 321-66. discussion. Michigan Law Review ures and private life. At least if the measures do not affect prevailing kinds of valuation and can operate autonomously in their own sphere, the law may be acceptable even if it does not reflect an appropriate kind of valuation for other contexts. A unifying theme for the discussion is the expressive function of law. 141 When evaluating a legal rule, we might ask whether the rule expresses an appropriate valuation of an event, person, group, or practice. The point matters for two reasons. The first and most important is based on a prediction about the facts: an incorrect valuation may influence social norms and push them in the wrong direction. For example, if the law says that the act of murder can or cannot be met with the death penalty, social norms may be influenced. If the law say, reproductive capacities - as a comwrongly treats something Incommensurability modity, the social kind of valuation may be adversely affected. If the law mandates recycling, subsidizes national service, or requires mandatory pro bono work, it may have healthy effects on social valuations of the relevant activities. It is appropriate to evaluate the law on this ground.142 We can go further. Some people seem to think that it is possible to assess law solely on the basis of consequences that an open-ended inquiry into consequences is a feasible way of evaluating legal rules. But this is not actually possible. The effects of any legal rule can be described in an infinite number of ways. Any particular characterization or accounting of consequences will rest not on some specification of the brute facts; instead it will be mediated by a set of (often tacit) norms determining how to describe or conceive of consequences. Part of the expressive function of law consists in the identification of what consequences count and how they should be described. Because any conception of consequences is interpretive and thus evaluative in character, simple consequentialism is not a feasible project for law. Michigan Law Review description of the effects of some legal rule is a product of expressive norms that give consequences identifiable social meanings including norms that deny legal significance to certain consequences. We can therefore see the expressive function both in the effects of law on social attitudes and in the use of law to decide what sorts of consequences matter for legal purposes. When it seems as if we can talk about consequences alone, it is only because the mediating expressive norms are so widely shared that there is no controversy about them.145 I have emphasized the possibility that the kinds of valuation reflected in law will affect social valuations in general.146 Sometimes this claim is right; valuations, like preferences and beliefs, are not a presocial given, but a product of a complex set of social forces, including law. But sometimes law will have little or no effect on valuations. Society is filled with legal provisions for market exchanges of goods and services like pets and babysitting, for example that are valued for reasons other than use. Market exchange need not affect social valuations; certainly intrinsic goods are purchased and sold. The question therefore remains whether the claimed effect on social norms will occur. It is fully plausible, for example, to say that, although a law that permits prostitution reflects an inappropriate valuation of sexuality, any adverse effect of the law on social norms is so small as to be an implausible basis for objection. 145. A broad conclusion seems to follow. There is no form of consequentialism that is nonsectarian. Every form embodies a controversial claim about the right or the good. This is of course a familiar point for utilitarians, whose consequentialism is made workable only through a set of defining commitments. Incommensurability terrorist, even if the consequence of the refusal is that many more people will be killed. Or a pacifist might refuse to take a job in a munitions factory, even if the refusal will have no salutary effects. We are all Expressionists part of the time. Sometimes we just want to scream loudly at injustice, or to stand up and be counted. These are noble motives, but any serious revolutionist must often deprive himself of the pleasures of self-expression. He must judge his actions by their ultimate effects on institutions. HERBERT SIMON, MODELS OF MY LIFE 281 (1991). Michigan Law Review The point bears on the cultural role of adjudication and especially of Supreme Court decisions. The empirical effects of those decisions are highly disputed.151 When the Supreme Court says that capital punishment is unconstitutional, that segregation is unlawful, that certain restrictions on hate speech violate the First Amendment, or that students cannot be asked to pray in school, the real-world consequences may be much smaller than we think. But the close attention paid to the Court's pronouncements may well be connected with their expressive or symbolic character.'52 When the Court makes a decision, it is often taken to be speaking on behalf of the nation's basic principles and commitments. This is a matter of importance quite apart from consequences, conventionally understood. It is customary and helpful to point to the Court's educative effect.'53 But perhaps its expressive effect, or its expressive character, better captures what is often at stake. Incommensurability among these areas, each of which raises distinctive issues of its own. Some of the issues are connected to problems of individual or social choices amidst scarcity; others are not. But I believe that it is impossible to obtain a full understanding of these areas of law without reference to ideas of this general sort. In this sense, these very diverse areas share a common subject. They are united by the presence of important questions about appropriate kinds of valuation and about commensurability. especially religious organizations A liberal society allows a high degree of social differentiation.'54 It includes the political sphere, the family, markets, intermediate organizations and much more. Michael Walzer's influential book155 offers an instructive discussion of these different "spheres." It would be especially valuable to be able to understand the social function or purpose of this sort of differentiation. Why might it be a good thing to carve life up in this way? And what exactly is the role of law in this endeavor? The liberal commitment to social differentiation can be understood as an effort to make appropriate spaces for different kinds of valuation.156 Without accepting naive conceptions of the public-private distinction, we can see the family as the characteristic liberal sphere for the expression of love. At its best, politics embodies the forms of respect entailed by processes of reason-giving.'57 In many intermediate organizations, people express affection and admiration. In religious organizations, the prevailing kind of valuation is usually one of worship and reverence. The market is typically the sphere for use. Things bought and sold on markets are typically valued in the way associated with pure commodities, although it is important and also true that many things sold on markets - music, vacations in beautiful places, art, childcare - are valued for reasons other than simple use. 154. See DON HERZOG, HAPPY SLAVES 148-81 (1989) (describing liberal state's neutrality on competing conceptions of the good); Richard Pildes, Separate Spheres of Constitutional and Political Value (Dec. 1, 1992) (unpublished manuscript, on file with author). Michigan Law Review natural. We know far too little to say that, in the state of nature, there is any such division (though there may well be antecedents158). Markets are of course a function of the law of property, contract, and tort, without which voluntary agreements would not be possible.159 It is law that decides what can be traded on markets, and how trades can occur. Undoubtedly families of various sorts would arise in the state of nature, but the particular families we have are emphatically a function of law. The law helps to create an independent familial sphere; it also determines who may be entitled to its protections and disabilities.160 To some extent, the state also insulates the public sphere from civil society, through, for example, the rule of one person, one vote161 and limitations on expenditures on campaigns.162 Intermediate organizations, like religious groups and labor unions, also receive various protections, insulations, and disabilities by laws designed to recognize independent social spheres.163 The creation of diverse social spheres, understood as a mechanism for allowing diverse kinds of valuation, is also an important social good, providing a form of liberty that is indispensable in modern society.164 It would be foolish to idealize current practices. Institutional practice often deviates from institutional aspiration. Politics is often a realm for use; it has important marketlike features. It is hardly a simple process of exchanging reasons. The family is not only a place for the expression of love. Women and children have often been used without their consent, sometimes like commodities. People who believe in different kinds of valuation do not deny the gap between current practice and current aspiration. Much social criticism consists of an insistence on that gap, and of a claim for reform in the interest of producing conformity to the aspiration. areas of social life arise spontaneously and are shaped independently of legal institutions). sanctions in sustaining ownership rights, bargains, and duties of care. that render all citizens' votes "approximately equal in weight"). others). Incommensurability Moreover, it is possible to conceive of prevailing institutions in quite different ways. Some familiar social criticism consists of a claim that an existing sphere of social differentiation embodies an inadequate kind of valuation. Thus, for example, the family has often been a place for hierarchy and deference, and it is sometimes suggested that processes of mutual respect and reason-giving should displace this unjust kind of valuation.165 The political process has often been conceived as appropriately a realm of reason-giving; the characteristic American attack on hierarchy and privilege is an attempt to replace a system of authority with a system of reasons.166 Some people think that the attack has not gone far enough and that if reason-giving is to prevail, legal changes are needed to ensure against (for example) the corrosive effects on democratic deliberation of disparities in wealth.167 Others argue that bonds of affection and even love ought to replace or supplement the kinds of reason-giving that are characteristic of modern politics.168 Often, of course, market thinking is said to be at least a descriptively and perhaps a normatively superior alternative to current kinds of valuation. Thus it is sometimes suggested that family life, sexual choice, and markets ought all to be conceived as systems of exchange and use.169 Some especially ambitious forms of social criticism involve an effort to claim that one kind of valuation - use, respect, love, worship - ought to be the universal one.170 Most modestly, it is sometimes suggested that things would be better if the family were made more marketlike, or if the market were made more familylike.'71 These debates show that many claims for social reform are really arguments for revision of the kinds of valuation prevailing in different social institutions. In some forms, these claims point to the constitutive role of law, urging that existing arrangements are hardly natural, that they could not exist without certain legal choices, and that revi of "as if commensurability," at least for predictive purposes. Michigan Law Review sions in law would make sense from the standpoint of justice or some other value. Of course a traditional liberal view is that widely diverse kinds of valuation are an important social good.'72 B. Religion, Civic Equality, and Political Liberalism Our system is one of liberal republicanism.173 As such, it is committed to a principle of political equality and to a certain view about the relationship between political life and religious conviction. We can make some progress on these abstractions by observing that a liberal republic attempts to exclude certain kinds of valuation from public life. Those kinds of valuation may be too sectarian, or they may be inconsistent with the premise of political equality. A liberal republic thus bans particular "inputs" into politics either because they express a kind of valuation that is suited only to private life, or because they deny political equality, a commitment that entails certain evaluative attitudes toward fellow citizens. What I want to emphasize is that we can get a distinctive purchase on certain constitutional issues in this light. A liberal republic also excludes certain kinds of valuation of human beings as inconsistent with constitutionally prescribed norms of political equality. I have referred to the prohibition on "titles of Incommensurability nobility,"179 a key to the American tradition in this regard. The Equal Protection Clause is now understood very much in these terms. Thus, for example, a law cannot be premised on the ground that blacks are inferior to whites, 80 or women inferior to men.181 This idea may help make sense of the controversial claim that discriminatory intent is a necessary and sufficient condition for invalidating legislation.'82 One would have to say much more to justify this proposition.'83 But we can get at what underlies the emphasis on discriminatory intent by seeing it as a ban on certain kinds of valuation of human beings. At the very least, we can see why discriminatory intent is by itself enough to doom a legislative enactment. purposes cannot legitimately account for legislation). Michigan Law Review ing media in the interest of promoting democratic goals.187 In at least two ways, issues of appropriate kinds of valuation and of commensurability underlie these debates. The first issue is whether to treat speech as an ordinary commodity, valued in the same way as other commodities. The second issue is whether free speech values are unitary or instead plural and diverse. In these circumstances, many of the recent challenges to deregulated markets in expression reject the notion that speech should be valued in the same way or for the same purposes as ordinary consumer products. This claim suggests that a system of free markets is not necessarily compatible with a well-functioning system of free expression. These are two very different things. If a free speech market promotes democratic goals, it is not because it is a conceptual truth, but because the forces of supply and demand work out that way.191 It may well turn out that market forces disserve democratic ideals by deterring substantive coverage of public issues and sufficient diversity of view. If so, democratic correctives may promote the purposes of the free speech guarantee. (1993) for such an argument and relevant citations. Incommensurability Communications Commission, Mark Fowler, said that "television is just another appliance. It's a toaster with pictures."192 This is a conspicuous statement of the market conception of free speech, and it is jarring because it reveals an unusually stark view of how to value the products of the broadcast media. an It would be especially obtuse to suggest that the free speech principle serves only political values. A system of free communication Michigan Law Review yields a wide variety of diverse social goods.197 Significant autonomy interests, quite independent of democracy, help justify the protection of free speech.198 There is also an important connection between free speech and individual self-development. The opportunity to create art or literature, like the opportunity to read the products of other minds, is part of the development of human capacities. A vigorous free speech principle also helps secure scientific progress. Finally, free communication is indispensable to economic development.199 A wellfunctioning system of free expression should be alert to the wide range of values at stake, and to the qualitative distinctions among those values. The point applies to most constitutional rights. As simply one other example, consider the debate over whether the Supreme Court should protect "fundamental rights" under the Due Process Clause. In an influential if extreme formulation, Judge Bork asks how the Court can protect the right to sexual privacy if it does not protect the right to pollute. On Bork's view, both rights amount to "gratifications," and there is no essential difference between them.201 A less extreme version of this view is the concern whether the Court can consistently protect sexual privacy without protecting property interests; who is to say that the former is more important than the latter?202 We might be able to handle this question better if we insist on qualitative rather than merely quantitative differences among rights. It is not necessarily true that someone will value sexual privacy more than continued employment for longer hours at better wages, but it is possible to have a distinct concern about government regulation of the former, and it may be because of the way that sexual privacy is valued Incommensurability that constitutional protection is appropriate.203 Once claims for constitutional protection are not aligned along a single scale and assessed in purely quantitative terms, it becomes easier to make progress in thinking about fundamental rights. Much might be said about these complex ideas. It is possible to think that, when we treat rights as trumps, we mean simply that rights are very highly valued and that they may not be violated without extremely strong justifications.207 Because of the high premium we place on free speech, or because of our distrust of ad hoc judgments, we ban case-by-case trade-offs. On this view, there is no issue of incommensurability. Or we might think that when A is lexically prior to B, it is simply because we place an especially high premium on A. It would indeed seem fanatical to suggest that any right, to qualify as such, must be respected regardless of the consequences. If someone denies that liberty of conscience is a basic liberty and maintains that all human interests are commensurable, and that between any two there always exists some rate of exchange in terms of which it is rational to balance the protection of one against the protection of the other, then we have reached an impasse. [J]ustice is a name for certain moral requirements which, regarded collectively, stand higher in the scale of social utility, and are therefore of more paramount obligation, than any others remains the appropriate name for certain social utilities which are vastly more important, and therefore more absolute and imperative, than any others are as a class . . . and which, therefore, ought to be, as well as naturally are, guarded by a sentiment not only different in degree, but also in kind .... Michigan Law Review be saying not that they are infinitely or even extraordinarily valuable when viewed solely in terms of aggregate levels, but that they are valued in a distinctive way - a way quite different from, and qualitatively higher than, the way we value the competing interests. Because of the distinctive way that they are valued, it is necessary that the competing interests be (a) of a certain qualitative sort and (b) extraordinary in amount or level, in order to count as reasons for abridgment.208 Similarly, in speaking of the lexical priority of equal liberty, we may mean that a just society values this interest in a way that precludes its violation for social and economic advantages. The lexical priority of liberty thus represents an effort to restate Kantian ideals about the priority of equal dignity and respect.209 We can imagine cases in which this judgment could be fanatical.210 But it seems clear that, in some cases, a belief in lexical priority may well reflect claims about incommensurability. We might treat equal liberty as a reflection of the foundational commitment to equal dignity and respect, and believe that we do violence to the way we value that commitment if we allow it to be compromised for the sake of greater social and economic advantages. On this view, the lexical priority of equal liberty is structurally akin to the refusal to allow a child to be traded for cash, or a promise to be breached as a result of mildly changed circumstances. It reflects a judgment that the prevalent kind of valuation forbids compromising the good for certain reasons, even though those reasons are legitimate bases for action in other contexts. Most positive theories of government regulation assess environmental issues211 by reference to people's "preferences" for environmental quality viewed abstractly, through a unitary scale, along the same metric that of utility or of willingness to pay.212 But there are some apparent anomalies in individual behavior here. In particular, ordinary people appear to resist the use of a unitary scale and the 208. As noted, this is John Rawls's understanding of the clear and present danger test in RAWLS, supra note 81; see also the discussion of hierarchical incommensurability in Pildes & Anderson, supra note 48, at 2147-58. Incommensurability claim of commensurability. Perhaps the discussion thus far can help make sense of some of the most puzzling phenomena relating to the public's environmental judgments. Through this route we may be able to understand some features of the apparent demand for environmental regulation, even if we ultimately conclude that the demand often involves irrationality. Consider a few examples. (c) Some apparently popular statutes reflect a sort of environmental absolutism. The Endangered Species Act215 forbids balancing except in the rarest of circumstances.216 To the same effect, the Delaney Clause217 forbids any entry of carcinogenic substances onto the market, banning trade-offs of any sort.218 (d) There are extraordinary disparities in federal expenditures for each life saved.219 Some environmental programs prevent risks at enormous cost; the government is willing to spend relatively little to stop other risks. All current efforts to produce uniformity in expendi 213. Daniel Kahneman et al., The Endowment Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias, 5 J. ECON. PERSP. 193, 202-03 (1991) (citation omitted). The authors comment: "These extreme responses reflect the feelings of outrage often seen when communities are faced with the prospect of accepting a new risk such as a nuclear power plant or waste disposal facility." Id. at 203. Michigan Law Review tures - understood, for example, as equivalent amounts of dollar expenditures for each statistical life saved - have failed. We might hypothesize that social valuation of environmental goods comes partly from an insistence that diverse social goods should not be assessed according to the same metric, and that those goods ought to be valued in different ways. With this hypothesis, some apparent anomalies dissolve or become more readily explicable. Some people, for example, insistently rebel against the idea that we should see all of the following, environmentally related consequences as "costs": unemployment, higher prices, greater poverty, dirtier air, more cancer, respiratory problems, the loss of species. If we understand all these things as "costs," to be assessed via the same metric, we will disable ourselves from making important distinctions. It might be hypothesized that when people refuse to trade off environmental quality and other goods, they are making a claim about the diversity of goods and incommensurability. They are claiming that one set of goods is superior to another not in the sense that it is infinitely valuable, but in the sense that it stands higher in a hierarchy of public val Cost-Effectivencess of Selected Regulations Cost per premature death averted Regulation Unvented Space Heater Ban Underground Construction Standards Auto Fuel-System Integrity Standard Standards for Servicing Auto Wheel Rims Side-Impact Standards for Autos (Dynamic) Low Altitude Windshear Equipment & Training Standards Hazard Communication Standard Standards for Radionuclides in Uranium Mines Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Coke Byproducts) Electrical Equipment Standards (Coal Mines) Arsenic/Copper NESHAP Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Transfer Operations) Coke Ovens Occupational Exposure Limit Arsenic Occupational Exposure Limit Asbestos Ban 1,2 Dichloropropane Drinking Water Standard Hazardous Waste Land Disposal Ban (1st 3rd) Formaldehyde Occupational Exposure Limit Atrazine/Alachlor Drinking Water Standard Hazardous Waste Listing for Wood-Preserving Chemicals Incommensurability ues.220 The refusal to accept certain sorts of trade-offs reflects and expresses this judgment. As in the context of lexical priority, the kind of valuation of the environment forbids compromises on the basis of reasons that are fully legitimate in other settings. the required risk premium In a way this approach makes obvious sense. For purposes of allocating resources to reduce risk, it is a promising alternative. But suppose that even after their behavior is explained in this way, people firmly resist (as is predictable) the conclusion that, to them, risk A, or their lives, is really worth X. Suppose they claim that this is not in fact their view. To the evidence of their behavior, suppose that employees respond that they did indeed "take the job," but they adamantly resist any broader or acontextual inference about their trade-offs between risk and dollars.225 They say that whatever they did, it is unreasonable to say that they value their lives at the amount represented by the discounted value of their life. Is it so clear that they are not making sense? Even if these people are indeed not making sense, we might be able to use their responses to understand some otherwise peculiar features of the social demand for environmental regulation. It is even possible that they are making sense.226 If so, it is because their valuation is not 220. See the discussion of hierarchical incommensurability in Pildes & Anderson, supra note studies). Michigan Law Review an acontextual one or a global judgment about valuation or optimization, but instead highly dependent on and geared only to the particular setting in which the choice is made. When a worker accepts a risky job for cash, it may mischaracterize his choice to say that he "really" thinks that the risk is equivalent to that amount of cash if the word "really" is intended to capture an abstract, acontextual judgment. Instead he has simply taken this job in preference to others among a specific range of opportunities, and this decision, in its context, means nothing more general.227 Through this route, we might help come to terms with phenomena (a) through (d) above.228 For example, the risk charts might reflect qualitative distinctions among different sorts of hazards. People might be interested not only in cost for each life saved, but also in whether the risk was assumed knowingly and voluntarily, whether the exposing entity knows the facts, whether the underlying activity produces valuable goods, whether the hazard is common, whether the exposure is essential, whether the risk is encountered occupationally or elsewhere, and whether the people subjected to risk were able to participate in relevant decisions.229 They might also be interested in the nature of the risk, thinking, for example, that certain deaths are worse than others. Through this route, we might well discover that people's valuations of different risks will vary a good deal with context. Hence the varying valuations will reflect not only irrationality or interest-group pressure, but also diverse judgments about diverse risks. 227. This is the argument in Sen, supra note 57, at 205-07. As Raz puts it: Revealed preferences are a very incomplete and misleading clue to people's valuations. These can be accurately gauged only if one takes account of people's own reasons for different valuations (a delicate task which is in principle incapable of completion, as it is impossible completely and exhaustively to describe a person's set of values at any given time). Incommensurability expenditures in light of the diverse factors outlined above, and at least some of the current variations might have some such foundation. 231. It is not responsive to say that some or many people might, under imaginable circumstances, allow the experiments if the amount were extraordinary high. See supra text accompanying notes 45-46. Michigan Law Review answer to the two questions: "How much would you have to be paid to allow degradation?" and "How much would you pay to avoid degradation?" People are perfectly willing to answer the second question with numbers that are systematically lower than those produced by the first. In the environmental area, the asymmetry is especially large, and it creates a considerable puzzle for conventional views about rationality. But it would be wrong to think that the answers to the second question are in some deep sense more revealing of "true" preferences, while the responses to the first question are mistaken. One of the most hotly disputed issues in law and policy involves the role of cost-benefit analysis (CBA). In the most dramatic victory for CBA, the Reagan administration adopted two important executive Incommensurability orders calling for the application of CBA to all regulatory decisions.235 These orders were withdrawn by President Clinton and replaced by a new executive order, which also places a high premium on cost-benefit analysis.236 There is of course much to be said in favor of CBA. Federal regulation is notoriously and pervasively chaotic and irrational.237 Who could object to the idea that we should systematize costs and benefits and compare them? The question seems especially powerful when combined with the plausible claim that some opponents of CBA are confused about their real objection. In fact, it is sometimes said,238 the opponents' real complaint is that some of the relevant variables have been insufficiently valued. Would it not be a sufficient response to say to the critics of this form of analysis that perhaps we should place a higher premium on, for example, human health, or the environment, and then proceed with CBA? It would be difficult to challenge the view that law and policy should be assessed on the basis of an inquiry into the advantages and disadvantages of different courses of action, and CBA often appears to be a way of systematizing that sort of approach. But at least for some purposes, I do not think this response would be sufficient. Nor is it entirely adequate to say, as critics of CBA typically do, that this sort of approach fails to address distributional issues or is biased against the poor.239 The real problem with any form of conventional CBA is that it is obtuse. CBA is obtuse because it tries to measure diverse social goods along the same metric.240 Suppose, for example, that we are told that the "cost" of a certain occupational safety regulation is $1 million, and that the "benefit" is $1.2 million. To make a sensible evaluation, we need to know a great deal more. To what do these numbers refer? Do they include greater unemployment, higher inflation, and the scaledback production of important goods? Do they mean more poverty? At least in principle, it would be much better to have a highly disag defended in Part III. Michigan Law Review gregated system for assessing the qualitatively different effects of regulatory impositions. People should be allowed to see those diverse effects for themselves and to make judgments based on an understanding of the qualitative differences. If all of the relevant goods are aligned along a single metric, they become less visible, or perhaps invisible. The best response to this claim is pragmatic and institutional. It would be that at least for law and public policy, it makes sense to act as if diverse goods were commensurable, because this way of proceeding makes decisions tractable where they would otherwise be ad hoc, and because ad hoc decisions lead to a systematic misallocation of resources and a perverse system of priorities. CBA may offer a less than full description of what is really at stake, but perhaps it counteracts the forms of inconsistency and ultimate irrationality that result in the public sector if we proceed without quantitative help. 241. See supra note 236 and accompanying text. 242. The Clinton order is cautious and even ambiguous about cost-benefit analysis as a tool of decision. It says "qualitative" costs and benefits will be included as part of the analysis: "Costs and benefits shall be understood to include both quantifiable measures (to the fullest extent that these can be usefully estimated) and qualitative measures of costs and benefits that are difficult to quantify, but nevertheless essential to consider." Exec. Order No. 12,866, 58 Fed. Reg. 51,735, at 51,735 (1993). The order further states: "Each agency shall assess both the costs and the benefits of the intended regulation and, recognizing that some costs and benefits are difficult to quantify, propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that the benefits of the intended regulation justify its costs." Id. at 51,736. The order also contains a vague reference to the relevance of "equity" and "distributive impacts." Id. Incommensurability abstract. My point is that if goods are diverse and valued in different ways, there will be considerable crudeness in this approach to regulation. Much will be lost even if much is also gained. We should therefore have a presumption in favor of a much more disaggregated accounting of the effects of regulation, one that exposes to public view the full set of effects. The legal system usually insists on an award of damages for the infliction of harm; a damages award appears to reflect a judgment in favor of commensurability. But sometimes damages are insufficient. We can approach a large subject the relationship between compensation and commensurability243 - by examining a pervasive issue in the law of contract: whether to award a damages remedy or instead to require specific performance.244 From an exploration of this issue, we may be able to offer a few tentative generalizations. A conventional answer is that damages remedies are inadequate when the good at issue is unique.245 But the notion of uniqueness is itself a puzzle. At least for economists, the term points at most to "questions of degree."246 All goods have substitutes of some sort; this is part of the usual understanding of choice amidst scarcity. In explaining the notion of uniqueness, some people have stressed that a damages remedy might well be inaccurate for certain goods. Subjective value is peculiarly hard to ascertain in some cases, and the goods may involve high search costs that judges cannot easily determine. Michigan Law Review The subjective value of Jones's painting is nearly impossible to know and may well substantially exceed the market value, if a market exists. The particular costs incurred by Jones in finding that particular painting are hard to establish. In these circumstances, the existence of a specific performance remedy can be seen as a natural response to information costs faced by the legal system in ascertaining the appropriate damages remedy. Incommensurability This point suggests the need to supplement Guido Calabresi and Douglas Melamed's well-known discussion of the choice between liability and property rules.250 In their terminology, a right is protected by a liability rule if it can be taken upon a payment of compensation. A right is protected by a property rule if it can be taken only through voluntary exchange, and if market compensation is therefore an inadequate justification for the taking. Calabresi and Melamed's important discussion rightly emphasizes the relevance of transactions costs, including information costs, to the choice between the two methods of legal protection.251 But this account provides only part of the picture. As the discussion above suggests, property rules are also appropriate when the relevant right or good is valued in a different way from money. In such cases, courts hesitate to use liability rules, not only because courts doubt their ability to calculate a proper cost for the forgone good, but also because a dollar amount will reflect the wrong kind of valuation of the good at issue. The litigant is entitled to the good and its existing kind of valuation, rather than to a substitute valued in a different way, even if in some aggregative sense "equally."252 The point bears on damage remedies generally, most obviously for emotional distress or pain and suffering.253 As Margaret Jane Radin Relationship of Contractual Remedies to Political and Social Status: A Preliminary Inquiry, 32 U. TORONTO L.J. 31 (1982). Michigan Law Review has argued, we might think of financial compensation not as commensurable with many injuries at issue in tort law, and thus not as a means of truly restoring the status quo ante, but less ambitiously as an effort to establish and recognize that a wrong has been done and to deter wrongdoing while ensuring that some redress has been paid. Even if a legal system can do no better, that redress does not fully rectify the wrong, because monetary sums are not commensurable with the relevant injury.254 The same ideas underlie an important debate in environmental law, having to do with the appropriate measure of damages for injury to natural resources. The "restoration cost" for, say, a portion of the Alaska seashore may diverge from its "use value," understood as aggregated private willingness to purchase the area in question. Through an important regulation, the Department of the Interior indicated its preference for use value if it was lower than restoration cost.255 The Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit invalidated the regulation on the theory that Congress had expressed a preference for restoration.256 The decision of the court reflects an understanding that those who injure natural resources should be required to restore the status quo ante, not because it is more valuable, but because the public is entitled to have a good that it values in the way that it values natural resources, rather than the so-called cash equivalent.257 may be unwarranted. See Croley & Hanson, supra note 20, at 59-67. The unwarranted inference is a version of that committed in Viscusi, supra note 222, at 362-65 seeing particular choices as reflecting global or acontextual judgments. See also Sen, supra note 57, at 206 (rejecting such an inference). Alan Schwartz illuminates this puzzle by describing financial remeinvolving "substitutes rather than replacements": dies "Nonpecuniary harms are not replaceable by insurance payments or damage judgments; rather. these transfers are used to purchase substitutes that make up for or assuage the pain of accidents." Alan Schwartz, Proposals for Products Liability Reform: A Theoretical Synthesis. 97 YALE L.J. 353, 408 (1988). The fatal flaw of [the Department of the] Interior's approach. however, is that it assumes [But] Congress was that natural resources are fungible goods, just like any other .... skeptical of the ability of human beings to measure the true "value" of a natural resource. Indeed, even the common law recognizes that restoration is the proper remedy for injury to property where measurement of damages by some other method will fail to compensate fully for the injury .... [N]atural resources have value that is not readily measured by traditional means. Incommensurability G. Feminism in Law An understanding of issues of commensurability, and of diverse kinds of valuation, should help explain a number of claims by and debates among feminists, both inside law and elsewhere. Some of these claims and debates have been inadequately understood in the legal culture, in part because of the importance of kinds of valuation258 and because of the infrequency with which such kinds are understood to be part of legal theory and practice. "all of the public economic values associated with an injured resource, including use values and nonuse values such as option, existence, and bequest values." 56 Fed. Reg. at 19,760. A leading textbook, interestingly, comments that: "the concept of 'compensable value' recognizes that resources are valued for many different reasons, not all of which are reflected accurately in market prices." ROBERT V. PERCIVAL ET AL., ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION: LAW, SCIENCE, AND POLICY 362 (1992). For subsequent public commentary and updating of the proposed regulation, see 58 Fed. Reg. 39,328 (1993). Michigan Law Review claim is that women have not been treated with basic dignity and respect. The invocation of love or affection, even if sincerely and intensely felt, is unresponsive to the relevant concern, which is about the appropriate kind and not the appropriate level of valuation. In fact many claims about issues related to sex equality including the distribution of labor within marriage, pornography, sexual harassment, and abortion - might be taken to be claims that law and social norms should treat women in a certain way, one that involves dignity and respect, or a principle of civic equality. On this account, a distinctive norm underlies the objection to certain forms of sex inequality, and the norm is connected with a claim about proper kinds of valuation.263 Hence the objection to sexual harassment is that this practice treats women as objects for the enjoyment and use of men. Hence the objection to legal proscriptions on abortion is that the law ought not to use women's reproductive capacities against women's will and for the protection of third parties, at least when it does not similarly use men's capacities. Similarly, the objection to pornography has a good deal to do with the way in which certain forms of sexually explicit material treat women's sexual capacities as objects for the use of others, especially through sexual violence.264 Thus pornography is challenged not as offensive, but as embodying an improper means of valuing human beings.265 Similar issues are raised by the sale of sexual and reproductive capacities through markets, as in the practices of prostitution and surrogacy.266 A good deal would have to be said in order to support the view that these claims entail any particular legal reform. All I mean to say is that an important strand in recent writing about sex discrimination 263. Compare Locke's assertion, as a governing principle in the State of Nature, that "there cannot be supposed any such Subordination among us, that may Authorize us to destroy one another, as if we were made for one another's uses." JOHN LOCKE, Two TREATISES OF GOVERNMENT 271 (Peter Laslett ed., student ed. 1988) (3d ed. 1698). This is an essentially liberal idea. It shows the deep continuity between certain strands of feminism and the liberal tradition, notwithstanding the purported antiliberalism of some feminist thought. See, e.g., CATHARINE MACKINNON, FEMINISM UNMODIFIED (1987); cf OKIN, supra note 33, at 61 ("[A] number of the basic tenets of liberalism . . have been basic tenets in the development of feminism, too."); Susan M. Okin, Reason and Feeling in Thinking About Justice, 99 ETHICS 229 (1989) (drawing connections between Rawls's work and feminist thought). offensive' further misconstrues its harm.... of the sexual inferiority of women . . Incommensurability should be taken to argue that an improper kind of valuation has pervaded norms and law relating to women, and that changes are required that would embody a different kind. An understanding of diverse kinds of valuation helps explain why liberal regimes generally respect voluntary agreements. If people value things in different ways, the state should allow them to sort things out as they choose. If values were commensurable, perhaps we could seek to block certain voluntary exchanges simply because we had better information about relevant costs and benefits than the parties themselves. But, in the face of diverse kinds of valuation, it is best to permit people to value as they like.267 But even a system that generally respects freedom of contract may block exchanges on several grounds. Typically such grounds involve some form of market failure: a party may lack relevant information, a collective action problem may exist, third parties may be affected, a party may be myopic. But an additional and distinct reason is that some exchanges involve and encourage improper kinds of valuation. I think that more common arguments stressing distributive considerations or unequal bargaining power often depend, upon reflection, on an unarticulated claim about inappropriate valuation. The claim is that to allow purchase and sale of a good will mean that the good will be wrongly valued in a qualitative sense.268 Consider, for example, the right to vote. Vote trading is objectionable in part because it would allow inappropriate concentration of political power in the hands of a few. The prohibition therefore overcomes a collective action problem.269 But perhaps the ban on vote trading also stems from a concern about kinds of valuation. If votes were freely tradable, we would have a different conception of what voting is for - about the values that it embodies - and this changed conception would have corrosive effects on politics. The welfare and the happiness of millions cannot be measured on a single scale of less and more. The welfare of people . . . cannot be adequately expressed as a single end .... [N]othing but partial scales of value exist - scales which are inevitably different and often inconsistent with each other. From this the individualist concludes that the individuals should be allowed, within defined limits, to follow their own values and preferences rather than somebody else's. 268. These claims are made explicit in Radin, supra note 23, at 1863-70, and KEI MAN. supra Michigan Law Review Some reactions to Judge Posner's argument on behalf of a form of "baby selling" stem from a similar concern.270 Judge Posner contends that a market for babies would serve most of the relevant policies better than does the current system. In some ways his argument is persuasive. Certainly the desire of infertile couples for children would be better satisfied through a market system. But part of the objection to free markets in babies is not quite engaged by Judge Posner. Instead the objection is that a system of purchase and sale would value children in the wrong way. This system would treat human beings as commodities, a view that is itself wrong, and a practice with possible harmful consequences for social valuation in general. This is at most a summary of a complex argument, based partly on uncertain empirical judgments, and it is hardly by itself decisive. But we cannot get an adequate grasp on the problem without seeing this concern. In coming to terms with the issue of blocked exchanges, some further points are important. As noted, the recognition of diverse kinds of valuation might well be made part of a conception of law that places a high premium on individual liberty and choice. At least as a general rule, the state should not say that one kind of valuation will be required. Within broad outlines, people ought to be permitted to value Incommensurability as they wish, though we should recognize that any kind of valuation will inevitably be affected by social norms and by law. A belief in diverse kinds of valuation has consequences for current debates about the actual and appropriate nature of legal reasoning. If it can be shown that a well-functioning system of law is alert to these 273. It is interesting, however, that these exchanges are also regulated by a complex system of norms. It would be odd to tell a babysitter that she will get a premium for being loving, or a reduced rate for being merely affectionate. Implicit deals on this front undoubtedly occur, but the fact that they are only implicit is itself important. Sec supra text accompanying notes 130-31. Michigan Law Review diverse kinds of valuation, theories of legislation, administration, and adjudication may be affected. Incommensurability of Anglo-American law in its idealized form. I have not yet dealt with two major questions. The first involves the choice among different kinds of valuation and, more particularly, the decision whether or not to make things commensurable. The second involves the issue of how to make choices among incommensurable goods. The two questions are obviously related. They are also large and complex; to answer them, we would need to answer many of the major questions in ethical and political theory. As I have emphasized, most answers must be developed in the context of particular problems. I offer only a few notations here. Michigan Law Review A. Which Kinds of Valuation? To come to terms with the question of appropriate kinds of valuation, we should begin by asking whether diversity in kinds is desirable at all. Perhaps we should adopt a unitary kind of valuation, or seek to obtain some sort of commensurability. In many ways this project unites such diverse thinkers as Plato, Bentham, and, in law, Richard Posner.279 It seems clear that this approach would have many advantages. It would simplify and order decisions by placing the various goods along a single metric. According to one familiar conception of rationality, this step would increase rationality. Would it not be a large improvement if commensurability could be obtained? Let us put law to one side for the moment and think about claims for unitariness and commensurability in human life generally. It seems obvious that an answer to this question should turn on what leads to a better conception of the human good. There is no transcendental or external standpoint from which to offer this answer. Our evaluation will inevitably be a reflection of what we think. But this should hardly be thought disabling.280 We might make some progress by considering what the world would be like if kinds of valuation really were unitary or if commensurability really did obtain. In such a world, for example, a loss of friendship or the death of a parent would really be like a loss of money, though undoubtedly a lot of it.281 An achievement in something that one prizes would be valued in the same way as an increase in net worth, or the birth of a new child, or falling in love, or the relief of human suffering, or the victory of a favorite sports team. Offers of cash exchange would really be evaluated solely on the basis of their amount. The distinction between instrumental and intrinsic goods would collapse, in the sense that many intrinsic goods would become both fungible and instrumental. A great deal would be lost in such a world.282 A life with genuine commensurability would be flat and dehumanized. It would eliminate 279. See supra notes 2-3 and accompanying text. 280. Note the fallacy of thinking that, without transcendental or external grounds, our evaluations have no basis at all; they are ultimately grounded in human experience, and none the worse for that. See generally HILARY PUTNAM, RENEWING PHILOSOPHY (1992). Incommensurability delight, bewilderment, and surprise. It would be inconsistent with an appropriately diversified approach to a good human life. It would eliminate desirable relationships and attitudes. In fact it would be barely recognizable.283 On the other hand, nothing in this brief account is fatal to the view that law and public policy sometimes ought to rest on unitary kinds of valuation or on assumptions of commensurability. It is possible to think that under ideal conditions, the best system of valuation is diverse and plural, but that in light of the weaknesses of human institutions and the constant prospect of bias and arbitrariness, public choices should assume a single kind or a unitary metric as the best way of promoting all of the relevant goods.284 This question cannot be answered a priori or in the abstract. But those who favor legal approaches based on unitary kinds of valuation and commensurability should understand that their approach is best defended as a means of overcoming certain institutional obstacles, and not as reflecting a fully adequate understanding of the relevant problems. I have suggested as well that even if, say, government officials align the diverse effects of regulation along a single metric, they should also provide a disaggregated picture, so that citizens can be aware of qualitative differences and of the various goods at stake. 283. Thus Wittgenstein: Some philosophers (or whatever you like to call them) suffer from what may be called "loss of problems." Then everything seems quite simple to them, no deep problems seem to exist any more, the world becomes broad and flat and loses all depth, and what they write becomes immeasurably shallow and trivial. Michigan Law Review in which reason-giving is the sole or pervasive kind of valuation would have different problems; but it seems clear that it would have problems as well. The bonds that unite people in a family are not adequately captured by the exchange of reasons. But this is not to say that injustice within families cannot be exposed through that exchange. A measure of respect is a condition for a well-functioning relationship between spouses.286 So, too, a political system dominated not by reasons but instead by self-interested bargaining may well produce inferior law, and precisely because the absence of reason-giving will fail to uncover difficulties with some of the various proposals.287 Such a political system will also violate principles of political equality to the extent that it allows the translation of economic disparities into law. A political system that depended on bonds of affection or love would probably prove unworkable, certainly in a large, heterogeneous society. How are choices made among incommensurable goods? How can those choices be assessed? The first point is that there is no algorithm or formula by which to answer this question. If we are looking for a certain sort of answer the sort characteristic of some believers in commensurability - we will be unable to find it. Relatively little can be said in the abstract. Instead we need to offer detailed descriptions of how such choices are made, and how to tell whether such choices turn out well. Here there are many possible criteria for public and private action, and a mere reference to the existence of incommensurabilities will be unhelpful standing by itself. Incommensurability and B. The selected option may conform to the agent's preferred selfunderstanding. To achieve that self-understanding, we need to be clear about what we value most deeply and to make choices that properly express the deepest valuations.288 Thus, for example, it may be irrational to value a certain amount of cash over spending time with one's family, because this would lead to a self-understanding that is either inconsistent with what has gone before or otherwise indefensible for those asking what a good life contains. Individual and social ideals play a large role in this assessment.289 These are inadequate and abstract remarks, but they may help explain how choices are made among incommensurables, and how choices tend to go right or wrong. Some of the same things can be said of law and the public sphere. Suppose that a society is deciding whether to sacrifice a number of jobs in return for protecting an endangered species. No unitary metric can be helpful here. But perhaps the people entrusted with the power of decision will ask, as part of the inquiry, about the society's prevailing ideals, about ways minimally to damage relevant goods, and about what decision best fits with the community's self-understanding as this has been established over time. This is not merely a descriptive inquiry. It involves asking what choice puts that self-understanding in its best or most attractive light. On this view, choice among incommensurables is an act of interpretation, one that involves a dimension of fidelity to the past, but that is also constructive.290 In law and politics, a diverse set of standards liberty, equality, prosperity, excellence, all of these umbrella terms - will be brought to bear on hard cases. A particular goal is to find solutions that will minimally damage the relevant goods. Perhaps an approach that promotes a recognizable form of liberty will only modestly compromise a recognizable conception of equality. Here too there is no escape from close examination of particular cases. 288. For the view that choice reflects the articulation of value commitments, see Charles Taylor, Responsibility for Self in FREE WILL 111 (Gary Watson ed., 1982). I am suggesting that this point applies to legal and political choice as well. See also the discussion of commitment in Amartya Sen, Rational Fools, reprinted in BEYOND SFI.F-INTIEREST 25, 31-43 (Jane J. Mansbridge ed., 1991). terms). Michigan Law Review after birth.291 Criminalization would entail difficult enforcement problems and might also discourage arrangements that do much good and little harm. We can understand why surrogacy arrangements might be thought to be connected with sex inequality, but the contribution to discrimination is probably too attenuated to justify criminalization. On the other hand, it may be damaging to the birth mother to force her to hand over a child against her will, especially because before the fact it may be quite difficult for her to know exactly what this action entails. The failure of the legal system to order specific performance is unlikely to have serious adverse consequences on prospective participants in such arrangements. This is of course an inadequate treatment of a complex problem. All I mean to do is to suggest some of the lines along which the inquiry might occur. (Compare an approach that would insist on commensurability. Such an approach would be laughably inadequate; it would prevent us from seeing what is really at stake.) Much of the relevant work here is done in two ways: through analogies and through understanding consequences, mediated as these are through expressive norms. When incommensurable goods are at stake, it is typically asked: What was the resolution of a previous case with similar features? Through this process, people seek to produce vertical and horizontal consistency among their various judgments. This system of testing is designed not to line goods up along a single metric, but to produce the sort of consistency and rigor that characterizes the successful operation of practical reason. The inquiry into consequences avoids monism while still examining the real-world effects of different courses of action. How, for example, will a particular result compromise or promote the relevant goods? This is a characteristic part of practical reasoning in law. Incommensurability initiatives. Of course it is true that, on some issues, we will lack relevant data. Michigan Law Review judges and legislators as well. A redescription of tragedy in terms that assume a monistic theory of value would not create the same sort of pressure. Human beings value goods, events, and relationships in diverse and plural ways. Sometimes we face serious problems of commensurability. This problem does not entail paralysis, indeterminacy, or arbitrariness. Decisions are made all the time among incommensurable goods, at the personal, social, and legal levels, and these decisions may well be rational or irrational. It might even be possible to convert our kinds of valuation for use on a unitary metric, or to make goods, events, and relationships commensurable. But if what I have said here is correct, this would be a sort of tragedy, not least because it would make the very fact of tragedy puzzling or even incomprehensible. Incommensurability of different courses of action, so that officials and citizens can see those effects for themselves.