University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1994 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Lawrence Lessig 

The President and the Administration 
The President and the Administration 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein & Lawrence Lessig, "The President and the Administration," 94 Columbia Law Review 1 
(1994). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

VOL.  94 

JANUARY  1994 

NO.  1

THE  PRESIDENT  AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

Lawrence Lessig*
and Cass R  Sunstein**

Introduction  .................................................... 
I.  An  Old  (But Quite  Lively)  Debate ......................... 
II.  The  Original  Executive .................................... 
A.  Original  Understandings  and Unitarian  Puzzles:  The

Executive  and  Prosecution ............................. 

B.  Original  Understandings  and Unitarian  Puzzles:

Departm ents  .......................................... 

C.  Original  Understandings  and Unitarian  Puzzles:  The

Opinions  Clause  ...................................... 
D.  Original  Understandings:  Rethinking Executive  Versus
Administrative  ........................................ 
1.  The  Nineteenth  Century View ...................... 
2.  Linking  the Nineteenth  Century View  to the

Constitutional  Text  ................................ 
3.  Linking  the  Nineteenth  Century  View  to  the Court's
Early  Executive  Cases:  Marbury and  Kendall ......... 
4.  The  Take  Care  Clause  ............................. 
E.  The  Original  Executive  Power:  Puzzles  Revisited  ....... 
1.  Puzzle  1:  Prosecution .............................. 
2.  Puzzle  2:  Departments  ............................. 
3.  Puzzle  3:  The Opinions  Clause  .................... 
F.  The  Language  of the  Original  Executive  ............... 
G.  The  Tale  of the  Bank  ................................. 

III.  The  Problem  of Changed  Circumstances:  Structure  and

Unitariness  ............................................... 
A.  M ethod  ............................................... 
B.  The Method Applied  .................................. 
C.  New  Circumstances,  Old  Commitments  ................ 
IV.  Current Issues  ............................................ 
A.  Constitutionality  of Independent  Agencies  ............. 
B.  Immunizing  Specific  Functions  from  the  President ..... 

2
5
12

14

22

31

38
43

47

55
61
70
70
71
72
72
78

85
86
91
93
106
106
108

*  Assistant  Professor  of Law,  University  of Chicago  Law  School.
**  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Professor  ofJurisprudence,  University  of Chicago,  Law  School
and  Department  of Political  Science.  We  are  grateful  to Akhil  Amar,  Bruce  Ackerman,
Steve  Calabresi,  David  Currie,  Dan  Kahan,  Abner  Greene,  Harold  Krent,  Alan  Meese,
Richard  Ross,  and  Peter  Strauss  for  helpful  comments.  Cyrus  Amir-Mokri  provided
exceptional research assistance.  For financial support, we are grateful to The Russell Baker
Scholars Fund and The James H. Douglas,Jr. Fund for the Study  of Law and  Government.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  1 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

C.  What  Does  "Good  Cause"  Mean?  ...................... 
D.  May Congress  Create  Truly Independent
Administrators?  ....................................... 

E.  Independence  Versus Aggrandizement  ................. 
F.  Cross-Branch  Appointments  ............................ 
G.  Precisely Which  Officers  May  Be  Protected with  a  Good
Cause  Standard?  ...................................... 
Conclusion  ..................................................... 
"The Great Departments" .......................... 
Appendix: 

110

113
114
116

117
118
120

INTRODUCTION

Many  think that under  our constitutional  system,  the  President must
have  the  authority  to control all government  officials who  implement  the
laws. 1  The  text,  structure,  and  history  of  the  Constitution,  we  are  told,
plainly require  this result. 2  Under this view,  it is  therefore  something of
an  embarrassment  that  the  Supreme  Court  has  permitted  conspicuous
exceptions  to  this  constitutional  imperative.  We  now  have  independent
special  counsels,  independent agencies,  and  other such  exceptions,  com-
monly thought to be inconsistent with  the basic founding commitment to
a  "unitary  executive."

Some  believe  that this  conception  of unitariness  derives  from  some-
thing  that  the  framers  decided-that  the  framers  constitutionalized  a
strongly  unitary executive,  and  that anyone  following  the original  design
must follow  this  structural  pattern.

We  think  that  the  view  that  the  framers  constitutionalized  anything
like  this vision  of the  executive  is just plain myth.  It is a  creation  of the
twentieth  century,  not the  eighteenth.  It derives from  twentieth  century
categories  applied  unreflectively  to an  eighteenth  century  document.  It
ignores  strong  evidence  that  the  framers  imagined  not a  clear  executive
hierarchy with the President at the  summit, but a large degree  of congres-
sional power  to  structure  the  administration  as  it thought  proper.

We  reach  this  conclusion  with  reluctance.  A strongly unitary  execu-
tive  can  promote  important values  of accountability,  coordination,  and
uniformity  in  the  execution  of  the  laws,  and  to  whatever  extent  these
were  the framers'  values,  they  are certainly  now ours.  If  these values  are

1.  See,  e.g.,  Steven  G.  Calabresi  & Kevin  H.  Rhodes,  The  Structural  Constitution:
Unitary  Executive,  Plural Judiciary,  105 Harv.  L. Rev.  1153  (1992);  David  P.  Currie,  The
Distribution  of  Powers  After  Bowsher,  1986  Sup.  Ct.  Rev.  19;  Geoffrey  P.  Miller,
Independent  Agencies,  1986  Sup.  Ct.  Rev.  41;  Theodore  B.  Olson,  Founders  Wouldn't
Endorse America's Plural Presidency, Legal Times, Apr. 27, 1987,  at 11  [hereinafter Olson,
Plural  Presidency];  Theodore  Olson,  Separation  of  Powers  Principle  is  No  'Triviality'
(Bowsher  v.  Synar),  Legal  Times, July  21,  1986,  at 4  [hereinafter  Olson,  Separation  of
powers].

2.  See, e.g.,  Calabresi & Rhodes, supra note  1, at 1167; Currie, supra  note 1, at 31-36;
Miller,  supra  note  1, at  58-60;  Olson,  Plural  Presidency,  supra  note  1, at  11-12;  Olson,
Separation  of Powers,  supra note  1, at 4.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  2 1994

19941

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

not  advanced  by  the  original  design,  we  seemingly  face  an  unpleasant
dilemma-either we adhere  to that design and sacrifice  important institu-
tional values, or we advance these  institutional values and sacrifice  fidelity
to  the original  design.  History apparently  leads us to choose  between the
original  design  and a design  many now view as  indispensable.

At least  this  is  so  unless  there  is  a  compelling  nonhistorical3  argu-
ment supporting a strong unitary design.  We believe  that there is  indeed
a plausible  structural  argument  on behalf of the hierarchical  conception
of the unitary  executive.  This  is  an  argument  that  emphasizes  changed
circumstances  since the  eighteenth  century, and  that accommodates  the
framers'  design  within  this  changed  constitutional  context-an  argu-
ment,  that  is,  that  translates 4  the  framers'  original  design  from  the  lan-
guage  and  context  of the  eighteenth  century into  the world  today.

3.  We  use  the  term  "nonhistorical"  rather  than  "nonoriginalist,"  though  at  many
points we will speak of originalism, a term that seems to us  decreasingly helpful.  Just as  the
"interpretivist-noninterpretivist"  division  now seems  unsatisfactory,  for  reasons  explained
in Ronald Dworkin, The  Forum of Principle, in A Matter  of Principle 33,  34-35  (1985),  so
it is necessary  to question  the  "originalist-nonoriginalist"  division  in  the  context  of many
legal  disputes,  especially  those  that involve  an effort to  maintain  fidelity to  constitutional
commitments  in the face  of changed circumstances.  When  circumstances  have changed,  a
supposedly  nonoriginalist  interpretation  may  well  have  a stronger claim  of fidelity  to  the
original  understanding,  for reasons  suggested  in  Part  III below.  The  approach  that we
advocate  may  therefore  be  described as  an  originalist  one.  See  infra  text accompanying
notes  37-47.

(1980) 

4. The  metaphor of translation  has  been  used by many people,  though in  somewhat
different  ways.  See,  e.g.,  Paul  Brest,  The  Misconceived  Quest  for  the  Original
Understanding,  60  B.U.  L.  Rev.  204,  218-22 
(arguing  for  nonoriginalist
constitutional  interpretation  using  a historical  interpreter as  translator);  MichaelJ.  Perry,
The Authority of Text, Tradition  and Reason:  A Theory of Constitutional  "Interpretation,"
58  S.  Cal.  L.  Rev.  551,  599  (1985)  (discussing  Robert Bennett  as  translator);  H. Jefferson
Powell,  Rules  for  Originalists,  73  Va.  L.  Rev.  659,  672  (1987)("[tlo  converse  with  the
founders, you need  a translator")  (emphasis deleted);  Terrance  Sandalow,  Constitutional
Interpretation,  79 Mich. L. Rev. 1033,  1067-69  (1981)  (arguing that no inflexible  "core" of
the  founders'  values  exist  but that  instead  each  generation  must interpret  these  values
itself);  Cass  R. Sunstein,  Interpreting  Statutes  in  the  Regulatory  State,  103  Harv.  L.  Rev.
405,  494-95  (1989)  (discussing effect  of changed  circumstances  in interpreting  old texts);
Mark  V.  Tushnet,  Following  the  Rules  Laid  Down:  A  Critique  of  Interpretivism  and
Neutral  Principles,  in Interpreting  Law  and Literature  193  (Sanford Levinson  & Steven
(comparing  neutral  principle  and  interpretivist  approaches  to
Mailloux  eds.,  1988) 
interpreting the  Constitution).  The  notion of course was  not born with Brest.  Perhaps its
most creative  pre-Brest  appearance  was  in an extraordinary  piece by  Felix  Cohen,  which
linked  the  process  of interpretation  across  contexts  to the  theory of relativity,  to  suggest
that "[t]he  achievements of modem  mathematics  and physics...  give ground for hoping
that  we  shall  some  day  achieve  a powerful  new  organon  for  mutual  understanding,-a
theory  of translation."  Felix  S. Cohen,  Field Theory  and Judicial  Logic,  59 Yale  LJ.  238,
272  (1950).  Most  recently, James  Boyd  White  has  discussed  the  notion  of  reading  as
translation  in James  B.  White,  Justice  as  Translation:  An  Essay  in  Cultural  and  Legal
Criticism  (1990).  Much  earlier,  Francis  Lieber may  have  captured  much of the  sense  of
translation  in  his  distinction  between  "interpretation"  and  "construction."  See  Francis
Lieber,  Legal and  Political  Hermeneutics  11,  44  (St. Louis,  F.H.  Thomas  & Co.,  3d  ed.
1880)  ("Interpretation  is the art of finding out the  true sense  of any  form of words," while
"[c]onstruction  is  the  drawing  of  conclusions  respecting  subjects  that  lie  beyond  the

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  3 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

After  outlining  the  debate  over  the  origins of a  unitary executive  in
Part I, this Article  goes  on to make  two  basic points.  The first, set out in
Part  II,  is  historical.  Conventional  wisdom  insists  (1)  that  the  framers
believed in  a hierarchical  executive  branch, with  the  President in  charge
of all  administration  of the  laws,5  and  (2)  that  we  must  also  ensure  a
hierarchical  executive  branch, at least if we  are to be faithful to  the fram-
ers'  constitutional  design.6  We  think  that  the  conventional  wisdom  is
wrong  on  both  counts.  There  is  no  historically  sound  reading  of the
Constitution  that  compels  anything  like  the  first  claim.  Any  faithful
reader  of history must conclude  that  the unitary  executive,  conceived  in
the foregoing  way,  is just myth.

But we  also think  that this conclusion  does not mean  that a strongly
unitary conception  of the constitutional  design  is  wrong.  Part  III of this
Article  offers  a justification  of that  conception,  relying  not  on false  his-
tory, but on the  best reading  of the framers'  structure  translated  into  the
current,  and  radically  transformed,  context.  Carried  into  this  context,
certain  crucial  aspects  of the  unitary  executive  view make  most sense  of
the framers'  design,  even if the application  of that design  differs  dramati-
cally  from the  application  in  the  framers'  own  context.

In  Part III, we  therefore  discuss  the basic  commitments  of the  origi-
nal  constitutional  system-the  avoidance  of  factionalism,  political  ac-
countability,  a degree  of centralization  in government,  and expedition  in
law  enforcement-and  show  that  in  the  face  of post-New  Deal  develop-
ments,  those founding commitments  would  be  compromised  by  limiting
presidential  power over  the administration  of the  laws.  However  ironic it
may be,  the  claims  on behalf of the  strongly  unitary executive,  while  im-
plausible  as a matter of simple history, may nonetheless  be  right as a mat-
ter of constitutional  interpretation.

In  Part  IV,  we  apply  these  general  propositions  to  a  wide  range  of
current  disputes  about  the  relationship  between  the  President  and  the
administration.  We  discuss  Congress'  power  to create independent  pros-
ecutors  and  independent  agencies.  We  also  attempt  to  sort out a  set of
issues  that  have become  prominent  in  the wake  of the  Supreme  Court's
surprising  reentry  into  this area  in  the period  from  1976 to  the present.

text.").  Alfred  Hill  has  described  a  practice  of  constitutional
expression  of  the 
interpretation  that may in  result  be  quite  similar  to  the  translator's  practice.  See  Alfred
Hill, The Political  Dimension of Constitutional Adjudication, 63 S.  Cal. L. Rev. 1237 (1990)
(asserting  probable  intent  of  founders  was  that  common  practice  of  the  times  be
observed).  For general treatment  of the idea of fidelity as translation, see Lawrence  Lessig,
Fidelity in Translation,  71  Tex.  L. Rev.  1165  (1993).

5.  By  administration  of  the  laws,  we  refer  very  broadly  to  all  tasks  that  involve

implementation  or execution  of legislative  enactments.
6.  See  infra  notes  19-32  and  accompanying  text.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  4 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

I.  AN  OLD (BuT  QuITE LWVELY)  DEBATE

Whether  the  founders  framed  a  strongly  unitary  executive,  or
whether we  should  continue  to recognize  what they framed,  is not a new
debate.  Throughout our history the question has been  the subject of in-
tense  controversy.7  Fueled  more  recently  by  the  work  of  Presidents,
judges, and  academic  observers,8  the  question has  regained  center stage.
Before  the  late  1970s,  the  question  seemed  well  settled,  even  if the an-
swers  were  to  some  observers  quite-jarring.  It was  clear that "executive"
functions  must be performed  by officers subject to the unlimited removal
and  broad  supervisory  power  of the  President.9  But it was  equally  clear
that  Congress  had  the  constitutional  power  to  remove  from  the
President's  authority  officers  having  "quasi-legislative"  and  "quasi-
judicial" functions.1 0

In  these  two  sentences  could  be  found  the basic  wisdom  about  the
relationship  between  the  President  and  administrative  agencies.  Some
unsettled  questions  remained.  But  it  appeared  that  those  questions
would  be  answered  through  accommodations,  formal  and  informal,  be-
tween  Congress  and  the  President, and  not as a  matter  of constitutional
law.

All  this changed  in the  1980s.  Spurred by President Reagan's  efforts
the entire  field ex-

to  assert hierarchical  control over  the  bureaucracy,' 

7.  See  especially  the various  opinions  in Myers  v. United  States,  272  U.S.  52  (1926);
see  also,  e.g.,  Nathan  -D. Grundstein,  Presidential  Power,  Administration  and
Administrative  Law,  18  Geo. Wash.  L. Rev.  285,  300  (1950)  (discussing  debate over  extent
of autonomy  that executive  has in appointing  and removing administrators);  Miller, supra
note 1,  at 52-58  (laying out pragmatic and neoclassical  approaches to  separation  of powers
debate); Peter L. Strauss, The Place of Agencies in Government:  Separation  of Powers and
the  Fourth Branch,  84 Colum.  L. Rev.  573,  599-600  (1984)  (noting that  the  Convention
was "ambivalent" about the President's relation  to those who would actually administer the
laws).

8.  See infra  text accompanying  notes  11-18.
9.  See  Myers,  272  U.S.  at  161-64.  The  dispute  in  Myers  involved  over  President
Wilson's  power to remove  a regional  postmaster without first gaining  the consent of Senate
as the statute  required.  The  Court found unconstitutional  the statutory provision  limiting
the  President's  removal  authority.  Myers  also  sets  out  three  exceptions  to this  rule.  See
infra text accompanying  notes  102-108.

10.  See Humphrey's  Executor v. United  States,  295 U.S.  602,  629  (1935).  Humphrey's
involved  the  power  of President  Roosevelt  to remove  a  Commissioner  from  the  Federal
Trade  Commission.  The  statute  provided  for  removal  by  the  President  only  for
"inefficiency,  neglect  of duty, or malfeasance  in  office."  The Court held  that, because  of
the  quasi-legislative  and quasijudicial  nature of the  Commission,  these  limitations  on  the
removal power  were  constitutional.

11.  Reagan's  efforts  came  primarily in the form of executive  orders.  See Exec.  Order
No.  12,291,  3  C.F.R.  127,  128  (1981),  reprinted  in  5  U.S.C.  §  601  (1988)  (requiring
agencies  to conduct cost-benefit analyses  and submit "Regulatory Impact Analyses"  of such
analyses  to OMB);  Exec. Order No.  12,498, 3  C.F.R.  323,  323  (1985),  reprinted  in 5 U.S.C.
§  601  (1988)  (directing agencies  to create and publish  yearly  regulatory agendas for OMB
approval); see also Thomas  0.  McGarrity, Reinventing Rationality:  The Role of Regulatory
Analysis  in the Federal Bureaucracy  19-24 (1991)  (reviewing President Reagan's  executive

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  5 1994

COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

perienced  a  minor  revolution.  Sharp  new  battle  lines  were  drawn.  In
several cases,  the Supreme Court limited  congressional  efforts  to insulate
administration  of  the  laws  from  presidential  control. 12  These  cases
seemed  to  suggest  that  the  whole  idea  of independent  administration
could  no  longer  be  sustained-a  change  in  understanding  that,  if  ac-
cepted, would dramatically  alter the framework of American  government.
This  shift  in  the  Court-toward  greater  solicitude  for  presidential
control  over  implementation-inspired  an  even  greater shift in  the acad-
emy.  Scholars began  to  assert more forcefully  that the conventional  view
of  the  executive  power-in  particular,  the  idea  that  Congress  could
create  independent  agencies-was  constitutionally  unfounded.'8  Per-
haps  the  Court  could  eventually  be  persuaded  to  conclude  that  the
Constitution  prohibited  Congress  from  creating "independent agencies."
But in several more recent cases  the Supreme  Court unambiguously  com-
mitted itself to the idea that Congress may, at least sometimes  and at least
to some  extent, make  administration independent  of the President. 14  In-
deed,  the Court has allowed  Congress  to go beyond  independent  "quasi-
legislators" and "quasijudges" and  create independent prosecutors1 5-an
innovation  from the previous  cases  that appears  to expand  congressional
authority.

The  recent  cases  leave  many  questions  unanswered,  involving  the
precise  relationships  among  the  President,  the  so-called  executive  agen-
cies,  and  the so-called  independent  agencies.  These  questions  assumed
special importance  in  connection  with  efforts  by President Bush  to  assert

orders);  Peter  L.  Strauss  &  Cass  t  Sunstein,  The  Role  of  the  President  and  OMB  in
(describing
Informal  Rulemaking,  38  Admin.  L.  Rev.  181,  185-97,  202-03  (1986) 
President Reagan's  executive  orders  and  arguing that their application  can  and should be
extended  to  independent  agencies).  President  Reagan's  efforts  should  be  seen  as  the
culmination  of a long historical  trend, beginning with President  Nixon.  See,  e.g.,  Harold
H.  Bruff, Presidential  Management  of Agency  Rulemaking,  57  Geo.  Wash.  L.  Rev.  533,
546-52  (1989)  (reviewing evolution  of presidential  management  programs beginning with
President Nixon).

12.  See,  e.g.,  INS  v. Chadha,  462  U.S.  919,  965-67  (1983)  (striking down  the  use  of
legislative  veto); Buckley v. Valeo,  424 U.S.  1, 118-37  (1976)  (holding that  Congress does
not have constitutional  power to appoint members  to Federal Election  Commission,  which
is  responsible  for administration  and  enforcement  of election  laws).

13.  See, e.g.,  Calabresi  & Rhodes, supra  note  1, at 1167-68;  Currie,  supra note  1,  at
32-36;  Lee S.  Liberman,  Morrison v. Olson: A Formalistic Perspective  on Why the Court was
Wrong, 38 Am.  U.  L.  Rev. 313,  318  (1989);  Miller, supra note  1, at 43.

14.  In  Mistretta,  the  Court  upheld  the  constitutionality  of  the  United  States
Sentencing  Commission.  See Mistretta  v. United States,  488 U.S.  361,  408-12  (1989).  The
Commission consists of seven members,  at least three of whom must be  federal judges, and
has  the authority to promulgate  binding sentencing guidelines.  See  id. at 368-70.  Under
the  statute,  the  President  may  remove  Commissioners  only  for  "good cause."  See  id.  at
368.  In  Morison,  the  Court  upheld  a statute  that  allowed  the  President  to  remove  an
"independent  prosecutor"  only  for "good  cause."  See  Morrison  v.  Olson,  487  U.S.  654,
685-93  (1988).

15.  See  487 U.S.  at 685-93.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  6 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

close  control  over  government regulation; 16  they  have  new urgency  as a
result of likely  new  efforts  by President  Clinton  to claim  authority  over a
government staffed  largely by Republican  Presidents. 17  Heated  struggles
arose  between  President  Bush and  Congress  over  a range  of unresolved
issues.18  Similar issues  are  likely  to rematerialize  during the  Clinton Ad-
ministration,  and  these  debates  will  undoubtedly  raise  new  issues  about
exactly  how unitary  the  executive  branch  can claim  to be.

It is  time again  to ask whether the executive  is "unitary" in  the sense
that  the  President  must have  plenary  power  to  control  administration
and execution  of the laws.  It seems  clear that the belief in a unitary exec-
utive  has captured the high ground  of principle,  so  that arguments for an
"evolving  Constitution,"  for  flexibility  in  interpretation,  or  for judicial
deference  to  political  compromise,  have  become  moves  of compromise
or  mere  politics.  But is  this  really a debate  between  principle  and  poli-
tics?  Or more precisely, is this a debate where  principle favors the unitary
view?

16.  See, e.g.,  Memorandum  on Reducing  the  Burden  of Government  Regulation,  28
Weekly  Comp. Pres. Doc.  232  (Jan.  28,  1992)  (asking  executive and independent agencies
to  refrain  from  issuing  new  regulations  during  90  day  period,  and  to  review  existing
regulations with  goal  of minimizing  economic  impact);  Memorandum  on Implementing
Regulatory  Reform,  28  Weekly  Comp.  Pres.  Doc.  728  (Apr.  29,  1992)  (extending
moratorium  for  another  120  days).  President  Bush  also  formed  the  Council  on
Competitiveness  on  March  31,  1989,  to  exercise  power  granted  by  Reagan's  executive
orders.  See supra  note  11.

17.  Clinton has replaced  President Reagan's Executive  Orders  12,291  and 12,498 with
Executive  Order 12,866.  The  new order provides that OMB  and the  Office of Information
and  Regulatory  Affairs  will  oversee  agency  regulation,  requires  that  agencies  undertake
regulatory analyses  under the new principles,  and effectively  places Vice  President Gore  in
charge  of the  overall  regulatory policymaking  function.  See Exec.  Order  No.  12,866,  58
Fed. Reg. 51,735  (1993);  see also Marshall Ingwerson &John Dillin, Vacancy  Signs Abound
in  Capital,  Christian  Sci.  Monitor,  Feb.  1,  1993,  at  3  (reviewing  continuing  Republican
control  of many  agencies).

18.  For example,  President Bush lost his battle  to  control  the Board  of Governors  of
the  Postal  Service.  He  had attempted  to  prevent  the  board  from  exercising  its  statutory
authority  to  represent  itself in  challenging  a Postal  Rate  Commission  decision,  either by
having  the  Department  ofJustice  dismiss the  suit on behalf of the  board, or by  removing
the board.  See Mal  Order Ass'n of Am. v. U.S. Postal Serv., 986  F.2d 509,  512  (1993).  The
D.C.  District  Court  enjoined  President  Bush  from  removing  the  board,  see  id.,  and  the
D.C.  Circuit  Court  held  that  the  board  can  represent  itself in  court  if its  position  is
inconsistent  with  that of the Department  ofJustice.  See  id. at 515.

Possibly  the  most intense battle  during  the Bush  presidency was fought between Vice
President Quayle  and Congress  over  the  role of the  Council  on  Competitiveness.  Before
the issue became  moot with  the election  of President  Clinton,  Congress  threatened  to cut
all  appropriations  for the  Council  if it failed  to  increase  public  accountability.  See,  e.g.,
138 Cong. Rec.  13,214-15  (1992)  (statement of Sen. Glenn);  Eric Pianin & Steven  Mufson,
Administration  Seeking  Showdown  on  Spending, Wash.  Post,  Sept. 13,  1992,  at Al.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  7 1994

COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

We begin  with  some  basics? 9  No  one  denies  that in  some  sense  the
framers  created  a unitary  executive;  the question  is  in what sense.20  Let
us distinguish between  a strong and a weak version.  The  strong version-
held  by  those  whom  we  will  call  the  modem  unitarians-contends  that
the  President  has  plenary  or  unlimited  power  over  the  execution  of
administrative  functions,  understood  broadly  to  mean  all  tasks  of law-
implementation.  All  officers  with  such functions  must  either be remova-
ble  at  the  President's  discretion  or  be  subject  to  presidential  counter-
mand in the context of policy disagreements.  The Constitution creates  "a
hierarchical  unified executive  department under the direct control of the
President," 21  with  consequences  we  develop  in  detail  below. 2 2  In  the

19.  This  account draws on  a recent statement of the modem  position.  See  Calabresi
&  Rhodes,  supra  note  1;  see  also  Saikrishna  B.  Prakash,  Note,  Hail  to  the  Chief
Administrator.  The Framers  and  the  President's  Administrative  Powers,  102 Yale  LJ.  991
(1993)  (building  on  the work  of Calabresi  & Rhodes).

20.  See, e.g.,  Strauss,  supra note  7, at 599-600  ("While  it was  understood  that there
would  be  departments  responsible  for  daily  administration,  the  Convention  clearly  and
consciously  chose  a  single  and  independent  executive  over  a  collegial  body  subject  to
legislative  direction.");  Prakash,  supra  note  19,  at  998-99  (Convention  chose  a  single
executive  based  on values  of accountability  and  efficiency).

21.  Calabresi  & Rhodes,  supra  note  1,  at  1165.  The  modem  unitarian  view  was
recently,  and  helpfully,  summarized  by  Calabresi  and  Rhodes.  As  they  describe  it,  the
position  is grounded  in  the  Vesting  Clause  of Article  II, which  provides:  "The executive
Power  shall be vested in a President."  U.S.  Const. art. If, §  1.  This clause,  together with  the
Take  Care  Clause,  id.  § 3,

creat[es]  a hierarchical,  unified  executive department  under the direct control of
the President. ... [Thus,)  the President alone  possesses all of the  executive power
and  .. . he  therefore  can  direct,  control,  and  supervise  inferior  officers  or
agencies  who  seek  to  exercise  discretionary  executive  power.  The  practical
consequence  of this  theory is dramatic:  it renders  unconstitutional  independent
agencies  and  counsels  to  the  extent  that  they  exercise  discretionary  executive
power.

Calabresi  & Rhodes,  supra note  1, at 1165  (footnotes omitted).

The Constitution  embraces,  the  modem unitarians  conclude,  a single  organizational
structure, with  the  Take Care  Clause  empowering  the  President  to  exercise  control  over
subordinates,  at  least  so  far  as  those  subordinates  exercise  "purely  executive  power."
"Unitary executive  theorists reject the view that the Take  Care  Clause contemplates  merely
a housekeeping  role for  the  President,  who  'takes  care'  from  a  distance while  unnamed
others  'faithfully  execute'  the  laws."  Id.  at 1167-68.

Of course  Congress has  some  role in filling  in the  details,  but that role,  according  to
the  modem  unitarian view,  is  crucially limited:  "Unitary  executive  theorists  concede  that
Congress  has  broad  power  under  the  Necessary  and  Proper  Clause  to  structure  the
executive  department.  .. . They  maintain,  however,  that  '[n]o matter  what  structure
Congress selects  ...  the President must retain the authority to  give directives  to the officers
who assist'  him."  Id.  at 1168  (footnotes omitted).

to 

Finally,  the  modem  unitarian  rejects  textual  clues  that  may  suggest  a  structure
somewhat 
the  Constitution  contemplates  some
though 
appointments  being vested  (and  hence some loyalty  engendered)  in heads of departments,
and not the President, and  though the framers  oddly  (for the  unitarian) felt it necessary  to
make  explicit  that the  President  could get  reports  from  his officers,

the  contrary.  Thus, 

unitary executive  theorists reject the contention  that Congress's  power to vest  the
appointment  of  inferior  officers  in  the  "Heads  of  Departments"  necessarily

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  8 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

modem unitarian's view, the  Constitution constitutionalizes  a single orga-
nizational  value-unitariness-at  the  expense  of other  possible  govern-
mental  values-such  as  disinterestedness  or  independence.  The
conclusion  is  that  any  organizational  structure  that  violates  unitariness
violates  the  Constitution.

The  weak  version  offers  a  more  unruly  picture.  It  contends  that
there  are  functions  over  which  the  President  has  plenary  powers;  that
these  functions  are  the "executive"  functions  in  the constitutional  sense;
but  that  in  the  founding  vision,  "executive"  functions-which  must  of
course  be specified in  detail23 -are  not coextensive  with all the functions
now  (or  then)  exercised  by the  President.24  As  for  these  nonexecutive
functions  exercised  by  the  executive,  the  original  unitarian-as  we  will
refer  to  those who  believe  in  the weak version-contends  that  Congress
has  a  wide  degree  of  authority  to  structure  government  as  it  sees  fit.
Under  this view,  unitariness  is  a significant  constitutional  value,  but  it is
not a trumping  constitutional  value.  Other values  may at times  override
unitariness,  and it is  Congress  that is  to choose  among  these  competing
values.

In  outline  form,  the  belief  in  a  strongly  unitary  executive 
is
grounded  in the Vesting  Clause  of Article  II:  "The executive  Power shall

insulates  these  officers  from  presidential  control.  Rather,  these  theorists
contend, this  Clause was an insignificant housekeeping provision  added at the last
minute.  Unitary  executive  theorists  also  deny  that  the  President's  explicitly
delineated  power  to  "require the  Opinion, in writing, of the  principal  Officer  in
each  of the  executive  Departments"  implies  that  the  President  has  no  inherent
power to tell principal  officers what to do.  Unitarians contend that the  Opinions  .
Clause  represents  too  slender  a  reed  to  support  this  qualification  of  the
substantial  grant  of power  embodied  in the  Article II Vesting  Clause.

Id.  (footnotes  omitted).

Charles  Tiefer provides  a similar  description of the modem unitarian  view.
This view  posits  constitutional  mandates  for executive  organization,  not only  in
areas  with traditional  Executive  hierarchies  such  as  communicating with  foreign
governments  and  directing  the  military,  but also  in  the  area  of  access  to  the
courts.  Under this view,  the Executive  branch  consists of agencies  organized in a
unitary  body  under the  President's  control  either  directly  or through  a chain  of
command.  Congress'  checks  on  abuse  within  this  unitary  body  consist  of
hearings,  investigations,  new  legislation,  political  pressures,  and  impeachment,
but Congress  cannot  shield  agencies  within  this  unitary  body  from  presidential
control or removal.  Thus, even in conflict of interest situations, such  as when the
Executive  department is called upon to conduct investigations  of the President or
his  top  officials,  proponents  of  this  approach  maintain  that  Congress  cannot
divest the  President  of control  over  the  investigation.

Charles  Tiefer,  The  Constitutionality  of Independent  Officers  as  Checks  on  Abuses  of
Executive  Power,  63 B.U.  L. Rev. 59,  61  (1983)  (footnotes omitted).

22.  See  infra  notes  25-32 and accompanying  text.
23.  See  infra  Part II.D.
24.  See  Peter L.  Strauss, Formal and Functional Approaches  to Separation-of-Powers
Questions-A  Foolish  Inconsistency?,  72  Cornell  L.  Rev.  488,  492-96  (1987)  (arguing
Constitution's  silence  about  administration  was  product  of  "explicit  purpose  to  leave
Congress  free  to make  whatever arrangements  it deemed  'necessary  and proper").

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  9 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

be vested  in a President."25  This clause  creates  "a" President,  not several;
it is  powerful,  and  to some  decisive,  textual evidence  in  favor of the view
that the  Constitution  creates  a hierarchy with  the President  at the  top.26
Moreover,  the  President  is  given  all executive  power.  The  framers  did
not split up  that power among  different national  entities.  The Take  Care
Clause  is  said  to  reenforce  this  view.  This  clause  explicitly  gives  the
President  the power  to "take Care that the Laws  be faithfully executed." 27
It may be true that the Take Care  Clause is a duty at least as  much as it is a
power;  but  the  duty  is  the  President's,  and  as  with  any  duty,  it implies
certain  powers.  If we  take  the  two  clauses  together,  the  argument  goes,
the  President  exercises  hierarchical  control  over  everyone  within  the  ex-
ecutive  department,  and  people  who  exercise  discretionary  authority
must serve  either  at the President's  pleasure  or remain  subject to his will
in  the sense  that he  can countermand  their decisions.  Congress'  author-
ity  to  structure  the  executive  branch  cannot  intrude  on  this  basic
principle. 28

On  this  view,  the  founders  imagined  a  hierarchical 29  executive
branch,  with the  President operating  at the  head of that hierarchy.  From
this  structure,  certain  limitations  on  the  power  of  Congress  naturally
flow-limitations  on Congress'  power  to restrict or  control  the  extent  of
the President's  authority  over  subordinates  who  execute  the  laws.  It fol-
lows that the  so-called  independent agencies  are in  conspicuous violation
of the  Constitution."°  It also follows  that the  Independent Counsel Act, 1
like  all other efforts  to separate  the President from  the  administration,  is
unconstitutional  under Article  11.32

One  could  approach  the  question  whether  the  Constitution  embod-
ies  the  strong  version  of unitariness  from  at  least  two  perspectives,  one
labeled  broadly  "originalist," the  other not.3 3  We understand  originalism
to  require  the  interpreter  to  ask whether  the  modem  unitarian's  limita-
tions  on Congress'  power were  indeed  understood  as  such  by  those who
ratified the  Constitution.  AsJustice  Scalia has stated the  test, the  original-
ist would  ask  whether  (1)  the  text standing  alone  contains  strong  unita-
rian  limitations,  or  (2)  whether  strong unitarian  limitations  were  so well

25.  U.S.  Const. art.  II, §  1.
26.  See, e.g.,  Calabresi  & Rhodes, supra  note  1, at 1165.
27.  U.S.  Const. art. II,  § 3.
28.  See  supra  note 21.
29.  As  we  emphasize  below,  we  are  not  claiming  that  the  founders  must  have
imagined  an  entirely  hierarchical  executive  for the  unitarian's  claim  to  be  in  substance
correct.  See  infra  text accompanying  notes 73-75;  notes  58,  96  and  accompanying  text.
We  simply begin  with what  is  (for us)  a  natural  assumption  here,  and  relax it later  on.

30.  See  supra  note 21.
31.  See  28  U.S.C.  §§ 591-598  (1988).
32.  See  infra  text accompanying  notes  48-53.
33.  For a qualification  of the  originalist/nonoriginalist  distinction,  see  supra note  3.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  10 1994

19941

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

understood at the founding so  as  to be  implied by the document itself.3 4
A nonoriginalist who  is  nonetheless  insistent on maintaining fidelity with
founding  commitments  would  ask  either  (1)  whether  such  limitations
should be understood to follow from  the best understanding  of the fram-
ers'  design,3 5  or  (2)  whether  such  limitations  follow  from  the  original
understanding  translated  into  the  current  (and  quite  different)  con-
text.3 6  We now proceed  to explore, on originalist grounds, which version
of unitariness  is  embodied  in  the Constitution.

34.  In  Harmelin  v.  Michigan,  111  S.  Ct.  2680  (1991),  Justice  Scalia  sketched  the

method of originalism  that we  will  employ  here.

There are of course many kinds of originalism.  We  emphasize  the form of originalism
advocated  by its  most  prominent judicial  devotee, Justice  Scalia,  but there are  competing
versions.  See,  e.g.,  Frank  H.  Easterbrook,  The  Role  of  Original  Intent  in  Statutory
Construction,  11  Harv. J.L.  & Pub.  Pol'y  59  (1988);  Richard  S.  Kay,  Adherence  to  the
Original Intentions  in Constitutional  Adjudication:  Three  Objections  and  Responses,  82
Nw.  U.  L.  Rev.  226  (1988);  Michael  W.  McConnell,  The  Origins  and  Historical
Understanding  of Free  Exercise  of Religion,  103  Harv.  L.  Rev.  1409  (1990).  Compare
Ollman  v.  Evans,  750  F.2d  970,  995  (D.C.  Cir.  1984)  (Bork, J.,  concurring)  (following
"judicial tradition  of a  continuing evolution  of doctrine" in  First Amendment  law),  cert.
denied, 471 U.S.  1127  (1985)  with 750 F.2d at 1038  n.2 (ScaliaJ., dissenting)  (arguing that
new  phenomena do not call for alteration  of preexisting  doctrine).  As we  have suggested,
the  method  that we  are  using here can  be  described  ds  one  form  of originalism.

35.  Cf. Ronald Dworkin,  Law's Empire  361-63  (1986)  (showing how fidelity to beliefs
of framers  may require abandonment  of historical interpretation).  It is unclear,  however,
to what  extent Dworkin's  project is one  of fidelity.  For instance,  Dworkin is willing to look
to  "popular conviction"  and "national  tradition" in  finding the  best interpretation  of the
Constitution.  See  id. at 398.

36.  For  examples  of  cases  that  can  be  understood  to  use  this  methodology  of
translation,  see  Lessig, supra note  4, at 1214-50.  The  most famous  of these  may  well be
West  Virginia v. Barnette.

True,  the  task  of  translating the  majestic  generalities  of  the  Bill  of  Rights,
conceived  as  part of the  pattern of liberal  government in the  eighteenth  century,
into  concrete  restraints  on  officials  dealing  with  the  problems  of the  twentieth
century,  is  one  to  disturb  self-confidence.  These  principles  grew  in  soil  which
also  produced  a philosophy  that the individual was  the  center of society,  that his
liberty was  attainable  through  mere absence  of governmental  restraints,  and that
government  should  be  entrusted  with  few  controls  and  only  the  mildest
supervision  over men's  affairs.  We  must transplant these rights to a soil in which the
laissez-faire  concept  or principle of non-interference has withered at least as to  economic
affairs,  and social advancements  are increasingly sought  through  closer  integration of
society and through expanded and strengthened governmental controls.  These  changed
conditions often deprive  precedents of reliability  and cast us  more than we would
choose upon  our own judgment.  But we  act in these  matters  not by authority  of
our competence  but by force of our commissions.  We  cannot, because of modest
estimates of our competence in such specialties  as public  education, withhold the
judgment  that history  authenticates  as  the function  of this  Court when  liberty  is
infringed.

319  U.S.  624,  639-40  (1943)  (emphasis  added).  It is  significant  that Justice  Jackson was
writing  about  constitutional  interpretation  in  the  aftermath  of  the  New  Deal,  since
constitutional  interpretation  in this  context  is a principal  subject  of our discussion  here.
Note that the two  questions asked by the nonoriginalist may  not be  sharply separable.
It may well be  that the enterprise  of translating the original understanding into the  current
context may be a more precise  way of describing  the first question  posed,  that is, whether

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  11 1994

COLUMBIA LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

II.  THE  ORiGINAL  EXECUTrvE

How  can we  know whether the  framers  believed in  a strongly unitary
executive  branch?  Many  originalists  would  approach 
this  question
through  a  (by now)  standard  formula-by  considering  almost  mechani-
cally  the  key  sources  of interpretation,  "text,  structure,  and  history,"  as
the  basis  for uncovering  the  Constitution's  original  meaning.3 7  And  so,
beginning  with  the  framers'  text, we  could  read  in  Article  II  that  "the
executive  power" is  to be "vested in a President" who shall  "take  Care that
the  laws be faithfully executed."  This is quite likely to yield  (for us)  a very
strong  conception  of the  President's  power-after  all,  it says  "the  execu-
tive  power,"  not "some"  executive power,  and  "all" this executive  power is
vested  in  "a" President.3 8

There  are  of course  other bits  of text  added  to  this  core-text  that
defines  some  additional  power  and  a  few  minor  duties 3 9-but 
in  the
main,  the  document  might appear  quite  clear.  Any  question about  this
clarity is easily  resolved by considering  the second  originalist  step-struc-
ture.  Article  II's Vesting Clause  is less  conditional than Article  I's:  Article
I vests legislative  power "herein granted," while Article  II vests  "the execu-
tive  power" without  such  a qualification.  And so  with  text and  structure,
we  quite quickly  come  to  a conception  of the  executive  that fits well with
a  familiar  picture  of  the  modem  presidency-a  strong,  constitutionally
empowered  "chief-administrator"  of the  executive  branch. 40

But we might  ask up front how well  this  method  can  serve  us in  this
setting.  For when  we  "begin" with  an  old  text, we  are likely also  to  begin
with  a range  of modem  presuppositions about the  meaning of that text-
modem, not founding, presuppositions.  The text is  not self-interpreting,
and  the presuppositions  with which we begin will  color our reading  of the
words,  possibly  more  than  they  illuminate  the  world  the  words  were
meant  to construct.4 1  "Executive  power" means  to us all power  not legis-
lative  and  not judicial;  but  we  might  ask,  was  this  its  meaning  for  the
framers?  "A President" is for us the center  of national policymaking, both

such  a  limitation  should  be  understood  to  follow  from  the  best  understanding  of  the
framers'  design.  On this  question, we remain  agnostic.  Finally, as we suggested  above, see
supra  note 3,  it may be  that an  understanding of this  form  of "nonoriginalism"  is the best
way  of understanding  what  "originalism" should  be.  For further  discussion  of this  point,
see  infra  Part III.

37.  See,  e.g.,  Akhil  R. Amar, The  Two-Tiered  Structure  of the Judiciary Act  of 1789,

138  U. Pa. L.  Rev.  1499,  1505  (1990)  [hereinafter Amar,  The Judiciary Act of 1789].

38.  See Morrison  v. Olson,  487  U.S. 654, 705  (1988)  (ScaliaJ.,  dissenting); Calabresi
& Rhodes,  supra note  1, at 1165.  It  might be revealing that much  of this  debate is a  debate
through  italics.

39.  See  U.S.  Const. art. II,  §§  2,  3.
40.  See,  e.g.,  Prakash,  supra note  19,  at  991  (arguing that  "[h]istorical  evidence...

indicates  the  Framers  attempted  to  establish  an  executive  who  alone  is  accountable  for
executing  federal  law  and who  has  the  authority  to  control  its administration").

41.  This  is  a  pervasive  problem  with  one  version  of formalism  in  law.  If we  aim  to

recover  original meaning,  we  cannot rely  on  text "alone."

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  12 1994

1994]

THE PRFSIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

foreign and  domestic;  was  this who  he was  at the start of the  nation?42  A
power  to "take  Care"  that the  laws  be faithfully  executed  yields  for us an
implied power to control and direct all those in the executive branch who
administer  the  law;  would  the  framers  have  understood  this  to  follow?
The  Opinions  Clause 43  (giving  the  President  the  power  to  demand  writ-
ten  opinions),  the  Commission  Clause"  (requiring  the President to  com-
mission  officers),  and  the  Inferior  Officers  App6intment  Clause 45
(allowing Congress  to vest the  appointment  of some  officers  somewhere
else)  all for us read plainly, but for the most part insignificantly;  were they
also  unnecessary  scribbles  for the  founders?

It is our  suspicion  that much  of the conventional  reading of Article
II's  text is  informed  by very modern  ideas,  and  this  leads  us  to  adopt a
distinctive  interpretive strategy.  Rather  than beginning with  text or struc-
ture  alone, we begin with history.  Our aim is  to dislodge modem precon-
ceptions  about  the  nature  of  the  President  and  executive  power  by
contrasting  these  conceptions  with  those  of the  framers  and with  the  ac-
tual  theory  and practice  of the  early Congress.  It is  an important  truism
that the  framers  were  quite skeptical  of broad  executive  authority,  a  no-
tion  that they  associated  with  the  tyrannical  power of the  King.46  Their
skepticism  about executive  authority-their  rejection  of the  monarchical
legacy-at least raises  doubts  about  the  idea that  the President  was  to be
entrusted  with  control  over  all  of what we  now  consider administration.
We  rely, however,  not on general  ideas about the  executive,  but on a
more particular  examination  of how well  the strongly  unitarian  claim  fits
with  the founding  vision.  We begin  with  three puzzles  presented  by the
original  practice.  In  each,  we  compare  the  actual  historical  practice  of
the  framers  and the  early  Congresses  with what  the  unitarian  would pre-
dict that  same  practice  would  be.  The  practice  is  important,  even  if not
decisive,  because  it  is  relevant  to  an  assessment  of  the  original  under-
standing.47  While  the  practice  does  not prove  the  original  understand-

42.  On  the  question  of policymaking  alone,  consider  President  Washington's  self-

conception  of his role  in  the legislative  process:

"Motives  of  delicacy,"  [President  Washington]  once  wrote,  "have  uniformly
restrained  the  P- 
from  introducing  any  topick  which  relates  to  Legislative
matters  to members  of either  house of Congress, lest it should be  suspected  that
to  influence  the  question  before  it."  He  would  not  permit
he  wished 
congressional  committees  to  solicit his  opinion,  but  intimated  his  willingness  to
express  his views,  "when  asked,"  to a friend.

Leonard D.  White, The  Federalists:  A  Study in Administrative  History 55  (1948)  (quoting
Draft Letter by George Washington  (Feb. 1792),  in  31  The Writings  of George Washington
491,  493  (John  C.  Fitzpatrick  ed.,  1939)).
43.  U.S.  Const. art.  II,  §  2,  cl.  1.
44.  Id.  cl.  3.
45.  Id.  cl.  2.
46.  See  Gordon  S. Wood, The  Creation  of the American  Republic  1776-1787,  at 521

(1969).

47.  No  doubt there are important questions that can be raised about the usefulness of
post-enactment  practice  for interpreting  the meaning  of the  Constitution.  The mere  fact

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  13 1994

COLUMBIA LAW REVEW

[Vol.  94:1

ing,  an  original  practice  widely  inconsistent  with  a  proposed  original
understanding  should  draw  that  understanding  into  doubt.  As  we  sug-
gest, in  every case  the original practice  conflicts  sharply with  the  practice
predicted  by  the  modem  unitarian's  theory.  Together,  we  suggest,  the
three  puzzles  force  us  to  ask  whether  there  is  a  different  model  of  the
original  executive  that better  captures  the original  design.  We  conclude
that there  is.

A.  Original Understandings and Unitarian Puzzles:  The Executive and

Prosecution

We  begin  with  the  narrow  but revealing  question  of criminal  prose-
cution,  as  presented  in  the  contest  over  the  independent  counsel  and
resolved in Morrison v.  Olson. 48  The Ethics  in  Government Act of 1978, 49
enacted in the wake  of Watergate,  established  the office  of the independ-
ent counsel  to  investigate  and  prosecute  offenses  against  certain  officers
of the  administration. 50  Without exploring  the  details  of the Act, suffice
it to say that under certain circumstances,  the statute vested in  the special
counsel  full prosecutorial  authority  for some  limited  period  of time,  un-
controlled  by  the  President  except  to  the  extent  that  the  Attorney
General  could  discharge  the  special  counsel  for  "good  cause."5 1  The
claim  of Theodore  Olson  (the  prosecuted)  was  that the power  of Alexia
Morrison  (the  prosecutor)  was  power  from  "the  executive  power,"  and
hence  "vested" in  the  President alone.  For Justice  Scalia,  writing in  dis-
sent,52  the  case  was quite  straightforward:  The  Constitution  vests  execu-

the  early  Congresses  enacted  a bill  certainly  cannot show  that the  bill  is  constitutional-
take for example, the Alien and Sedition Acts.  The  Sedition Act, ch.  74,  1 Stat. 596  (1798)
(expired Mar. 3, 1801);  The Alien Enemies  Act, ch.  66, 1 Stat.  577  (1798)  (current version
at 50 U.S.C.  §§  21-23  (1988));  The Alien Act, ch.  58,  1 Stat.  570  (1798)  (expiredJune  25,
1800); The Naturalization Act, ch. 54, 1 Stat. 566  (1798)  (repealed by Act of April  14, 1802,
ch. 28, §  5,  2  Stat. 153, 155).  In  this area, Congress'  self-interest appears  to be at stake, and
we  may  therefore  discount  its  conclusions.  We  do  believe  the  practice  is  relevant,  even
persuasive,  and we  will  rely  upon it below.  But we  are  not using  the  practice  to prove  a
particular  theory;  rather  our aim  is  to  use  it  to  raise  doubts  about  a reigning,  strongly
unitarian theory.  A complete picture of the original understanding would include  a much
broader survey of practice  notjust after, but before the  Constitution's enactment.  Our aim
here,  however,  is  not  the  final  history  of  the  founding.  It  is  enough  to jar  current
understandings  by  emphasizing  the  inconsistencies  they produce.  Note  that  this  practice
of  looking  to  the  early  Congresses  as  an  understanding  of  the  framers'  meaning  is
common  in the  Supreme  Court as well.  See,  e.g.,  Harmelin  v. Michigan,  111  S. Ct.  2680,
2694  (1991)  ("The  actions  of the  First Congress...  are of course  persuasive  evidence  of
what the  Constitution means,  [Marsh v.  Chambers,  463 U.S.  783  (1983);  Carroll  v. United
States, 267  U.S.  132,  150-52  (1925);  cf. McCulloch  v.  Maryland,  17 U.S.  (4 Wheat.)  316,
401-02  (1819)].").

48.  487  U.S. 654  (1988).
49.  Pub.  L.  No.  95-521,  92  Stat.  1824  (1978)  (codified  as  amended  at  scattered

sections  of 2,  5,  18,  28  & 39 U.S.C.).

50.  See  28  U.S.C. §§  49,  591-598  (1988).
51.  See  id.  § 596.
52.  See  487 U.S.  at 697  (Scalia, J.,  dissenting).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  14 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

tive  power in  the  President,  and  prosecution  is  an  executive  power;  the
independent  counsel  exercises  prosecutorial  discretion,  but without  the
President's  control;  the act creating the independent counsel  is therefore
unconstitutional.  ForJustice  Scalia,  the President  must in some  way con-
trol  the  exercise  of all  executive  power,  and  this  statute  did  not furnish
that  control.53

So  much  certainly  follows  as  a  matter  of modem  unitarian  theory;
but what about the framers'  actual practice?  At the core  ofJustice  Scalia's
argument was an implicit claim about that practice.  In defining the scope
of "executive  power," Justice  Scalia wrote:

In what other sense can  one identify  "the executive Power"  that is
supposed  to be vested in  the President  (unless it includes  every-
thing the Executive Branch  is given  to do)  except by reference  to
what  has  always  and  everywhere-if  conducted  by  government
at  all-been  conducted  never by  the  legislature,  never  by  the
courts,  and  always  by the  executive  .... Governmental  investi-
gation  and  prosecution  of crimes  is  a  quintessentially  executive
function.

5 4

This  is  a  textually  plausible  claim.  To  many  modem  readers,  it  seems
certainly  correct.  But has "the executive  Power" "always  and  everywhere"
been  so  understood?

In  answering  this  question,  again,  we  proceed  in  two  steps.  First,
does the  constitutional  text in its original  context speak to the  question at
issue?  Second, if the  text does  not squarely answer the question,  does  the
original  practice  reveal  an  understanding  uniformly  shared  by the  fram-
ers  that  itself resolves  the  question?5 5  The  text of  course  does  not  say
whether  prosecution  is  within  the  term  "executive  Power."56  So  the
originalist must turn  to  the  second  step, and  ask whether  despite  textual
ambiguity,  the  framers  clearly  understood  prosecution  to  be  within  the
term  "executive  Power."

If the framers'  and early Congresses'  actual practice  is any indication
of their  original  understanding,  then  they  did  not  understand  prosecu-
tion  to be within  the notion  of "executive  Power"  exclusively,  and there-
fore  did  not  understand  it  to  be  within  the  exclusive  domain  of  the

53. See  id. at 705-15  (Scalia, J., dissenting).
54.  Id. at 706  (Scalia, J.,  dissenting).
55.  Again,  this method was  used byJustice  Scalia  in Harmelin v. Michigan,  111  S. Ct.

2680, 2691-99  (1991).  See  supra note  34.

56.  While  the  Constitution  explicitly  grants  the  President  five  executive  powers,
nowhere  is the  power  of  prosecution  explicitly  mentioned.  These  powers" include  the
power  to receive  ambassadors,  the  power to take  care  that the  laws be  faithfully  executed,
the  power of commander  in chief, the  power  to veto legislation,  and  the  power  to grant
pardons in federal  cases.  See  Charles L. Black, Jr., The Working Balance  of the  American
Political  Departments,  1 Hastings  Const. L.Q. 13,  14-15  (1974).  Compare  Peter Strauss'
list,  Strauss,  supra  note  7,  at  598  (listing  only  Article  II  powers,  thereby  omitting  veto
power).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  15 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

President.  While  the  argument  for  this  conclusion  has  been  discussed
before  in  depth,5 7 we  can  quickly  summarize  the important points  here.
Consider first  the  original  structure  of federal  prosecution.  If the
modern  unitary model were  the framers'  model, one might think that the
framers would have  established  a hierarchical  department  of legal affairs,
responsible  for  all  federal  prosecution,  with  officers  answerable  to  the
President or the President's  agent (for example, the Attorney General).58
In fact, the record  is  not at all so neat.  The  first Congress  established  no
hierarchical  department  of  legal  affairs-as  we  discuss  below,  the
Department  of Justice was  not even  born until 1870.- 9  Nor  did the fram-
ers establish  a general  or centralized  body for federal  prosecution.  Most
importantly,  they  established  no  absolute  rule  that  prosecution  must be
conducted  solely by those answerable  to  the President.  In  each  of these
three  design  elements,  the unitary  model  mispredicts  the  original  prac-
tice.  We  consider  these  in  turn.

First:  For the first eighty years  of the Republic,  there was  no central-
ized and hierarchical  department of legal  affairs in  the executive  branch.
While  the Judiciary Act of 1789  did create  the office  of Attorney General,
it did  not  create  a  "department"  under  him. 60  By  statute,  the Attorney
to  represent  the  United  States  in  the
General  had  just  two  duties: 
Supreme Court  (only), and  to answer legal questions  submitted to him by
the President  or  heads  of departments  on  matters  relating  to  the opera-
tion  of  those  departments 6 1-though 
from  the  start,  the  Attorney
General  also served  as the  President's  legal  advisor.6 2  The same  act  cre-
ated district attorneys who prosecuted suits on behalf of the United States
in  the  district courts. 63  Until  1861,  however,  these  district attorneys  did
not report to the Attorney General,  and were not in any  clear way  answer-
able to him.  Before  1861,  the district attorneys reported either directly to
no one  (1789  to  1820)  or to the Secretary  of the  Treasury  (1820  through

57.  See,  e.g.,  Harold J.  Krent,  Executive  Control  Over  Criminal  Law  Enforcement
Some  Lessons  From  History,  38  Am.  U.  L.  Rev.  275  (1989);  Daniel  N.  Reisman,
Deconstructing  Justice  Scalia's  Separation  of  Powers  Jurisprudence:  The  Preeminent
Executive,  53 Alb. L. Rev. 49,  53-60  (1988);  Stephanie A.J.  Dangel,  Note,  Is Prosecution  a
Core  Executive  Function?  Morrison v.  Olson and  the  Framers'  Intent, 99  Yale  LJ.  1069
(1990).

58.  It is  important  to  emphasize  that  we  are  not  saying  a  unitarian  must  link  this
organizational norm of hierarchy with the unitarian claim  of ultimate control.  Hierarchy is
just one  of any number of organizational  forms  that  could still give the  executive  ultimate
control.  To  twentieth  century  ears,  however,  it  is  a  likely  organizational  form,  and  we
consider  it here  first as just one possibility.

59.  See Act  ofJune 22,  1870,  ch.  150,  16 Stat.  162.
60.  SeeJudiciary Act of 1789,  ch. 20, §  35, 1 Stat. 73, 93; Lawrence Lessig, Readings  by

our Unitary  Executive,  15  Cardozo  L. Rev.  175,  186-96  (1993).

61.  See  id.
62.  See White,  supra note  42,  at 164-68.
63.  See Judiciary Act  of 1789  §  35,  1 Stat. at 92.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  16 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMTNISTRATION

1861.6)  Throughout this period, they operated without any clear organi-
zational  structure  or  hierarchy. 65

Second:  The first centralized  federal  prosecution was outside the di-
rect  control  of the  President.  Within  the  Department  of the  Treasury,
Congress  established  the  office  of the Comptroller,  and in  1797 charged
him  with the  power  "to institute  suit for  the recovery  of" a "sum or  bal-
ance reported to be due to the United States, upon the adjustment of any
[revenue officer's account]."66  This  power was expanded  in  1817,  giving
the Comptroller  the power "to  direct suits and legal proceedings, and  to take
such  measures  as may be  authorized  by the laws  to enforce  prompt pay-
ments  of all debts  to  the  United States."67  But the Comptroller  himself
was  not directly within  the  President's  control, and  most  commentators
understood  the Comptroller  to be  "relatively  independent."6 8  So special
was  the  Comptroller's  position  that it  led  Madison,  who  ordinarily  sup-
ported  an  absolute  removal  power  by  the  President  over  executive  of-
ficers,  to  comment  that  "there  may be  strong reasons  why  an  officer  of
this  kind  should  not  hold  his  office  at  the  pleasure  of  the  Executive
branch  of the Government."6 9  At one  point in  the debate,  Madison  ar-
gued  that  the  Comptroller  should  hold  his  office  for  a  fixed  tenure. 70

64.  Note that  during this period  the Secretary  of the Treasury  reported  to Congress.

See  infra  text accompanying  note  156.

65.  Leonard White  describes  the early  control  of district attorneys  as  follows:
By clear  implication  and  subsequent practice  the  district attorneys  thus  became
subject  to the  comptroller's  instructions for this  class  of cases,  as well  as  the fifth
auditor's  instructions  after  1820  in  cases  involving  delinquent  collectors  of
revenue.  They  also  assisted  the  Postmaster  General  in  suits  against  delinquent
postmasters  and  their  sureties,  and  in  the  prosecution  of offenses  against  the
mails.  The  attorneys  might,  therefore,  receive  instructions  from  three  major
federal  agencies,  to  none of which  they were  clearly  responsible.

Leonard D. White, TheJeffersonians:  A Study in Administrative  History 1801-1829,  at 340
(1951);  see  also  Tiefer,  supra  note  21,  at 75  ("The  Attorney  General  did  not control  or
supervise federal  district attorneys;  his function  was merely to advise  the President  and the
Cabinet.  Federal revenue  collectors  obtained legal  enforcement  for their  collection  cases
in decentralized  fashion, paying fees to the federal district attorneys  or to private counsel."
(footnotes omitted)).

66.  Act of Mar.  3,  1797,  ch. 20,  §  1, 1 Stat. 512,  512;  see also  Tiefer, supra note  21,  at
75.  For a  general  discussion  of  the  Comptroller's  office,  see  Harvey  C.  Mansfield,  The
Comptroller  General  (1939).

67.  Act  of  Mar.  3,  1817,  ch.  45,  § 10,  3  Stat  366,  367  (emphasis  added);  see  also

Tiefer,  supra note  21,  at 75.

68.  See  Darrell  H. Smith,  The General Accounting  Office:  Its  History, Activities  and

Organization  22  (1927);  Tiefer, supra  note 21,  at 73-74.

69.  1 Annals of Cong. 636  (Gales  & Seaton  eds.,  1834);  see also Tiefer, supra note 21,

at 74.

70.  See  1 Annals  of Cong.  636  (Gales  & Seaton  eds.,  1834).  It should  be  noted,  as
lawyers  are  wont  to do,  that  much  of the  argument  against  modem unitarians  hangs  on
this single  reference. to one  debate by Madison.  Indeed, Madison  the  next day  "withdrew
the  proposition which  he yesterday laid upon the  table," id. at 639,  though it is not entirely
clear  to what proposal  this  refers.  The  point that  must be  stressed,  however,  is  that  too
much  of the  anti-unitarian  case  may  be resting upon  this  single speech  by Madison.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  17 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

Congress  did not entirely follow Madison's  suggestion, 71 but nonetheless
the  Comptroller's  decisions  to  prosecute  were  independent,  as were  his
final  determinations  of disputes  referred  by  statute  to  him.72  More  im-
portantly,  whether  Madison's  initial  thoughts  prevailed  or  not,  what  is
clear  is  that  all  thought the  matter  open  for Congress'  determination-
that is,  that Congress had significant flexibility in structuring the  duties of
this  "executive"  officer.

Thus,  the  organizational  structure  of the original  executive,  at least
with  respect  to  prosecution,  was  not  hierarchical.  But  perhaps  the  es-
sence  of unitarianism  is not organizational  structure. Perhaps  instead  the
essence is mere  control,  through whatever  structure.  If the President  re-
tained  either  directory  authority  over  the  district  attorneys,  or  removal
authority  over  all  exercising  prosecutorial  power,73  the  unitary  position
may  seem  unimpaired,  at least  so  far.  While  acknowledging  that  there
was no  clear organizational  hierarchy,  the unitarian  could still  claim  that
the essential  requirement of presidential  control was preserved 74:  Even if
the  story just told  shows  that  the  Attorney  General  could  not  direct  or
remove  district attorneys,  nothing yet shows  the President  could  not.75
Third:  But so far this story ignores  a crucial fact about federal prose-
cution at the founding-federal  officers  were  not the  only ones who con-
ducted  federal  prosecutions.  State  officials  also  conducted  federal
prosecutions,  and these  officers were  clearly not subject to control  by  the

71.  The  Act  contained  a  general  removal  clause  that  stated:  "if any  person  shall
offend  against  any  of the  prohibitions  of this  act,  he  shall  be  deemed  guilty  of a  high
misdemeanor,...  and shall upon conviction be removed from office."  Act of Sept. 2,  1789,
ch. 12,  §  8,  1  Stat.  65, 67.  Compare  this with  the-Temoval provision for the  Secretary, which
stated simply "[t]hat whenever the Secretary shall be removed from  office by the President,"
without providing  any  limitations  on  the President's  removal  power.  §  7,  1 Stat.  at 67.

72.  See Tiefer, supra note 21,  at 74.  We  believe that Madison's  concern here certainly
was that the Comptroller be independent of the President for checks and balances reasons.
But the  modern unitarian  could perhaps argue that the  real motive for the independence
was  simply  efficiency,  and  therefore  that  the  Comptroller's  position  is  not  strongly
probative  of the  framers'  understanding  of any  constitutionally  required  control  of the
President.

73.  On  the distinction  between  directory  and removal  authority,  see James  Hart, The
Ordinance  Making  Powers  of the  President  of the  United  States  188-97  (1925);  Itzhak
Zamir, Administrative  Control of Administrative  Action,  57  Cal.  L. Rev. 866,  877  (1969).

74.  Though  as  Susan  Bloch  convincingly  argues,  it  is  not  at  all  clear  the  framers
believed  they were vesting  in the  President  removal  authority over  the Attorney  General.
See  Susan L. Bloch, The Early Role of the Attorney General in our Constitutional  Scheme:
In  the  Beginning There Was  Pragmatism,  1989  Duke  L.J.  561,  582.

75. Jefferson  at least exercised  the directory  power when  he ordered  district attorneys
to cease  prosecution  under  the  Alien  and  Sedition Acts.  See,  e.g.,  Letter  from  Thomas
Jefferson  to Wilson  C. Nicholas  (June  13,  1809),  in 12  The Writings  of Thomas Jefferson
288  (Andrew A.  Lipscomb  ed.,  1905)  [hereinafter Lipscomb, Writings  ofJefferson];  Letter
from ThomasJefferson  to Edwin  Livingston  (Nov.  1, 1801),  in 8 The Writings  of Thomas
Jefferson  57-58  n.1  (Paul  L. Ford  ed.,  New York,  G.P. Putnam's  Sons  1897)  (hereinafter
Ford, Writings ofJefferson].  In  1897,  the Supreme Court concluded the President  had the
power  to  remove  a U.S.  attorney,  despite  his  being  granted  a four-year  term  under  the
appointment statute.  See Parsons  v.  United  States,  167  U.S.  324, 343  (1897).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  18 1994

1994] 

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION 

19

President.  Perhaps it would be possible to say that state  officers enforcing
federal  law  were  not  exercising  "the  Executive  power  of  the  United
States"; but it seems quite reasonable  to think that insofar as enforcement
of federal  law is  at stake,  this  was indeed  their responsibility.  As  Harold
Krent writes,

Congress vested jurisdiction  in  state  courts  over actions  seeking
penalties  and  forfeitures,  granted  concurrent  jurisdiction  to
state courts  over  some  criminal  actions,  and assigned  state  offi-
cials  auxiliary  law  enforcement  tasks.  Thus,  Congress  assigned
law enforcement  responsibility to state  officials who were  far re-
moved  from control  of the  executive  branch.76

Even  when  actions  were  criminal,  "[t]he  decisions  whether  to  sue  and
what  punishments  to  seek  remained  in  the  discretion  of  individuals
outside  the Executive's  control."77  The original practice  thus violated the
unitarian's  plan,  even  in  its  most  minimal  form.78  Here  at  least,  some
federal prosecution was  exercised  that was  clearly beyond  the President's
control.

But not here only.  For  not only was  federal  prosecution  vested  in  at
least some federal officers  not subject to direct presidential  control, 79 and
in  some state  officers  far  removed  from  executive  control,8 0  but federal

76.  Krent,  supra  note  57,  at  303.  Krent's very  careful  analysis  makes  three  distinct
points:  (1)  "Congress  limited  the  Executive's  effective  control  over  law  enforcement by
dispersing  supervisory  responsibility  among  various  executive  officials,"  id.  at  286;  (2)
Private actions  constituted  prosecution outside  the executive's  control, see  id. at 290-303;
(3)  States  exercised  some  federal  prosecutorial  authority, see  id. at 303-10.  The last two
points are  discussed below, see  infra text.accompanying  notes 77,  81-83.  For an example
of a statute  giving control of prosecution  to state  officials,  see Act  of July  6,  1798,  ch. 66,
§ 2,  1 Stat.  577, 577  (respecting alien  enemies);  see also  Thomas  Sergeant, Constitutional
Law 269-70  (Philadelphia,  Abraham  Small  1822).  Finally, one should note that there is an
important  difference  between  vesting  executive  authority  in  a  state  official  and  vesting
executive  authority in a federal  official  not directly  responsible to  the President.  Only the
latter  is  subject  to  the  machinations  of  Congress,  and  hence  the  former  might  be
considered constitutionally  distinct.  We  do  not address  that difference,  pointed  out to us
by Alan  Meese,  in  the analysis  that follows.
77.  Krent, supra note  57,  at 304.
78.  One  should  ask  what  the  appropriate  baseline  is  for  evaluating  unitariness,  or
alternatively, the  extent of original executive  control.  For obviously  one cannot carry over
modem  conceptions,  built  upon  modem  capacity  and  technology,  to'the  eighteenth
century world.  What may  appear  to us  to  be  lax  control  may have,  in context,  appeared
quite  centralized.  And  indeed,  as  Charles  Thach argues,  against the  background  of state
executives,  and  the  continental  executive,  Article  II's  executive  was  quite  strong.  See
Charles  C.  Thach,  Jr.,  The  Creation  of  the  Presidency  1775-1789:  A  Study 
in
Constitutional  History,  Johns  Hopkins  University  Studies  in  Historical  and  Political
Science, No. 4  1922,  at 1, 77.  It would  remain  possible  for the modem  unitarian  then to
argue  that compared  to  the  degree  of control existing  before  1787,  the  new  Constitution
was  a more  centralized  and unitarian  structure.  Nonetheless,  that it was  more centralized
would  not entail a present  understanding  of it as fully  centralized.

79.  Recall  the  discussion  of the  district attorneys  and  the  Comptroller,  supra  notes

64-72 and accompanying  text.

80.  See  supra text accompanying  notes  76-77.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  19 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

prosecutorial  authority  was  also  granted  to  private  individuals  wholly
outside  the  executive's  control.  Both  through  citizen  access  to  federal
grand juries, 1l  and through civil  qui tam actions  (treated for at least some
purposes  as  criminal  actions),8 2  citizens  retained  the  power  to  decide
whether  and  in  what manner  to  prosecute  for violations  of federal  law.
Here  too  the decision  whom  to prosecute  and what  crime  to  charge  was
placed  in  a person  not subject to  presidential  direction  or removal.8 3

Together,  these  bits of history are  devastating  to  the  modem  unita-
rian's  originalist  claims  about  prosecution.8 4  Contrary  to  the  unitary
model,  not  all  federal  prosecution  was  vested  in  officers  answerable
(whether  directly  or  not)  to  the  President.  Although  Justice  Scalia  is
technically  correct that "always  and  everywhere-if conducted  by govern-
ment at  all-[the prosecutorial  authority  has]  been  conducted  never by
the  legislature,  never  by  the  courts,  and  always  by  the  executive,"8 5  this

81.  See  Reisman,  supra  note 57,  at 56-57.
82.  See Krent, supra note 57, at 300  ("Because  qui tam actions historically were viewed
as  criminal  or  quasi-criminal,  Congress,  by  authorizing  such  actions,  determined  that
private individuals  could  don the mantle  of a public  prosecutor.").  On  the  qui tam action
generally,  see  Evan  Caminker,  Comment,  The  Constitutionality  of  Qui Tam Actions,  99
Yale  LJ.  341  (1989).  Blackstone  discusses  qui  tam  actions  in  3  William  Blackstone,
Commentaries  *161-62.  For examples  of early  qui tam statutes,  see Act of Mar.  22,  1794,
ch.  11,  §  2,  1 Stat.  347,  349  (prohibiting carrying  on the  slave  trade); Act  ofJuly 22,  1790,
ch.  33,  §  3,  1 Stat.  137,  137  (regulating  trade  and intercourse  with Indian  tribes);  Act  of
July 20, 1790,  ch.  29,  §  1,  1 Stat.  131,  131  (governing  and regulating  seamen  in merchant
service).  See  also  Musgrove  v.  Gibbs,  1 U.S.  (1 Dall.)  216  (Pa.  1787)  (action  for usury);
Phile v. The  Ship Anna, 1 U.S.  (1 Dall.)  197  (Pa.  Ct. of C.P.  of Philadelphia  County  1787)
(forfeiture of vessel);  Talbot v. Commanders  and  Owners  of Three  Brigs,  1 U.S.  (1 Dall.)
95  (Pa.  High  Ct. of Err. & App.  1784)  (marine  trespass).

83.  Here  too  it  would  be  possible  to  say  that  the  "Executive  power  of the  United
States"  is  not at  stake,  but  what  is  important  for  our  purposes  is  that  the  early  practice
allowed  enforcement activity to take place outside of presidential  control.  On the question
of  whether  qui  tam  actions  by  private  parties  are  exercises  of  the  United  States
government's  powers, see United States v. Boeing Co.,  No. 92-36660,  1993 WL 460501  (9th
Cir. Nov. 5,  1993).

84.  One  problem  with  the  history  related  to  the  citizen  suits  is  the  problem  of
periodization.  Krent  is  quite  happy  to  draw  on  precedents  spanning  from  the  late
revolution  through  the first quarter of the nineteenth  century.  So too have we.  It remains
for a historian,  however, to question the  methodology that so casually  compresses  75 years
of history  into  a single  story  line, or  alternatively,  to  question  the  methodology  that  so
casually  presumes  that  the nature  of the  events  is  somehow  the same.

There are two responses to  this criticism.  First, as  the tussle between  Congress and  the
President  has  never  really  been  resolved,  it is  at  least  plausible  to  presume  that  this  is
indeed  a  unified  story  line, and  thus  the  wide  temporal  and contextual  span  is justified,
Second,  as  the  purpose  throughout  our use  of this  history  is simply  to  explore  whether
certain  issues  were  of  concern  to  the  framers-issues  such  as  unified  prosecution  that
would  be  central  for the  modem  unitarian-we  scan  widely  to  see  whether  there is  any
evidence  that  these  constitutionalists  resolved  the  issues  in  a  manner  that  modern
unitarians  deem mandatory.  For these purposes, we believe  the time frame  problem  is less
pronounced.

85.  Morrison  v.  Olson,  487  U.S.  654,  705-06  (1988)  (Scalia, J.,  dissenting).  But cf.
Julius  Goebel,  Jr.,  &  T.  Raymond  Naughton,  Law  Enforcement  in  Colonial  New  York

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  20 1994

19941

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

does  not  mean  it  has  always  and  everywhere  been  the  domain  of the
President.  Sometimes  government  did  not  prosecute  (private  citizens
did),  and sometimes  the federal  executive  did not prosecute  (state execu-
tives  did 8 6).  And if we put standing issues  to one  side,87  nothing in  prin-
ciple  would  have  stopped  the  framers  from  assigning  the  decision  to
prosecute  someone  to  a  federal  official  not  subject  to  presidential  re-
moval  (as  Madison  argued  the  Comptroller  should  have  been8 8),  or to
state  officials  clearly  outside  federal  control,  or indeed  to private citizens
prosecuting  qui tam actions  (as  every  Congress  since  the  founding  has
allowed 89).  In  short,  the decision  "who  should  prosecute  whom" was  a
decision  the  early  Congresses  at least  thought far  more  subtle  and  com-
plex  than  do the  believers  in  a strongly unitary  executive. 90

Perhaps it remains for the modern unitarian  to insist on the implied
control  over  prosecution  reserved  to  the  President  through  the pardon
power.  As  the  President  has  the  power  to  pardon  either  before or after
conviction,9'  he  retains  throughout  prosecution  a practical  control  over
the  effects  of  prosecution.  Thus  one  could  say  that,  in  effect,  the
President  does  retain  ultimate  control  over  the  executive  function  of
prosecution,  even  if prosecutorial  power  is  vested  elsewhere.  Notably,
this  argument would  mean  that Morrison was  rightly  decided and indeed
that  Congress  could  place  prosecutorial  power  wherever  it  chooses,  so
long  as  the  President retains  the  authority  to  pardon.

No doubt the pardon power is an important grant to the President of
control  over  prosecution.  But, it is  a limited  grant  as well.  There  is  an
important  difference  between  the  power not to  prosecute and  the power
to  pardon-for  the  latter  is  much more  likely  than  the  former  to  incur
significant  political  costs.  It would be  fully consistent  with  a conception
of separated  powers  that the  President  retain  the power  to  pardon,  but
that he  suffer political  consequences  to limit the  exercise  of this  power.
The  power  to control  prosecution  is  conceptually  and  politically  distinct
from  the power  to grant pardons,  and  therefore  the  modern  unitarian's

321-22,  366-67  (1970)  (describing  the prosecutorial  duties of the  Supreme  Court and its
judicial  officers  in colonial  New York).

86.  See supra  text accompanying  notes  76-77.
87.  See  generally  Cass  K  Sunstein, What's  Standing  After Lujan?  Of Citizen  Suits,
"Injuries," and Article  III, 91 Mich.  L. Rev. 163  (1992)  (reviewing  the  Court's invalidation
of citizen standing in Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 112 S.  Ct. 2130  (1992),  and arguing  that
the  Court's  holding is based  on  a misinterpretation  of the original  Constitution).

88.  See  supra text accompanying  notes  69-71;  infra text accompanying  note  128.
89.  The "citizen  suit"  is the  modern  incarnation  of the  qui tam action.  Citizen  suit
provisions  are  most pervasive  in  environmental  law.  See,  e.g.,  Federal  Water  Pollution
Control Act,  33 U.S.C.  §  1365 (a) (1988);  Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C.  § 7604(a)  (1988  & Supp.
II  1990).  Congress  recently  revitalized  the  False  Claims  Act,  a  long  dormant  qui  tam
statute.  See  False  Claims  Amendments  Act  of  1986,  31  U.S.C.  §§  3729-31 
(1988)
(originally enacted  in  1863,  see  Act of Mar.  2,  1863,  ch.  67,  12  Stat.  696).

90.  For an excellent summary  of the  same point, see Dangel, supra note 57,  at 1070.
91.  See  Pardons,  1  Op.  Att'y  Gen.  341,  342  (1820);  Louis  Fisher,  The  Politics  of

Shared  Power:.  Congress and  the Executive  10-12  (2d  ed.  1987).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  21 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

conception  of prosecutorial  control  cannot  derive  from  the  power  to
pardon.9 2

Thus far, then, we  have  seen  that the original practice  does not sug-
gest  a  presidential  monopoly  over  the  power  of  prosecution.  In  a
number  of settings, enforcement  of the  criminal  law was  placed  beyond
the  control  of the President.

B.  Original Understandings and Unitarian Puzzles:  Departments

Prosecution  constitutes  the  first puzzle  with  the  unitary model.  But
it is left to the modem  unitarian  to respond  that perhaps the  framers did
not understand prosecution  to be a "core" executive function. 93  Perhaps
prosecution  was  an  anomaly;9 4  perhaps  the  framers  thought  that  this
function  was  a  distinctive  one  entitled  to  a  unique  exemption  from  the
general  principle  of presidential  control over  administration  of the laws.
We suggest  that, on the  contrary, the story of prosecution  suggests  a
need  for  a  much  more  fundamental  rethinking  of  the  framers'  under-
standing  of what the executive  was.  The  second puzzle  presented  by the
original  practice  confirms  the need  for reevaluation.

If the  Constitution  entrenches  presidential  control  over  all  depart-
ments, 95  we  would  expect  the  framers  to  have  adopted  a  relatively  uni-
form  organizational 
to  be  arranged
hierarchically,  all subordinate  to the President and  all answerable  to him
in  the exercise  of all discretionary functions. 96  Congress  may impose  du-
ties  on  departmental  officers,  but  it  may  not  "structure  the  executive

structure-departments 

92.  Historically,  it has not always  been  clear whether control over prosecution  derives
from  the pardon  power, from  the  "take Care"  power,  or from  executive  power  generally.
Indeed,  the first  real  exercise  of executive  control  over  prosecution  suffered  from  this
ambiguity.  Jefferson's power to dismiss Sedition Act prosecutions was at times explained as
flowing from the pardon power, see Letter from ThomasJefferson  to judge Spencer  Roane
(Sept.  6,  1819),  in 15  Lipscomb,  Writings  of Jefferson,  supra  note  75,  at  212,  214,  and
sometimes  from  the  power to  "take  Care  that  the  laws be  faithfully  executed,"  see  Letter
from  Thomas  Jefferson  to  Edwin  Livingston  (Nov.  1,  1801),  in  8  Ford,  Writings  of
Jefferson,  supra  note  75,  at 57-58.

93.  The notion of a "core" executive  function was  discussed in Morrison v. Olson, 487
U.S.  654,  688-90  (1988)  (holding  that  ability  of  Congress  to  restrict  removal  power
through  "good  cause" provision  does  not depend  on  whether official  performs  a  "core"
executive  function),  though it was  conceded  there that prosecution  was such  a function.
94.  See  Frank  H.  Easterbrook,  Unitary  Executive  Interpretation:  A  Comment,  15

Cardozo  L.  Rev.  313, 319  (1993).

95.  Again, however,  the argument from  the structure of the Constitution alone here is
quite  weak.  While  some  may  suggest  the  President's  control  over  departments  follows
from his power  to appoint  heads  of departments,  no one suggests  that the President  has  a
power  to  control  judges  because  he  appoints  them.  See  Zamir,  supra  note  73,  at 870
(arguing that the constitutionally enumerated powers  of the President are ambiguous as to
control  of "executive  powers  by  all officers  under  all laws").

96.  Note  again, what is crucial is not the particular form of the organizational  control
of  the  executive  power.  All  that  matters  is  that  the  Constitution  require  ultimate
presidential  control,  whatever  the  structure  of  the  organization.  Nonetheless,  while  a
particular form may not be  crucial, that there was not a consistent form  is at least suggestive.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  22 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

department in ways  that would deprive  the President  of his constitutional
power  to control  that department."9 7

We  can  test that theory against the framers'  actual  practice by exam-
ining  the structure  of the  original  executive  departments.  According  to
the  modem  unitarian,  that  structure  should  make  manifest 
the
President's  exclusive  power  to  control  and  direct  department  heads  in
the exercise  of their discretionary  functions.  But,  in fact, the  authors  of
the  original  practice  embraced  no  such  single  structure.  Interestingly,
they  created  a variety  of structures,  not a  single  one.  More  important,
they did not give the President  plenary control  over all of the institutions
that they  created.

The  first great Supreme  Court opinion on this general subject, Myers
v.  United  States,98  relies  primarily  on  the  great  debate  about  the
President's  removal powers that occurred when  the first Congress created
the  first  departments  in  the  new  government-a  debate  known  as  the
Decision  of 1789. 9 9  The  Decision of 1789  is in  turn a universal  source  of
historical  support  for  the  belief  in  a  strongly  unitary  executive.10 0  In
Myers, ChiefJustice  (and former President)  Taft relied  on that debate  to
establish  three  important  propositions: 
the  framers  conceived  of  a
President who was vested  constitutionally  with  control over  the executive
departments;  Congress  could not limit his control,  through removal, over
the  members  of those  departments;  and  therefore  Congress  could  not
condition  his  ability  to  fire  a member  of a department,  in  this  case  the
postmaster.10 1

However  strong  a  statement  of  the  unitarian's  vision,  Taft's  claims
show  some  relative  modesty.  The  Myers  Court  offered  three  important
qualifications  to the  modem unitarian's  view.  First, it said that  the Civil
Service  Act,  immunizing  inferior  officers  from plenary  presidential  con-
trol,  did  not  offend  Article  II  and  the  unitariness  of  the  executive
branch. 0 2  Second,  the  Court  agreed  that  officers  with  adjudicative  du-
ties could be immunized  from presidential  influence, even  if those officers
operated within  the executive  branch:  "[T ] here may be duties of a quasi-
judicial  character  imposed  on  executive  officers  and  members  of execu-
tive  tribunals whose  decisions  after hearing affect the  interests of individ-.
uals,  the  discharge  of which  the  President  can  not  in  a  particular  case
properly influence  or  control."10 3  Third,  it said that  Congress  might be

97.  Calabresi  & Rhodes, supra  note  1, at 1168.
98.  272  U.S. 52  (1926).
99.  The debate  began  on May  19,  1789,  and continued throughout  the summer.  The
House debates are  set out in  1 Annals  of Cong. 384-412,  473-608, 614-31,  635-39  (Gales
& Seaton  eds.,  1834).  There is no reliable  record  of the Senate debates.  The details of the
debate are  discussed  infra  text accompanying  notes  112-129.

100.  See,  e.g.,  Grover  Cleveland,  Presidential  Problems  24  (1904);  James  Hart,
Tenure  of Office  Under the  Constitution 217-22  (1930); Thach, supra note 78,  at 140-65.

101.  See  272  U.S.  at 111-32.
102.  See  id. at  173-74.
103.  Id. at  135.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  23 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

able  to prevent  the President from  "overruling" administrators  in  certain
instances, even if he  disagrees with  them:  "[T] here may be duties so pecu-
liarly and specifically committed to the discretion of a particular officer as
to  raise  a question whether  the President  may  overrule  or  revise  the  of-
ficer's interpretation  of his  statutory duty in a particular instance."1 04  All
the Constitution  required, Taft  asserted, was  that  the  President have  the
power  to  discharge  the employee  for  making a  decision  contrary  to  the
President's  wishes;  but Congress  need not give  him  control to  direct the
decision  itself.10 5  This  conception  of presidential  oversight-that  the
President  may not dictate  outcomes,  although  he  may discharge  people
with whom  he disagrees-has  considerable  importance, 10 6 and we will re-
turn to it below.10 7  But it is  sufficient here simply to recognize  that Myers
does  not  stand  for  unlimited  executive  authority  that  some  take  it  to
require.' 0 8

The commentary  on the  Myers opinion,  and on its terse  partial rejec-
tion  merely  eleven  years  later in  Humphrey's Executor v.  United States,'0 9 is
of course  vast." l0  What we  want  to  emphasize  here  is  the Myers  Court's
failure  to  present  the  complete  story  of the  Decision  of 1789.  We  can
move  quickly through what is  essential for our purposes.  Everyone  agrees
that  this  debate  is  crucial  for  understanding  the  framers'  conception  of
the  executive;  but unlike  some  who  have  relied  upon  Taft's  opinion,"'

104.  Id.
105.  See  id.
106.  See  also  William  H. Taft,  Our Chief Magistrate  and  his Powers  125  (1916).  Taft

states:

In  theory,  all  the  Executive  officers  appointed  by  the  President  directly  or
indirectly  are  his  subordinates,  and  yet  Congress  can  undoubtedly  pass  laws
definitely  limiting  their  discretion  and  commanding  a  certain  course  by  them
which  it is not within  the  power of the Executive  to  vary.  Fixing the  method  in
which  Executive  power shall be  exercised  is perhaps  one  of the chief functions of
Congress....  Congress  may  repose  discretion  in  appointees  of the  President,
which  the President  may not himself control.  The instance I  have already given is
one  of these, in  which  the  Comptroller  of the  Treasury  has  independent  quasi-
judicial  authority  to  pass  on  the  question  of what  warrants  are  authorized  by
appropriation  acts  to  be  drawn by him  on  the funds  of the Treasury.

Id.  This passage  may well  suggest  only  that the  President  must  not tell  his  employees  to
violate  the law,  rather than  indicating,  as does  the Myers dictum,  that the  choice  of course
of action is for the  employee  rather than the President, subject  to the President's  power  to
discharge.  See  272  U.S.  at 135.

107.  See infra  text accompanying  notes  141-143.
108.  See, e.g.,  Morrison v. Olson,  487 U.S.  654,  723-24  (1988)  (ScaliaJ.,  dissenting);

Calabresi  & Rhodes,  supra note  1, at 1166  & n.56.

109.  295 U.S.  602,  626  (1935)  (limiting Myers to  the narrow point that the Senate may

not play a  direct role  in removal  of purely executive  officers).

110.  See,  e.g.,  Edward  S.  Corwin,  The  President:  Office  and  Powers,  1787-1984,  at
100-10  (Ronald W. Bland et al.  eds.,  5th  ed. 1984);  Miller, supra note 1, at 90-94; Peter P.
Swire,  Note,  Incorporation  of Independent  Agencies  into  the  Executive  Branch,  94 Yale
LJ. 1766,  1767-68  (1985).

111.  See,  e.g.,  Calabresi  & Rhodes, supra note  1, at 1166-67;  Currie, supra  note  1, at

34.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  24 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

we think that the debate defeats  rather than  supports the claim  on behalf
of a strongly  unitary  executive.

resolve 

Beginning in May  of 1789,  Congress  considered  the original  organi-
zation  of  the new  government.  Representative  Boudinot  proposed  that
the  House 
itself  into  a  committee  of  the  whole,  and
Representative  Benson proposed  the establishment of three departments:
Foreign  Affairs  (which  was  changed  to  the  Department  of  State  in
September  1789112),  War,  and  the  Treasury. 113  The  committee  of  the
whole  took up  deliberations  initially  on  the  Department  of Foreign Af-
fairs.  Those  deliberations  show  that  distinctive  organizations  were
thought  to  warrant  distinctive  treatment.

In  supporting  the strong version  of the unitary  executive,  the  mod-
ern  unitarians  focus on  the debate  over the President's  power  to  remove
the Secretary  of Foreign Affairs.  As  originally proposed,  the Secretary  of
Foreign  Affairs  was  to  be  removable  by  the  President,  but this  proposal
gave  rise to  confusion.  Some  thought that  removal  of necessity followed
appointment,  and  that since  the  President  and  Senate  were  involved  in
appointment,  only the President  and  the Senate  could remove.  On  this
view,  a  shared  role  in  removal  was  a  matter  of  constitutional  necessity.
(This  indeed  was  the  apparent  position  of  the  executive's  strongest
booster, Alexander  Hamilton, writing in The Federalist Papers. 1 4)  From

112.  See Act of Sept. 15,  1789,  ch.  14, §  1, 1 Stat. 68,  68; White, supra note 42, at  132

n.12.

113.  See  1 Annals of Cong.  384  (Gales  & Seaton  eds.,  1834).  A fourth  department,
the  Domestic  Department,  was  rejected,  since  it was  thought that  many  of the  domestic
matters  could  be  assigned  to the  Secretary  of State.  See  id.  at 385-86;  White, supra note
42,  at 133.

114.  See  The  Federalist  No.  77,  at 459-62  (Alexander Hamilton)  (Clinton  Rossiter
ed.,  1961)  ("The  consent  of  [the  Senate]  would  be  necessary  to  displace  as  well  as  to
appoint.").  Contemporaries  were  a  bit  upset  with  the  fact  that  Hamilton,  a  strong
supporter of a strong presidency, apparently  conceded  that the Constitution  did not grant
the  President  the  Royal  Prerogative  of removal  from  office.  See  Field  v. People  ex  rel.
McClernand,  3  El.  (2  Scam.)  79,  161-74  (1839)  (Lockwood, J.,  concurring)  (reviewing
debate  over  President's  removal  power).  Nonetheless,  courts  subsequently  inferred  the
President's power  to remove  officers  unilaterally.  See,  e.g.,  id at 116-19.  The battle  over
Hamilton's  position did  not end, however, with his publication  of Federalist No.  77 in the
New  York  Packet,  April  4,  1788.  After  Hamilton's  publication,  editors  reworked
Hamilton's words.  The first general  publication of the Federalist,  in 1810, by Williams and
Whiting added a note to  the sentence  of Hamilton just noted that read, "This construction
has since been  rejected by  the legislature;  and it is now settled in practice,  that the power
of  displacing  belongs  exclusively  to  the  president."  The  Federalist  No.  77,  at  220  n.*
(Williams  & Whiting eds.,  New York  1810).  There  is  no  indication  that  this  note  is  not
Hamilton's  own  words,  as  at  other  places  in  the  same  edition,  notes  that  clearly  are
Hamilton's  are indicated in the same manner.  A reader could not tell the difference.  The
phantom  note  disappears  in  the  Henry  B.  Dawson  edition,  published  in  1863,  see  The
Federalist  No.  77,  at  532  (Henry  B.  Dawson  ed.,  New  York,  Charles  Scribner  1863)
(mislabeled as No. 76),  but reappears  in the 1892  edition  of the Federalist,  edited byJohn
C.  Hamilton,  see The  Federalist No.  77,  at 568  n.*  (John  C.  Hamilton  ed.,  Philadelphia,
J.B. Lippincott  Co. 1892).  The note does not appear in modern  editions of The Federalist,
see,  e.g.,  The Federalist No. 77,  at 459  (Clinton  Rossiter  ed.,  1961).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  25 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

this  point,  some  concluded  that  by  assigning  removal  to  the  President
alone,  the proposal  deprived  the Senate of its constitutional  role.  Others
thought that removal followed  appointment, and that since  the President
appointed  (Senate  consent  notwithstanding),  only  the  President  could
remove.  But these members  were concerned that by stating in the statute
what  the  Constitution  compelled,  later  interpreters  would  believe  the
power  was  not  constitutionally  required.  Still  others  thought  the matter
wholly  within  Congress'  power  to  regulate. 1 15  The  President  was  ulti-
mately  though implicitly  given plenary  removal power, if by a revealingly
narrow  vote." 6  Importantly, however,  asJustice Brandeis  pointed out in
Myers,117  the final vote  did  not express  the  conviction  that the  power  to
remove  even  this  purely  executive  officer  was  constitutionally  vested  in
the President.  Indeed,  the vote reveals,  as  David Currie argues,  that there
"was  no  consensus  as  to whether  [the  President]  got  [the  authority to  re-
move]  from Congress  or from  the  Constitution  itself.""18

The  details  of this  complex  debate  are not  essential  here.  For what
has  been  too  quickly  overlooked  is  a  more  fundamental  fact  of the  de-
bate,  and one  that is  not subject  to any similar ambiguity.  Whatever  dis-
pute  there  may  be  about the  removal  power  of the  President  over  the
Secretary  of Foreign  Affairs  and  similar officers, 119  there  is  no  ambiguity

115.  For a  full  account  of the  four  positions  in  the  debate,  see  Letter  from James
Madison  to Edmund  Randolph  (June  21,  1789),  reprinted  in James  Hart, The  American
Presidency  in Action  1789,  at 156-58  (1948);  Gerhard  Casper, An  Essay in Separation  of
Powers:  Some  Early Versions  and  Practices,  30 Wm.  & Mary L.  Rev. 211,  234-35  (1989).
116.  See Casper, supra note  115, at 237.  As  Casper  reports,  the decision  in the house
was "sealed in an  evenly split Senate, with the Vice President  casting the decisive  vote."  Id.
at 237.  Following the  debate on  the  power  of the  Secretary  of Foreign Affairs,  Congress
considered  the power  of the Secretaries  of War  and Treasury.

117.  See  Myers  v. United  States,  272  U.S.  52,  286-87 n.75  (1926).
118.  David P.  Currie,  The  Constitution  in Congress:  The First Congress,  1789-1791,

at 66  (1993)  (unpublished  manuscript, on  file with  the  Columbia  Law Review).

119.  It bears repeating  that it was not  at all  clear  at the founding,  let alone in  1789,
whether removal was  implied.  Recall  that Hamilton, certainly the strongest proponent of a
strong executive,  see,  e.g., Lynton K.  Caldwell, The Administrative  Theories of Hamilton  &
Jefferson  100  (1964),  apparently  presumed  that  the  Senate  would  share  in  the  removal
power.  See  The Federalist  No.  77,  at  459  (Alexander Hamilton)  (Clinton  Rossiter  ed.,
1961).

Even  if one believes that the President  retained, in the framers'  conception,  complete
authority  to remove  any subordinate officer, one should  be careful  not to  mistake the form
of  this  removal  power  with  its  substance. 
It  may  well  have  been  that  the  framers
understood  the nature  of the  power-in particular,  the  grounds  under which  it could  be
exercised-in a restrictive  sense.  Jefferson,  for example,  did  not believe  he could remove
subordinates just because  they did not share his political beliefs.  See White, supra note 65,
at 351.  Adams also  declined to  exercise  the  removal  power, partly  on principle  and  partly
on  political  grounds.  See  id.  at 67.  Consistent with  the  claim we  make  below-that  the
framers  treated different departments  differently-the  framers struggled  more or less with
respect to the removability  of the heads of different departments.  For example,  Hart notes
that " 'a number' of senators  who had favored  presidential  removal  of the  other Secretaries
were  at first against his  removal  of the Secretary  of the  Treasuiy."  Hart, supra  note 115,  at
217.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  26 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

about a central  point:  the first Congress  conceived  of the proper organi-
zational  structure  for  different  executive  departments  differently.  This
conception,  we  believe,  argues  against  the  belief  in  a  strongly  unitary
executive.

120

treated 

the  departments  differently 

The  relevant  difference  is  manifest  in  two  important  ways.  First,
in  their  formation.
Congress 
Congress  established the Departments  of Foreign  Affairs  and War  as "ex-
ecutive  departments," l 2'  with  little detail,  and with  secretaries  who were
obligated  to "perform and  execute  such duties as  shall from time to  time
be  enjoined  on  or  intrusted  to  [them]  by the  President  of the  United
States." 122  But  the  treatment  of  the  Department  of  the  Treasury  was
wholly  different.  Unlike  with  Foreign  Affairs  and  War,  the  enacting
Congress  (1)  did not denominate Treasury an  "executive department,"12 3
(2)  did  specify  in  detail  the  offices  and  functions  of Treasury,  (3)  did
the
impose  on  the  Treasurer  specific  duties,  and  (4)  did  shield 
Comptroller  (an  office  within  Treasury)  from  presidential  direction.' 2 4

120.  To  the same  general  effect, see  Caldwell,  supra  note  119,  at 98-99;  Hart, supra
note 73,  at 195  n.30; 3 Westel W. Willoughby, The  Constitutional  Law of the United  States
1480  (2d  ed. 1929);  Bloch, supra note  74, at 572-73,  576;  Strauss, supra note  7, at 605; A.
Michael  Froomkin, Note, In Defense  of Administrative  Agency Autonomy,  96 Yale  LJ. 787
(1987);  see  also  infra Appendix,  comparing  and  contrasting the  original  departments.

121.  See  Act ofJuly 27,  1789,  ch.  4,  1 Stat.  28  (establishing an executive  department
denominated  the  Department  of Foreign  Affairs);  Act  of Aug.  7,  1789,  ch.  7,  1  Stat. 49
(establishing an  executive  department denominated  the Department  of War).

122.  Act  ofJuly 27,  1789  §  1,  1 Stat.  at 29; Act  of Aug.  7,  1789  §  1,  1 Stat. at 50.
123.  See Act of Sept. 2,  1789,  ch. 12,  1 Stat. 65  (titled "An Act to establish  the Treasury
Department")-although  nine days later, in a salary bill, Congress  referred  to the Secretary
of the  Treasury as  the secretary  of an "executive"  department.  See Act  of Sept.  11,  1789,
ch.  13,  §  1, 1 Stat. 67; Bloch, supra note 74, at 578 n.56.  Thach takes  the later correction  in
the salary bill as  evidence  that the  Congress was just confused  earlier,  and always  genuinely
conceived  of  the  departments  as  uniformly  executive.  See  Thach,  supra  note  78,  at
144-45,  158.

124.  See Act  of Sept.  2,  1789  §§  1, 2,  8,  1  Stat. at  65-67.  As  described  by  Gerhard

Casper:

The  real  decisions  of 1789  are  those  embodied  in  the  statutes  establishing
the  "great  departments"  of  government.  These  statutes  are  of  considerable
interest  beyond  the  fact  that  they  recognized  a  presidential  removal  power.
Three  departments-Foreign  Affairs,  War,  and Treasury-were  established  that
to  those  of  the  Continental  Congress.  The
were  the  direct  successors 
departments  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  War  were  denominated  "executive"
departments,  and  thus  were  placed  squarely  within  the  executive  branch.
Although  areas  of responsibility were  spelled  out,  the  secretaries  were subjected
. . The  initial  organization  of  the
explicitly  to  presidential  directions  . .
departments  was skeletal,  with only  a chief clerk  named expressly.

Matters  were  completely  different  as  to  the  Department  of Treasury.  The
Treasury  was  not  referred  to  as  an  'executive"  department,  even  though  the
Secretary  of the  Treasury was  grouped with  other "executive  officers"  in  the  act
setting salaries and the Secretary  was removable  by the President.  The legislation
was  silent  on  the  subject  of  presidential  direction,  yet  did  not  vest  the
appointment of inferior  officers  in the Secretary.  An  elaborate set of such officers
and their responsibilities was spelled out in detail....  For instance,  disbursement

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  27 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 94:1

As  Professor  White  describes,  "Congress  at  first  believed  the  Treasury
Department  should  be  closely associated  with  it .... occupying  a  status
different  from that  of State  and War."125

These  differences  in  structure  reveal  one  sense  in  which  the  first
Congress  considered  the  organizational  form  of  the  government  to  be
mixed rather than unitary. 126  And this, we suggest,  has  enormous  impli-
cations.  Some  thought that entities  whose duties bear a strong affinity  to
the judiciary  need  not  be  subject  to  presidential  supervision  alone. 127
Madison,  for example,  stated and  believed  that Congress  had  considera-
ble authority over entities  that have 'judicial  qualities."128  Many agencies,
both executive  and  independent,  are now  engaged  in adjudicative  tasks.
It appears  to  have  been  Madison's  conviction  that  Congress  has  the  au-
thority to  immunize  such agencies  from  presidential  control  and  indeed
that  Congress  should  exercise  that authority.129

Madison's view was  not shared by all.  But at a minimum, we can  say
that  the  framers  were  not of one  mind about  the  proper  organizational
structure and responsibility for these  different departments.  More  likely,
they  had  different  conceptions  about  the  proper structures,  depending
on  the nature  of the  department  at issue.  Where  from  the  nature  of the
office  it was  "proper" for  an office  holder to be  subject to  the  control  of
Congress,  or  insulated  from  the  influence  of  the  President,  the
Constitution  empowered  Congress  so  to  provide.  But where  it was  not
proper  in  this  sense,  it  did  not.  Again,  Madison's  writings  suggest  this
understanding:

Whatever...  may be my opinion  with respect  to the  tenure
by which  an  executive  officer  may  hold  his  office  according  to
the  meaning  of the constitution,  I  am very well  satisfied,  that  a
modification  by the legislature  may take  place in such as partake
of the judicial  qualities,  and  that  the  Legislative  power  is  suffi-

could  be  made  only  by  the  Treasurer,  upon  warrants  signed  by  the  Secretary,
countersigned  by  the  Comptroller,  and  recorded  by the  Register.

Casper,  supra  note  115,  at 239-40;  see also  Fisher, supra  note  91,  at 124  ("the House  of
Representatives  regarded  the  Treasury  Department  partly as  a  legislative agent");  Tiefer,
supra  note  21,  at  73-74  (Comptroller  "clearly  was  expected  to  exercise  independent
judgment, since the safeguard of having him countersign  the Secretary's warrants would be
lost  if he  were  wholly  under  the  Secretary's  direction.").  On  the  President's  power  to
remove  the  Comptroller, see supra  note  71.

125.  White, supra  note 42, at  118-19;  see also  3  Willoughby, supra note  120,  at 1480
(debates  surrounding Act  and  language  of Act  show that  Congress  intended  Treasury  to
take  its direction  from Congress).

Wilson  noted  this  difference  between  the Treasury  and  the  War and  Foreign  Affairs
departments,  and, rather  than read Treasury as  the exception,  treated the  limited control
over the  Treasury as the  rule.  See Woodrow Wilson, Congressional  Government:  A Study
in  American  Politics  262  (Boston, Houghton  Mifflin  1885).

126.  Fisher  suggests  a similar  point.  See Fisher, supra note  91,  at 133.
127.  See  1 Annals  of Cong.  637-38  (Gales  & Seaton  eds.,  1834).
128.  See  id.  at 636.
129.  See  id.  at 636-37.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  28 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

cient  to establish  this  office  on such  a footing  as  to  answer  the
purposes  for which  it is  prescribed.' 3 0
The  presence  of this  understanding  of  permissible  insulation  from
the  President  is  significant  enough  when  we  are  dealing  with  the
Department  of the  Treasury.  The  problem  for  the  unitary  model  only
grows  as  we  consider  the  next  two  great  departments  created  by
Congress:  the Department  of the Navy and  the Post Office.  The  debate
surrounding the formation  of the Navy department  (in 1796)  was the first
on a  "new" department  since  1789.  Its organizational  form followed  that
of State and War, while the organizational form  of the Post Office  tracked
more  closely Treasury's.

,  Consider  Navy first.  Like  the Department  of War,  Congress formed
the Department  of the Navy primarily to help the President  to execute his
commander in chief powers,  powers constitutionally  committed to him in
Article II.  And,  like War, Congress'  specification  of the internal structure
of this department was  sparse.  It was  enough to establish  a secretary who
was  to  obey the  President, for it was  the President's  power  that he would
be  executing.  Moreover,  the  Act  creating  the  Department  of the Navy,
like  those  creating the  Departments  of War  and State, was  brief and sim-
ple:  The Act established an  "executive department"  with a Secretary  as its
chief officer,  whose  duty was  "to execute  such  orders  as he  shall  receive
from the President of the United States" concerning the "procurement of
naval  stores...,  the  construction  ... 
, equipment  and  employment  of
vessels  of war  and  naval  matters." 131

But the  Post Office  followed  the opposite  pattern.  The  statute creat-
ing the Post Office  in  1789  did make  the Postmaster  General  "subject to
the direction  of the President of the United States in  performing  the du-
ties of his office."' 3 2  But Congress  did not denominate  the Post Office  an
"executive  department" as  it did the  Departments  of State, War, and  the
Navy.' 33  Moreover,  the original act was  clearly provisional,  explicitly con-
templating its replacement within  the year,'3 4  and when Congress  reorga-
nized  the  office  in  1792,  Congress  gave  the  Postmaster  the authority  to
enter contracts  and make appointments, and permitted the Post Office  to
operate  from  postal revenues.' 3 5  When  this  change  occurred,  Congress
removed  the  language  making  the Postmaster  General  subject to  the  di-
rection  of the President. 3 6  The  purpose of this change  was  to avoid  the

130.  Id. at 636;  see  Casper, supra  note  115, at 238.
131.  Act of Apr. 30,  1798, ch. 35,  § 1, 1 Stat. 553, 553; see also White, supra note 42, at

158.

132.  Act of Sept. 22,  1789,  ch.  16,  §  1,  1 Stat.  70,  70.
133.  See  1  Stat.  at 70  (titled  "An Act  for  the  temporary  establishment  of the  Post-
Office").  This  might  lend  further  support  to  the  view  that  the  failure  to  denominate
Treasury  as an executive  department was  intentional.  See supra  text accompanying  note
123.

134.  See  §  2,  1 Stat. at 70.
135.  See  Act of Feb.  20,  1792,  ch.  7,  §§  2, 3,  1 Stat. 232, 233-34.
136.  See  § 3,  1 Stat. at 234; Fisher, supra note  91, at  132.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  29 1994

COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

charge  that  the scheme  would combine  "purse and  sword"  by giving  the
President power over the revenues  directly.' 3 7  The  office,  functioning to
carry into effect the post power of Congress, was separated from  presiden-
tial  review  and control.'3 8

The framing Congress  thus followed  two  basic  tracks when  establish-
ing  the departments we  now consider departments  of the executive.  For
some  departments  (Foreign Affairs,  War, and  Navy),  Congress  granted
the President plenary power over the affairs of agents within  those depart-
ments-they  were  truly  his  agents.  For  the  remaining  departments
(Treasury  and  Post  Office),  Congress  granted  the  President  no  clearly
stated  or implied  authority  over  the  affairs  of the  relevant  officers,  and
did  not  hesitate  to  articulate  the  full  range  of departmental  structures
and officers,  complete  with a full  specification  of the  duties such  officers
had.  Some  departments  the  framing  Congress  treated  as  purely  execu-
tive,  and  others  not;  where  the  departments  were  not  purely  executive,
Congress did not hesitate to create a degree  of independence  from presi-
dential  will.

One final feature  of the original departmental  structures  should also
be  remarked.  The  differential  treatment  of  these  five  departments  sug-
gests  that  the  early  Congress  viewed  the  degree  of presidential  control
required over executive officers differently.  But as with control over  pros-
ecution, it is left  to the modem  unitarian  to  argue  that the President still
retained  control, through  removal,  over  each  of these  officers,  the  "rela-
tively independent" no  less  than  the  purely executive.  This  does not yet
capture  the full story of Congress'  view of its ability to create independent
entities.

Consider  the status  of the first  truly independent  agency  in  the  re-
public's history, the Second Bank of the United  States, created in  1816.139
Certainly few agencies  in  the  early republic  had as  much  power over  the
nation  as  did  the  Bank.' 40  But what  is  crucial  about  the  Bank  for  our
purposes  is  its  relative  independence  from  the  President's  control-in-
deed,  in  some  respects,  it  was  absolutely  independent.  Of  the  Bank's
twenty-five  directors,  the  President  could  appoint  only  five,  and  these
were  the  only  directors  subject  to  his  power  of removal.' 4 1  Obviously,
directors  of the Bank made what we  would consider policy decisions;  ob-

137.  On  this  concern  that  tyranny follows  mixing power  over  the  purse with  power
over  the  sword, see,  e.g.,  1 The Records of the  Federal  Convention  of 1787, at  144  (Max
Farrand ed.,  1966)  [hereinafter  Farrand]  (opinion of Col.  Mason).

138.  See  Grundstein,  supra  note  7, at  299-300  ("The  fact,  too,  that  the Post  Office
Establishment  was  for  some  years  organized  on  a  basis  apparently  independent  of
that  Congress  did  not  consider
Presidential  direction  seemed  additional  evidence 
administration  as  necessarily  subordinate 
to  the  President  and  beyond  legislative
control.").

139.  See  Act  of Apr.  10,  1816,  ch.  44,  3  Stat.  266.
140.  Indeed, as we discuss  later, the power  of the Bank and its  independence sparked

the  first true challenge  to  executive  supremacy.  See  infra  Part II.G.

141.  See Froomkin,  supra  note  120,  at 808.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  30 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

viously those  decisions had a dramatic  effect upon the nation. 14 2  But the
vast  majority  of  those  directors  were  outside  the  control  of  the
President. 143  Here,  as  with  federal  prosecution,  not  only  did  the
President  have  relatively  less  control-he  had no  control at  all.

One final  bit of evidence  helps  confirm  the view  that  the President
need not control all of what we now consider to be  departmental adminis-
tration.  In  a  recent  and  important  essay,  Saikrishna  Prakash  recovers
something  of the  framers'  understanding  about  the  role  of state  execu-
tives  in  the  execution  of federal  law.14 4  As  he  quite  forcefully  demon-
strates,  the  framers  fully  expected  that  Congress  could  vest  in  state
executives  the  power  to  execute  particular  federal  laws. 14 5  They  under-
stood the Constitution  to permit, as Prakash puts  it, a type  of "field office
federalism,"  where  state  executives  (if not  state  legislatures)  could  be
"commandeered" by Congress  to help  execute  federal  law,146 all without
the control of the President. 147  In just the way that federal  executive  de-
partments could be vested with  the  execution  of federal law,  state execu-
tives  could be  vested with  the execution  of federal  law.

Some questions  might be raised  about presidential  control over fed-
eral departments,  or indeed about federal  control over  the original  bank.
But there is  little question about the President's  control over  state execu-
tives.  The  President  had no  power  to  remove  state  executives  who  exe-
cuted  federal  law  in  a way  inconsistent  with  the  President's  view  about
how such  laws should be  executed; and  as should be equally  obvious, the
President had no  power to  recall  the authority  that Congress  by law had
granted state executives  to execute  federal law.148  To the extent that the
framers understood  the original design to permit the vesting of the power
of execution  in  state  executives,  the framers  understood  the  original  de-
sign  as something  other  than unitary.

What this puzzle  about the original  departments  comes to is this:  the
modem unitarian  would  predict that  the framers,  mindful  of the  unita-
rian injunction, would have left in the President a wide range of executive
control  over  officers  within  those  departments.  But history shows  some-
thing quite  different:  Congress  vested  different degrees  of control in  the

142.  For a discussion  of the modem  analog, the  Federal Reserve, see  HaroldJ. Krent,
the  Unitary  Executive:  Congressional  Delegations  of  Administrative
Fragmenting 
Authority  Outside  the  Federal  Government,  85 Nw. U. L. Rev.  62,  84-85  (1990).  In  that
essay,  Krent discusses a different aspect of the limitations  on  executive  power,  limitations
created by delegations  of power  outside  the executive.  We  do  not address  this  important
dimension  of the unitary  executive  question here.

143.  Indeed,  as  Richard  Latner  suggests,  the  President  could  not  even  get access  to
information  about  what  was  going  on  within  the  bank.  See  Richard  B. Latner,  The
Presidency  of AndrewJackson:  White  House Politics  1829-1837,  at 173  (1979).

144.  See  Saikrishna  B. Prakash,  Field  Office Federalism,  79 Va.  L.  Rev.  1957  (1993).
145.  See  id.  at 1990-2004.
146.  See  id. at 1995-96.
147.  See  id.  at 2000-01.
148.  We  discuss  this  more infra  text accompanying  notes  283-284.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  31 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

President,  and  in  some  cases,  no  control  at  all.  The  early  Congresses'
practice  undermines  the  claim  that the founding vision  was motivated  by
a single  organizational  ideal.

C.  Original Understandings and Unitarian Puzzles:  The  Opinions Clause

Anomalies  surrounding  presidential  control  over  prosecution  sug-
gested similar  anomalies  surrounding  organization  of departments  more
generally,  and  these  constituted  the  second  puzzle  about  the  original
practice.  Before  we  attempt  a  resolution  of these  two  puzzles,  consider
finally  a third.

The  Opinions  Clause  of Article  II  provides  that the  President  "may
require  the  Opinion,  in  writing,  of the  principal  Officer  in  each  of  the
executive  Departments,  upon  any  Subject relating  to the  Duties  of their
respective  Offices." 149  Believers  in  a  strongly  unitary  executive  have
noted  that  this  clause  was  adopted  with  little  recorded  debate.' 5 0  They
have  argued that it was,  as Hamilton said,  a "mere redundancy...  , as  the
right for which  it provides would  result  of itself from  the  office,"' 5 '  and
thus provides  "too slender a reed to support  [the weak unitarian's]  qualifi-
cation  of  the  substantial  grant  of  power  embodied  in  the  Article  II
Vesting  Clause."1 52

No doubt, standing alone in the face  of clear evidence  that the fram-
ers were  adopting the  strongly unitary  conception,  this clause would  be a
slender reed, and a redundancy.  What possible reason could there be for
providing  the  President  with  a  constitutional  power  to  demand  written
reports  from  officers  over  whom  he  already  had  an  inherent  power  of
control?  But  the  question  we  are  asking  here  is  whether  the  framers
adopted  the strongly  unitary conception,  and for that purpose,  the  clause
is  certainly  relevant  for choosing  among  the  competing views.  Although
standing  alone the  clause would  not support our rejecting a strongly  uni-
tarian  view of the  Constitution,  at least  it raises  an  enormous  puzzle.' 5 3
And this should lead us to ask what the history of the  clause does  suggest.

149.  U.S.  Const. art. II,  § 2.
150.  See  Calabresi  & Rhodes,  supra note  1, at  1206-07 & n.261.
151.  The Federalist No. 74, at 447  (Alexander Hamilton)  (Clinton Rossiter  ed.,  1961);
see also  2John R. Tucker, The  Constitution of the United States  718  (Chicago,  Callaghan
& Co.  1899)  ("This  is,  as  Mr.  Hamilton  says,  'mere  redundancy,  as  it  would  have  been
inferred  necessary  without  being  expressed.'");  Prakash,  supra  note  19,  at  1004-07
(Opinions  Clause  means  that President may ask for considered opinions  and implies  that
President will  make  the  ultimate decision).  But see Froomkin,  supra note  120,  at 800-01
(arguing that  "Constitution  should not  be read  to  have  such  a redundancy").

152.  Calabresi  & Rhodes, supra  note  1, at 1168.  But see  Reisman,  supra note  57,  at
76-77  ("If the  President had  unlimited control over  the principal  Officers in the executive
bureaucracy  [the  Opinions  Clause]  would  .
. be  meaningless  and  superfluous.");
Froomkin,  supra  note  120,  at  800-01  ("A  more  reasonable  interpretation  is  that  the
opinions  in  writing  clause  exists  because  it  was  not  assumed,  or  at  the  very  least  not
obvious,  that  the  President  had absolute  power  over Heads  of Departments.").

.

153.  Zamir argues  that the clause suggests  the greater power  (to do more than  obtain

opinions)  was not granted.  See  Zamir, supra note  73,  at 870.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  32 1994

19941

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

The  origin  of the  Opinions  Clause  is  somewhat obscure.  The  clause
appears  to have  surfaced for the first time on August 20,  1787, in a propo-
sal by Pinckney  and Morris,  which vested  the  President with the power  to
demand  opinions  of both  the  Supreme  Court and  the  heads  of depart-
ments.15 4  The  former  power was  dropped, and  only the  latter  retained.
And  though it  was  not much  debated, the  clause was  before  the  conven-
tion  for most  of the  convention's  life.' 55

What does  the  clause say  about the  inherent power  of the  President
over the  affairs  of the  executive  branch?  While an  unambiguous  reading
is  impossible,  some  hints  do  emerge. 
It  seems  clear  that  the  framers
thought the legislative  branch possessed an inherent authority to demand
reports-while  there is  no opinions  clause  in Article  I,  the  first Congress
had  no  difficulty  instructing  the  Secretary  of the  Treasury  to  report  on
matters  within  his  domain. 15 6  Does  this  history  suggest  that  it  makes
sense  to read the  same understanding about inherent authority in Article
II?  Did  the  framers,  as  do  the  unitarians,  believe  that  the President  has
an  inherent  power  to demand  written  reports?

We  believe  that they did not.  Instead, we  suggest two  quite  different
readings  of the  Opinions  Clause, both  of which would  make sense  of the
clause  as something more than  a redundancy, and each of which entails a
vastly  narrower  conception  of the  President's  inherent authority.  We be-
gin  with  the  more  limited  of the  two  readings,  relying  on  the  framers'
consideration,  and  eventual  rejection,  of  an  opinions  clause  for  the
Supreme  Court.

What does  it mean  that the framers  considered  and then rejected  an
opinions  clause  for  the  Supreme  Court?  Certainly  all  would  agree  that
without  an  opinions  clause,  the  President  could  not  demand  written
opinions  of theJustices. t 57  If this is  so, then proposing the  clause  for the
Supreme  Court was  a  recognition  of that  inability, and  its  defeat  ajudg-
ment  that  such a  power  in  the  President was  not desirable.  In  this way,
both  the  proposal  and  its  defeat  seem  to  have  probative  value  for  the
Opinions  Clause  vis-A-vis  the  departments:  If this were  the  way  the  fram-

154.  See  2  Farrand,  supra  note  137,  at 334,  336-37.  The  clause  gave  the President
power  over  the  also  proposed  "Council  of State."  The  Council  of State  was  to  be  a
constitutionally specified council of department heads.  Later  drafts of course  dropped the
constitutional  enumeration  of  executive  departments, 
the
establishment  of departments.

to  Congress 

leaving 

155.  See  generally  Prakash,  supra  note  19,  at  1004-07  (describing  treatment  of

Morris-Pinckney  proposal).

156.  See Fisher, supra note 91,  at 40.  In fact, the first act establishing the Department
of the Treasury required  the  Secretary to report to Congress.  See Act of Sept. 2,  1789,  ch.
12,  § 2,  1 Stat. 65,  66.  In contrast, consider the  odd history relating to Congress'  ability to
require  the  Attorney  General  to  give  it  legal  opinions.  See  Lessig,  supra  note  60,  at
188-90.

157.  The  Court itself indicated as much in a letter  to Secretary of StateJefferson.  See
Correspondence  of theJustices  (1793),  reprinted in Paul M. Bator et al., Hart & Wechsler's
The Federal  Courts and  the  Federal  System  65-67  (3d ed.  1988).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  33 1994

COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 94:1

ers understood the President's  power vis-A-vis  the Supreme  Court, then so
too might it be the way they understood the President's power vis-a-vis the
departments-that  without this clause,  the President would not necessar-
ily  have  had  the  power  to  direct  the  departments  to  report  to  him. 15 8
And  if the framers  did not understand  the President to have  the inherent
power  to order opinions  from the  departments,  or if the framers  did not
understand  the  President  to  have  that  power  by  virtue  of  the  Vesting
Clause,  then  we  would  have  decisive  evidence  against  the  unitary
conception.

So  understood,  the clause would  have  an  important function.  With-
out it, there would be nothing to constrain  Congress  from making admin-
istrative  departments  wholly independent from the President, even  to the
extent of allowing a department  to refuse  to report to the President about
its activities.  With it, the Constitution  brings about at least a minimum  of
presidential  control  over  executive  departments,  by assuring  that at least
one  official-the  President-has  access  to  information  about  the  opera-
tions  of those departments,  and by limiting  Congress'  power  to structure
departments  as it might wish.  Without this clause,  Congress  could clearly
forbid,  say, the Attorney General  from  reporting  to the  President  on the
activities  of the special  prosecutor; with  the  clause, Congress  could  not so
require.15 9

But this  reading  still  reads  "departments"  in  a unitary  fashion,  as  if
the President's power to demand  opinions would be the same for all types
of departments.  To  support  the  argument  that, for  the  framers,  all  de-
partments  were  not the same,  there must be a second way  of reading  the
Opinions  Clause-a way  that is  ultimately  more  radical.

As James  Hart  noted forty-five  years  ago,  there is  a particular  oddity
in  the  structure  of  the  original  three  departments  established  by
Congress  in  1789,  and  this  oddity  may help  us  understand  the original
meaning  in  the  Opinions  Clause. 160  The  statutes  establishing  the
Department of Foreign Affairs  and the  Department of War both  declared
that "there shall be a principal officer therein,  to be called  the Secretary for
the Department of" Foreign Affairs  and War respectively.' 6 1  By  contrast,
the  statute  establishing  the  Department  of  the  Treasury  declared  that
there  "shall be...  a Secretary  of the Treasury,  to be  deemed  head of the
department."162  Why,  one might  ask, did  the  early Congress  not consider

158.  At  least,  the  President  would  not  have  this  power  by  constitutional  necessity.
This would  not limit the departments'  right to do so voluntarily, or limit Congress'  power
to  direct  the  heads  of departments  or  principal  officers  to  respond  to  the  President's
requests.

159.  This would  apply  so  long as  the  Attorney General  is  the  head  of a  department.
Recall  that he was  not designated as  such  at the  founding.  See  supra text accompanying
note  60.

160.  This  discussion  is  drawn from  Hart, supra  note  115,  at 219-20.
161.  Act  ofJuly 27,  1789,  ch.  14, §  1,  1 Stat.  28,  29; Act  of Aug. 7,  1789,  ch.  7,  §  1,  1

Stat. 49,  50  (emphasis  added).

162.  Act  of Sept.  2,  1789,  ch.  12,  §  1,  1 Stat. 65,  65  (emphasis  added).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  34 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  a  "principal  officer"  in  just  the  way  the
Secretaries  of Foreign Affairs  and War were?  What was  it that was  differ-
ent about these  officers  that lead  them  to  refer to  some  as "principal  of-
ficers"  and  some as  "heads  of departments?"

Add  to  this  curiosity  the  particular  language  of  the  Opinions
Clause-that  the President  "may require  the  Opinion,  in  writing,  of the
principal Officer in  each of the executive Departments."163  And finally, add
again  the only  reference  to  "Heads of Departments" in  the Constitution,
the Inferior  Officers Appointment  Clause, which provides  that "Congress
may by Law  vest the Appointment  of such inferior Officers,  as they think
proper,  in  the President  alone, in  the  Courts  of Law,  or  in the Heads  of
Departments."'6  These  distinctions in  language raise a  number of ques-
tions.  Why  does  the Opinions  Clause  speak  only of  "executive"  depart-
ments?  Are  there other kinds  of departments?  And why speak  of "Heads
of Departments" in clause  1 of section 2, but "principal Officers" in clause
2?

Perhaps  these  puzzles  are not terribly probative.  Certainly the usage
of the framers in  debate is not wholly inconsistent.1 6 5  But clearly nothing
in  the  modem  unitarian's  conception-that  the  framers  imagined just
one  kind  of department-could  easily  explain  such  different  usages.  If
all  departments were  the same,  there  would be no reason  to speak of the
heads  of Foreign  Affairs  and  War  any  differently  from  the  head  of the
Treasury,  or  the  Post  Office.  If all  departments  were  the  same,  there
might be no reason  to qualify the power of the President to demand writ-
ten  opinions  by saying  that he  had  that  power  over principal  officers  of
the "executive"  departments.  If all  departments  were  the  same,  and  all
equally  under the  President's  directory  control,  there would be  little rea-
son to give  Congress the power to vest appointments  in "Heads of Depart-
ments," as the President would have  the power both to direct the heads  of
departments  to  make  appointments  and  to  remove  those  they  have
appointed.' 66

But  consider  these  same  bits  of text  against  the  background  of an-
other  conception  of the original  understanding-one  that  imagines  that
the framers  conceived  of departments  differently, and contends  that  the
President  would,  by  the  Constitution,  have  directory  power  over  only
some  of those  departments.  If there  were  in effect  two  kinds  of "depart-
ments"  rather  than  just  one,  then  we  could  understand  the  Opinions
Clause  to extend  to  the President the power  to demand written  opinions

163.  U.S.  Const. art. II,  § 2,  cl. 1  (emphasis  added).
164.  Id.,  cl. 2  (emphasis  added).
165.  We  are indebted to Sai  Prakash for pointing this out to us.  See,  e.g., Answer to
Mason's  Objections  by  Iredell,  reprinted  in  Pamphlets  on  the  Constitution  333,  344-50
(Paul  L.  Ford  ed.,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.  1888)  (President  may  receive  written  opinions  from
principal  officers,  but "must be  personally responsible for everything").

166.  There  would  be  even  less  reason  to  give  Congress  power  to vest appointment

powers  in  the  Courts of Law.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  35 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

over  principal  officers  of  "executive"  departments,  implying  that  the
President  has  no  constitutional authority  to  demand  opinions  from  the
nonexecutive  departments  and  that  Congress  could  choose  whether  to
extend  that power  or  not.

But what could these  nonexecutive departments  be?  Here we invoke
again  the acts establishing  the first three  "great Departments."  When  the
framers  speak  of  "principal  officers"  in  the  way  the  Opinions  Clause
speaks  of "principal  Officers,"  they are  referring  to  the  two  departments
clearly  established  to  help  the  President  with  his  "executive"  functions,
Foreign Affairs and War, where  "executive" here refers  to those functions
constitutionally  enumerated within  Article  II-principally  foreign  affairs
powers  and war making powers. 167  Putting the  Opinions Clause  together
with  the first  three department  acts,  it appears  possible  that  the  framers
spoke  of "principal  Officers"  only when  speaking  of  "executive  Depart-
ments," and spoke  of "Heads of Departments" when  intending to include
nonexecutive  departments  as well. 168

How  would  this  help  explain  the  Inferior  Officers  Appointment
Clause?  As with  the  Opinions  Clause,  many have  considered  this  clause
in  part a redundancy  of its own-if the President has an inherent author-
ity  to  direct  the  departments,  what  function  could  there  be  in  giving
Congress  the  power  to  vest  appointment  in  someone  the  President  al-
ready  controls?  At  most,  the  clause  (so  understood)  is  a  convenience,
possibly useful  as  clarification,  but certainly  not essential  to any overarch-
ing  separation  of powers  design.

167.  See  U.S.  Const. art. II.
168.  See  Hart, supra  note 115,  at 219-20,  243.  On  the distinction  in language,  Hart

posits  that:

since  it  presumably  had  a  purpose,  it  may  be  ventured  as  an  hypothesis  that
"departments" and "heads of departments"  were the generic terms applicable  to all
three  of  the  departments  first  created;  and  that  "executive  departments"  and
"principal  officers"  were 
included  only  those
departments  created  to act as  administrative arms of the President in the exercise
of his  constitutional  executive  powers.

the  smaller  category  which 

Id. at 243.  Note  finally  that the next  two departments  follow this  pattern as  well.  The  act
establishing  the  "Post-office"  does  not  denominate  it an  executive  department,  and  does
not refer to the Postmaster  as  a "principal officer."  See Act of Feb.  20,  1792,  ch.  7, 1 Stat.
232;  supra  text  accompanying  notes  132-138.  The  act  establishing  the  Navy,  on  the
contrary, does  refer to  that department  as "an executive department," Act of Apr. 30,  1798,
ch. 35,  §  1, 1 Stat. 553, 553, and refers  to  the head of that department as  the "chief officer."
See  supra text accompanying  note  131.

It  might  be  argued  that  because  the  Inferior  Officers  Appointment  Clause  allows
Congress to vest the appointment  of inferior  officers  in "the President alone, in the  Courts
of Law,  or in the  Heads  of Departments,"  it cannot be  that the  "principal  officers"  of the
Departments  of  State  and  War  were  considered  to  be  different  from  the  "Heads  of
Departments"-otherwise,  vesting  in  them  the  appointment  of inferior  officers,  as  the
original  statutes  did, would  have  been  unconstitutional.  But as  the  quotation  from  Hart
just given  suggests,  if "Heads  of Departments"  is a generic  term,  then for purposes  of the
Inferior  Officers  Appointment  Clause,  it  could  include  the  top  person  in any  executive
department.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  36 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

But if we  understand  the  framers  to  have  understood  different  de-
partments  differently"-if some  are "executive"  in the  constitutional  sense
and  others  not-and  if we  adopt  the  framers'  apparent  convention  of
speaking  of  "principal  officers"  when  speaking  narrowly  of the  heads  of
executive departments,  then the Inferior Officers  Appointment Clause has
a new  meaning.  For it says that Congress  could  remove  the appointment
of some  inferior  officers  from  the President,  and vest it in  an  officer  (a
head  of a department)  who was  not constitutionally the mere agent of the
President  (as a "principal officer,"  such as the Secretary  of War or Foreign
Affairs,  was)  but was  an officer  whom  Congress  could  make  relatively  in-
dependent  of the will  of the  President  (as  the discussion  above  suggests
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  could  be  considered169).  This  does  not
mean  that a principal officer  could  not be given  the appointment  power,
for a principal officer  could also be a head of department.  All we claim  is
that  the  clause  also  means  that  a member  of the  more  general  class-
including  those  not  necessarily  controlled  by  the  President-could  be
given  this  appointment  power  as  well.

Thus, on this reading, among  the "Heads of Departments" are a sub-
set who  are  also  "principal  Officers.' u7 0  These,  the first acts  of Congress
suggest,  are  those  officers  who  lead  an  "executive  department"-for  the
first  Congress,  Foreign  Affairs  and War-and  from  whom  the  President
has  a  power  to  demand  written  opinions.  What would  seem  to  follow
from  this  by  negative  implication  is  that  the  President  would  have  no

169.  See  supra note  156  and  accompanying  text.
170.  This  again  was  Hart's  reading.  See  supra  note  168.  The  question  whether
"principal  officers"  are a subset  of, or distinct from, "Heads of Departments"  is important,
but one  we  do  not need  to  resolve  here.  Again,  if "principal  Officers"  are  a subset  of
"Heads  of  Departments"  then  it  follows  that  they  could  be  given  the  inferior  officer
appointment power;  if they are  distinct,  it follows  that only  the  President  could  be  given
the  appointment  power  for  officers  inferior  to  the  "principal  Officers."  Supporting  the
suggestion  that  "principal Officers"  were not  to  be considered "Heads  of Departments"  is
Chief  Justice  Marshall's  discussion 
the
President's duty to commission officers,  and his power of appointment.  Marshall says these
are  distinct  powers,  because  the  "Heads  of Departments"  clause  makes  it possible  that
someone  could  be  appointed  whom 
the  President  would  not  want  appointed.
Nonetheless,  the  Commission  Clause  requires  him  to  commission  this  unwanted  officer.
This supports  reading heads  of departments  as  distinct  from  principal  officers  since  it is
unlikely  that  the  framers  conceived  of  principal  officers  in  executive  departments  as
independent  of the  President.  See  Marbury  v.  Madison,  5  U.S.  (1  Cranch)  137,  154-56
(1803).

in  Marbuty  about  the  distinction  between 

Finally,  it should be clear  that, at the least,  this  historical  usage draws  into  doubt the
Court's  opinion  in  Freytag  v.  Commissioner,  111  S.  Ct.  2631  (1991).  There  the  Court
determined  that the  "tax  court"  could not be  considered a "department"  for purposes  of
the  Inferior  Officers  Appointment  Clause,  since,  as the  Court held,  "department"  in  that
clause,  like  "department" in  the  Opinions  Clause,  refers  to  "cabinet-level"  departments,
and a tax court was  not a cabinet-level  department.  See id. at 2643.  But, however broadly
one  reads  "departments,"  it seems  clear  at  least  that  the  original  usage  undermines  an
argument  that treats  the  usage  in the  Opinions  Clause  as  equivalent  to  the  usage  in  the
Inferior  Officers  Appointment  Clause.  For as just  noted,  the  usage  suggests  the  framers
and  the first  Congress were speaking  of entities  of a different kind.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  37 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

power  by virtue  of the  constitution,  express  or implied,  to order written
opinions  from those  heads  of departments  who  were  not also  "principal
Officers"  of "executive  Departments."1 7 1

We do  not want  to make  too much of these  textual  differences,  nor
do we claim that there is  decisive  evidence in favor of any particular inter-
pretation.  But whether one adopts the more conservative  understanding
of the Opinions  Clause,  or the more radical,  it is  enough  here  to remark
that both make  clear the oddity in the idea  that the framers  imagined  the
President to have inherent authority  to direct  executive  officers by virtue
of the Vesting  Clause  of Article  II  alone.  If that were  so,  there  was  no
need  to  enact the  Opinions  Clause  in  any form,  and  plausibly little  pur-
pose in giving Congress  the power to vest appointment of inferior officers
in  "the  Heads  of Departments."  No  doubt, standing alone  the  Opinions
Clause  does  not dispose  of the  matter:  there  may be many  possible  rea-
sons for  the  dropping of the  Supreme  Court  opinions  clause,  and  these
might allow the clause  to be  considered  a redundancy. 17 2  But the  clause
does  suggest  a serious  puzzle  for  those  who  believe  that  the  executive
power 
to  direct  or  supervise  all
administration.

inherent  power 

includes  an 

D.  Original Understandings: Rethinking Executive Versus Administrative

The  modem  unitarian  would  predict  that the founders  would  have
vested  a function  as executive  as  "prosecution"  exclusively  in  the control
of the President;  they did not.  The modem  unitarian  would predict that
the  original  departments  would  follow  a  single  organizational  design,
with  the  President  recognized  as  the  head  of all  discretionary  authority
within  those  departments;  the  original  departments  did  not follow  this
pattern.  The modem unitarian would predict that a power as small as the
power 
in 
the
Constitution's  unitary  scheme;  but  for 
it  was  not
unnecessary.

reports  would  be  unnecessary 

to  order  written 

the  framers, 

In  each  case,  the  model of the  modem  unitarian  bumps  up  against
an  inconsistent practice  of the framers.  We are naturally  led to the  ques-
tion:  Are we  missing something?  Is  there something about  the  world in
which  the framers  lived  that we  no longer see  and that explains the wide-
spread  contemporary  misunderstanding  of  the  original  constitutional
theory and  practice?

We  suggest  that  there  is.  Together  these  puzzles  perhaps  do  not
prove  that the unitary conception  of the framers'  design is  false,  but they

171.  Congress  could  always  grant  the  power  by statute.  Cf. the  statutory  "heads  of

departments"  opinions  clause,  discussed  in Lessig, supra note  60,  at 187-90.

172.  The redundancy  of course could have been  intentional; the framers could simply
have  been  making  clear  the  obvious,  to  protect,  for  example,  the  heads  of departments
from  interbranch  conflicts.  Cf. Bloch,  supra note  74, at 580  (arguing  removal  legislation
was  intentionally  redundant).  We  have  assumed,  perhaps  incorrectly,  that  the  principle
adopted  in  drafting  the  Constitution was  to  avoid such  redundancy.  See supra  note  151.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  38 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMNISTRATION

do  give  us a reason to look further.  We suggest that there are  two  distinct
aspects  of the  framers'  world  that are  forgotten  today,  the  first  touching
the  substance  of what we understand "executive  power" to be, the second
involving the  nature  of the  framers'  understanding  of categories  such  as
"executive"  or "legislative" authority.  In outline form:  First, by "executive
power"  the  framers  meant  something  substantively  different  from  what
we  have come  to mean by the same term.  Second, the framers  thought of
questions  of administrative  structure in a much more pragmatic and flexi-
ble  way  than  we  think  of  the  same  questions.  Both  differences  matter
crucially  to  how we  now understand  the  framers'  design.

Consider  first  the  definition  of "executive  power."  At its  core  lies  a
distinction  central  to most constitutionalists, but which  our generation  of
constitutionalists  seems  to have  lost.  Stated  too  briefly,  the  distinction  is
this:  When  we  speak of "executive"  power, we  tend to conflate  two  ideas
that for many are  quite  distinct.  As  one commentator  at the  turn of the
century  made  the  point,

The functions  of a chief executive  of a sovereign  State  are, gen-
erally  speaking,  of  two  kinds-political  and  administrative.  In
different  countries,  with  different  governmental  forms, the  em-
phasis  laid  respectively  upon  each  of these  functions  varies.  In
some,  the  powers  and  influence  of  the  executive  head  are  al-
most wholly  political.  In  others, as  for example  in  Switzerland,
the  political duties  of the  executive  are  so fully under legislative
control  that  its  chief  importance  is  upon  the  administrative
side.173
For  most  constitutionalists,  resolving  issues  of what  we  call  "execu-
tive"  power  means  deciding  two  different  sets  of questions.  The  first set
relates  to who performs  the political functions of an executive-the  power
to  conduct  foreign  affairs,  for  example,  or  the  power  to  act as  head  of
state.  The second set of questions  relates to who directs the  administrative
functions  of  an  executive-in  parliamentary  systems,  who  controls  the
government.

Consider  three  possibilities:
(1)  a  constitution  could  vest  control  over  all  political  and  adminis-
trative  functions  in  the  executive;

173.  3  Willoughby,  supra  note  120,  at  1479.  Consider  also  Frank  Goodnow's

description  of the  functions  of government:

[T] here are two distinct functions of government, and their differentiation  results
in  a  differentiation  ... of  the  organs  of government  provided  by  the  formal
governmental  system.  These  two functions  of government  may  for purposes  of
convenience  be  designated  respectively  as  Politics  and Administration.  Politics
has  to do with  policies  or expressions  of the  state will.  Administration  has  to do
with  the  execution of these  policies.

FrankJ.  Goodnow,  Politics and Administration:  A Study  in Government  18  (reissued  ed.
1967).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  39 1994

COL UMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

(2)  a constitution  could vest control overjust the  political functions
in  the executive,  and control over the administrative functions  in  the
legislature;  and
(3)  a constitution  could  vest  control over  all  political  and  some  ad-
ministrative  functions  in  the  executive,  but  leave  to  the  legislature
the  power  to  decide  how  much  of  the  balance  of  administrative
power  should  be  afforded  the  President.
Option  two describes  most existing constitutional  systems; England is
the  most familiar  example. 174  Option  one  describes  what  most  believe
the framers  created' 7 5-a  President with  constitutional  control  over  the
administrative  functions.  But we  believe  that it  is  option  three  that de-
scribes  best the original understanding  of the framers'  design.  That is, we
believe  that  the  framers  meant to  constitutionalize just some of what we
now  think of as  "the executive power,"  leaving the balance  to  Congress  to
structure as it thought proper.  What follows from this is  that if there were
some functions  that were  not within the  domain  of what the framers were
constitutionally  vesting  in  the  President when  they vested  "the  executive
power,"  then  there  are  some  functions  over  which  the  President  need
the  original  design,  have  plenary  executive
not,  consistent  with 
control.' 76

There  are at least two  ways  to understand  this claim  that the framers
did not intend  to vest in  the  President  control  of all administrative  func-
tions.  The  distinction  between  these  two  ways  connects  with  the  second
misunderstanding we have  described  above-that is, it connects  with how
we  understand  how  they  understood  these  categories  of  governmental
power.  One understanding  would be that the framers  had in  their heads
clear  categories  of  "executive  power"  (or  in  many  cases  equivalently
"political  power")  and  "administrative  power,"  and  by  constitutionally

174.  See  Arend  Ljphart,  Democracies:  Patterns  of  Majoritarian  and  Consensus

Government  in Twenty-One  Countries  1-20  (1984).

175.  See, e.g., Prakash, supra note 19, at 992 n.9  ("The Chief Administrator  theory is a
claim  that  the  unitary  executive  may  control  the  administration  of federal  law  and  may
control  the  exercise  of statutory  discretion.").

176.  There  should  be  obvious  parallels  between  this  conception  of  the  nature  of
"executive  power"  and  Akhil  Amar's  conception  of how  far  the  "judicial power"  "shall
extend"  in  Article  III,  section  2.  Just  as  we  believe  Article  II  constitutionalizes  some
executive  power, and leaves  the rest to Congress  to define under the Necessary and Proper
Clause, Amar  argues  that Article III establishes  two tiers  of possible objects  of the judicial
power;  the  first  tier  Congress  must  (consistent  with  the  Constitution)  provide  for,  the
second tier Congress  may in its discretion  provide for.  See Akhil R. Amar, A Neo-Federalist
View of Article  III:  Separating  the Two  Tiers of Federal Jurisdiction,  65 B.U. L.  Rev. 205,
254  n.160  (1985)  [hereinafter  Amar, A  Neo-Federalist  View];  Akhil  R. Amar,  Marbuiy,
Section  13, and  the  Original jurisdiction  of the Supreme  Court,  56  U.  Chi.  L. Rev.  443,
481-83  (1989)  [hereinafter  Amar,  Original Jurisdiction];  Akhil  R. Amar,  Reports  of My
Death  are  Greatly  Exaggerated:  A  Reply,  138  U.  Pa.  L.  Rev.  1651,  1653-54  (1990)
[hereinafter Amar, Reply]; Amar, The Judiciary Act of 1789, supra note 37, at 1507-08; see
also Rhode Island v. Massachusetts,  37 U.S.  (12  Pet.)  657, 720  (1838)  (describing necessary
and proper  power over Article  III).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  40 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

vesting  in the President  "the executive  power" they  intended  to vest con-
stitutionallyjust "executive  power," leaving the second category, "adminis-
to  vest  as  it  thought  proper.  This
trative  power,"  for  Congress 
understanding  relies  on clear  categories  of governmental  power.

A  second  understanding  does  not turn  on  clear  categorical  under-
standings  of these  powers, but rather on a more ambiguous  and undevel-
oped  conception  of  what  these  powers  could  be.  It  understands  the
framers  to believe  that some  powers fall  clearly within the domain of "the
executive"  (and  these  they  constitutionalized),  but the balance  (what we
would  roughly  call  administrative) 
they  believed  would  be  assigned
pragmatically,  according  to  the  values  or  functions  of  the  particular
power  at issue.  While  the  first understanding  treats  the  framers  as  bud-
ding constitutional  formalists,  who simply  chose  not  (or forgot given  the
small number of administrative  functions)  to include  a vesting clause  for
"the  administrative  power,"  the  second  treats  them  as  speakers  of a less
categorical,  more  pragmatic,  language,  at least for a wide range  of  (what
we  consider)  executive  functions.

Our  understanding  is  emphatically  the  second.' 7 7  We  believe  that
the framers wanted  to constitutionalize just some  of the array  of power a
constitution-maker  must  allocate,  and  as  for  the  rest,  the  framers  in-
tended  Congress  (and posterity)  to control  as  it saw fit.178  Modern  con-
stitutionalists  find  it  so  hard  to  see  this  undeveloped  design  as  the
framers'  design because modern constitutionalists  treat the terms  "execu-
tive"  or "legislative"  or  "judicial" as describing  fully developed  categories
that carve  up  the world of governmental  power without  remainder,  as if
governmental  power were  the genus, and  executive, legislative,  or judicial
were  the  only species. 179  But the founders'  vision was  not so  complete,

177.  Indeed,  the  modern  sense of "administration" is  quite new.  See John A. Fairlie,
Public  Administration  and  Administrative  Law,  in Essays  on  the  Law  and  Practice  of
Governmental Administration  3,  24  (Charles G. Haines  & Marshall  E. Dimock  eds.,  1935)
(asserting  that  statutory  and judicial  recognition  of  the  term  "administration"  did  not
begin  until  1874).

178.  This view  is pressed most forcefully by Peter Strauss.  See Strauss, supra note  7, at
578  (arguing that when  considering  "the structure  given law-administration  below the very
apex  of the  governmental  structure, the  rigid separation-of-powers  compartmentalization
of governmental functions should be abandoned in favor of analysis in terms of separation
of functions  and  checks  and balances");  see also  Gary Lawson  & Patricia B. Granger, The
"Proper" Scope  of Federal  Power.  AJurisdictional  Interpretation  of the  Sweeping  Clause,
43  Duke L.J.  267, 333  (1933)  (arguing that Necessary  and Proper Clause  limits  Congress'
ability to  distribute  government  power).

179.  Peter Strauss  writes:

The  preceding  review  of the  existing  institutions  of American  government
and  of the  body  of textual,  contextual  and  interpretational  constraints  bearing
upon  them should cast  doubt on  the  idea that  our Constitution  requires that the
organs  of  government  be  apportioned  among  one  or  another  of  three  neat
"branches," giving each a home in one and merely the possibility of relations with
the  others.

Id. at 639.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  41 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

their ideas not so developed,  their experience  not so extensive,  and  their
intent  to constitutionalize just a part  of the many issues  of governmental
power  that they  understood  to confront  any government.

To be convincing about our understanding of the framers'  vision, we
must accomplish  two  quite  distinct  tasks.  First, we  must make  clear  the
type  of power  that  we  believe  the  framers  did  not  constitutionally  vest.
Second, we  must point to what in  the  framers'  own  actions indicates  that
they  did  not  understand  their  constitution  to  constitutionalize  the  full
range of (again, modern understandings  of) executive powers,  but rather
understood Congress as free  to assign  powers as  such assignment seemed
proper.  To  complete  the first task,  we  pass briefly  through  the first self-
conscious attempt by  constitutional  scholars to  define  the scope  of execu-
tive  versus  administrative  power,  a  debate  that  rose  through  the  nine-
teenth  century  and  peaked  at  the  beginning  of  this  century,  and  that
revealed  a conception  of the framers'  design wholly  alien  to the  modern
unitarian.  To  complete  the  second,  we  use  a  model  derived  from  this
alien  nineteenth  century perspective  to look  again at familiar features  of
the founding debates,  and ask whether the  modern  unitarian's  model, or
the nineteenth  century  theorists'  model,  better makes sense  of the struc-
tures  that the  framers  actually  established.

The  conclusion  of these  two  steps  will  be  an  understanding  of the
framers'  Constitution  that is  quite  distinct from  the current  understand-
ing.  We  emphasize  at the start, however,  that we are not arguing that the
framers'  understanding  is  the  same  as  what we  will  call  the  nineteenth
century  understanding.  Indeed, we  believe  that  there  are  three  distinct
views,  associated with  the framers,  the  nineteenth  century  constitutional
theorists,  and  the  modern  unitarians.  The  modern understanding  is dif-
ferent  from  that  of  the  nineteenth  century  theorists'  because  where
moderns see  one category  (executive power),  they saw two  (executive and
administrative).  But  both  the  modern  and  nineteenth  century  under-
standings  are  different from  that of the framers,  because  where  the  first
two  see  categories of executive power, the eighteenth  century  constitution-
alists  saw  a  collection  of functions,  none  fitting  firmly  or  completely
within  our  current  categorical  structure.  The  nineteenth  century  view
helps us see that the framers'  was  a world  of more  than one type  of execu-
tive  function,  but its formalism  obscures  the  fundamentally pragmatic  ap-
proach  that  the  original  constitutionalists  brought  to  the  question  of
allocated  federal power.  To understand  the framers'  world,  we must un-
derstand  not just the  differences  in  the substance  of their constitutional
structure,  but  also  the  difference  in  the very  language  with  which  they
thought and  spoke  of that structure.

In the end  our claim  against modern  unitarians  is  first that they  im-
port  to  the  eighteenth  century  a false  conception  of what was  meant  by
the  term  "executive  power,"  and  second  that  they  import  to  the  eight-
eenth  century  a  wrong-headed  conception  of the form  of constitutional
discourse.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  42 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

1.  The Nineteenth Century View.  -

In  our  path  back  to  the  under-
standing  of the eighteenth  century, we pause first with the understanding
of the scope  of executive power held by nineteenth century  theorists  and
commentators'"0  when  confronted  with  precisely  the  same  question  of
the  Constitution's  implicit  executive  structure.  The  nineteenth  century
view will  give  us a language with  which  to  understand  the difference  be-
tween  the  contemporary  view  and  that  of the  framers.  But importantly,
this  language  will  function  as  no  more  than  a heuristic-as  a  device  to
help  us see the difference  in understandings-and  a heuristic  that we will
in  the  end  discard.

Begin with  a  debate  born  at the birth  of the  modem  administrative
state.  At  the  turn of the  century,  theorists  in  both  law  and political  sci-
ence were  confronted with  an increasingly uncomfortable  question-who
was  to run the  administrative  agencies?  Did the Constitution  unambigu-
ously vest this  power in the President?  Did the President have  a constitu-
tional  claim to control the full range  of administration, whether Congress
vested  in  him  that  control or  not?

180.  More  particularly,  we  focus  on  the  view  of three  nineteenth  century  scholars,
Westel  Woodbury  Willoughby,  William  Franklin  Willoughby,  and  Frank  Goodnow,  and
perhaps  unjustifiably,  take  these  three  as  standards  for what we  will  call  the  nineteenth
century  view.  The  Willoughbys  were  twin  brothers,  born  in  1867,  and  like  Goodnow,
influential in  the political  science  movement begun  atJohns  Hopkins.  Goodnow was  one
of the  founders  of the  study of administration,  and  the  first  president  of the  American
Political  Science  Association.  A  central  focus  of his  early work was  the  attempt to  make
representative  democracy  work  in  the  context  of growing  administrative  functions.  See
FrankJ.  Goodnow, Politics and Administration:  A Study in  Government  chs.  6-9  (1900).
This,  Goodnow believed,  required  the  creation  of expert  bodies  to implement  the will  of
the people.  See FrankJ.  Goodnow, The American  Conception of Liberty and  Government
58-59  (1916).  More importantly,  it required that administrative law  reflect changes  in the
political  and economic  context.  See  FrankJ.  Goodnow,  Comparative  Administrative  Law
59-60,  71-74  (New York,  Putnam,  student  ed.  1893).  The  Willoughbys  can  be  seen  to
carry  on  from  Goodnow's  work.  See  Essays  in  Political  Science  in  Honor  of W.W.
Willoughby  355-64  (John  M. Mathews  &James  Hart eds.,  1937)  (considering  the work of
Westel  Woodbury  Willoughby);  Grundstein,  supra  note  7,  at 289-94  (discussing  work  of
William Franklin Willoughby).  The three we focus  on  are of course  not the only  relevant
theorists.  Nathan Grundstein  discusses  two  additional  theorists:

The main  contours  of the  concept  of the  unity  of the  executive  power  as  it has
developed  in  relation  to  the  national  administration  are  delineated  in  the  early
literature  on  administrative  law,  particularly  in  the  writings  of  Freund  and
Wyman.... Constitutional interpretation  was to strive  to secure for the President
a control over administration  that would exhibit the attributes set forth by Freund
and Wyman as  characteristic  in a fully integrated administrative  hierarchy-unity,
through  the subordination  of the officers constituting  the administration;  central
direction  of  the  exercise  of  official  powers;  discretionary  authority  and  the
complete  integration  of official  discretion;  and the  actual  or symbolic vesting  of
all authority in the head  of the administration, whose status as  chief executive  was
coordinate  with  that of the legislature.

Grundstein,  supra note 7, at 287.  As will  become apparent, it is not important whether the
views  of  these  three  were  aberrations.  Nothing  hangs  on  their  position  being
representative,  for our use  of these  views is  purely  heuristic.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  43 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

Ask  why  the  question  was  uncomfortable  to  them.  For  to  modem
observers,  the  question  appears  just  daft.  In  the  modem  conception,
there are  three branches of government;  any agency of government must
fall within one; and administration falls within  the executive. 18'  Congress
may create  things called  "administrative" agencies,  but what Congress  cre-
ates becomes  part of the executive,  subject to "the executive  power."  For
modem  readers  "administrative"  and  "executive"  are just  the same  idea.
The  framers  carefully  placed  all  executive  power  in  the  President,  the
existence of a separate  "administrative" branch  is  a conspicuous  violation
of the constitutional  plan.

But if we  are  to  understand  a  different period,  we  must first  make
sense  of what appears  especially silly.  What  would one have  to  believe  to
make  the  question, who  runs  the administration,  a  real  question?

One  thought would  be a firm  sense  of distinction  between  the  cate-
gories  of executive and  administrative power.  And indeed,  that is precisely
what  the  late  nineteenth  century  theorists  claimed  the  framers  had.  As
they saw  it,  to  the framers  this  distinction  (even  if to  us  apparently  na-
ive' 8 2)  was  a crucial  one, which  Grundstein  describes  as  having had  "the
stature  of a first principle"  even  if it "today  [is]  on  the verge  of oblitera-
tion."' 8 3  As  one of the leading  nineteenth  century theorists  described  it:
Owing  to  the fact that  the President at the  present  time  in  fact
exercises  large  administrative  powers  and  is  in  appearance  the
head  of  the  administrative  departments  the  popular  opinion
prevails  that  the framers  of the  constitution  employed  the term
executive  as  including  what  are  now  known  as  administrative
powers  and  that it was  their intention  that the  President should
be  the head of the administration.  This is a mistake.  There can be
no question but that they used the term executive in its technical sense as
covering only the political duties of the titular head of the nation.  "[I]t
was undoubtedly intended, " writes W. W. Willoughby  ....  "that the
President should be little more than a political chief, that is  to say, one
whose function  should,  in  the main, consist in  the performance
of  those  political  duties  which  are  not  subject  to  judicial
control." 184

181.  See,  e.g.,  Miller, supra  note  1, at 43.  But see  Geoffrey  P.  Miller,  The  Unitary
Executive  in a Unified  Theory of Constitutional  Law:  The  Problem of Interpretation,  15
Cardozo  L.  Rev.  201,  201-02  (1993)  ("The  President's  Constitutional  powers  over  the
administrative  state  should  . . . be  determined  in  light  of a  careful  assessment  of  the
particular  functions  involved.").

182.  It is naive, or appears so,  because  it rests  upon a faith in a scientific  conception

which  we  no  longer share.  See  infra text accompanying  notes  388-392.

183.  Grundstein,  supra  note 7,  at 287.
184.  W. F. Willoughby, An  Introduction  to the  Study of the  Government  251  (1919)
(emphasis  added); see also  3 Willoughby, supra note  120, at 1479-80.  This  conception  of
the  framers'  fundamental  distinction  between  "politics"  and  "administration"  was  shared
by Goodnow as well.  See, e.g., FrankJ. Goodnow, The  Principles of the Administrative  Law
of  the  United  States  70  .(1905)  ("The.American  conception  of  the  executive  power
prevailing  at the  time of the adoption  of the United States  constitution corresponded  with
that part of the executive  power which  has been called political.");  id. at 73-74  ("The grant

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  44 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

If one understood these notions as "naturally" distinct, then as these  theo-
rists  suggested,  it would also  seem  natural  to  see  that while  the framers
had assigned  "executive" power to the President, this assignment entailed
no judgment  about  where  Congress  must  assign  administrative  power,
and  more  importantly,  about  who  gets  to  control  the  administrative
power.  Again,  these  theorists suggested, the question was  left to Congress
under  the Necessary  and Proper  Clause.' 8 5  In  this way,  the nineteenth
century  theorists  picked  up  the  understanding,  apparently  clear  (to
them)  in  the  text,  that  Congress  had  broad  authority  to  structure  the
administration  of government  institutions  as  it saw  fit-so long  as  such
structures  were  both  "necessary  and proper."' 8 6

To  these  commentators,  then,  the  question  whether  the  President
has  a  right  to  direct  or  control  the  actions  of  his  agents  turns  upon
whether  the agents  are  exercising "executive"  or "administrative"  power.
If executive,  the President would  have  such  a right;  if administrative,  he
would  not  have  this  right  (at least not by virtue  of the Constitution).  If
the  power  exercised  by  the  agents  was  administrative  power,  the
Constitution  would  not  require  Congress  to  vest  such  control  in  the
President.

What  then  is  the  distinction  between  "executive"  and  "administra-
tive"  powers?  As will become  apparent in  what follows,  the  line  is  not at
all a clean  one.  But we  can begin with  a sketch of the difference:  Among

to  the  President of the  executive  power had  for  its effect  that the  President  was  to  have
military and political  power  rather than administrative  power.  The  meaning of the words
'executive  power'  is  explained  by  the  specific  powers  granted  to  the  President  by  the
constitution."); 
id.  at  78  ("[P]erusal  of  the  early  acts  of  Congress  organizing  the
administrative system  of the United States will show that the first Congress  did not have the
idea  that  the  President  had  any  power  of  direction  over  any  matters  not  political  in
character.").  For  President  Wilson's  account,  see  Woodrow  Wilson,  Constitutional
Government in the United States  59  (1908)  ("The makers  of the constitution seem  to have
thought of the President as what the stricter Whig theorists  wished the king to be:  only the
legal  executive,  the  presiding  and  guiding  authority  in  the  application  of law  and  the
execution  of policy.").

185.  The  framers  referred  to  this  as  the Sweeping  Clause.  See  3 The Debates  of the
State  Conventions  463-64  (Jonathan  Elliot ed.,  Philadelphia, J.B.  Lippincott & Co.  1881).
The Necessary  and Proper Clause  provides that  Congress shall  have the  power "[t]o make
all  Laws  which  shall be  necessary  and  proper for  carrying  into  Execution  the  foregoing
Powers,  and all  other Powers vested  by this Constitution  in the  Government  of the United
States, or in any Department  or Officer  thereof."  U.S. Const. art. I,  § 8,  cl. 18.  It was  this
view of Congress'  power that lead Woodrow Wilson  to view  Congress  as the  ultimate chief.
See Wilson, supra  note 125,  at 262  ("Of course  the secretaries  are in the leading-strings  of
statutes,  and all  their  duties  look towards  a strict obedience  to Congress.  Congress  made
them  and  can  unmake  them.  It  is  to  Congress  that  they  must  render  account  for  the
conduct of administration.").

186.  The  same  conclusion  has  been  drawn  by  a  wide  range  of  modern-day
constitutionalists.  See, e.g., Zamir, supra note 73, at 869, 873  ("Guided by the model of the
colonial  governments,  the  framers  of  the  Constitution  probably  did  not  intend  the
President  to  be  the  administrative  chief  of the  executive  branch,  clothed  with  a  general
power  to  control  the  acts  of all  executive  officers.");  Froomkin,  supra  note  120,  at 795
(discussing  distinction between  "presidential" and  "executive"  powers).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  45 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REViEW

[Vol.  94:1

the  laws  that  the  President  executes,  we  can  distinguish  two  types.  One
type  is  the  set  of laws  necessary  and  proper  to  a  power  specifically  de-
scribed in Article  II (defining the executive power);  the second type is  the
set  of  laws  necessary  and  proper  to  a  power  specifically  described  in
Article I  (defining the legislative  power).  As a rough first cut at the differ-
ence  between  administrative  and  executive  power,  we  can  call  the  laws
necessary  and proper to Article  II powers  executive, and  the laws necessary
and proper  to  Article  I  powers  administrative. As  will  become  clear,  our
claim  about the framers'  vision is  that they saw a difference  in the consti-
tutionally  required  control  that the  President would  have  over  adminis-
trative  and executive power.  In short, whatever control was required  over
executive  power, less  was  required  (constitutionally)  over  administrative.
To  understand  fully  the  source  of  this  nineteenth  century  concep-
tion would  require  us to  stray far beyond  the  scope  of this Article.  Obvi-
ously,  much  of the  spirit of the  time  echoes  in  their hard,  formal,  and
categorical  distinctions. 187  And  just  as  importantly,  Willoughby  and
Goodnow were fighting  their own intellectual  campaigns; 188 indeed,  they,
along with  such aspirants as Woodrow Wilson, were  locked in a campaign
to reform  the executive  by making less political  many of its administrative
functions.' 8 9  Enthusiastic  about impartial  expertise,  they sought to make
an  apolitical  space  for  independent  administrators  in  American  govern-
ment.  This  spirit,  and  their  motives,  obviously  draw  into  question  the
fidelity  of their readings  of the  framers  as  a  matter  of history.

But our purpose  in pointing to  these scholars  is  simply comparative,
and  our use  of this  intellectual  history  merely suggestive.  The  aim  is  to
use  their conception  of the  executive  to suggest a second model for exec-
utive  power,  one  that  distinguishes  between  two  kinds  of functions  and
the extent of executive  control constitutionally  required over  each.  With
this  model  we  will  examine  again  the  three  puzzles  already  presented,
and  ask  whether  a  model  of  the  executive  that  conceives  of more  than
one  type  of executive  function  better  explains  the  framers'  actual  prac-
tice.  If it does,  the unitarian's  single-function-and-responsibility  model is
incomplete:  And,  as  we  have  hinted, so  too will  the  nineteenth  century
theorists'  model be incomplete:  for again,  it speaks as  if the framers  had
a firm  or clear  categorical  conception  of administrative  functions  versus

187.  See  for  example  the  character  of  the  discussion  in  Leonard  D. White,  The

Republican  Era:  A  Study in Administrative  History  1869-1901  (1958).

188.  For contemporary reviews  of Willoughby's  and Goodnow's  positions, see Robert
(reviewing  Westel  W.
E.  Cushman,  Book  Review,  24  Am.  Pol.  Sci.  Rev.  746  (1930) 
Willoughby,  The  Constitutional  Law  of the  United  States  (2d  ed.  1929));  Ernst Freund,
Book Review,  1 Am.  Pol. Sci. Rev.  136 (1906)  (reviewing FrankJ. Goodnow, The Principles
of the Administrative  Law  of the  United States  (1905))  (criticizing  Goodnow's  distinction
between administration  and  politics).

189.  This was  in part to  allow a shift of the public  business  from  Congress,  perceived
by  Wilson  and  his followers  as  hopelessly corrupt,  to  the  administration.  For  a modern
discussion  with  similar  goals,  see  Stephen  Breyer,  Breaking  the Vicious  Circles:  Toward
Effective  Risk Regulation  59-72  (1993).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  46 1994

19941

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

executive  functions.  The  framers  had  no  such  conception.  As  we  will
develop  further below,  the  framers  had  no  clear  idea  how  their  unruly
intuitions  about executive  power would  work  out, but  instead  imagined
them to  become  defined  over  time  through  practice.

2.  Linking the Nineteenth Century View to the Constitutional Text. - The
nineteenth  century view sees  two  executive  functions  where  the  modem
unitarian  sees  one.  But  how  are  these  functions  divided?  Does  some-
thing  in  the  text itself,  or  in  the  political  context,  help  us  understand
what  this  nineteenth  century  executive  would  be?

An  initial  question is whether the text of Article  II supports  the idea
that the framers  contemplated  two kinds  of (what we  consider)  executive
functions.  One  immediately  apparent  argument  that  it  does  not,
presented  by the  modem  constitutionalists,  rests  on  the Vesting Clause.
As  Calabresi  and  Rhodes  recently  argued, Article  II's Vesting  Clause  ap-
pears  to vest  executive  power  beyond  those  powers  enumerated  in  the
balance  of Article  11.190  For unlike  the Vesting  Clause  in Article I  (which
provides,  "All legislative  power  herein granted"191), the Vesting  Clause  of
Article  II  ("The executive  power"19 2) does not limit its power  to the enu-
merated  powers listed in Article  I1.193  Therefore, the argument goes, the
framers  did not understand  the executive  power to be limited  to the par-
ticular  powers  enumerated;  and if not limited to the enumerated powers,
it would follow that one  cannot divide  executive  functions  from  "adminis-
trative"  functions,  at least for constitutional  purposes.' 9 4

We 

that 

think 

this  argument 

if  the
Constitution  vests  all  executive  power  in  the  President,  there  is  now
enough  reason  to  question  whether  all  executive  power  as  then  under-
stood includes  all executive power as now understood.  As we conceive  it,
the  framers  intended  the  Vesting  Clause  to  vest  constitutionally  little
more  than  the enumerated  executive  powers. 195  It says  who  has the execu-

is  unpersuasive.  Even 

190.  See  Calabresi  &  Rhodes,  supra  note  1,  at  1175-79.  Others,  of course,  have

argued  the same  before.  See,  e.g.,  Cleveland,  supra note  100,  at 14-15.

191.  U.S. Const.  art. I,  § 1 (emphasis  added).
192.  Id. art. II,  §  1.
193.  The  executive  power extends  beyond those  enumerated  in Article  II at least  to
the veto power  in Article I.  See  id. art. I,  §  7.  For a useful  comparative analysis of the veto
power,  see  ChesterJ.  Antieau,  The  Executive  Veto  (1988).

194.  See, e.g.,  Hart, supra note 73, at 221  (noting conflicting evidence but concluding
"take  Care" is a "grant of general  power of an  executive  nature");  Prakash,  supra note  19,
at 995-97  (relying  on  statements  of Hamilton  and Madison  in  asserting that  "take  Care"
Clause  is a general  grant of authority).

195.  See  Hart,  supra  note  100,  at  223-24;  cf. Zamir,  supra  note  73,  at  870-71
(asserting  that  founders  read  Vesting  Clause  to  grant  President  full  control  only  over
"those  officers  appointed  to  ... political  functions  which  the  Constitution  vested  in  the
President").  Consider  also  the  statement  of Representative  White,  during  the  debate  of
the  removal  of the  Secretary  of Foreign  Affairs.  "The executive  power  is  vested  in  the
President;  but the executive  powers  so vested are those enumerated in the constitution."  1
Annals  of  Cong.  485  (Gales  &  Seaton  eds.,  1834).  Justice  Jackson  makes  a  similar
argument in  the  Steel Seizure Case.  See Youngstown  Sheet  & Tube  Co. v.  Sawyer,  343  U.S.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  47 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

tive power; not what  that  power  is, just  as  the Vesting  Clause  of Article  I
says  who has  the  legislative  power  (a Congress),  while  section  8 says  what
that  power  is,' 9 6  and  the  Vesting  Clause  of Article  III  says  who  has  the
judicial power  (one  Supreme  Court  at least)  while  section  2  specifies  to
what that power "extend[s] ."19  As  Daniel Webster  described  it,

It is true,  that the  Constitution declares  that the executive  power
shall  be  vested  in  the  President;  but  the  first  question  which
then arises  is,  What is executive power?...  Executive  power is  not
a  thing  so  well  known,  and  so  accurately  defined,  as  that  the
written  constitution  of a limited government can  be supposed to
have  conferred  it in the lump.198
Four arguments  support this conclusion.  First, if the Vesting  Clause
were  read  in  the  way  that  Calabresi  and  Rhodes  would  read  it, it would
have  the  effect  of rendering  superfluous  much  of the  balance  of Article
11,199  since  much  of  the  balance  of Article  II  merely  articulates  what
Calabresi  and  Rhodes  would  say  is  implied  in  the  Vesting  Clause.20 0
There  is  reason  to seek a  reading that  can  eliminate  this  redundancy.20 1
There is  good  reason as  well  to minimize  the significance  of this  distinc-
tive  language in Article II-"herein granted."  For the addition of "herein
granted,"  relied  upon  by Calabresi  and  Rhodes, 20 2  was  made  at  the  last
moment by the  Committee on Style, a committee  without the authority  to
make  substantive  changes. 203  The  change  induced  no  debate  at all;  this

579,  640-41  (1952)  (Jackson, J.,  concurring).  That  nothing more  than  the  enumerated
powers  are  vested  does  not  entail  that  those  powers  are  to  be  understood  narrowly.  In
particular, this does not determine  the scope of the Take  Care  Clause, see infra Part II.D.4.
All we mean  is that the Vesting  Clause  does nothing  more than show who  (a President)  is
to  exercise  the  executive  power,  and not  what that power  is.

196.  See  U.S.  Const.  art.  I,  §  8.
197.  See  id.  art.  III,  §  2.  For  a  related  analysis,  see Joseph  P.  Verdon,  Note,  The
Vesting Clauses,  the Nixon Test, and the Pharaoh's Dreams, 78 Va.  L. Rev.  1253  (1992).  As
that  Note  well  argues,  one  should  not  give  the  Vesting  Clauses  a  substantive  meaning
beyond identifying who holds the respective  powers, but should  grant to Congress  through
the  Necessary  and Proper  Clause  the power  to fill  in  details  where  the  Constitution  does
not  resolve  the  question.  See  id.  at  1258.  For  a  nineteenth  century  perspective,  see
Goodnow,  supra  note  184,  at  73-80.  This  was  Daniel  Webster's  understanding  of  the
Vesting  Clauses.  See  Daniel  Webster,  Speech  in  the  Senate  (May  7,  1834),  in 7  The
Writings  and Speeches  of Daniel  Webster  124-25  (Nat'l ed.  1903)  [hereinafter  Writings
and  Speeches  of Webster].

198.  Daniel  Webster,  Speech  in  the  Senate  (Feb.  16,  1835),  in  7  Writings  and

Speeches  of Webster,  supra note  197, at  186  (second  emphasis added).

199.  This  assumes  of  course  that  redundancy  is  to  be  avoided  in  reading  the
Constitution.  See supra  note 151  and accompanying  text;  see also  Hart, supra note  73,  at
115-16  (broad grant of "royal prerogatives" would make commander-in-chief superfluous).

200.  See  Calabresi  & Rhodes,  supra  note  1, at  1176.
201.  See  Goodnow,  supra note 184,  at 73-80  (claiming that Vesting  Clause  does not

grant powers  beyond  those  enumerated).

202.  See  Calabresi  & Rhodes,  supra note  1, at  1177-78.
203.  Consider  Thach's account:
The  next  stage  . . . was  to  give  the  Constitution  its  final  literary  polish.
Consequently,  on  September  8  a  committee  was  chosen  consisting  of Johnson,

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  48 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

suggests that the framers saw it as having  an effect as slight as we argue it
should  have.20 4

Second,  not even  Hamilton  described  the  Vesting  Clause  as  an  in-
dependent  source  of  substantive  executive  power,  though  he  was  in
general  quite  eager  to  define  a strong  executive.  In  his  catalog  of  the
executive  powers,  contrasting  the  American  executive  with  the  British
monarch,  nowhere  does  he  discuss  a  general  executive  power  arising
from  the Vesting Clause.2 0 5

Third,  while  the  federal  constitution  certainly  constituted  a  more
unitary executive than  most state  constitutions,  the same language vesting
executive power in state constitutions had  been understood at the time  of
the framing not to mark an inherent power, but to describe  an  authority

Hamilton,  Gouverneur  Morris,  Madison  and  King  "to  revise  the  stile  of  and
arrange  the  articles  which  had  been  agreed  to  by  the  House."  This  work was
entrusted  to Morris....  Positively with  respect to  the  executive  article  he could
do  nothing.  But  he  could  do  much  by  leaving  the  vesting  clause  as  it  stood.
When  the  report  of the  committee  of style  was  submitted  it was  found  that  the
legislative  grant now read:  "All legislative  powers  herein granted  shall be vested
in a Congress."  ...  Whether  intentional or not, it admitted  an interpretation  of
executive  power  which would  give to  the President  a field  of action  much  wider
than  that outlined by  the  enumerated  powers.

Thach,  supra note 78, at 138-39.  Importantly, however, the ratifiers would not have  known
when  "herein  granted" was  inserted.  Therefore,  it remains  for the  modem  unitarian  to
argue  that the  Constitution  as  ratified contemplates  these  two kinds  of vesting  clauses.

204.  This  argument  rests,  of  course,  on  the  much  disputed  Doyle  canon  of
construction-Sherlock  Holmes's  inference  that the visitor was  familiar  because  "the dog
did not bark."  See Arthur C. Doyle,  Silver Blaze,  in 2 The Annotated  Sherlock Holmes 261
(William S. Baring-Gould  ed.,  1967).  Compare  Chisom v.  Roemer,  111  S.  Ct.  2354,  2364
("Congress'  silence  in  this  regard  can  be  likened  to  the  dog  that  did  not
n.23  (1991) 
bark"),  Church  of Scientology  v.  IRS,  484  U.S.  9,  17-18  (1987)  (lack  of debate  may  be
likened to "Sir Arthur Conan  Doyle's 'dog  that didn't bark'"), Harrison v. PPG Indus.,  Inc.,
446  U.S.  578,  602  (1980)  (Rehnquist, J.,  dissenting)  (if the  construction  would  make  a
sweeping  change, judges  "may take  into  consideration  the  fact  that  a watchdog  did  not
bark in the  night")  with  Chisom, 111  S.  Ct. at 2370  (ScaliaJ.,  dissenting)  ("We  are  here to
apply the statute,  not legislative  history, and certainly  not the absence  of legislative  history.
Statutes  are  the  law  though  sleeping  dogs  lie.")  and  Harriyon, 446  U.S.  at  592  ("In
ascertaining the  meaning of a statute, a court  cannot, in the manner  of Sherlock Holmes,
pursue the  theory of the dog that did not bark.").  The  challenge  against the  Doyle  canon
has less force, we  believe, in the context of the  Constitution than it does in the  context of a
statute, for the  canon  makes  sense where  so  much  is at stake.

Webster's  account  adds further  support  to  this  interpretation:
They  did  not  intend,  certainly,  a  sweeping  gift  of  prerogative.  They  did  not
intend  to  grant to  the  President  whatever  might  be  construed,  or supposed,  or
imagined to be  executive  power, and the proof that they meant no such  thing is,
that,  immediately  after  using  these  general  words,  they  proceed  specifically  to
enumerate  his  several  distinct  and  particular  authorities;  to  fix  and  define
them.  ...

Daniel  Webster,  Speech  in  the  Senate  (Feb.  16,  1835),  in 7  Writings  and  Speeches  of
Webster,  supra  note  197,  at 186.

205.  See  The Federalist  No.  69,  at 417-33  (Alexander Hamilton)  (Clinton  Rossiter

ed.,  1961).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  49 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

limited  to  that  power  enumerated. 20 6  At  least as  a presumption,  similar
language 
federal  constitution  would  suggest  a  similar
the 
understanding. 207

in 

Finally,  and  perhaps  most  interesting  for  our  purposes,  is  an  argu-
ment resting  on  the other vesting clause  similar to  the Vesting  Clause  of
Article  II and  more  explicit than  the  Vesting  Clause  of Article  I:  that is
Article  III's  clause which  provides  that  "[t] he Judicial  Power... shall  be
vested."  If the  difference  between  Article  II  and Article  I  entails  broad
inherent  power  in  the President,  does  it entail  the  same broad  grant  of
inherent power in Article III?  Forjust like Article  II, and unlike Article  I,
Article  III  vests  "[t]he judicial  power"  (and  not just  the judicial  power
"herein granted")  in  "the  Supreme  Court."  But does  this mean  that the
judicial branch  has a wide  range  of inherent and  (legislatively)  unregul-
able judicial authority  beyond  that enumerated and  granted by Congress,
drawn  from English  practice?  Can  the  Supreme  Court  claim  a  range  of
implied  authority  to  decide  any  issue  of  a judicial  matter,  or  does  the
subsequent  specification  of  "cases  and  controversies"  exhaust  that
authority?

It  is  at  least  clear  how  an  originalist  should  answer  this  structural
question.  For  the  originalist  is  quick  to  point  to Justice  Iredell's  argu-
ment in  Chisolm v.  Georgia208  for  the  proposition  that  the  Constitution
granted  no  inherent judicial  power  to  create  judicial  remedies  where

206.  For an extraordinary  record  of this, see Field v. People  ex rel.  McClernand,  3  Ill.
(2  Scam.)  79  (1839),  in which  the Illinois Supreme  Court, reading a similar vesting clause
in its own  constitution,  concluded,  "[t]his  clause...  is a declaration  of a general  rule; and
the  same  remarks  are  applicable  to  this,  as  a grant  of power,  that  have  been  made  in
Id.  at  84.  No  doubt,  as  Thach
reference  to  them.  It  confers  no  specific  power." 
comments,  the  aim  of the  framers  was  to  create  an  executive  more  powerful  than  state
executives,  see  Thach,  supra  note  78,  at 52,  but  that  is  not  enough  to  conclude  the
President is to have  unlimited inherent power.  However, one  can rely on state  experience
only  with  caution.  As  Gerhard  Casper  remarks,  "No  clear-cut  state  precedents  were
available  to  the  members  of  the  House  of Representatives  as  they  faced  the  task  of
interpreting the provisions  of the United States  Constitution  with respect to  the  tenure  of
executive  officers."  Casper,  supra  note  115,  at  234;  cf.  Daniel  Webster,  Speech  in  the
Senate  (May  7,  1834),  in  7  Writings  and  Speeches  of Webster,  supra  note  197,  at  125
(noting  that even  in  state  constitutions,  there  were  no  perfectly  drawn  lines  between  the
powers  of each  department).

207.  Indeed,  nothing  could  have  been  further  from  the  framers'  objective  than  to
constitutionalize  a  claim  to  inherent powers  by  anyone.  The  tenor  of  the  time  is  well
sounded in Virginia's declaration  of 1776,  that "'the  executive  powers  of government'  were
to  be  exercised  'according  to  the  laws'  of  the  commonwealth,  and  that  no  power  or
prerogative  was  ever  to be  claimed  'by  virtue of any law,  statute,  or custom  of England.'"
Corwin,  supra note  110, at 6. Justice Scalia  argues that we should infer from  the absence of
similar language  in the federal  Constitution that the federal  executive power is not to be so
limited.  See Antonin  Scalia,  Originalism:  The  Lesser Evil,  57 U.  Cin. L. Rev. 849,  859-60
(1989).  But  the  predicate  for applying  this  modified  xpressio unius  rule  is  too  weak  to
support the  conclusion.  The  fact that  one  political  body  enacted  a stronger  statement  of
independence  from  the English  conception  of the executive  need  not mean that another
political  body is  adopting the  English  conception  of the  executive.
208.  2  U.S.  (2  DalI.)  419,  429  (1793)  (Iredell, J.,  dissenting).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  50 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

Congress  has  chosen  not to  do so.  The judicial  power,  Iredell  believed,
was just that  power  to  hear  "cases  and  controversies."  But this  did  not
mean  any  "case  or  controversy."  As  he wrote  there,

I conceive,  that all the  Courts of the United  States must receive,
not  merely  their  organization  as  to  the  numbers  of Judges  of
which  they  are  to  consist;  but all  their authority, as  to the man-
ner  of  their  proceeding,  from  the  Legislature  only.  This  ap-
pears to me to be one of those  cases, with  many others, in which
an article  of the  Constitution  cannot be  effectuated without  the
intervention  of  the  Legislative  authority.  There  being  many
such,  at  the  end  of the  special  enumeration  of  the  powers  of
Congress  in  the  Constitution, is  this  general  one:  'To  make  all
laws  which  shall be  necessary  and  proper for carrying  into  exe-
cution  the foregoing  Powers, and all other powers vested  by this
Constitution  in  the  Government  of the United States,  or in any
department  or  officer  thereof.'  None  will  deny,  that an  act of
Legislation  is  necessary  to  say,  at  least  of  what  number  the
Judges  are  to  consist;  the  President  with  the  consent  of  the
Senate  could  not  nominate  a number  at their  discretion.  The
Constitution  intended this article so  far at least to be  the subject
of a Legislative  act.  Having  a right  thus  to  establish  the  Court,
and it being capable  of being established in no  other manner, I
conceive  it  necessarily  follows,  that  they  are  also  to  direct  the
manner of its proceedings.  Upon  this authority,  there is,  that I
know,  but  one  limit;  that  is,  'that  they  shall  not  exceed  their
authority.' 20 9
We believe  that what Iredell says here  about Article  III power applies
to  Article  II powers  as  well.  Article  III  gives  certain  courts  "the judicial
power,"  which  power  "extend[s]"  to  certain  "cases  and  controversies";
nonetheless,  Iredell argues, this does not yet imply any power of the court
to  decide  cases  or  grant remedies  unless  Congress  has  acted  to  confer
such jurisdiction.2 10

The  same  should  hold  for  executive  power.  Article  II  gives  the
President "the  executive  power,"  which  is  defined  to include a catalog  of
powers  in  section  2,  and  some  in  section  3, and  at least one  specified  in

209.  Id. at 432-33  (Iredell, J., dissenting)  (emphasis deleted).  It would  in general be
quite  odd to  rely upon a  dissenting opinion  to help  establish  the original  intent  (though
some  would  say  that Justice  Harlan's  view  of  the  Fourteenth  Amendment  in  Plessy  v.
Ferguson,  163 U.S. 537,552-64  (1896)  (Harlan,J.,  dissenting), was closer to the truth than
Justice  Brown's),  but Iredell's  position  (in part) was  subsequently ratified by  the Eleventh
Amendment.  See Vicki  C. Jackson,  The  Supreme  Court, the  Eleventh  Amendment,  and
State Sovereign  Immunity, 98 Yale LJ. 1, 8  (1988).

210.  This  point  with  respect  to  the  power  of  Congress 

to  control  Article  III
jurisdiction  is made by Akhil  Amar.  See Amar, A Neo-Federalist View,  supra note  176,  at
254 n.160; Amar,  OriginalJurisdiction,  supra note  176, at 481-82; Amar, Reply, supra note
176, at 1653  n.12;  Amar, TheJudiciary Act,  supra note 37,  at 1504;  cf.  Henry  M. Hart, Jr.,
The  Power  of  Congress  to  Limit  the  Jurisdiction  of  Federal  Courts:  An  Exercise  in
Dialectic,  66 Harv.  L. Rev.  1362,  1365  (1953)  (suggesting Congress  has plenary  power  to
distribute  original jurisdiction in  civil cases,  but  not criminal  cases).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  51 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

Article  I, section 7  (veto).  If the Article III power does not even  extend to
the full range of an  enumerated  power without Congress'  intervention,  a
vesting  clause  notwithstanding,  so  too should it follow that  the  executive
power  in  Article  II  does  not  extend  beyond  the  enumerated  powers
there, unless  Congress, through the Necessary  and  Proper Clause,  acts  to
extend  it.  Congress  must  act  in  both  cases  for  the  power  to  be
effective. 21 1

These  arguments  together  suggest  an  understanding  of  the  nine-
teenth  century  theorists'  two-function  view:  if "executive power"  extends
to just those powers  enumerated, then the  "administrative power" spoken
of by the nineteenth  century  scholars would  extend  to  departments  and
agencies  created  by  Congress  independent  of these  Article  II  powers.2 12
And  it  would  follow  that  any  constitutional  limit  on  Congress'  power
would track just these  powers  enumerated  as  the President's.  One would
test limitations  on other powers  granted by Congress-for example,  limi-
tations  on the control over  aspects  of the administration  unrelated  to the
enumerated  powers-not by any Article  II  consideration,  but instead  by
the  reach  of the Necessary  and  Proper  Clause.

This understanding  makes  sense of two  other central features  of the
original  executive  debate.  First,  it is  consistent with  what we  view as  the
real  question  in  the  debate-whether  the  President  would  be  one  or
many.  Against  that  background,  what  section  1 does  is  simply  say:  We
have  chosen  one President.  Second, the  nineteenth  century understand-
ing  makes  sense  of another  important  feature  of  the  founders'  under-
standing  that  we  have  lost.  The nineteenth  century  view  distinguished
between  executive  and  administrative;  the  former  it called  political,  the
latter  not.  We  can  recover  this sense  of "political"  by comparing  it with
our judgments  about  legislative  power,  the  nature  of which  is  relatively
clear.  We  consider  a  grant  of legislative  power  to  Congress,  within  the
boundaries  of constitutional  limitation,  to be  a  grant of a  prerogative  to
select  or  not  to select  topics  for  legislation,  or  to  enact  or  not  to  enact
bills, all subject to the  sanction  of the political process only.  The  granting
of this prerogative  makes legislative  decisions  to act or not act political, in
an  early sense  of that word-political  in the sense  that they are subject to
the  review  of no  one directly,  though  subject to  the review of the people
indirectly  (through elections, popular outcry, and  the like). 213  Congress'
legislative  power is political  in the sense that Congress  exercises  it without
the review  of anyone  else  within  the  government.

211.  Note  that  there are  three distinct  grounds  upon  which  Congress  may  regulate
judicial  power-the  power  to  "constitute Tribunals  inferior  to  the  supreme  Court,"  U.S.
Const.  art.  I,  §  8,  cl.  9,  the  power  to  make  "Exceptions,  and  . . . Regulations"  to  the
Supreme  Court's  appellate jurisdiction,  id.  art.  III,  §  2,  and  the  Necessary  and  Proper
Clause power, see id. art. I, §  8,  cl.  18.  See also Amar, TheJudiciary Act of 1789, supra note
37, at  1504.

212.  The  obvious  gap  in  this  analysis  so  far-the  Take  Care  Clause-is  discussed

below.  See infra  Part II.D.4.

213.  See  infra  text accompanying  notes  221-234.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  52 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

So too should we think of the original grant of "executive  power."  As
Professor  Bestor describes  Blackstone's  conception  of "executive  power:"

Executive  power  signified  to  Blackstone,  as  it  did  to  the
American  framers,  those powers  of decision  and action that can
be  exercised  by a  chief executive,  or in his  name, simply  by vir-
tue  of the  authority  granted  directly  to  him by the  constitution
or  the  laws.  Though  the  executive  may  ultimately  be  held  re-
sponsible-by impeachment or by the repudiation  at the polls-
for  executive  decisions  made  or  executive  actions  carried  out,
executive  powers  themselves  are almost by definition  discretion-
ary,  and therefore  capable  of being exercised without the neces-
sity of submitting a proposed course  of action to prior legislative
deliberation  and  approval.2 1 4

The  point  is  stated  succinctly  in  the  following  account  of
present-day English  constitutional  practice:  "For the  exercise of
a prerogative  power  the prior authority  of Parliament is  not re-
Parliament  may  criticize  Ministers  for  the  conse-
quired .... 
quences  which 
the  exercise  of  prerogative;
Parliament  too may abolish or curtail  the prerogative  by statute;
but in  regard  to  the  exercise  of the prerogative  Parliament has
no  right to  be  consulted in  advance."2 1 5

result  from 

What marks  a power  as  executive  (within  the  framers'  language)  is that
the decision whether and how that power is to be exercised lies within the
discretion  of that person  designated as  the executive.  Under this concep-
tion,  an  executive  need no  more consult  others before  exercising execu-
tive  power  than  the  legislature  need  consult  others  before  exercising  its
powers. 2 16

214.  Arthur  Bestor,  Separation  of Powers  in  the  Domain  of Foreign  Affairs:  The

Intent of the  Constitution  Historically Examined,  5  Seton  Hall  L. Rev.  527, 532  (1974).

215.  Id.  at 532  n.14  (quoting E.C.S. Wade  & G. Godfrey Phillips,  Constitutional  Law

185  (E.C.S.  Wade  & A.W.  Bradley  eds.,  8th  ed.  1970)  (footnote  omitted)).

216.  On  this  point, see  Charles  Tiefer

Constitutional  law  since  1789  has  distinguished  between  executive  officers
performing  "political"  functions,  and  executive  officers  performing  other
functions,  and it has rejected the  notion that such  non-"political" functions  must
be  under  the  President's  exclusive  direction.  In  the  "political"  realm,  the
President  must  direct  all;  in  the  non-"political"  realm,  Congress  may  make  an
officer  independent  of presidential  control,  and instead  may  subject  the  officer
solely  to the  direction  of the  law.

Tiefer,  supra  note 21,  at 86.

Note, however,  that this  special  sense to the word  "political" does  not entail  a special
sense  to  the word  "administration."  Indeed, the  original  usage  of "administration"  seems
quite ordinary to our ears.  For example,  consider Hamilton's  use in the Federalist Papers:
The  administration  of  government,  in  its  largest  sense,  comprehends  all  the
operations  of the  body politic, whether legislative,  executive,  orjudiciary;  but in
its  most  usual  and  perhaps  in  its  most  precise  signification,  it  is  limited  to
executive  details,  and  falls  peculiarly  within  the  province  of  the  executive
department.  The actual conduct of foreign negotiations,  the preparatory  plans of
finance,  the application  and  disbursement of the public  moneys in conformity to
the  general  appropriations  of the  legislature,  the  arrangement  of the  army  and

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  53 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

If we  can use  this bit of contextual understanding,  if executive  pow-
ers are  political in this  early sense  of that word, and finally, if the Vesting
Clause is  limited in  the sense  we  describe,  then  there  is  an  entirely obvi-
ous  sense  in which  one  can  distinguish  "executive"  functions  from  other
functions  contingently  exercised  by  the  executive.  If executive  powers
are  those  granted  the  President  under  the  Constitution,  then  the  nine-
teenth  century's "administrative"  powers  are those  given the  President or
officers  of  the  government  by  Congress.  And  while  Congress  has  only
questionable  power  to  condition  the  constitutional  grant  of  executive
powers, 217  Congress  has  clear  authority  to  limit the  exercise  of adminis-
trative  powers  as  a condition to its  grant of these  powers  to any officer  of
the government.2 18  In the  original conception, what constrains  Congress
when  creating administrative  power is  principally the  requirement  that it
be  necessary  and  proper;  beyond  that  limitation,  the  Constitution  does
not speak.

In  this  view,  then,  the  framers'  vision  about  the  executive  comes  to
this:  The  Vesting  Clause  of Article  II  designates  the  President  as  the
holder of "the executive power"-not  a council,  not a triumvirate, 2 19  but
a  single  person.  The  balance  of Article  II  defines  what  that  executive
the
power  is.  More  specifically,  it  defines  what  executive  powers 
President  can  exercise  as  a  matter  of  constitutional  prerogative;  other
powers  Congress can  grant if it thinks proper.  With respect  to those exer-
cising the President's  constitutionally  enumerated  powers,  including  the
President himself, Congress  has considerable  authority  to  impose  obliga-
tions  of law;  with  respect  to  people  exercising  the  President's  constitu-
tionally specified  authority, the  President must  have  hierarchical  control;
but beyond  these  enumerated aspects  of "the executive  power" is  an un-

navy,  the  direction  of the  operations  of war-these,  and  other matters  of a like
nature,  constitute  what  seems 
to  be  most  properly  understood  by  the
administration  of government.

The Federalist No.  72,  at 435-86  (Alexander Hamilton)  (Clinton  Rossiter  ed.,  1961).

217.  For example,  it is doubtful that Congress  could constitutionally  refuse  to vote any
funding  for  White  House  functions.  Cf.  Report  of  the  Congressional  Committees
Investigating  the  Iran-Contra  Affair, S. Rep.  No. 216,  H.R. Rep.  No. 433,  100th  Cong.,  1st
Sess.  473-74 (1987)  (minority views)  (arguing that the President is the  "sole organ" of the
government  in  foreign  affhirs,  and  that  Congress  cannot  constitutionally  prevent  the
President  from  sharing  information,  asking  other  governments  to  contribute  to  the
Nicaraguan  resistance  or  entering  into  secret  negotiations  with  factions  inside  Iran).
Compare  the  discussion  in Alex Whiting,  Note,  Controlling Tin  Cup  Diplomacy, 99 Yale
LJ.  2043  (1990)  (discussing  contours  of  Congress'  power  to  control  executive  foreign
affairs  conduct through  use  of funding statutes).

218.  See Myers  v. United States,  272 U.S. 52,  177  (1926)  (Holmes,J.,  dissenting).  We
do not consider here  any limitations on Congress'  powers to place  duties on the President,
as  distinct from agents  of the  President.

219.  Hamilton  discusses  these  options  in Federalist  No.  70.  They  were discussed  in
the  convention,  see  1 Farrand, supra note  137, at 64-66  (Wilson-Rutledge-Sherman, June
1);  id.  at 88-89  (Rutledge-Randolph,  June  2);  id.  at 96-97  (Gerry, June  4);  id.  at 252
(Wilson,  June  16);  2  Fan-and,  supra  note  137,  at  100-01  (Williamson,  July  24);  id.  at
537-38  (Mason,  September  7).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  54 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

defined  range  of powers  that  we would  now  describe  as  "administrative
power,"  marking  a domain within which  one has  a duty  to act according
not  to one's  own judgment, but according  to the standards  or objectives
of a law.22 0  With  respect to these  latter powers,  Congress  has wide  discre-
tion  to  vest  them  in  officers  operating  under  or  beyond  the  plenary
power  of the  President.

3.  Linking  the  Nineteenth  Century  View  to  the  Court's Early Executive
Cases:  Marbury and Kendall. - This view-that by constitutionalizing the
"unitary executive"  the  framers  did  not  believe  that  they  were  constitu-
tionalizing who  must have  power  over  all  functions  that we  now  call  ad-
ministrative-gains  support from  early Supreme  Court cases  dealing with
the  scope  of  executive  power.  In  this  section,  we  consider just  two  of
those  cases.  In both, we believe  that the Court's approach  can  be  under-
stood  through  the view  that we  have just sketched.

Most  famous  of  these  cases  is  of  course  Marbuy  v.  Madison,2 2 1
although less  for its relationship  to the  debate  over  the unitary  executive
than for its founding  ofjudicial  review. 222  Before  Chief Justice Marshall
struck a statute  of Congress,  he  sketched broadly  the Court's  conception
of the  executive,  and  its  amenability  to  the  control  of  other  branches,
whether Congress  or the courts.  This view, we  suggest, ties directly to  the
model  that we  have  outlined.

Recall  the basic  facts.  John Adams  had appointed  William  Marbury
to  be  a Justice  of the Peace  in  the  District of Columbia.223  The  Senate
had  confirmed  his  appointment,  and  President  Adams  had  signed  the
commissions.  But unfortunately  for Marbury  and four other similarly  sit-
uated  magistrates-to-be,  Marshall  (the  same),  who  had been  Secretary  of
State  under  Adams,  failed  before  leaving  office  to  deliver  the  commis-
sions  to  Marbury  and  the  others.  Madison,  the  new  Secretary  under
PresidentJefferson,  refused to deliver the  commissions.  Marbury sued to
compel  him  to  deliver  his commission. 224

For our purposes,  we  can  focus  on  one crucial  aspect  to  the Court's
dictum.  Central  to Marshall's  analysis  is  a distinction  between  two  kinds
of authority  or power  under which  the Secretary  of State  may  act-one
that he calls "political" authority and the other authority derived from law
(the  same  distinction we  have  traced).  As Marshall  explained:

By  the  constitution of the  United  States,  the  President  is  in-
vested  with certain  important political  powers, in  the exercise  of

220.  Reconsider  the Decision of 1789  in this light, discussed  supra text accompanying

notes  112-130.

221.  5  U.S.  (1  Cranch)  137  (1803).
222.  But see Tiefer,  supra note  21,  at 86-87  (discussing  distinction made  in Marbury
between  "political"  functions,  over  which  President  exercises  complete  discretion,  and
other functions for which  Congress  might provide  direction).

223.  The office  had been  created by what has come  to be  called the "MidnightJudges
Act."  See  Act  of Feb.  27,  1801,  ch.  15,  § 11,  2  Stat.  103,  107;  see  also  William  W. Van
Alstyne,  A  Critical  Guide to  Marbury v. Madison,  1969  Duke LJ.  1,  3-6.

224.  See  5 U.S.  (1 Cranch)  at 146.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  55 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REViEW

[Vol.  94:1

which  he is  to use his own  discretion,  and is  accountable  only to
his country in his political character,  and to his own  conscience.
To aid him in  the performance  of these  duties,  he is  authorized
to appoint  certain  officers,  who act  by his  authority and  in  con-
formity with  his orders.  In such cases,  their acts are his acts; and
whatever  opinion  may be  entertained  of the  manner  in  which
executive discretion may be used, still there exists,  and can  exist,
no power  to  control that  discretion. 225

Thus  far then, Marshall sounds like a believer  in a strongly unitary execu-
tive,  at least to  the  extent that he is  pointing  to an absolute  power  in  the
President  to  exercise  control  over  subordinates,  and 
the  un-
reviewability  of their acts  pursuant to  that authority.

to 

Marshall  then immediately  links this power to  a department we  have

just reviewed.  Says  Marshall,

The application of this remark will be  perceived  by adverting  to
the  act  of congress  for  establishing  the  department  of foreign
affairs.  This  officer,  as his duties  were  prescribed  by that act,  is
to conform precisely  to the will  of the President.  He is the mere
organ  by whom  that will is  communicated.  The  acts  of such an
officer,  as an  officer,  can  never  be  examinable  by the  courts. 22 6
Thus, Marshall  conceived the foreign  affairs department to flow from this
power  that Marshall  calls  "political" and that we have  been  calling execu-
tive.  In this way,  Marshall  sounds very  much  like  ChiefJustice  Taft, writ-
ing in  Myers.2 2 7  When  an  officer  exercises  the  (executive)  power, which
this  department has  by virtue  of its  tie  to the  constitutional  grant of this
executive  power to the President, his acts  "can never be examin [ed]" by a
court.

2 2 8

But Marshall goes on to qualify this sea of unreviewability  in a crucial

way:

But when  the legislature  proceeds  to impose  on that officer
other  duties;  when  he  is  directed  peremptorily  to  perform  cer-
tain  acts;  when  the  rights  of individuals  are  dependent  on  the
performance  of those  acts;  he  is  so  far  the officer  of the  law;  is
amenable  to the  laws  for  his  conduct;  and  cannot  at his  discre-
tion  sport away  the  vested  rights  of others. 229

Thus, an  executive  officer is  either an agent of the  President  (a  "political
officer")  or  an  "officer of the law."  He  can  serve  either  the  President  or
the  lawmakers  (Congress),  but  when  he  serves  Congress'  will  (as  ex-
pressed  in  law),  his performance  under  that will  is, Marshall  asserts,  sub-
ject to  the  review by the  courts.

225.  Id. at 165-66  (emphasis  added).
226.  Id. at 166.
227.  See  Myers  v.  United  States,  272  U.S.  52,  132-34  (1926)  (ruling  that  President
must  have  "unrestricted  power  to  remove"  those  officers  acting  under  the  President's
"political"  powers),  discussed  supra text accompanying  notes  98-108.

228.  See  5  U.S.  (1 Cranch)  at 166.
229.  Id.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  56 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

Now it is important  to qualify what Marshall  has said so  far, by point-
ing out that Marshall was not arguing that  the only "political" power  pos-
sessed  by  the  President  was  that  given  by  the  Constitution.  Though  he
says  "by the constitution"  the President  is  vested  with  political  authority,
Congress  too,  he  suggests,  can  grant  the President  a  "legal  discretion,"
and when  he  or  his  officers  act under  that discretion,  then he  or his  of-
ficers  enjoy the same immunity  from judicial  review  as when  the officers
act  under  a constitutional  discretion. 230  But where  neither  the  law  nor
the  Constitution  gives  any discretion,  the officer  is  subject to  the duty  of
the  law,  the President  notwithstanding.

The conclusion  from this reasoning  is, that where  the heads
of  departments  are  the  political  or  confidential  agents  of  the
executive,  merely to  execute  the will  of the  President, or rather
to  act in  cases  in which  the executive  possesses  a constitutional
or  legal  discretion,  nothing  can  be  more  perfectly  clear  than
that  their acts  are  only  politically examinable.  But where  a spe-
cific  duty  is  assigned by law,  and individual  rights  depend upon
the performance  of that duty, it seems  equally  clear  that the in-
dividual  who  considers  himself injured,  has  a right to  resort  to
the  laws  of his country  for a remedy.2 31
In Marbury itself, then, the Court declared  that because  the President
had  completed  the  last  act  required  to  complete  his  exercise  of his  ap-
pointment  power,  the  duty  fell  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  deliver  the
commissions  to  Marbury. 23 2  Thus,  according  to Marshall:

The  power  of nominating  to  the senate,  and  the power  of
appointing  the  person  nominated,  are  political  powers,  to  be
exercised  by  the  President  according  to  his  own  discretion.
When  he  has made an appointment,  he  has exercised  his whole
power  and  his  discretion  has  been  completely  applied  to  the
case.  If, by law,  the officer  [appointed]  be removable  at the will
of the  President,  then  a new  appointment  may be  immediately
made, and the  rights  of the officer are  terminated.  But as  a fact
which  has  existed  cannot  be  made  never  to  have  existed,  the
appointment  cannot be annihilated;  and consequently  if the of-
ficer  is  by  law  not  removable  at  the  will  of  the  President;  the
rights he  has  acquired are protected  by the law,  and  are  not re-
sumable by the President.  They cannot be extinguished by exec-
utive authority, and he has the privilege  of asserting them in like
manner  as if they had  been  derived  from  any  other source. 233

230.  See  id.
231.  Id.
232.  The  steps  to this  conclusion  are  not  essential  here, though  they  are  somewhat
complex.  Signing the commission,  Marshall said, was the last act in the appointment, since
it was a public act manifesting the  completion  of the appointment;  the act of signing was,
however,  distinct  from  the  appointment.  The  commission  was just the  evidence  of the
appointment.  See  id. at 155-58.

233.  Id. at 167.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  57 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

Now on  the face  of this  claim-that  the President  controls  the  offi-
cials  to  the extent  they are  acting on  a constitutional  or  legal  discretion,
and not when the officer is acting as an  "officer of the  law"-the believers
in a strongly unitary  executive  may find  nothing at all problematic.  The
modem  unitarian's claim has always been  that the President must be able
to  direct  discretionary exercises  of authority;  and  believers  in  a  strongly
unitary executive  have  long yielded the point regarding  "ministerial" acts.
No one  thinks that the President may authorize  administrative  officers  to
violate  the  law.23 4

So far, then, the modem  unitarian view appears to be both  coherent
and consistent with what we  have  quoted.  But it is  not entirely consistent
with  how  the framers  and  the  Court  in  Marbuiy understood  things.  The
believers in  a strongly  unitary  executive  say  that  whenever an exercise of au-
thority is  discretionary, the  Constitution  permits  the  President  to  control
such an  exercise;  but the  original view would suggest  that what  the fram-
ers  meant  was  that  whenever  it  is  a  political power,  derived  from  the
Constitution, or a legal discretion granted by  Congress, the President must have
the power to direct  the exercise of this discretion.  Nothing in this entails
that where  Congress  directs  otherwise-by vesting in  an  officer  a discre-
tionary  power beyond  the President's  review-the  President nonetheless
has  power  to  direct or even  to interfere  with  the exercise  of that  power.
The  modem  unitarian  confuses  the  source  of  the  power  to  act  (the
Constitution  versus  laws  of  Congress)  with  the  type  of power acted  upon
(discretionary  versus  ministerial). 
the
Constitution  or  from law;  power  may be ministerial  or discretionary.  As
we  understand the founding view, Congress  had a measure  of authority  to
structure what modem observers  consider to be executive  with  respect  to
power  deriving  from  law,  whether  ministerial  or  not.

Power  may  derive  from 

All  this  suggests  a  sharp  distinction  between  (a)  the  acts  that  the
President may control  and  (b)  the acts  that Congress  may  regulate.  This
distinction  flows  from  the  nature  of the  source  of  the  authority  to  act
(Article  I's  Necessary  and  Proper  Clause  versus  Article  II)  rather  than
from the nature of the  act (discretionary  versus ministerial).  The point is
not unambiguous  in  Marbuy itself, there  it is  merely suggested.  But  the
point emerges  clearly from  another case  that many believers in a strongly
unitary  executive  take to stand for precisely  the opposite  point, Kendall v.
United States ex  rel. Stokes.23 5

Postmaster  Amos  Kendall  refused  to pay a  claim  made  by a William
B. Stokes  (and others),  who had contracted with the Post Office  to deliver
the  mall.  Congress  had  by  law  directed  that  the  Postmaster  make  the
payment;  Kendall,  at the  urging  of President Jackson,  refused.  At  issue

234.  See  supra note  106.  The  exception  is  in cases  where  the  executive  believes  the
underlying  law  unconstitutional.  See,  e.g.,  Lear  Siegler,  Inc. v.  Lehman,  842  F.2d  1102
(9th  Cir.  1988)  (executive  refusing  to  enforce  law  viewed  as unconstitutional),

235.  37  U.S.  (12  Pet.)  524,  561  (1838).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  58 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

was  the  power  of  the  district  court 2 36  to  issue  a  mandamus  to  the
Postmaster  to pay  the  debt. 23 7

Kendall is  often  understood  to stand for  the proposition  that where
the  action  enjoined  upon  the  executive  is  "ministerial,"  then  the execu-
tive  can  be directed  by law to perform  it, which  suggests  (wrongly we  be-
lieve)  that if the  action  is  "discretionary,"  then  the  executive  cannot be
directed by law to perform  it.  But this implication  follows neither in logic
nor from the opinion.  What is  crucial  to the opinion  (and conceded  by
the  dissenting justices  as well)  is  that  the  authority at issue  in Kendall de-
rives  from law,238  and  not from  the  constitutionally  committed  executive
powers;  and since  derived  from law,  the executive  could not control it.239
The  argument  for the  Court follows  precisely  the distinction  drawn
by Chief Justice Marshall:  "The executive  power is  vested  in a  President;
and  as far as  his powers  are  derived  from  the  constitution, he  is  beyond
the reach  of any other department, except in the mode prescribed  by the
constitution  through  the impeaching  power."240  Thus, where  the source
of the President's  power is the Constitution, 241 he is free from the control
of the courts  or  Congress.

But it by no  means follows,  that every officer  in every  branch  of
is  under  the  exclusive  direction  of  the
that  department 
president.  Such  a principle, we apprehend, is  not, and certainly
cannot  be  claimed by the president.  There  are  certain  political
duties imposed upon many officers in the  executive  department,
the  discharge  of which  is  under the  direction  of the  president.
But it would be  an  alarming doctrine,  that congress  cannot im-
pose upon any executive  officer any duty they may think proper,
which  is not  repugnant  to  any rights  secured  and  protected  by
the  constitution;  and  in  such  cases,  the  duty  and  responsibility
grow  out of and are subject to the control of the law, and  not to
the  direction  of the  president.2 42

Note  here  the unqualified  nature  of Congress'  power.  Congress  has  the
power to impose upon  any executive  officer  "any duty they  may think proper"
so long as  this is not repugnant to "rights secured by" the Constitution.  A
duty  may  be  ministerial  or  nonministerial  (discretionary  or  nondiscre-
tionary).  With regard  to  ministerial  duties,  all that  Kendall says is:  "And
this is  emphatically  the case,  where  the  duty enjoined is  of a mere  minis-
terial  character."243

236.  The  Marbury mistake was  not to be  made again.  This time the  mandamus action
was  brought in  a court with  the  power to  hear the  claim within  its  original jurisdiction.

237.  See  37  U.S.  (12  Pet.)  at 534.
238.  See id.  at 626  (Taney, C.J.,  dissenting);  id. at 641-42  (Barbour, J.,  dissenting).
239.  See id.  at 610-13.
240.  Id. at 610.  Recall Marshall's  statement  supra  text accompanying  note  225.
241.  We  include  here  statutes  designed  to  allow implementation  of the  President's

constitutional  powers.

242.  37 U.S.  (12  Pet.)  at 610.
243.  Id.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  59 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVEW

[Vol.  94:1

Modem  defenders  of the  unitary  model  have  read  this  single  sen-
tence  to mean  that the President's  power is  cabined  only when  the  power
Congress  grants  is  ministerial. 2 "  From  this  they  have  drawn  the  lesson
that  where  the  power  is  not ministerial,  Congress  may  not interfere;  it
may not, that is,  constrain the  President's power  to control the  discretion
of "his" officers.  But this  is  not  the  Court's  claim.  All  the  Court says  is
that "it is  emphatically the  case"  that the  officer  can  be  constrained  when
the duty is merely ministerial.  The  Court does not say that the officer  can
be  constrained  only  when  the  duty is ministerial. 245

The  grounds  for  this  point  were  made  even  more  clearly  by  Chief
Justice Taney in dissent  (note again:  the dissenters  agreed with  the  Court
that  Congress  could  give  the  courts  mandamus power  over  an  executive;
the dispute among them was  over whether Congress  had given  the  courts
such  power):

is  not  created  by 

the
The  office  of  postmaster  general 
constitution;  nor  are  its  powers  or  duties  marked  out  by  that
instrument.  The  office  was  created by act of congress;  and  wher-
ever congress creates such an office  as  that of postmaster general,  by
law, it may unquestionably, by law,  limit its powers,  and regulate
its proceedings;  and may  subject it to any supervision or control, exec-
utive  or judicial, which  the  wisdom of the legislature may  deem  right.
There  can,  therefore,  be  no  question  about  the  constitutional
powers  of the  executive  or judiciary,  in  this  case.  The  contro-
versy  depends  simply  upon  the  construction  of  an  act  of
congress.

24 6

As Taney and  the Court affirmed,  the judgment about how to  control the
department was  Congress',  so  long as  Congress  exercised  that judgment
according  to  law.  Once  expressed  by  law,  the  duty  of  the  President  is
plain:  The  Constitution  directs  him to  "take  Care"  that the laws  be faith-
fully  executed,  and  "[tio  contend  that  the  obligation  imposed  on  the
President  to  see  the  laws  faithfully  executed,  implies  a  power  to  forbid
their  execution,  is  a  novel  construction  of the  constitution,  and  entirely
inadmissible."247

244.  This  reading is suggested,  for example,  by Tiefer,  supra  note 21,  at 88 n.144.
245.  Cf.  Hart,  supra  note  73,  at  31  (discussing  absence  of judgment  involved  in
.ministerial"  tasks,  as  compared  to  "administrative  determinations"  that  involve  some
degree  ofjudgment).  Even  President Taft, author of Myers  v. United States,  272  U.S.  52
(1926),  understood  as  much.  See  Taft, supra note  106, at 125-26.

246.  37  U.S.  (12  Pet.)  at 626  (Taney, CJ.,  dissenting).
247.  Id. at 613.  This view  is echoed  by ChiefJustice  Rehnquist, expressed  in a memo

when  working for the  Department of Justice:

It is in our view  extremely  difficult to formulate  constitutional  theory  tojustifr  a
refusal by the President to comply with a Congressional directive  to spend.  It may
be argued  that the spending of money is inherently an executive  function, but the
execution  of any  law,  is by  definition,  an  executive  function  and  it  seems  an
anomalous  proposition  that  because  the Executive  Branch  is bound  to  execute
the  laws,  it is free  to decline  to execute  them.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  60 1994

1994]

THE  PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

To  be sure,  this statement may  be taken  to stand for the  narrow  and
uncontroversial  view  that  the  President  must  obey  the  law,  and  that he
may  not order his subordinates  to do otherwise.  As  we  have  noted, mod-
em  unitarians  do  not dispute  this  claim.  But something  more was  hap-
pening  in  the  case.  The  President  had argued  in  Kendall a  ground  that
resonates  well  with  the  current  believers  in  a  strongly  unitary  executive.
His  attorney  general  told  the  Court:

[T] he executive ought to have  this power, because  it is executive
in  its  nature.  The  executive  is  fitted  to  execute  it, and  armed
with means  to execute  it.  It  can  always  execute  it...  promptly,
uniformly,  and  in the  time and manner that the  public  interests
may  require;  and  as  its  means  may  enable  it.248

But whether  the  "executive  ought"  or  not, as  every Justice  in  Kendall af-
firmed,  the  Constitution  allowed  the  President only those  powers  of exe-
cution  given  by  Congress.  We  do  not  claim  that  Marbuiy and  Kendall
dispose  of the  debate  over the  nature  of the unitary  executive.  There  are
many  ambiguities  in  the  opinions.  But  the  language  and  spirit  of  the
opinions  seem  to fit  better with  the  approach  we  have  offered  here.

4.  The Take  Care Clause. -

If  (1)  the Vesting  Clause is  not meant  to
vest executive  power generally,  but rather was  meant to vest just the enu-
merated  executive  powers,  and  (2)  the framers  understood  the  executive
powers  that derived from the  Constitution as  political  (subject  only to the
control  of the  ballot  box 249 )  and  distinguishable  from  what  we  might
term  the  administrative  power  (a creation of law, subject to the  control of
Congress  and  the  courts),  then the  nineteenth  century  model of the  ex-
ecutive  gains  support  over  the  unitary  model  of the  twentieth  century.
But  before  we  reconsider  how  well  the  nineteenth  century  model  ex-
plains  the  puzzles  that began  this Article,  consider  one  final  hurdle  that
the  opponents  of the  modem  unitarian  view must  clear-the  Take  Care
Clause.

Commentators  have  consistently  relied  on the  Take  Care  Clause  as a
firm  basis  for  the  modem  unitarian  view. 250  This  clause,  together  with
the Vesting  Clause, is taken to suggest the President's  plenary authority in
the  realm  of all  that is executive  and  administrative.  It is  the  President,

Arthur S. Miller, The President and Faithful Execution  of the Laws,  40 Vand.  L. Rev. 389,
397  (1987)  (quoting now Chief Justice  Rehnquist).

248.  37  U.S.  (12  Pet.)  at 545.
249.  The framers  also may  have permitted reasonable  statutory limits,  a subject we do

not discuss  here.

250.  See,  e.g.,  Cleveland,  supra  note  100,  at  16;  Taft  supra  note  106,  at  85-88;
Prakash,  supra  note  19,  at  1000-03.  While  he  does  not  read  the  Take  Care  Clause  so
broadly, Peter Strauss does believe  (as do we)  that it has an  important role in the structure
of Article  II.  See  Strauss,  supra  note  7, at  648-50.  Justice  Holmes stated  the  minimalist
reading  of  the  Take  Care  Clause  in  Myers  v.  United  States,  272  U.S.  52,  177  (1926)
(Holmes, J.,  dissenting)  ("The  duty of the President  to see  that the  laws  be  executed  is  a
duty that does  not go  beyond the laws  or require  him to achieve  more than  Congress sees
fit to  leave  within his  power.").

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  61 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

and not anyone  else, who is  given the  power to "take Care" of the faithful
execution  of the  laws,  and he must have  the power to perform  his respon-
sibility over all who  are  engaged  in  carrying out the  law.

But  there  is  something  quite  odd  about  the  structure  of  the  Take
Care  Clause  if it was  conceived  by the  framers  as  the  source  of presiden-
tial power over  all that we now consider administration:  Unlike the other
power  clauses  of Article  II,  the  Take  Care  Clause  is  expressed  as  a  duty
rather  than  a power.2 51  Indeed,  rather  than  appearing  in  section  2  of
Article  II,  where  the  balance  of the  President's  basic  powers  are  articu-
lated,2 52  the  Take  Care  Clause  appears  in  section  3  of Article  II,  in  the
context  of a  laundry  list  of  other  discretionary  presidential  duties  and
(arguably)  powers. 255  Most  of these  are  expressed  not as  something  the
President may choose  to  do  (as  is  the  case  where  he  has  the "power" to
undertake  actions),  but as  something  that he  "shall" do.

This  language  and  its  placement  notwithstanding,  modem  unitari-
ans claim  that even  if a duty, the clause  implies  that if the President has a
duty to  take  care  that the laws are  faithfully  executed,  he also  has a power

251.  See,  e.g.,  3  Willoughby,  supra  note  120,  at  1474.  Tiefer  suggests  that  it  was
intended  as a clause "to preclude presidential  claims of super-legal  authority, not to confer
positive  authority  to override  legislative  acts."  Tiefer, supra  note 21,  at 90  n.151.

252.  Article  I,  section  2  provides:
[1]  The  President  shall  be  Commander  in  Chief of  the  Army and  Navy  of  the
United  States, and  of the militia of the several  States; when  called into  the actual
Service  of the  United  States,  he  may  require  the  Opinion,  in  writing,  of the
principal  Officer in each of the Executive Departments,  upon any Subject  relating
to  the  Duties  of  their  respective  Offices,  and  he  shall  have  Power  to  grant
Reprieves  and Pardons  for Offenses  against the  United States,  except  in Cases  of
Impeachment.
[2]  He  shall  have  Power, by  and  with  the  Advice  and  Consent  of the  Senate  to
make  Treaties,  provided  two  thirds of the  Senators  present  concur, and he shall
nominate,  and by and  with  the Advice and  Consent of the  Senate,  shall  appoint
Ambassadors,  other public  Ministers  and  Consuls, Judges  of the  supreme  Court,
and all  other  Officers  of the  United  States,  whose Appointments  are not  herein
otherwise  provided  for, and which  shall  be  established  by Law;  but the  Congress
may by Law vest the Appointment  of such inferior  Officers,  as  they think proper,
in  the  President alone, in  the  Courts  of Law,  or in  the Heads  of Departments.
[3]  The President shall have Power to fill up all Vacancies  that may happen during
the  Recess  of the Senate,  by granting Commissions  which  shall expire  at the End
of their  next Session.

U.S.  Const. art.  II,  §  2  (emphasis  added).
253.  Section  3  of Article  II  provides:
He  shall from  time to  time give to  the  Congress  Information  of the  State  of the
Union, and  recommend  to  their  Consideration  such Measures  as  he shall judge
necessary  and  expedient;  he  may,  on  extraordinary  Occasions,  convene  both
Houses,  or  either  of them,  and  in  Case  of Disagreement  between  them,  with
Respect  to  the Time  of Adjournment, he may adjourn  them  to  such  Time as  he
shall  think proper,  he shall  receive  Ambassadors  and  other public  Ministers;  he
shall  take Care  that the Laws be faithfully  executed,  and shall Commission  all  the
Officers  of the United  States.

Id. §  3.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  62 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

to  direct and  control  all administrative  functions  directed  to  the  execu-
tion of those laws regardless  of the law's  nature,  or the source  of the law's
authority.  On  this view,  this  directing  and  supervising  authority  is  just
one  more  executive  power  that  must  be  vested  exclusively  in  the
President.

What is  most striking about the centrality  claimed  for this clause  is its
relatively modem  origin.25 4  By the beginning  of the modem presidency,
constitutional  scholars were  pointing  to  the Take  Care  Clause  as the pri-
mary source  of  executive  power.  President  Taft  relied  on  the  clause  to
support the  notion  that the President can  act to advance  federal  interests
without specific legal authority,2 5 5  and Theodore  Roosevelt  believed that
the clause  meant  that  the  President  could  do  anything so  long as  there
was  not specific legal  authority forbidding  it.25 6  But at the founding,  the
clause  received  relatively  little  consideration  by  practically  everyone  in
the debate.257  Hamilton  devoted only a few lines in the Federalist Papers
to  discussion  of  this  "minor" executive  power  or  responsibility.258  The
fact  that  the  clause  received  so  little  initial  attention  suggests  that  one
ought not take it as a broad  grant of presidential  power  over  administra-

254.  We  do  not claim  that  the  argument  was  entirely  unheard  of by  the  framers.
Representative  Ames, for example,  argues  the  point in  the Removal  Debate,  see  1 Annals
of Cong. 492,  561  (Gales  & Seaton eds.,  1834),  as  does  Madison, see  id. at 516.  Neither,
however,  advances  the  position  as  strongly  as  the  modem  unitarians.  That strong  claim
reaches  back  to  President Jackson.  Something  like  this  argument  was  relied  upon  by
Jackson  in his  removal  of funds  from  the  Bank  of the  United  States.  See infra  Part II.G.
Webster's  response  to  this  claimed authority  is telling:

I will never agree that a President of the United States  holds the whole  undivided
power of office  in his  own  hands, upon  the theory  that he is responsible  for the
entire action  of the whole  body  of those engaged  in carrying  on the government
and executing  the  laws.  Such  a responsibility is  purely ideal,  delusive,  and vain.
There  is,  there  can  be,  no  substantial  responsibility,  any  further  than  every
individual  is  answerable,  not merely  in his reputation,  not merely in the  opinion
of  mankind,  but  to  the  law, for  the  faithful  discharge  of  his  own  appropriate
duties.

Daniel  Webster,  Speech  in  the  Senate  (May  7,  1834),  in 7  Writings  and  Speeches  of
Webster,  supra  note  197, at  143.

255.  In Taft's words,  "[tihe widest  power and  the broadest duty which  the President

has is conferred  and imposed by  [the Take Care  Clause]."  Taft, supra note  106,  at 78.

256.  See  Theodore  Roosevelt,  An  Autobiography  357  (1929);  see  also  Hart,  supra
note  73, at 221  n.67  (stating that "executive  power was limited only by specific restrictions
and  prohibitions  appearing  in  the  Constitution  or  imposed  by  the  Congress  under  its
Constitutional  powers").

257.  See  John  C.  Hueston,  Note,  Altering  the  Course  of  the  Constitutional
Convention:  The Role  of the  Committee of Detail in Establishing the Balance of State and
Federal  Powers,  100  Yale  L..  765,  779  (1990)  (arguing  that  lack  of debate  was  due  to
public pressure  to complete  the  convention  rapidly).

258.  Hamilton completely fails to discuss it in his consideration  of presidential powers
in  Federalist  69.  See  The  Federalist  No.  69  (Alexander  Hamilton).  In  Federalist  77,
Hamilton  says,  "no objection  has  been  made  to  this  class  of authorities;  nor  could  they
possibly  admit  of any.  It  required,  indeed,  an  insatiable  avidity  for  censure  to  invent
exceptions  to  the  parts  which  have  been  excepted  to."  The  Federalist  No.  77,  at  463
(Alexander Hamilton)  (Clinton Rossiter  ed.,  1961).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  63 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

tion, at least to the extent that it would solve  the hardest and most sharply
disputed  questions.

More  significant  than  the lack of debate  over  the scope  of the  Take
Care  Clause  is  the shift in  the language  of the  clause  and  its relationship
to  the  Necessary  and  Proper  Clause.  By  reviewing  the  development  of
these  two  clauses,  we  hope  to  show  that  the  framers  shifted  from  the
President and to the Congress  a crucial aspect of the decision  of how laws
were  to be  carried  into  effect.

Like other  clauses in Article  II,  the Take  Care  Clause  came into  the
constitutional  text with  apparently  little  debate.259  The  language  "take
Care  that the laws  be faithfully  executed" emerged  from  the work  of the
Committee  on Style, which  reported to the  convention  on September  12,
1787.  This  Committee  was  the  last step  in  a  long series  of debates  that
began  with  a number  of resolutions  from  Randolph  of Virginia.  These
resolutions were  the focus  of the convention that convened  May 25,  1787,
to discuss  amendments  to  the Articles  of Confederation.

Before  the Committee  on Style  created  this  text, something  close  to
it had  appeared  in various  earlier drafts.  Its first appearance  was  in Ran-
dolph's  resolution  number  7, which  resolved  "that a  National  Executive
be  instituted..,  and  that besides  a general  authority  to  execute  the Na-
tional  laws,  it ought  to  enjoy the  Executive  rights  vested  in  Congress  by
the Confederation." 260

This  was  May  29,  1787.  It was  not until June  1 that  the convention,
now  convened as a Committee of the Whole,  turned  to consider the exec-
utive  power.  Madison  suggested  that  the  committee  first  consider  the
scope  of  the  executive  power,  before  it  decide  the  central  question-
whether  there would  be one  or more  "executives."  As  Madison  outlined
it, the President  (whether a single person or a plurality)  was to have three
powers:

[the]  power  to  carry into  effect  the  national  laws;  to  appoint to
offices  in  cases  not otherwise  provided  for, and  to  execute such
other powers  not Legislative  norJudiciary in  their nature  as may
from  time  to  time  be  delegated  by the national  Legislature. 261
Note  the last  of these  three  powers-the  power  to  execute  "such  other
powers  not Legislative  nor Judiciary  in  their nature  as  may from  time  to
time  be  delegated  by the national  Legislature."262  To  someone  who be-
lieves  that the Constitution  recognizes just  three powers,  executive,  legis-
lative, and judicial, what could  be powers  "not Legislative  norJudiciary  in
their  Nature"  be, such  that the  executive  would  not in  any  case  possess
them?  For if the  only  powers  are  powers  legislative, judicial,  and  execu-

259.  See  Hueston,  supra note  257,  at 779.
260.  1 Farrand,  supra  note  137,  at 21  (Madison,  May  29).
261.  3  Documentary  History  of the  Constitution  of the United  States  of America  38

(1900)  [hereinafter Documentary History].

262.  Id.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  64 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

tive,  then it follows  that a power  not legislative  and not judicial  is execu-
tive;  and presumably,2 63 the executive would have all powers  executive.2 64
This  power  to  exercise  powers  "not Legislative  and  not Judiciary"
suggests a limited  executive  power, which  Congress  may supplement  ac-
cording to itsjudgment.  The language  was proposed by Pinckney.2 65  It is
significant  if only  because  it suggests  the possibility  of a power  neither
legislative,  nor judicial,  nor executive.2 66  Certainly  it  would  have  been
easier  to say  that  Congress  may delegate  other "executive"  powers  if that
is  what  Pinckney  meant  by  "not Legislative  nor Judiciary."  Instead,  the
power  of which  Madison  is  speaking  suggests  a power  that  we,  and  the
nineteenth  century  theorists,  might  call  administrative.

Support for this reading of this obscure  clause derives first from what
may have  been its original source-Jefferson's  proposal  in the early 1780s
for the Virginia constitution.  There Jefferson argued for a Governor who
was to be granted  those powers  "which are necessary  to execute laws  (and
administer the government)  and which are not in their nature  either leg-
islative  or  judiciary,"  their  precise  nature  being  "left  to  reason."267
Clearly  in  this  reference,  Jefferson  evinces  an  understanding  of  the  di-
verse  types  of  power-  executive  and  administrative-that  can  be  pos-
sessed by the  executive.  This understanding  is further supported  by the
debate  in the Convention  following Madison's  proposal.  Immediately  af-
ter Madison  made  this  proposal,  Pinckney  rose  to suggest  that  the  third
clause  be  struck, not because  (as modem  constitutionalists  would think)
there  is  no  such thing  as  a power  simultaneously  not legislative  not judi-
cial  and  not  executive,  but  because,  in  his  words  (as  reported  by
Madison):  "they were  unnecessary,  the object of them  being included  in
the  'power  to  carry  into  effect  the national  laws.'"268  The President  did
not  need a  special  power  to  execute  the  powers  not legislative  and  not
judicial,  since  this power was  implied by the  power to  "carry  into  effect"
the nation's  laws.

In both Randolph's  and Madison's view, the President had  the power
to execute  the laws,  as  well as  an implied power  to define  how it was that
the  laws  would  be  "carried  into  effect."  But what  was  the scope  of this
implied  power?  Members  of the  convention  were  quick to  express  their
own concern  about questions  of scope.  By the  time  the convention com-
pleted  the draft of these  resolutions,  at least two  members  had  reconsid-

263.  We can say  only "presumably" because  there  was no clear vesting  clause yet,  so it

is  conceivable  these  three would  have been  exclusive.

264.  See also  Thach, supra note  78, at 117 n.26  (discussing Pinckney's  move to strike
out last clause  as the power it granted was  included  in the  general  power to execute  laws).

265.  See  3  Documentary  History,  supra note  261,  at 38.
266.  This  language  also  suggests  that  the  implied  power  would  be  defined  by

Congress,  but this  point we  discuss  below.  See  infra  text accompanying  notes  279-282.

267.  See Wood,  supra  note 46,  at 435; Jefferson's  Proposed  Revision  of the Virginia
Constitution,  in 6  The  Papers  of Thomas Jefferson  278,  299  & 307  nn.34,  36  (Julian  P.
Boyd  ed.,  1952).

268.  3 Documentary  History,  supra note  261,  at 38.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  65 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 94:1

ered  the  extent  of the  grant  of  this  "power."  On July  20,  1787,  Dr.
McClurg of Virginia  asked  the convention

whether  it would  not be  necessary,  before  a  Committee  for  de-
tailing  the  Constitution  should  be  appointed,  to  determine  on
the means  by which the Executive is  to carry the  laws into effect,
and to resist combinations  [against]  them.  Is  he  to  have  a  mili-
tary force  for the purpose,  or to have  the command  of the  Mili-
tia,  the  only existing  force  that can  be  applied  to  that  use?  As
the Resolutions  now Stand the Committee will have  no determi-
nate  directions  on  this  great point.2 69

James Wilson agreed that something more should be specified,  and Rufus
King assured the convention  that the  Committee on Detail would address
the  matter.270  Just about  a  week  later,  the  Committee  of the Whole  fi-
nally approved  the "resolution respecting the  national  executive,"27'  and
on July  26,  1787,  the  proceedings  of the Committee  of the Whole  were
sent to  the Committee  on Detail.

The document that emerged from  that Committee reveals  the extent
to  which  the  drafters  had  addressed  McClurg's  question.  Two  critical
changes  had  been  made.  First, as  the  Committee  on Detail  returned  the
plan,  the  language  at  issue-the  power  "to  carry  into  execution"-was
removed  from the  President's  list of powers.  Therefore  (under the  rea-
soning  of Pinckney)  he  no  longer  had  an  implied  power  to  say  how  to
carry  into execution  the laws.  Instead, the President now had  the duty to
"take  Care  that  the  laws  be  faithfully  executed."  Second,  at  the  same
time, Article  I gave  Congress  a power that  closely tracked  the power  the
President  had  lost.27 2  It  was  now  Congress  that  had  the  power,  in  the
Necessary and Proper Clause, "[t]o make all Laws which shall be necessary
and  proper  for  carrying  into  Execution  the  foregoing  Powers,  and  all
other  Powers  vested  by  this  Constitution  in  the  Government  of  the
United  States,  or in  any Department  or  Officer  thereof."273

After  the  Committee  on  Detail was  finished,  then,  the  Constitution
granted  Congress  the  power  to  define  just  how  these  powers,  which,
Pinckney  argued,2 74  included  powers  that we  would  call  administrative,
were  to  be  executed.  And  the  Constitution  instructed  the  President  to
take  care  that he  follow  Congress'  instructions.  In  this way  the conven-
tion  chose  between  a relatively  broad  grant  of executive  power  to  the
President  to  select  the  means  of executing  federal  law,  and  a relatively

269.  Id. at 389-90.
270.  See  id.  at 390.
271.  2  Farrand,  supra note  137,  at 116  (Journal, July 26).  The  committee  resolved,
"[t]hat  a  national  Executive  be  instituted  . . .with  power  to  carry  into  execution  the
national  Laws  [and]  to appoint  to Offices in cases  not otherwise  provided  for."  Id.

272.  Saikrishna Prakash  has  carefully  traced  the lineage  of the  Necessary  and  Proper
Clause  in Prakash,  supra note  19,  at 1009  n.123.  As  he has  pointed  out to us,  the  clause
appears  first in  Pinckney's  plan.  See 3  Farrand, supra note  137, at 598-99.

273.  U.S.  Const. art.  I,  § 8,  cl. 18.
274.  See  supra  text accompanying  notes 261-268.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  66 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

narrow  imposition  of  duty-simply  to  follow  and  to  execute  the  laws
Congress  enacts.

That  the  Necessary  and Proper  Clause  was to  become  the  fount for
power to define  the  means by which  the government's  powers  are carried
into effect is plain  notjust from this bit of history, but even more emphat-
ically, from the  text of the  clause itself. The  clause, as  a whole, empowers
Congress:

(1)  To  make  all laws  that  shall  be  necessary  and  proper for carrying
into Execution the foregoing Powers  [Congress'  powers];
(2)  To  make  all laws  that  shall  be  necessary  and  proper for carrying
into Execution all other Powers vested  by  this  Constitution  in  the  Gov-
ernment  of  the  United  States,  or  in  any  Department  or  Officer
thereof 2 75

Chief Justice  Marshall,  in  McCulloch v.  Mayland,2 76  of course  made  fa-
mous  the  first half  of this  crucial  clause-the  vertical  dimension  to  the
Necessary  and  Proper  Clause-allowing  Congress  to  determine  the  im-
plied  powers  necessary  to  give  effect  to  its enumerated  powers. 277

But for  our  purposes, what  is  far more  crucial  is  the  second half of
the  clause-the  horizontal  dimension  to  the  Necessary  and  Proper
Clause. 278  In  as  clear  a  textual  commitment  as  possible,  it is  Congress
that is granted the power to determine  the means for specifying  how pow-
ers-and  again,  all powers-in the  federal  government  are  to  be  exer-
cised. 279  And a  dictum of ChiefJustice  Burger notwithstanding,280  if the
clause  extends the enumerated powers  of Congress, by suggesting  a scope
for  implied  powers,  it  also  vests  the judgment  about  the  extent  of any
implied  power  anywhere  in  the  government in  Congress  alone.2 8 '

275.  See U.S.  Const. art.  I,  § 8,  c.  18.
276.  17 U.S.  (4 Wheat.)  316  (1819).
277.  See  id. at 415.
278.  For  the  most  important  presentation  of  this  argument,  see  William  W.  Van
Alstyne,  The Role  of Congress  in Determining  Incidental  Powers  of the  President and of
the Federal  Courts:  A  Comment  on  the Horizontal Effect  of the Sweeping  Clause,  Law  &
Contemp.  Probs.,  Spring  1976,  at 102,  111;  see  also  Lawson  & Granger,  supra  note  178.
Lawson  and  Granger  argue  persuasively  that  the  framers  imagined  the  Necessary  and
Proper Clause  to be a real  constraint on congressional  power.  While we  do not agree that
the  clause  is a limitation  on Congress'  power  (rather  than a grant of power),  we  do agree
that  the  constraints  of "propriety"  are  real  constraints  on  Congress.

279.  Cf. Hart, supra  note  73,  at 202  (positing  that  although  not requiring  statutory
authorization  for every  presidential  act, Necessary  and Proper  Clause  makes  it  clear  that
the President cannot legislate).

280.  See United States v. Nixon,  418 U.S.  683, 705  n.16  (1974)  (asserting that absence
of privileged  communications  provision  in Article  II does not resolve  issue of existence  of
the  privilege).

281.  Van  Alstyne  summarizes  the  same  point:
Neither  the  executive  nor  the judiciary  possesses  any  powers  not  essential  (as
to  the
distinct  from  those  that  may  be  merely  helpful  or  appropriate) 
performance  of  its  enumerated  duties  as  an  original  matter-and  each  can
exercise  a  wider  scope  of incidental  power  if, but only  if,  Congress  itself  has
determined  such  powers  to be  necessary  and proper.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  67 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 94:1

Through  the Necessary and Proper  Clause,  then,  it is  Congress  that
is  given  the power  to  define  the  means to  carry  into  effect  any power  of
the federal  government.  The  only limit on this power is the requirement
that  Congress  act  through  laws and  that  those  laws  be  "necessary  and
proper."  Subject to those constraints,  and linked to the Take  Care Clause
as  sketched  above,  we  suggest  that  it is  Congress  that  is  vested  with  the
power  to determine  how to structure  the  administration  and  how it is to
function.  In  at least this respect,  the domain  of implied  executive  power
is  Congress',  not the President's. 28 2

It is  time  to conclude.  The  history of the  Take Care  Clause,  and the
text of the  Necessary  and  Proper  Clause,  further  support  the  claim  that
the framers  viewed executive  power less  uniformly than  the modem  uni-
tarians  now view it.  This section has shown  that the framers  toyed with  a
clause  that appears to imagine  Congress  delegating something other than
executive power;  that they at first seemed  to decide  in favor of a structure

Van  Alstyne,  supra  note  278, at  111.  Van Alstyne  also  makes  the  obvious  point that  the
current  understanding  of neither  the  President  nor  the Judiciary  is  consistent  with  this
original  understanding.  As  he says:

The  most  obvious  current  illustration  of an  implied  executive  power  is  that  of
'executive  privilege.'  Presidents  have  taken  the  view  that just  as  Congress  may
make provision  for all  things it not unreasonably deems  necessary  and proper  in
aid of its  own  enumerated  powers  granted in article  I of the  Constitution,  so  also
may the  President  in aid  of the  enumerated  executive  powers  granted  in article
II ....

It  is  not  at  all  difficult  to  find  similar  examples  of  incidental  or  implied
powers  in  the judiciary.  Here,  too,  a claim  of coequal  authority to initiate  rules
conducive to  thejudiciary's express  powers has  sometimes  been made  .... The
'supervisory'  authority  of the  Supreme  Court is a familiar  example.  A  different,
very  recent  illustration  is  found  in  Bivens  v. Six  Unknown Named Agents,  which
sustained  a  claim  for  money  damages  for  a fourth  amendment  violation  even
though  Congress  made  no  provision  for that kind  of remedy.

Id.  at  107-10.  But whether  the  original  understanding  should  control  is a  question Van
Alstyne  does  not address.  That  question is  the subject  of Part III  below.

Finally,  of course  the judgment  is  not made  by  Congress  alone-Congress  exercises
necessary  and  proper  power  only  through  laws,  and  laws  must  be  presented  to  the
President.

282.  Tucker makes  a similar  point:

legislative  powers,  and  not  executive,  because 

Again, we  think it is clear  that the incidental powers  which  may be  necessary
and proper to  carry into effect the powers  vested in the Executive  Department by
the  Constitution  are 
the
seventeenth  [sic]  clause  of the  eighth section  of the first article  gives  to  Congress
the  power-the legislative  power-to  supply the  means necessary  and  proper for
carrying  into  execution the  powers vested  in the Executive  Department.  It would
seem  indeed that while the  express powers vested  in the President  are not in any
degree  within  the  control of the legislative  power,  yet where an  executive  power
needs  co-efficient  means  for  carrying  it  into  execution,  those  means  are  not
executive  powers  at  all,  but  are  to  be  supplied  by  the  legislative  powers  of
Congress.

Tucker,  supra note  151,  at 694;  see  also  Van Alstyne,  supra note  278,  at 115-16  (arguing
that  Myers  has been  an  embarrassment  to the  Court,  and  the  Court has  therefore  since
defined  some administrative  agencies  as  "legislative"  and  "judicial").

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  68 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

that  gave  the  President  a  broad  claim  for implied  power  to  "carry  into
execution"  the  laws  of the  Nation, which power  must include  something
like  what we  would  today  conceive  of as  administrative  power;  and  that
this  broad  implied  power  was  then  eliminated,  by granting  to  Congress
the  power  to  specify  the  means  by which  laws were  to  be  executed,  and
leaving  to  the President  the  duty  merely  to  take  care  that  those  means
were  followed.  All  these  are  clues  suggesting  that the framers  conceived
of the  type  of power, and  the place  it should reside, in a far more flexible
and  nuanced  way  than  modem  unitarians  suggest.

In  our understanding  then, the  Take  Care  Clause  (as  originally un-
derstood)  obliges  the  President  to  follow  the  full  range  of  laws  that
Congress  enacts,  both  (a)  laws  regulating  conduct  outside  the  executive
branch,  and  (b)  laws  regulating execution  by regulating  conduct within
the  executive  branch.  The  modem  unitarian's  understanding  is  that
"laws"  of type  (b)  are  inherently suspect-that  if the President  has a duty
to "take Care," he must have  a power to say how he will take care.  But this
is  a simple  non  sequitur.  One  could  have  a  duty to  pay income  taxes;  it
does  not follow that one would  have  the  power to  say how he  or she will
pay income  taxes  (for example, when,  in what form, whether  full or par-
tial).  The  choice over  who gets to specify the  how of federal  execution was
made  by the framers  when  they drafted  the Necessary and Proper Clause.
This  does  not mean  that every law regulating  execution  is  constitutional,
any  more  than  it  means  that  every  law  regulating  conduct  is  constitu-
tional.  In both  cases,  Congress  could  breach  a constitutional  limit.  The
difference  between  our  position  and  the  modem  unitarian's  is  that  we
believe  that a wider range  of values  inform  the judgment whether  a par-
ticular  law  regulating  execution  is  necessary  and  proper,  and  that  this
wider range of values was manifested  by the types  of executive and admin-
istrative  structures  erected  by the  early Congresses.

We  can  sharpen  the  point even  further.  As Sai Prakash  has  argued,
the framers  and  the early Congresses  believed  that state  officers  could  be
empowered  to  execute  federal  law.28 3  More  importantly,  they  believed
that "[a ]lthough the federal  government can utilize  state officers,  the  fed-
eral  government  may  not interfere  with  the  personnel  practices  of state
agencies." 28 4  Thus, the framers imagined  that the execution  of some fed-
eral law  could  be vested in  officers  subject  neither  to the  removal  power
nor  the  directory  power  of the  President,  an  exception  to  the  ordinary
rule  that the  President  superintends  the  execution  of all federal  law.  In
our view,  such  statutes  were  not  necessarily  unconstitutional  under  the
original  understanding: 
so  long  as  the  vesting  did  not  remove  the
President's  control over enumerated executive  powers,  they could be nec-
essary  and  proper.  Under  the  modem  unitarian's  view,  such  statutes
must  be  considered  unconstitutional,  unless  one  imagines  that  the

283.  See  Prakash,  supra note  144,  at 1990-2007.
284.  Id. at 2000.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  69 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

President has the power to divest state  officers  of powers granted  them by
Congress  if such officers disobeyed  the President's  direction.  No  one has
suggested  the President  has such power,  and we  know  of no example  of
any President purporting  to  exercise  it.

E.  The  Original Executive Power:  Puzzles Revisited

The modem unitarian  imagines  one category  of executive  functions.
It says  that  the President  must have  plenary  power  to  direct and  control
the administration  of the laws.  The nineteenth  century view imagines two
categories  of executive  functions-one  executive,  one  administrative-
only one  of which  the  President has  a constitutional  right  to  direct and
control.  If we  had  to  choose  between  these  two  models,  which  makes
more  sense  of the historical  data?  Which  better  solves  the  three  puzzles
of the early period?

1.  Puzzle  1:  Prosecution. - As  illustrated  above,  modem  unitarians
cannot  easily  explain  the  actual  practice  of  prosecution  at  the  found-
ing.28 5  In  particular,  they  cannot  explain  how,  in  some  cases,  effective
control  over  prosecution  was  taken  away  from  the  President.  Can  the
nineteenth  century  conception  explain  the  original  practice  any  more
completely?

The  history is fully  consistent with  the  nineteenth  century  theorists'
conception.  Prosecution  is  not  among  the list  of enumerated  executive
powers;  indeed,  at  the  framing  the-e  was  a  long  history  of nongovern-
mental  prosecution, 28 6  and  this  history would  have  made  it  odd  to  con-
ceive  of the  powers  as  exclusively  the government's  at all.  According  to
the nineteenth  century  conception,  prosecution  is  a  power incidental  to
Congress',  and Congress  may vest such authority  wherever  "proper."

Most  of the  time,  it  may  be  proper  to  vest  it  with  the  executive-

though whether it is  proper turns on a range of factors  that are particular
to the type of prosecution  at hand.  For example, in conditions  like  those
of the founding,  it made  little  sense  to vest  in  the  President  centralized
control over  district attorneys, given their distance from  the center, and it
would  be  fully  understandable  that  they would  function  relatively  inde-
pendently  of the  President.  Under other conditions,  it may be  constitu-
tionally  required  that  Congress  vest  control  over  prosecution  in  the
executive.  But  even  in  these  conditions  sometimes  (say,  prosecution  of
high-level  executive  officials),  it  may  be  proper  to  vest  such  power  in
someone  other  than  the  President-or  at least, it is  within  the  power  of
Congress  to decide so.  The  decision whether or not to vest control in the
President turns  on  its  propriety,  and  under  the  nineteenth  century  pic-
ture of the executive  branch,  the factors that determine  whether a vesting
is  proper are  more  than  the  single  factor of unitariness.

285.  See  supra Part II.A.
286.  See  supra text accompanying  notes  60-83.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  70 1994

1994]

THE PRESDENT AND  TIE ADMINISTRATION

2.  Puzzle 2:  Departments. -

It is  also  relatively  easy  to see  how  the
nineteenth  century model  can  account for the multiplicity in  the organi-
zational  forms  of executive  departments.  Where  the power  exercised  by
the department relates  to an executive  power  (derived from Article II)-
foreign  affairs, war, and navy-the early Congresses  properly left much of
the  determination  of  the  department's  structure  and  direction  to  the
President. 28 7  Where  the power exercised by the department derives  from
an  administrative  power  (stemming  from  Article  I)-treasury  and  post
office-the early Congresses  properly took pains  to control  these  depart-
ments,  treating  them  as  the creation  of Congress,  rather  than the  crea-
tion  of the Constitution.2 88

In  this  diversity,  then,  the  early  Congresses  reveal  again  the  wide
range  of values  that affect whether a particular  structure  should  be  con-
sidered proper.  In answering the question, is this a proper structure, they
considered  not only the value  of unitariness,  but also  the  values  of disin-
terestedness,  efficiency,  accountability,  and  others.2 8 9  Applying  the nine-
teenth  century  vision  as  mechanically  as  possible  to  some  modern
developments,2 90  we think  that Congress  could not constitutionally  make
the Department of Defense  into an  independent agency;  but it could al-
low at least a degree  of independence  for such modem institutions  as the
National  Labor  Relations  Board  and  the  Federal  Communications
Commission.

Finally,  the  nineteenth  century  view  can  explain  a  relatively  minor
but  puzzling  inconsistency  in  denomination.  For both  the  Constitution
and its framers  seem  to conceive  of at least two  types  of "departments"-
executive  and  not.  Indeed,  when  first  establishing  the  departments,
Congress spoke of the Executive  Departments of War and Foreign Affairs,

287.  Indeed, as  Susan Bloch argues, the first Congress  showed  some fear in getting at

all  close  to regulating  these  departments.

In  establishing the  two  "great executive  departments"  ...  Congress was  notably
concerned  with  assuring  presidential  control  and  limiting  congressional
interference  with presidential  powers.  There was  a threshold  concern  that mere
congressional  definition and establishment of executive  departments  was  an undue
intrusion  on  presidential  powers.  Senator  William  Maclay  suggested,  for
example, 
to  create  whatever
administrative  institutions  he  desired .... 
Although  Congress  rejected  this
proposal,  its  sensitivity  to  the  separation  of powers  issue  is  striking.  As  will  be
shown,  Congress  made  no  effort  to  dictate  the  internal  structure  of  these
departments and explicitly  provided that the  President had the power to appoint
these  officers,  control  their  actions,  and remove  them at his will.

that  the  President  should  have  discretion 

Bloch,  supra  note  74, at 572-73.

288.  See  supra  text accompanying  notes  123-125,  132-138.
289.  One  particularly  clear value  animating the  early structure was  the desire  to keep
the  "purse" separate  from the  "sword," as  the Treasury,  the  Post Office,  and the  Bank of
the  United  States-the  three  relatively  independent  original  structures-all  involved
control  over financial  affairs.  See  supra text accompanying  notes  121-143.

290.  We  question  this  approach  to interpretation  below,  see infra  Part IIIA.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  71 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

but only  of the "department"  of Treasury.29 '  The  departments  denomi-
nated  executive  were  those  relating  to  the  President's  Article  II  powers;
those  not so  designated were  what we  would  now  call  administrative  de-
partments,  created  by  Congress  and  if Congress  chooses,  entitled  to  a
degree  of protection  from  ongoing  presidential  control.

3.  Puzzle 3:  The  Opinions Clause. - Finally,  the  nineteenth  century
conception  makes perfect sense of the Opinions  Clause, under either the
conservative  or radical  reading suggested  above. 292  Under  the  conserva-
tive  reading,  against a background  of congressional  power  over adminis-
trative  structures,  the  Opinions  Clause  has  a  clear  unifying  purpose.
Against this background,  it sets a minimum below which Congress  cannot
step-requiring  at  least  that  the  President  have  the  power  to  discover
what is  happening  within  departments. 29 3  So understood,  the  Opinions
Clause  serves  as  a  requirement  of minimal  unitariness.

The  clause  also  has a purpose  under the  radical  reading.  In a world
where  power  exists  only when  power  is  enumerated-as  we  suggest  was
the framers'  world-it made sense for the framers  to enumerate  the  con-
trol  the  President  would  have  over  departments  that were  executive,  to
protect  against  attempts  by Congress  to  invade  the  President's  domain.
Rather  than  relying  on  relatively  weak  "inherent  authority"  claims,  the
Constitution  so  understood  gives  the  President  a  constitutional  right  to
access  over  information  related  to  his  constitutional  functions.  So,  for
example,  if he  believed  he  needed  to  remove  the  principal  officer  of an
executive  department,  he  could  at least  have  access  to  the  information
that formed  the basis  of hisjudgment, and  thereby protect himself politi-
cally from  the  consequences  of such a  dramatic  act.  So  understood,  the
clause  serves  as  a  buttress  to  support  the  executive's  separated  powers.

Under  either  reading,  the  Opinions  Clause  would  have  a  function
distinct from the  redundancy  it plays  in  the  modem  unitarian's  concep-
tion.  And so here again,  a more  discriminating model of the  executive-
distinguishing  executive  from administrative  functions-helps  elucidate
the  framers'  actual  design.

F.  The Language of the  Original Executive

Modem  constitutionalists  think  of just one  thing when  reading  the
Vesting  Clause  of Article  II:  executive  power.  Nineteenth  century  consti-
tutionalists  thought of two:  executive  and  (what we  are  calling)  adminis-
trative.  Here, as  elsewhere,  believing is  seeing.  Because  modem  readers
believe  that there is just this single thing  (the executive),  they do not see
the  implications  that flow  from  a  distinction  between  executive  and  ad-
ministrative.  Because  nineteenth  century  constitutionalists  see  executive

291.  Note  again  the  inconsistency with  the  salary bill.  See  supra note  123.
292.  See supra  Part II.C.
293.  See, e.g.,  Strauss, supra  note 7,  at 647  (President  always  can  exercise  a minimal

control  through  Opinions  Clause).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  72 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

and  administrative  power,  they  argue  that Article  II  is  quite  clear  about
the locus of executive power  (in a President)  and  that Article  II  is not so
clear about the locus  of administrative  power.  And under  this view-fu-
eled by the progressive  enthusiasm for administrative  expertise-because
the framers  believed  that  the Constitution was  not so  clear  about the lo-
cus  of such  power,  the  contours  of administrative  power  would  be  left
largely to Congress.  It would follow that for the framers, any claim by the
executive  of inherent  authority  to  direct  the administration  is  quite  fan-
tastic-for the framers were  quite clear  (as the nineteenth century  consti-
tutionalist views  the world)  that Congress  retained  the power  to regulate
presidential  control  over  administrative  officials.294

But as  we  suggested  at the start, the view of the  nineteenth  century
constitutional  theorists  is  misleading  in  one  important  respect,  and it is
time  now  to  distance  our  ultimate  view  about  the  framers'  design  from
the filter  of the nineteenth  century view.  The  modem  unitarian  argues
that  there  is  one  clear  category  of executive  power.  To  the  extent  that
the nineteenth  century  constitutional  theorists  argued  that there  is  more
than one type  of executive  function,  that argument  seems  certainly  cor-
rect.  But  to  the  extent  that the  nineteenth  century  constitutional  theo-
rists argued  that  rather  than  one,  there  were just two  clear  categories  of
executive  power-executive  and  administrative-the  argument  is  mis-
leading.  While  there  is  good  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  framers
thought the  structure  of executive  power far more complex than  the sin-
gle  dimension  offered  by  the  modem  unitarians,  there  is  no  good  evi-
dence  to  suggest  that  the  framers  thought  the  structure  of  executive
power was as simple  as  the nineteenth  century constitutional  theorists be-
lieved.  The mistake, that is, is notjust in seeing one  category where there
were  two; the mistake is also in seeing clear categories and defining judgments
when  the framers  offered  no  such vision.295

294.  See  supra  text accompanying  notes  184-186.
295.  Woodrow Wilson points  to  another quite  colorful  presuppositional difference  in

criticizing the  framers'  theory  of checks  and balances.  As  Wilson  wrote:

The government  of the  United  States  was  constructed  upon  the Whig  theory  of
political dynamics,  which was a sort of unconscious  copy  of the Newtonian  theory
In  our  own  day,  whenever  we  discuss  the  structure  or
of  the  universe. 
development  of anything,  whether  in  nature  or  in  society,  we  consciously  or
unconsciously  follow Mr. Darwin; but before  Mr. Darwin,  they followed Newton.
Some  single  law, like  the  law  of gravitation,  swung  each  system  of thought  and
gave  it is principle  of unity.  Every sun, every planet, every free body  in the spaces
of the  heavens, the world itself, is kept in its place  and reined to  its  course by  the
attraction of bodies  that swing with  equal order and precision about it, themselves
governed by  the nice poise  and balance  of forces which  give the whole  system  of
the  universe  its symmetry  and  perfect adjustment.

The trouble with the theory is that government is not a machine, but a living
thing.  It falls,  not under  the  theory  of the  universe,  but under  the  theory  of
organic  life.  It  is  accountable  to  Darwin,  not to  Newton.  It is  modified  by  its
environment,  necessitated  by  its  tasks,  shaped  to  its  functions  by  the  sheer
pressure  of life....  This  is  not theory, but fact,  and  displaces  its  force  as  fact,

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  73 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

Rather  than  constitutionalizing  everything,  from  the  top  level  gov-
ernmental  functions  down  through  the bottom  level  administrative  de-
tails,  the framers thought it enough to draw a few clear lines and leave  the
balance  to  Congress. 29 6  They  thought it  enough  not only because  they
thought flexibility  a virtue,  but also  because  they  had no  clear models  of
separation  to follow.  Their  (from our perspective)  confusion,  their  mix-
ing of functions  at the administrative  level,  their failure  to remark what to
our  eyes appears  plainly wrong-headed  conflations-all  are  evidence  that
the  lines  between  the  branches  had  not yet  been  drawn,  either  in  the
framers'  heads, or in  the text of their document.  The framers  were politi-
cians-pragmatic  even  if principled-and  their first  task was  rescuing  a
revolution  from disaster.  They did not have  a sufficiently developed  con-
ception  of the  distribution  of national  powers  to  allow for clear  and  au-
thoritative  legal judgments  about  who  would  direct  what  we  now  call
administration.  On these  points,  their understanding  was  far murkier.
One example makes  clear the  framers'  (from a modem  perspective)
confusion  and mixture  of functions  at the administrative  level.  In March
1792,  Congress  enacted  the  "Invalid  Pensions  Act,"2 97  designed  to  pro-
vide  relief  to  veterans  from  the  Revolutionary  War.  The  details  of this
statute  are  quite  telling for  one  who  pictures  the framers  either  as  the
modem  unitarians  do  or  as  the  nineteenth  century  constitutional  theo-
rists did.298  Congress  did not establish a commission  or agency to admin-
ister  this  program.  Indeed,  given  the  constraints  of geography,  and  the
absence  of any substantial federal presence throughout  the nation, such a
bureaucracy  would have been  exceptionally expensive.2 99  Instead, circuit
courts  were  to  receive  and  process  applications,  and  submit  to  the
Secretary  of War  a list of pensioners,  which  the  Secretary  of War  could
change  if he suspected  "imposition or mistake."3 00  In a wholly pragmatic
sense,  this  division  of  labor  made  perfect  sense-circuit  courts  could

whatever  theories  may  be  thrown  across  its  track.  Living  political  constitutions
must be Darwin  in structure  and practice.

Wilson,  supra note  184, at 54-57.

296.  See  Casper,  supra  note  115,  at  260-61  (asserting  that  no  clear  separation  of
powers  model  emerged  from  the  Constitutional  Convention);  Strauss,  supra  note  7,  at
597-99,  639  (with  regard  to  departments,  "a determination  was  made  to  eschew  detailed
prescription  as  a  means  of  underscoring  presidential  responsibility  and  preserving
congressional  flexibility").

297.  Act  of Mar.  23,  1792,  ch.  11,  1 Stat.  243.
298.  See  generally Maeva  Marcus,  Separation of Powers in  the Early National  Period,
30  Win.  & Mary  L.  Rev.  269,  272-73  (1989)  (describing judicial  responses  to  duties  of
circuit  courts  under  Invalid  Pensions  Act  as  ad  hoc  and  individual);  Maeva  Marcus  &
Robert  Teir,  Hayburn's Case.  A  Misinterpretation  of Precedent,  1988  Wis.  L.  Rev.  527,
527-41  (describing  decisions  concerning Invalid Pensioners Act as  varied and  pragmatic).
299.  Compare  Amar's  use  of the  difficulty  of travel  during  the  formative  years  as  a
justification  for  the  original jurisdiction  clause.  See  Amar,  Original Jurisdiction,  supra
note  176,  at 476-78.

300.  See  Act  of Mar.  23,  1792  § 4,  1 Stat.  at 244;  see  also  Bloch,  supra  note  74,  at

590-91.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  74 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

most efficiently  find the facts  about whether an  allegedly injured veteran
was in fact injured,  and the Secretary  of War could most efficiently  deter-
mine  whether the  claimant was in  fact a veteran.

To modem  separation  of powers  sensibilities,  the statute  is a consti-
tutional  howler.  Under  the  statute,  not  only  were  Article  III  courts
tethered with "administrative"  tasks,  but their work was subject  to the  re-
view of the secretary  of an executive  department.  So thought at least five
of the  six  Supreme  Court justices,  who  expressed  their concerns-their
advisory  opinions,  that  is-to  President  Washington  in  a  collection  of
letters.3 01

But  when  did  the  Invalid  Pensions  Act  become  a  constitutional
howler?  In  an  age  when  the  Court  has  invalidated  twenty-five  acts  of
Congress in the past twenty years,3 02  we are quick to accept the judgment
that  Congress  has  gone  wrong  constitutionally.  But  this  is  the  second
Congress,  not the one hundred and second.  While five of the six justices
may have  thought  the statute  unconstitutional,  at least forty  of the sixty
voting  members  of the  House  did  not.3 03  Moreover,  nowhere  in  the  de-
bate in  Congress is  there a suggestion  of this constitutional  concern.  Nor
did  President Washington  indicate  that there  was  anything  problematic
about the statute  as written.

What  the  Invalid  Pensions  Act  reveals,  we  think,  is  not  a  Congress
blind  to  the  constraints  of  the  Constitution,  but  a  Congress  legislating
before the contours  of what is  constitutional  had been  carved  out.  What
the  statute shows,  with  its mix  of administrative  courts  and  executive  re-
view,  is  a pragmatic  approach  to  the  problems  of executive  administra-
tion.  What unified this peculiar structure was a multiplicity  of checks and
balances,  not  a  singularity  of  organizational  design.30 4  The  second
Congress  did  not see  its  Act  as  a  constitutional  howler,  because  as  the
Constitution  was  framed,  it was  not  a constitutional  howler.  Why  it be-
came  so, and what influences  that  change  reveals,  are  important and in-
teresting  questions,  but  questions  unrelated  to  the  question  framed  by
the  familiar version  of originalist  methodology.

The conventional  character  of the  Invalid  Pensions  Act is  even  fur-
ther  confirmed  when  we  compare  it with  other  court structures  existing
at the time.  Courts at the founding were  administrators  in just the sense

301.  The  advisory  opinions  are  collected  in  1 American  State  Papers,  Miscellaneous

49-53  (1834).  The existence  of the letters  at all is an intriguing fact.

302.  We  draw this  statistic from  a report by the  Congressional  Research  Service.  See
Cong. Res.  Serv.,  The  Constitution  of the  United  States:  Analysis  and Interpretation,  S.
Doc.  No.  16,  99th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.  1885-1912  (1987  & Supp.  1988).  It  is of  course  a
radically  conservative  estimate.  See  INS v.  Chadha,  462  U.S.  919,  967  (1983)  (White, J.,
dissenting)  (asserting  that  decision  "sounds  the  death  knell"  for  nearly  200  statutory
provisions);  Sunstein,  supra note  87, at 165  & n.11  (discussing effect  of Lujan on  "citizen
standing" statutes).  If one  counts  Lujan v. Defenders  of Wildlife,  112 S. Ct. 2130  (1992),
and  Chadha, the  number would  be  more like  400  acts of Congress  in  the  past 10  years.

303.  See  3 Annals of Cong. 803-04  (Gales  & Seaton  eds.,  1834).
304.  See the  description  of checks  and balances  in Wilson,  supra note  125,  at 12-13.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  75 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

we  think they cannot be any more;  they handled matters  that today would
be within  the executive  branch, not primarily because  of some principled
reason why such  matters  should be handled  by courts,  but more because
of the administrative  ease  in relying upon the existing court structures  to
administer  state programs.3 0 5

Nor were  modem  administrative/judiciary  borders  the only borders
that  the  framing  generation  crossed.  We  have  already  mentioned  the
lack of any  centralized control  of the prosecutorial  power in  the  original
republic.3 0 6  This decentralized  structure  led Jefferson,  when  attempting
to  stop  prosecutions  under  the  Alien  and  Sedition  Acts,  to  ask  his
Postmaster  General  to  instruct the  local  district  attorney  (the equivalent
of today's  U.S. Attorney)  to  cease  prosecution.  Obviously Jefferson  here
trades  on  more  than  mere  authority  when  he  requests  the  district
attorney  to stop prosecution,3 0 7  and we should take  this small  clue  about
the  nature  of executive  authority  as  a  reason  to  look  at  a  structure  of
authority without  our  modem  bureaucratic  categorical  divisions.

A fair picture  of the founding  generation,  then,  is  not  one of clear-
cut categories  or  sharply  articulated  boundaries  between  branches  cut-
ting from  the  top  to bottom.  It is  instead  a  picture  of a web  of interac-
tions,  many  political,  many  more  unbureaucratic,  that  through  the
mixture  of  influence  and  authority  yielded  a  government  that,  it  was
hoped, would work.5 08  Our structures,  our intuitions, our categories,  our
law-all  of these  are  ours,  the  product  of two  hundred  years  of theory
and practice.  The originalist  must work  to separate  this  intermediation
from  the picture  of the founders  he sketches.

Adding  these  final  twists  to  the  picture  we  outline  is  important,  if
only to  force  the  critical  point  that the  modem  unitarian  must face.  As
suggested  at  the start,  the  originalist  requires  either  a  clear  limit in  the
constitutional  text  or  a  clear  understanding  in  the  enacting  context

305.  For a description of the mixture  of functions  in colonial  practice,  see Goebel  &

Naughton,  supra note  85,  at 366-67.

306.  See  supra text accompanying  notes  58-83.
307.  See Letter from ThomasJefferson  to  Gideon  Granger, Esq.  (Mar. 9,  1814),  in 14

Lipscomb,  Writings  ofJefferson,  supra note  75,  at 111,  116-17.

308.  See  Casper, supra  note  115,  at  212-24;  Strauss, supra  note  7,  at 604.  As  Susan

Bloch  describes  it:

But while  history  cannot  provide  definitive  answers,  it offers  an  instructive
approach  to constitutional  interpretation.  The  framers  of the  Constitution  and
the  early  legislators  understood  they were  creatingm"constituting"-a  dynamic
organism.  They  created  a  unitary  Presidency,  but  did  not  mandate  complete
presidential  control  over  all administrative  offices  that  Congress  might  establish.
Their approach  to questions of control  was  neither rigid nor doctrinaire.  On  the
contrary,  it  was  remarkably  subtle  and  pragmatic.  The  simplified  model  of
separation  of powers  assumed  by  many  modem  discussants  misses  the  nuances
the framers  and early legislators  appreciated.

Bloch,  supra  note  74,  at 563.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  76 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

before  the  Constitution  may  stand  in  the way  of Congress'  will.3 0 9  What
this picture  of the  framers'  pragmatism  shows is first, that it is  hazardous
in  the  extreme  to  read  constitutional  text in  a  contextual  vacuum,  and
second,  that except for a narrow if important class  of textually  committed
executive powers,  no clear consensus  existed  at the framing as  to the fully
articulated  governmental  structure.  The  framers  gave  us  at  most  some
starting clues.  It  is fanciful  to suggest that this history is  enough to yield a
definitive  constitutional  commitment for a wide range  of issues involving
the  modem  executive  branch.  And when  used  to  resist  the  will  of the
democratic  branches,  it is  something much worse. 3 10

309.  See,  e.g.,  Harmelin  v. Michigan,  111  S. Ct.  2680,  2696-99  (1991)  (Scalia, J.)
(affirming  life  sentence  for  drug  offense  because  "Itihere  are  no  textual  or  historical
standards" to enable judges to determine whether  a particular penalty is disproportional);
supra notes  34,  55  and accompanying  text.

310.  On  the  founders'  vision  of  separation  of  powers,  consider  the  following

descriptions.  Bloch writes:

Nonetheless,  this  early  history,  used  judiciously,  can  guide  and  inform
modem  analysis.  In  particular,  the  experiences  in  establishing  the  principal
offices of government, including that of the  Attorney  General,  are important for
what  they  suggest  about  constitutional  interpretation.  The  drafters  of  the
Constitution established  the framework  of the government and created  the major
institutions  of  President,  Congress,  and  Supreme  Court.  But  they  left  the
implementing  details  to Congress.  They  anticipated  that  Congress would  create
departments  and  imposed  some  requirements  ...  but,  for  the  most  part,  the
specifics were left for Congress.  And the First Congress's exercise of that power  is
instructive.  In  particular,  we  can  learn  from  the  early  legislators'  approach
toward  the question of presidential  control  of the various  offices  they created,  an
approach  that was distinctively  functional and pragmatic.  Although  it is unlikely
that anyone in the  1790s anticipated precisely the  questions raised by modem-day
interbranch  disputes,  the  framers  and  early  legislators  were  sensitive  to  the
difficult  issues  of control  and approached  them  without rigid rules  or formulas,
an approach  from which we  can  profitably  learn.

Bloch,  supra note  74, at 635-36  (footnotes  omitted).  Casper  makes  a similar  point:
Forrest McDonald...  has concluded  from the  decisions  of the Convention  that
the  'doctrine  of the  separation  of powers  had clearly  been  abandoned  in  the
framing of the  Constitution.'  This judgment presupposes that a doctrine  existed
that could be abandoned.  Given  the state  of the  discussion  of the framers  in the
last quarter of the eighteenth  century and the  constitutions enacted  after 1776, a
'pure'  doctrine of separation of powers  can be no more than a political science  or
legal  construct  ...

No  consensus existed as  to the precise  institutional arrangements  that would
satisfy  the  requirements  of the  doctrine.  The  only  matter on which  agreement
existed  was  what  it  meant  not  to  have  separation  of powers:  it  meant  tyranny.
This  insight  is not to  be  belittled.  Madison  and  Sherman were  right when,  in
their  1789  proposals,  they  claimed  that  the  particular  distribution  of  powers
founded  in  the  Constitution  could  be  legitimately  seen  as  a  version  of  an
uncertain  doctrine.

Casper,  supra note  115,  at 224  (footnotes omitted).  And again,  Marcus:

Chief Justice John Jay...  indicated  what  everyone's  approach  should  be:
"[W]ise  and  virtuous  men,"  he  declared,  "have  thought  and  reasoned  very
differently  respecting  Government,  but  in  this  they  have  at  Length  very
that  its  Powers  should be  divided  into  three,  distinct,
unanimously  agreed  ... 

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  77 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

We  have  completed the final stage in  our effort to dislodge the mod-
em  conception  of the executive.  We understand  better what the framers
were  constitutionalizing  if we  distinguish  executive  from  administrative
functions, 3 1'  and view the framers  as constitutionalizing  only  the former;
we  understand still better if we  can see the  range of functions  the framers
were  pragmatically  adjusting,  rather  than  fixed  categories  of executive
and  administrative.  The  framers  spoke  less  categorically,  and  more
pragmatically;  they  gave  us  an  executive  at  once  more  flexible  and  less
universal  than  the  executive  perceived  by modem  unitarians.

G.  The  Tale of the Bank

So much  then about  the framers'  constitution,  and  the world within
which  they  authored  that  text.  There  is  no  question  that  along  many
dimensions,  the framers'  world has radically changed, and along with that
change,  so  too have  shifted conventional  views about  the presidency.  We
all now quite  firmly believe  that the President retains  a strong and inher-
ent  authority  to  direct  a wide  range  of executive  and  administrative  ac-
tions,  and  in  the second  half of  this Article,  we  address  the  question  of
whether  one  can  derive  that  authority  from  a faithful  interpretation  of
the Constitution.  But let us first complete  our description  of the  original
practice  of executive power.  One final  piece of evidence  helps reveal  the
boundaries  of  this  vision;  it  also  marks  the  first  successful  claim  by  an
executive  of a  power  more  expansive  than  what  we  claim  the  founders
understood  to  exist.  This  is  the  confrontation  between Jackson  and  the
Bank  of the United  States,  and Jackson's  insistence  that  his Secretary  of
the Treasury remove  funds from the Bank contrary  to the Secretary's  best
judgment.

We  should  be  clear about  the  purpose for which  we  offer  the story
that follows.  Our aim is not so  much to convince  about the truth or error
of Jackson's  conception  of the presidency.  It is  instead  to  show the first
and sharpest conflict between two fundamentally  different conceptions  of
the executive power.  For in the debate  that follows, we see the  end of the
presidency  as  we  believe  the  framers  saw  it,  and  the  birth  of the  presi-
dency  as  we  have  come  to  know it.

In brief, the story of the confrontation  is  this:  Jackson and  the  Bank
had  suffered  a long  and  unfriendly  relationship.  Jackson  had  opposed
the Bank on a number of grounds, both political  and constitutional.  The

independent  Departments ....  But how to constitute  and ballance  [sic]  them  in
such  a  Manner as  best to  guard  against Abuse  and  Fluctuation,  & preserve  the
constitution  from Encroachments,  are  Points  on  which  there  continues  to  be a
great Diversity  of opinions,  and on which  we  have  all  as yet  much  to learn."

Marcus,  supra note 298,  at 270  (quotingJohnJay's  Charge  to the GrandJury  of the Circuit
Court for the District of NewYork  (Apr. 12,  1790)  (JohnJay Papers, Columbia University))
(footnotes  omitted).

311.  On  the  distinction  between  executive  and  administrative  functions,  see  supra

text following  note  186.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  78 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

Bank too had opposedJackson,  perhaps  most importantly forJackson,  by
resisting his reelection  in part with  bank funds.3 12  Spurred by the Bank's
blatantly political  manipulation  of the  money supply3 13  in  an  attempt to
defeat his  reelection, Jackson,  upon  reelection,  ordered  the Secretary  of
the  Treasury  to  withdraw  funds  from  the  Bank.  The Secretary's  refusal
inaugurated  the executive's  first midnight  massacre,  as Jackson  fired Sec-
retary  after  Secretary  until  he  found  one  willing  to  obey  his  orders.3 14
Jackson  promoted  the  first  refusing  Secretary,  McLane,  to  Secretary  of
State.  A second,  Duane, judged  that he  could not in good  faith exercise
his  authority  to  remove  funds  from  the  bank; Jackson  summarily  fired
him.  Finally, Jackson appointed  Roger Taney  (later ChiefJustice  Taney),
who  carried  out the  President's  wish.3 15

The  statute challenged byJackson's  action plainly raises  the  problem
of unitariness  that we  are discussing, for it undertook to vest a discretion-
ary authority in  the  Secretary  of the  Treasury.  The  statute  required that
the Secretary  of the Treasury deposit all funds  of the United States in the
Bank  of the U.S.

in  places  which  the said bank  and branches  thereof may be  es-
tablished,  [and]  shall be made  in said bank or branches  thereof,
unless  the  Secretary  of the Treasury  shall at any  time  otherwise
order and  direct;  in  which  case,  the  Secretary  of the  Treasury
shall  immediately  lay before  Congress  ... 
For  the  modem  unitarian,  this  authority,  since  discretionary,  must
lie  ultimately within  the President's  supervision  and control.3 17  This was
Jackson's  understanding  as well.  Jackson  argued  that  the President  had
an inherent authority to  exercise the  discretion vested  in the  Secretary  of
the Treasury by statute, at least through  the removal  power;  through  his
threats and removals,  he, in .effect, exercised  that discretionary  power.318

the  reasons  .... 

316

312.  See,  e.g.,  Latmer, supra  note  143, at  165.
313.  The  story is  told by Buchanan  at 13  Cong. Deb. 440,  442-43  (1837)  (Expunging
Debate).  For other accounts  of the removal  crisis,  see Thomas  P. Govan,  Nicholas Biddle:
Nationalist  and  Public Banker,  1786-1844,  at  106-287  (1959);  Hart,  supra  note  100,  at
211-12;  Latner, supra  note 143,  at  164-92; 3  Robert V. Remini,  AndrewJackson  and the
Course  of American  Democracy,  1833-1845,  at 1  (1984);  Arthur M.  Schlesinger, Jr., The
Age  ofJackson  75-102  (1953).

314.  See  Clay's  description in  13  Cong.  Deb. 429,  431  (1837)  (Expunging Debate).
315.  See  Hart,  supra  note  100,  at  211-12.  Duane  recounts  his  story  in  William  J.
Duane,  Narrative  and  Correspondence  Concerning  the  Removal  of the  Deposites  and
Occurrences  Connected  Therewith  (Philadelphia  1838).  Taney  suffered  greatly  for  his
loyalty,  though  not  as  much  as  the  executioner  of  our  generation's  Saturday  Night
Massacre,  Robert  Bork.  See  Stanley I.  Kufler, The  Wars  of Watergate  406-14  (1990).

316.  Act  of Apr.  10,  1816,  ch.  44,  § 16,  3  Stat. 266,  274.
317.  There  is  an  internal  dispute  in  the  modem unitarian  camp  over  whether  the
President  may  order  the  Secretary  to  act  or  (what  is  not  the  same  thing)  inform  the
Secretary  that  while  the  decision  is for  him  (the  Secretary)  to  make,  the  President will
remove  him from office  if he acts contrary to the President's wishes.  See supra note 73 and
accompanying  text.

318.  See  Daniel Webster,  Speech  in  the  Senate  (May  7,  1834),  in 7  Writings  and
Speeches  of Webster, supra note  197, at 145-47  (Webster's  summary ofJackson's  claims).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  79 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

Jackson's  action-described by Clay as "Jackson's Thunderbolt" 3 1 9-
drew immediate  and intense sanction  by the Senate, which,  on March 28,
1834, passed  a  resolution  condemning  his  actions  as contrary  to  the law
and  the Constitution.3 20  The text of this  resolution  is instructive.  After
many drafts,  the  Senate resolved:  "That the President, in the late  execu-
tive  proceedings  in  relation  to  the  public  revenue,  has  assumed  upon
himself authority and  power not conferred  by the  constitution  and  laws,
but  in  derogation  of both."3 2'  Jackson's  action  had  spurred  passionate
denunciations  across  the nation, as  the  action of a monarch, wholly  with-
out the power of law and ominously foretelling the great power this presi-
dency could  display.

At first the debate was  not overJackson's  power  to fire the  Secretary
of the Treasury.  Calhoun  and Webster  both  (at least initially)  conceded
the President's  right  of removal,  secured  by the  Constitution,  at least  as
interpreted  by the Decision of 1789.322  Only later did their position  shift
to the view  that the Decision  of 1789  was  in error, and  that the  President
did  not have a  constitutionally  vested power  of removal.3 23  Instead,  the

Jackson  ground  his  argument  in  the  familiar  claim  that  "the executive  power"  plus  the
"take  Care"  duty  meant  the  President  must  have  inherent  authority  to  supervise  the
decisions  of all  subordinates.  See  id.

319.  See  13  Cong. Deb. 429,  431  (1837)  (Expunging Debate).
320.  See  10  Cong. Deb.  1187  (1834).
321.  Id.
322.  See,  e.g.,  John  C.  Calhoun,  Speech  in  the  Senate  (Jan.  13,  1834),  in  12  The
Papers  of John  C.  Calhoun  200,  215  (Clyde  N. Wilson  ed.,  1979)  [hereinafter  Papers  of
Calhoun]  ("I  cannot  doubt that  the  President  has, under  the  Constitution,  the  right  of
removal from office:  nor can  I  doubt that the  power of removal,  wherever it exists,  does,
from necessity, involve  the power of general  supervision  ...  .");  Daniel Webster, Speech in
the Senate  (May  7,  1834),  in 7 Writings  and  Speeches  of Webster, supra note  197,  at 105
("I  have  to say,  that I did not vote  for the resolution  on the  mere  ground of the  removal
....  Although  I disapprove  of the removal  altogether, yet the power of removal  does exist
in the  President ....  ").

323.  See John  C.  Calhoun,  Speech  in  the  Senate  (Feb.  20,  1835),  in  12  Papers  of
Calhoun,  supra  note 322, at 483, 484-85  (arguing power  of Congress  to  control  removal
flowed from Necessary and Proper Clause); Daniel Webster, Speech  in the Senate  (Feb.  16,
1835),  in 7 Writings  and Speeches  of Webster, supra note  197, at 185  ("I am  very willing to
say, that, in my deliberatejudgment,  the original  decision  [of 1789 and my own view of that
decision]  was wrong.  I  cannot but think that those  who  denied the  power in 1789  [of the
. .").  Webster  believed  Congress
president to  remove]  had  the  best  of the  argument. 
could,  in  1835,  pass  a  resolution  effectively  reversing  the  Decision  of  1789.  See  id.  at
198-99.  No  doubt in  part this  change  of heart by Webster  and  Calhoun was  due  to  the
radical  use of the removal  power byJackson,  which was said by Calhoun  to be  at least "ten
or  twenty  to  one  greater  than  all  made  by  all  our former  Executives."  United  States'
Telegraph, Jan.  12,  1836,  at 3,  reprinted  in  13  Papers  of Calhoun,  supra  note 322,  at 31.
Others too  had by this  time  reconsidered  the President's  removal  power.  James  Kent is a
famous  example.  See Letter from James  Kent to  Daniel  Webster  (Jan.  21,  1830),  in 3 The
Papers  of Daniel Webster  11,  12  (Charles  M. Wiltse  ed.,  1977)  ("I  begin  to  have  a strong
suspicion that Hamilton  was right [that removal  required the concurrence of the Senate]").
Supporters  ofJackson-James  Buchanan  in  particular-argued  the Senate  should rely  on
the Decision  of 1789, in part because it was a decision  made at a time when the country was
not  "convulsed  by  party  spirit."  See James  Buchanan,  Speech  in  the  Senate  (Feb.  17,

.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  80 1994

19941

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

initial  complaint attackedJackson's  "assumption" of a discretion vested in
his  Secretary  of  State-and  more  particularly,  the  use  of his  removal
power  to  sap from  the  Secretary  any  discretion  at all.3 2 4  The  argument
against Jackson  was  that  the  President  had  no  authority  to  usurp  the
properly  vested  discretion  of the  Secretary.

Eventually,  however,  it  was  Jackson's  argument,  not  that  of Clay,
Calhoun  and  Webster,  that  prevailed.  Within  three  years,  Jackson  had
won  this constitutional  battle, for in  1837,  the  Senate took the  extraordi-
nary  action  of expunging  its journal  of  the  resolution  that  had  con-
demnedJackson. 325  The  expunging  of 1837  indicates  at the least  that by
then, the  nation's  conception  of the Presidency  had begun  its mammoth
transformation.  Proponents  of the  expunging  resolution  (Senator  and
later  President  Buchanan  was  Jackson's  prime  ally)  defended Jackson
both  on  the  merits  (though  never  with as  broad  a  claim  of inherent au-
thority  as  present  day  believers  in  a  strongly  unitary  executive  would
make),  and  on  the  more  technical  ground  that  the  charges  made  were
grounds  for 
the
Constitution's  procedures  for impeachment 3 26

impeachment,  but  Congress  had  not  followed 

Defending  the  Senate's  action  condemning Jackson  three years  ear-
lier were  two  of the  nation's  most prominent  statesmen,  Daniel Webster
and  Henry  Clay.3 27  It  is  Clay's  characterization  of the  events  leading  up
to the resolution againstJackson  that captures perhaps our last glimpse of
the  framers'  conception  of the President's  power.  Clay began  his defense
by  remarking  on  the  special  character  of the  Treasury--a  character  we
have  already seen  discussed  above. 328  As  he  said,

1835),  in 2  The  Works  of James  Buchanan  422  (John  B.  Moore  ed.,  Antiquarian  Press
1960)  (1908-1911).

324.  Webster  stated:

Now,  Sir,  it  is precisely  this  which  I  deem  an  assumption  of  power  not
conferred  by the Constitution and laws.  I think the law  did not give this authority
to the President, nor impose on him the  responsibility of its  exercise.  It is evident
that, in  this removal,  the  Secretary  was in  reality  nothing but  the scribe;  he was
the  pen  in  the  President's  hand,  and  no  more.  Nothing  depended  on  his
discretion,  his judgment,  or  his  responsibility....  This,  Sir,  is what  I  call
assumption  of power.

Daniel  Webster,  Speech  in  the  Senate  (May  7, 1834),  in  7 Writings  and  Speeches  of
Webster, supra  note  197,  at 107.

325.  In order  to meet  arguments  that  such  a  resolution violated  the  Constitution's
journal  requirement,  they simply  "[drew]  black  lines  round  the said  resolve, and  [wrote]
across  the face  thereof, in strong letters,  the  following words: 
'Expunged by  order  of the
Senate,  this 16th day ofJanuary, in the year of our Lord 1837.'"  13 Cong. Deb. 504 (1837).
326.  See id. at 441-44,448-50.  The proponents said that it was the House that by the
Constitution  had  been given  the  power to  resolve  charges  against  the  President,  and the
Senate  that was  to  try  them;  and  that  by simply concluding,  as  the Senate  had  done,  the
President had been  denied his  right to  answer and defend  himself.  See  id.  at 450.

327.  For a full account of Clay's attack, see Henry Clay, Address on the Removal of the
Deposits  (Dec. 26, 1833),  in 5 The Works of Henry Clay 575  (Calvin Colton ed.,  NewYork,
Henry Clay  Pub. Co.  1897).

328.  See  supra text accompanying  notes  121-125.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  81 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

Our immediate  ancestors, profiting  by the lessons on civil  liberty
which  had  been  taught  in  the  country  from  which  we  sprung,
endeavored  to encircle  around the public  purse, in  the hands  of
Congress, every  possible security  against the intrusion  of the Ex-
ecutive.  With  this  view,  Congress  alone  is  invested,  by  the
constitution,  with  the  power to  lay and  collect  the taxes.  When
collected, not a cent is to be drawn  from  the public treasury but
in virtue  of an  act of Congress.  And among  the  first acts  of this
Government  was  the passage  of a law  establishing  the  Treasury
department, for the  safe  keeping  and  the  legal  and  regular dis-
bursement of the money so  collected.  By  that act a  secretary of
the  treasury is  placed at the  head  of the  Department;  and  vary-
ing in  this  respect  from all  the  other Departments,  he  is  to  re-
port, not to  the President, but directly  to Congress,  and  is liable
to be called to give information  in person before  Congress.  It is
impossible  to  examine  dispassionately  that  act, without coming
to the conclusion  that he  is  emphatically  the agent  of Congress,
in  performing  the  duties  assigned  by  the  constitution 
to
Congress.  The act further provides  that a Treasurer  shall  be ap-
pointed to receive  and keep  the  public money and  none can  be
drawn from his custody but under the authority  of a law,  and in
virtue  of a warrant  drawn by the Secretary of the Treasury, coun-
tersigned  by  the  Comptroller,  and  recorded  by  the  Register.
Only when such a warrant is presented can  the treasurer lawfully
pay one  dollar from the public purse.  Why was  the  concurrence
of these  four  officers  required  in  disbursements  of the  public
money?  Was  it  not  for  greater  security?  Was  it  not  intended
that each,  exercising a separate and independent will,  should be
a check  upon  every other?  Was it not the purpose of the law to con-
sider each of these four officers, acting in his proper sphere, not as a mere
automaton, but  as an intellectual, intelligent and responsible person,
bound to observe the law, and to stop the warrant, or stop the money,  if
the authority of the law were wanting?3 29

The design  of the law was  then clear-to keep separate  "sword and purse"
the  President  was  not  to  have  control  over  the  funds  save  through  the
check of his  (relatively)  independent  Secretary  of the  Treasury. 30

Independence  notwithstanding, Jackson defeated  this design, resting
his  claim  on  an  inherent  power  of superintendence,  all following  from
the  now  familiar  claim  to  the  power  of  removal.  Again,  we  can  hear
Jackson's  argument  in  Clay's  rebuttal:

But  [even]  if the  power  of dismissal  was  as  incontestable  as  it is
justly controvertible,  we  utterly  deny the consequence  deduced
from it.  The  argument is that the  President has, by implication,

329.  13  Cong.  Deb.  429-30  (1837) 

(Expunging  Debate).  For  Webster's  similar
account in response toJackson's  protest against the resolution  condemning  his action,  see
Daniel  Webster,  Speech  in  the  Senate  (May  7,  1834),  in  7  Writings  and  Speeches  of
Webster, supra  note  197,  at 103-47.

330.  Recall  the similar  thinking at the  founding.  See  supra  text accompanying  note

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  82 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

the  power  of dismissal.  From  this  first  implication  another  is
drawn;  and  that  is,  that  the  President  has  the  power  to  control
the  officer, whom he  may  dismiss,  in the  discharge  of his  duties
in  all  cases  whatever;  and  that  this  power  of control is  so  com-
prehensive  as  to  include  even  the  case  of  a  specific  duty  ex-
pressly  assigned  by law  to  the  designated  officer.

Now,  we  deny  these  results  from  the  dismissing  power.
That power,  if it exists,  can draw after  it only a  right  of general
superintendence.  It  cannot  authorize  the  President  to  substi-
tute  his will to  the  will of the  officer  charged  with  the  perform-
ance  of  official  duties.  Above  all  it  cannot  justify  such
substitution  in the case where  the law, as in the  present instance,
assigns  to  a  designated  officer  exclusively  the  performance  of
particular  duty,  and  commands  him  to  report,  not  to  the
President  but to  Congress  in  a  case  regarding  the  public  purse
of  the  nation,  committed 
the  exclusive  Control  of
to 
Congress.
By  Clay's time, the presidency  and the nation had  changed.  And yet
Clay  could still point backwards  to a  shared understanding  of the nature
of the  original presidency,  one perhaps  eclipsed  by the times,  but none-
theless still alive  in the memory  of the nation.  From the meek and  timor-
ous  institution  presided  over  by Washington,  it had  become,  in  Clay's
mind at least, a monster.

3 3 '

How  is  it with  the  President?  Is  he  powerless?  He  is  felt
from one extremity  to the other of this vast republic.  By  means
of principles which he has introduced and innovations  which he
has made  in  our institutions,  alas!  but too much countenanced
by Congress  and  a confiding  people, he  exercises  uncontrolled
the power of the State.  In  one hand  he holds the purse,  and in
the  other  brandishes  the sword  of the  country.  Myriads  of de-
pendents  and partisans,  scattered  over  the  land, are  ever ready
to  sing  hosannas  to  him  and to  laud  to  the  skies  whatever  he
does.  He  has swept  over  the Government,  during the last  eight
years,  like  a tropical  tornado.  Every department  exhibits  traces
of the ravages  of the storm. 33 2
Whatever  the presidency had become  by the  end  of Jackson's  reign,
it was a different presidency  from  that of the founders.  As we  have tried
to  argue,  we  often  miss  this  crucial  fact, in  part  because  we  have  been
raised  on  the image  of the presidency  Clay  and  Webster  so  passionately
feared.

It has  been  our aim to suggest  the framers  used more  than one  lens
to view  the  executive where  we  have just  one;  that they  were  concerned
not just with allocating what they  understood  to be  executive power,  but
also with  a class  of authorities  that we  might  call  roughly administrative

331.  13  Cong. Deb.  431-32  (1837)  (Expunging Debate).
332.  Id. at 438.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  83 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

power;  and  that  even  if they  had  a  single  model  for  the  regulation  of
those  powers  called  executive,  they  had  no single  model  for  the alloca-
tion  of those  powers  we  would  call  administrative.  Instead,  the  framers
had  a pragmatic  and not fully worked-out understanding  of the  appropri-
ate  connections  of control  and  review,  leading  them  to  adopt  different
structures  for different  problems.

What  this  pragmatism  created  was  a  relatively  simple  structure  of
power.  Where  the  President claimed  power by virtue  of executive  power
granted  by  the  Constitution,  his  discretion  in  executing  that  power  was
subject  to  the review  of none  save  the people. 333  Where  members  of his
administration  claimed administrative  power by virtue of an act executing
Congress'  power, then their power, and  the President's  power to  control
them, was  as  Congress  defined  it.  This  is  not a  claim  that  the President
may be separated  from  the superintendence  of all federal  law altogether.
Indeed,  a reasonable  understanding  of Congress'  actions would be to pre-
sume  control in the President where  Congress  does not otherwise  specify.
But there is  no  evidence  that the framers  imagined  that such control was
constitutionally  compelled-no  evidence  that  they saw an  implicit limita-
tion  on  the power  of Congress  to structure  administration  as  they saw fit.
One can infer no such implicit limitation on the democratic  process from
the multitude  of views  that  populated  the founding.  Even  if some  mem-
bers  of the founding  generation  had a firm  conception  of a strongly  uni-
tary executive,  there is insufficient evidence  that the framers  and  ratifiers
meant  this conception  to become  part of the  Constitution.3 3 4

333.  There  are  two  possible  qualifications  on  this  plenary  power: 

(1)  substantive
statutory provisions  must be  respected  and (2)  it may  have been  possible  for Congress  to
say that  the  President  cannot make  the  ultimate  decision,  but  that he  can fire  an official
who  refuses to  do what he wants.  See supra note  106 and  accompanying  text.  Of course
some  statutes  would  involve  constitutionally  granted  authority,  and  here  the  President
must  be  allowed  to control  his subordinates.

334.  We  do not discuss  here  the particular  controversies over  presidential  power that
followed  the  framing period,  particularly  those  occurring  during  the  Civil  War and New
Deal  periods.  Instead we focus  more narrowly on the original  understanding, adapted as it
must sometimes be for changes in circumstances.  No doubt a full account of the growth of
presidential power must account for the enormously  significant and self-conscious  changes
in  the  role  of  the  presidency  from  the  period  following  Jackson  through  Franklin
Roosevelt.  Our purpose  in this Article  is more limited-lookingjust  to the first moment of
constitutionalism,  can  we  understand  the  executive  as  the  modem unitarians  propose  it.
For  a broader  view,  see  1 Bruce  Ackerman,  We  the  People  (1991).  But we  do  note  two
developments  of  interest.  The  first  is  The  Tenure  in  Office  Act,  ch.  154,  14  Stat.  430
(1867),  amended  by Act of Apr. 5,  1869,  ch.  10,  16 Stat. 6  (deleting provision  applicable  to
cabinet  members),  repealed  by  Act  of  Mar.  3,  1887,  ch.  353,  24  Stat.  500,  by  which
Congress insulated members of the President's Cabinet from at-will discharge.  The Act was
declared  unconstitutional,  long after  the fact,  in Myers  v.  United  States,  272  U.S.  52,  176
(1926);  but it is of considerable  interest that it was  enacted at all, and  also  of interest  that
PresidentJohnson's  violation of the Act was thought by a majority of Congress  to be a basis
for an impeachment  conviction.  The vote for conviction  fell  short by  one  member.  See
Michael  L. Benedict, The Impeachment  and Trial of AndrewJohnson  app. B at 193  (1973)
(the vote  was  39-19-0);  Laurence  H. Tribe, American  Constitutional  Law  §  4-17, at 291

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  84 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

III.  THE  PROBLEM  OF  CHANGED  CIRCUMSTANCES:
STRUCTURE  AND  UNrrANEss

The founding  generation  did  not believe  that  all those  who  engage
in what we now  think to be  "executive"  activities  must operate  under  the
control  of  the  President.  But  is  this  decisive  for  current  constitutional
law?  Does  history  entail  the  conclusion  that  Congress  has  free  rein  to
allocate  administrative  tasks to people immune from presidential  supervi-
sion?  For  some originalists,3 3 5  the  answer  must be yes.  The  framers  did
not  constitutionalize  anything like  the  single  value  of unitariness;  it fol-
lows  (from one  version  of originalism)  that  neither  can we.

But is  there  an  account  of constitutional  fidelity  that  might yield  a
contrary  answer?33 6  Is  there  an  account  of fidelity  that  can  produce  a
strongly  unitary  executive  even  if the  framers  did  not accept  that view?
We believe  that  such an argument  can  be  made.  Our purpose  here is to
outline  its features,  without making a judgment on whether it might ulti-
mately be made  persuasive.  To introduce  the argument in  advance:  The
central  point is  that the  national  government  has  changed  dramatically
since  the  founding,  and  so  too  has  the  national  presidency.  In  light of
these  changes, mechanical  application  of the  founding understanding-
to  allow independent  officials  to  engage  in  tasks  that  the  framers  never

(2d  ed. 1988).  Second, shortly  after the  New Deal  President Roosevelt attempted  to assert
broad authority  over the administration via the Reorganization Act  of 1939, ch.  36, 53 Stat.
561.  After  a  prolonged  debate,  involving  many  of  the  issues  discussed  here,  Congress
rejected  Roosevelt's  efforts.  See  Barry  D.  Karl,  Constitution  and  Central  Planning-  The
Third  New  Deal  Revisited,  1988  Sup.  Ct.  Rev.  163,  187-88.  Whether  and  how  these
developments  should bear on  constitutional  interpretation  raises  complex issues  that are
beyond  the scope  of this Article.

335.  On  competing yersions of originalism  in constitutional  interpretation,  see supra

note  34.

336.  There  are  of  course  methods  of  constitutional  interpretation  that  are  not
methods  of fidelity,  in  the  sense  that  they  do  not  ultimately  depend  on  whether  the
outcome  is traceable  to some judgment or commitment  of the  framers.  See,  e.g.,  Ronald
Dworkin,  Law's  Empire  chs.  2,  10  (1986)  (describing  constitutional  interpretation  as  an
effort to  cast the  relevant constitutional  provision "in the  most favorable  light," or to make
it "the best it can  be").  For the  issue at hand-the  meaning of "executive"  in Article  II-
probably  this  method  would  make  it  necessary  to  ask  whether  hierarchical  presidential
control  of administration  makes  the  best sense  out of the  Constitution,  given  applicable
requirements  of "fit," see  id.; and it may well be  that in light of our  discussion  below, this
method  would  entail conclusions similar  to those  that we will  reach  in this Article.  There
are  intriguing  similarities and differences  between  a method  of fidelity  based  on  changed
circumstances,  and  a  method  of the  sort  described  by  Dworkin.  It might  appear  that
Dworkin's  method  would  entail  much  more  in  the  way  of policymaking  and  principle-
espousing  discretion for  the judge.  The  appearance  may well  be  reality.  But,  of course,
any  effort  to  come  to  terms  with  changed  circumstances  will  involve  a  measure  of
discretion,  especially  in characterizing  the  relevant constitutional  commitments,  see  infra
text  accompanying  notes  371-380.  This  is  not  the  occasion  for  a  discussion  of  the
relationship  between  seeking  fidelity  across  changed  circumstances  and  more  avowedly
and  self-consciously  nonoriginalist  approaches  to  constitutional  law.  Instead  we  assume
that judges  should follow  a  method-of  fidelity, without  defending  that  assumption.  For
relevant  observations,  see  Cass R.  Sunstein,  The  Partial Constitution  ch.  4  (1993).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  85 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

foresaw-may  well  disserve  the  very  commitments  that  underlay  the
founding  itself.  Under  current  circumstances,  a  strongly  unitary  execu-
tive  is  the best way of keeping  faith  with  the most  fundamental  goals  of
the  original  scheme.

As  noted,  it is  not our aim  to  defend  fully  this view against  possible
alternatives.  Our  goal is  more  modestly  to  sketch  the  argument  so  as to
give  a sense  of its familiarity and  coherence.  The argument  proceeds  in
several  steps.  We  begin  with  general  remarks  on  interpretation  across
changing  circumstances.  In the  next section,  we apply these  ideas to  the
broad area of presidential  power.  In Part IV, we discuss the application  of
the  method  to a number of currently  contested Article  II issues.

A.  Method

Within  the American  constitutional  tradition,  most practices  of con-
stitutional  interpretation  can  be  described  as  practices  of fidelity-prac-
tices in which  the commitments  of the framers  have  a prominent place in
finding  and  preserving  constitutional  meaning.33 7  "Originalism"  is  the
paradigm  within  this  tradition.  For the  originalist,  the  commitments  of
the  framers  are  the  exclusive  source  of  constitutional  authority,  unless
subsequently  changed  by constitutional  amendment.

Within this  tradition  of interpretive  fidelity,  everyone  must confront
what we can think of as  the fundamental  problem for constitutional inter-
pretation,  namely  how  a constitutional  text  is  to  be  read  over  time.  All
methods  of fidelity, that is,  must ask how changes over  time should affect
understandings  of the framers'  commitments-what kinds  of changes will
count,  and how they will  be  treated.  The  point may seem  obscure  in the
abstract,  but it  emerges  naturally from  familiar practices,  as  we  will  see
shortly.

Let us distinguish  between  two very  different  responses  to  the prob-
lem  of  reading  over  time.  Some  methods  of  fidelity  track  or  follow
changes  in  the  constitutional  text  only  (that  is,  constitutional  amend-
ments);  others  track  or  attend  to  nontextual  changes  as  well  (that  is,
changes  in  the world  that  affect  the  meaning  of the  text's  application).
Said  differently,  some  methods  focus  on  the foreground of the  constitu-
tional  meaning  only  (the  text),  and  some  focus  on  both  the foreground
and  background of constitutional  meaning  (text and  context).  So,  for ex-
ample, while  all originalists  track  changes  in the constitutional  text when
finding  constitutional  meaning,  some  originalists  will  also  examine
changes  in  the  constitutional  context  that  could  affect  meaning.3 38

337.  An alternative view,  seeing constitutionality as  a common law process  concerned
with  case-by-case  decisions  over  time,  is defended  in  Harry  Wellington,  Common  Law
Rules  and Constitutional  Double Standards:  Some Notes  on Adjudication,  83 Yale LJ. 221
(1973);  David  Strauss,  Constitutional  Interpretation  and  the  Common  Law  (1993)
(unpublished  manuscript,  on file  with the  Columbia Law  Review).

338.  See,  e.g.,  Olman  v.  Evans,  750  F.2d  970,  995-96  (D.C.  Cir.  1984)  (Bork, J.,
concurring)  (discussing  proper  scope  for  the  First  Amendment  in  a  way  that  allows

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  86 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

Other  originalists  will  noLan 9  Instead,  these  latter  originalists  simply
locate  a meaning  that the document originally had, and  apply that mean-
ing "in the same way"  today, without regard to how the context today may
have  changed.3 40

Let  us  now  consider  those  who  (1)  are  committed  to  interpretive
fidelity  and  (2)  follow or  track the  changes  in  both the foreground  text
and background  context.  For such people, it follows  that particular  appli-
cations  of a  constitutional  text  may  change  over  time  as  the  context of
application changes-all  consistent with  the  command  of fidelity.  Brown
v.  Board of Education 41  is  a  famous  example.3 42  In  Brown,  the  Court
changed  the  application  of  the  Equal  Protection  Clause  (as  compared
with  Pessy v. Frguson3 43) in  large  part  because  of a change  in  the  social
context  since Pessy.344  Perhaps  it could  be  said that  in  Pessy's context,
state-run  schools were  so  insignificant  as to  make  state-imposed  segrega-
tion constitutionally legitimate under the Equal Protection  Clause.  In the
context of Brown, however,  state-run schools  were  of central  importance,
and this change  was  highly relevant to interpretation.  Public schools  had
assumed  an  entirely  different role.  This  change  required  a different in-
terpretation  of whether school  segregation  violated  the  commitment  to
equal  protection  of the laws.  No longer could the harm  of segregation-
to the underlying constitutional  principle-be  legitimately ignored, even,
or perhaps  especially,  if our concern was  to respect  the original  constitu-
tional  principles.3 45

Or perhaps  it was possible  to think that at the time of PMessy,  the view
that segregation  stigmatized blacks  was  a product not of the law of segre-
gation,  but of the "construction" placed  on  it by black  people.  This  un-
derstanding  of the facts,  explicit in  Pessy itself,3 4 6 was not sustainable  by
the time  of Brown.

consideration  of changes  in  context  since  the  founding  period),  cert.  denied,  471  U.S.
1127  (1985).

339.  See,  e.g., 750  F.2d at 1036-39  (Scalia,J.,  dissenting) (rejecting what he considers

to  be Judge Bork's  expansive  reading of the  First Amendment).

340.  See,  e.g., Schad v. Arizona,  111  S.  Ct.  2491,  2507 (1991)  (Scalia,J.,  concurring in
part and concurring  in the judgment)  (discussing  interpretation  of due  process);  Edwin
Meese,  Address  Before  the  Federalist  Society  Lawyers  Division,  in  Interpreting Law  and
Literature,  supra  note 4,  at 24, 29  ("On every  question of construction  [we should]  carry
ourselves  back  to  the  time,  when  the  constitution  was  adopted;  recollect  the  spirit
manifested in the  debates;  and instead  of trying [to find]  what meaning may be squeezed
out  of  the  text,  or  invented  against  it,  conform  to  the  probable  one,  in  which  it  was
passed."  (quoting  President Jefferson)).

341.  347 U.S.  483  (1954).
342.  See  Mark  V.  Tushnet,  Following  the  Rules  Laid  Down:  A  Critique  of

Interpretation  and Neutral  Principles,  96  Harv.  L. Rev.  781,  800-01  (1983).

343.  163  U.S. 537  (1896).
344.  See  Brown,  347  U.S. at 492-93.
345.  An argument of this kind is offered in Robert H. Bork, The Tempting of America
74-84  (1990);  see  also  Planned  Parenthood  v.  Casey,  112  S. Ct.  2791,  2813  (1992)
(plurality opinion)  (discussing  shift from P/essy in related  terms).

346.  See  163 U.S.  at 551.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  87 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

[The  social]  understanding  of the facts  upon  which  a constitu-
tional  ruling was sought  in  1954  was  thus  fundamentally  differ-
ent from  the  basis  claimed  for  the  decision  in  1896....  The
Pessy Court's  explanation  for its  decision was so  clearly  at odds
with  the facts apparent  to the Court in  1954 that the decision  to
reexamine Plessy was  on this ground alone not only justified  but
required.

3 47

In  other words,  the  application  of the Equal  Protection  Clause  changed
because understandings  of the  background  facts  had  changed.

For convenience,  we will  use the term  "translation"-understood  as a
metaphor-to  describe  methods  of fidelity  that pay attention  to,  and  try
to account for or track changes in  context 3 48  If an argument of constitu-
tional fidelity points  to a  change in  the context of application  to justify a
changed  application  of a  constitutional  text,  then  we  will  consider  that
method a practice  of translation.  Whether the  translator may account for
any change in  context, or whether other institutional values  constrain  the
types  of  changes  the  translator  may  notice,  are  questions  beyond  the
scope  of this  Article.3 49  Of  course,  some  examples  of  translation  are
more  energetic  and  controversial  than  others;  some  purported  transla-
tions  are  clear abuses  of interpretive  authority.  Moreover,  the  very prac-
tice  of translation  may  create  risks  to  the  project  of fidelity  (though  we
think  that  the  failure  to  translate  creates  at least equivalent  risks).  It  is
enough  for  our  purposes  simply  to  focus  on  the  distinction  between
methods  that  track changes  in  the background  of interpretation  (meth-
ods  of translation)  and methods  that do not  (some forms  of originalism).
In  some  ways  the  term  "translation"  may appear  exotic.  But  as  we
have  said,  the method  is  quite  conventional.  Consider  two  more  exam-
ples  to  help  make  the  point-both  of them  (not incidentally)  involving
the  post-New  Deal  transformation  of the  constitutional  framework.3 50

The  first is  a  mildly stylized  history of the  Commerce  Clause,  grant-
ing to Congress  the  power to "regulate  Commerce...  among  the several
States."3 51  As  originally understood,  the clause gave  to Congress  a  power
that fell far  short of plenary authority  over  the  national  economy.3 52  In-

347.  Casy,  112  S.  Ct.  at 2813.  This  development  could  be  connected  to  large-scale

changes  associated  with  the  New Deal.  See  Sunstein, supra  note 336,  ch.  2.

348.  Again,  in using  this  methodology, we  are  not  the first, see  supra note  4.
349.  For a  detailed  discussion,  see Lessig,  supra note 4.
350.  Bruce  Ackerman  understands  the  New  Deal  as  a  constitutional  amendment,
described  as such  in part because,  in Ackerman's  view,  we cannot otherwise  make sense of
the  constitutional changes  of the 1930s.  See 1 Ackerman, supra note 334, at 103-04.  What
we say here  suggests a different  understanding:  The developments  of the  New Deal period
can be  seen as legitimate interpretation  in the context of changed circumstances.  See  Cass
R.  Sunstein,  New  Deals,  The  New  Republic,  Jan.  20,  1992,  at  32;  Lawrence  Lessig,
Understanding  Changed  Readings:  Fidelity  and  Theory  59-87  (1993)  (unpublished
manuscript,  on file  with  the  Columbia Law  Review).

351.  U.S.  Const. art.  I,  § 8,  cl.  3.
352.  See,  e.g.,  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  22  U.S.  (9  Wheat.)  1  (1824);  McCulloch  v.

Maryland,  17 U.S.  (4 Wheat.)  316, 405  (1819).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  88 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

stead, the framers  understood  it only to  allow Congress  to  regulate inter-
state commerce, 353  and  most  commerce  was  unmistakably  (conceived  to
be) intrastate, and thought rarely to affect the national  economy.  In light
of the  nature  of the  nineteenth  century economy  (and economics),  the
category  of "Commerce  ..  .among  the  several  States"  could  be  under-
stood  to  be  relatively  narrow,  at least  by modem  standards.  Hence  the
founders'  understanding of the scope  of the Commerce  Clause was  quite
limited.

But by the early twentieth century, much had changed  in the context
of the  Constitution's  application,  though of course  not in  the text.  Dra-
matic  changes  in  communications,  transportation,  and  technology  had
produced  a  highly  integrated  national  economy.  Intrastate  commerce
commonly  had  significant  interstate  effects.35 4  Commerce  Clause  doc-
trine therefore  faced  a conceptual  crisis:  Should  the  Court interpret the
clause in  accordance with  the framers'  conception  of its  narrow scope, or
should  the Court interpret it in a way  that is  consistent with  the text, that
seems to  fit with  the  framers'  basic  commitments,  but also  takes  account
of new  conditions  that created  a  quite  different  economy?

The  Court eventually  settled on the latter approach,  in a way similar
to  the  Court's  own  description  of  what  happened  between  Plessy  and
Brown.355  Did  fidelity  require  the  Supreme  Court  to  understand  the
twentieth  century  Commerce  Clause  to extend  no further than  the fram-
ers  believed  in  the  eighteenth?  We  do  not  believe  so.  In  light  of  the
changes  in circumstances,  fidelity  to the  original design  properly allowed
an extended  commerce power, translated  into the new context.  The text
of  the  clause  reaches  all  interstate  commerce,  and  that  category  had
greatly  enlarged  by  the  twentieth  century.  The  original  purpose  was  to

353.  See  Richard  A.  Epstein, The  Proper Scope  of the  Commerce  Power,  73  Va.  L.

Rev.  1387,  1396  (1987).

354.  Consider Hart's  remarkable  description  of this  slow  realization:
What do we  mean by saying  that this relegation  of laissez-faire  to the background
has  been,  and  will  continue  to  be,  a  "necessity?"  We  refer,  of  course,  to  no
mystical "force" driving us on,  to no fatalistic philosophy.  We  mean primarily  that
the  development  of  a  network  of  complicated  economic  relationships  has
multiplied  the  instances  in  which  the  associated  activity  of  one  group  affects
indirectly the  other groups  in the  community, and that these  other groups have,
in  the  more  obvious  cases,  recognized  these  indirect  consequences  as  affecting
their  interests,  often  adversely,  and  accordingly  have  sought,  through
government,  to control  such  consequences.

Hart, supra  note  100,  at 31.

355.  See,  e.g.,  Wickard  v.  Filbum,  317  U.S.  111,  118-19  (1942) 

(holding  that
Commerce  Clause  reaches  completely  intrastate  activities  that  would  frustrate  interstate
regulation);  NLRB v.Jones  & Laughlin Steel  Corp., 301 U.S. 1, 30-37 (1937)  (holding that
Commerce  Clause  extends  to  all  activities  that have  a  "close  and substantial"  relation  to
interstate  commerce,  even  if activities  are  entirely intrastate).  Of course  we  do not claim
that  all  of the  modern  commerce  cases  were rightly  decided.  Nor  do we  suggest that the
translative  issue  is  simple  or clear.  Lost  in  translation  of the  early  cases  at  least was  any
understanding  of  the  federalist  component  (if there  was  such)  to  the  original  federal
limitation.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  89 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

ensure  that  the national government  could reach  all such commerce.  In
these  circumstances,  fidelity  to the  original  design  entitled  the  Court to
understand  the  clause quite  differently from  the way  the framing genera-
tion  had  understood  it.

The post-New Deal understanding  of the Commerce  Clause is  an  ex-
ample  of a changed  reading  of a constitutional  text in light of a changed
context.  But still this change is  quite moderate  (at least formally),  for the
new reading  is  quite consistent with  the  original  text.  (This  is the  nature
of  the  argument  we  shall  make  with  respect  to  presidential  power.35 6)
One  can  see,  that  is,  how  "commerce  among  the  several  States"  could
touch  most  or perhaps  even  all  of the full  range  of commerce  regulable
under  the modem  Court's  conception  of the Commerce  Clause.

Consider,  however,  a second  example  in  which  the  translated  read-
ing  is  not  consistent with  the original  text-an  example  generally  over-
looked  but quite  important:  The  First Amendment  says  "Congress" shall
make  no law abridging the freedom of speech. 35 7  For a textualist, and for
some originalists,  it would seem clear  that the executive  branch,  through
regulations,  may abridge  rights  of free  expression  without  offense  to the
First Amendment.  The  text does not speak of "the executive."  Nor does it
refer  to  the judiciary-notwithstanding  the  curiosity  that  in  New  York
Times v. Sullivan,3 58  no  one complained  of this fact.359  How is  it that the
modem  Court-without  even  a  mention of this  textual  inconsistency-
can apply  the  proscriptions  of  the  First Amendment  to  all  government,
whatever its form?3 60  How is it that this textually  implausible  application
is  taken  to  be  entirely  uncontroversial?

One  argument  that might justify the  changed  reading  of the text of
the  First  Amendment-again,  a  reading  plainly  inconsistent  with  the
text-might  go  something  like  this:  The  limitation  of the  First Amend-
ment to  Congress was  based  on a set of distinctive  assumptions about  the
background-most  important,  the  assumption  that  de facto  and  de jure
lawmaking  power  would  be  exercised  primarily  or  perhaps  even  exclu-
sively by Congress.  In  the  context of the founding,  the executive branch
posed  little or  no  threat  to  free  speech  because  its  regulatory  authority
was  sharply limited.  Any  executive  (or administrative)  intrusions  on  ex-
pression  would  occur  pursuant  to  a  law  that  plainly  called  for  such
intrusions.

356.  See  infra  Part III.C.
357.  See  U.S.  Const. amend. I.
358.  376  U.S.  254  (1964).
359.  See  Mark  P.  Denbeaux,  The  First Word  of the First Amendment,  80  Nw. U.  L.

Rev.  1156,  1158-59  (1986).

360.  Note  that  this  question  is  distinct  from  the  question  of  incorporation.  The
Fourteenth  Amendment  certainly  can  be  read  to  extend  the  proscriptions  of  the  First
Amendment  to  the  states.  But  a precise  extension  could  well  have  been  to  extend  the
limitations  to state legislators.  What ground then does  the Court have to extend it to state
common  law  courts,  as  it  did  in  New  York  Times?  See  376  U.S.  at 276  (describing  how
"Congress" can  mean  "government" in First Amendment  context).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  90 1994

19941

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

In the  aftermath  of the New Deal, this assumption  is  of course unsus-
tainable.  The  executive  branch is  a principal  national lawmaker.  Its reg-
ulations  are  law-like  in  character,  partly  because  its  institutions  make
large  policy judgments  with  relatively  little  congressional  guidance.  In
order to maintain fidelity with  the original  design, it is at least plausible  to
think  that the First Amendment, understood  in  our  context, must apply
to  the  executive  branch  as  well.  If it were  not so  understood,  an  impor-
tant  goal  of the  original  design-the  effort  to  ensure  against intrusions
on  speech  by  national  institutions  endowed  with  lawmaking  power-
would  be  defeated.  Thus, courts  have  rightly  read  the  First Amendment
with  a  gloss,  rightly  in  the  sense  of being  faithful  to  the  basic  or  most
fundamental  commitments  in  the  original  design,  constitutional  text
notwithstanding.

These  examples  raise  many  questions,  questions we  do  not begin  to
resolve  here.  Perhaps  a  clear  textual  resolution  ought to  be  decisive  in
cases  of this kind.  No doubt  it would  be  easy  to imagine  cases  in  which
there  would  be  a  large  abuse  of authority in  the  claim  that  new  circum-
stances  call  for  a  new  conception  of constitutional  meaning.  No  doubt
the  enterprise  of preserving  meaning  in  new contexts  is  extremely  com-
plex,  and we  do not suggest that any  method  of translation  is simple,  or
mechanical,  or uncontentious.  There  is  no doubt that the "meaning" be-
ing preserved  is  not a brute  fact, but a product of constructive  interpreta-
tion.  Constitutional  commitments,  described  at a level  of generality,  are
not self-defining,  and  their application  to particular  cases  involves  much
judgment.  For present purposes, we mean  only to suggest that over time,
some  constitutional  applications  may  change  as  a  result  of  changes  in
context,  and  that  accommodating  these  changed  contexts  to  preserve
constitutional  meaning  is  a  recognizable  and  even  familiar  part  of  the
project  of fidelity  in  constitutional  interpretation.

B.  The Method Applied

Now let us turn  to the question of presidential  authority.  Begin with
the  constitutional  text.  As  we  have  argued,  two  principal  questions  are
relevant to the  constitutionality  of a particular condition  or limit on presi-
dential  power  over  administration  of  the  laws.  First,  we  have  to  know
whether  "executive"  power  (in  the  constitutionally  relevant  sense)  is  at
stake.  Second, we  have  to  know whether  the  limit on  that power  is  both
"necessary  and  proper" to  carry  into  execution  the  President's  power  or
other  powers  in  the  national  government.

With  respect to  the  first question,  the  issue  is  what the  scope  of the
powers  of  the  President  will  now  be  taken  to  be.  Just  as  "commerce
among  the  several  States"  took  on  a  wider  scope  over  time  because  of
changes  in  the  structure  of  the  economy,  so  too  might  the  executive
power  take on  a  wider  scope  because  of changes  in  the  structure  of the
national  government  itself.  That  is,  it is  possible  that  certain  authority

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  91 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

should  now  be  deemed  executive  that was  originally  not so categorized,
and precisely because  of changed  conditions  and  understandings.

With  respect to this second question  (whether a limitation  on execu-
tive  power  is  "necessary  and  proper"),  the  problem  is  more  complex.
What  are  the values  against which  Congress  must test  the  administrative
structures  it establishes  to determine  whether  they are  "proper"?  Should
Congress  look only to the values  of the framers when  testing a particular
executive  structure?  Can or must Congress  look to contemporary  institu-
tions  and  even  contemporary  values  when  testing a  particular  executive
structure?  And what  is  the  role  of reviewing  courts  in  assessing  a  claim
that  a particular  structure  is  necessary  and  proper?

To answer  all these  questions  fully would be to  enter debates  far be-
yond  the scope  of this Article.  For our purposes  here, a few observations
will  suffice.  First, like any number of other  clauses in  the  Constitution-
the  Cruel  and  Unusual  Punishments  Clause,36 1 
the  Due  Process
the  Vesting  Clause 364
Clause, 3 62  the  Equal  Protection  Clause3 3-both 
and  the  Necessary  and  Proper  Clause 365  have  a  degree  of  open-
endedness,  at least on their face. 66  We  might understand  the Cruel  and
Unusual  Punishments  Clause,  for example,  to  require  the interpreter  to
look  at  least in  part  to  a  current  society's  "standards  of  decency" 6 7  to
determine  the  scope  of  the  clause's  reach.  Of  course,  an  interpreter
could  simply  look to  the world  that  the  framers  saw  when  filling  in  the
meaning  that such  clauses  leave  open.  One  could,  that  is,  look  to  what
was  considered  cruel  and  unusual  at  the  framing,368  or  to  the  process
then considered  due, 6 9 or to the government structures  then  considered
proper,  and  test a particular  punishment,  or procedure,  or  government
structure  against  those standards.

It is  clear, however, that many believe  that the Constitution  demands
something  else of a constitutional  interpreter. Just as the  interpreter who
aims  to assure  that the meaning of the Constitution  is  preserved3 7 0  must
locate  those  punishments  now  to  be  treated  as  "cruel  and  unusual,"  so

361.  U.S.  Const. amend. VIII.
362.  Id. amend.  X1V,  § 1.
363.  Id.
364.  Id. art. II,  § 1, cl.  1.
365.  Id. art.  I,  § 8, cl.  18.
366.  Of course,  in some  sense  this is  true  of every  clause.
367.  See  Trop v. Dulles,  356  U.S.  86,  101  (1958)  (Warren,  Cj., plurality  opinion).
368.  See  the  discussion  of Harmelin v. Michigan,  111  S. Ct. 2680  (1991),  supra notes

34, 55  and 309.

and  concurring in  the judgment).

369.  See  Schad v. Arizona,  111  S. Ct. 2491,  2507  (1991)  (ScaliaJ.,  concurring in part

370.  Of course  the whole  enterprise  of "preservation" is a constructive  task.  There is
no  preinterpretive  "it" out there that is being  translated, either in literary translation  itself,
or  in  its metaphorical  application  here.  All  one  can  do  is make  a best effort  at making
sense  of a past understanding,  by understanding  how it would fit within  a current world.
That  it  is constructive,  that  it  has  no  firm  limits,  that  it  is not mechanical-all  this  is
acknowledged.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  92 1994

1994]

THE PRFSDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

too  must  an  interpreter  who  aims  to  assure  the  meaning  of  the
Constitution  is  preserved  locate  those  governmental  structures  permissi-
bly thought proper now, and notjust those permissibly thought proper at
the founding.  This is  so at the very least because  of dramatically  changed
circumstances  since  the  period  in  which  the  framers  wrote.  In  other
words,  the interpreter  should locate  the  equivalent sanction  that  the  re-
quirement  of propriety  compels now, by locating  the equivalent demands
of propriety  then.

All this is very abstract; we will come  to particulars  shortly.  But first a
proviso.  What we have said emphatically does not mean that the constitu-
tional words are simply bottles  into which any generation simply pours its
own values.  The interpreter's  role is  to take  account of changing circum-
stances  insofar as  these  bear on  the question  how best the framers'  com-
mitments  are  to be implemented.  As we  understand  it, the interpreter  is
bound  by  the  duty  of fidelity;  the  Constitution  should  not  be  made  to
take  on values  that are  not fairly traceable  to founding commitments.  In
the  context  at  hand,  a  new  understanding  of the  word  "executive"  or
"proper,"  if different  in application  from  the framers'  application,  must
be  based on a claim  that that understanding  manifests  a better means  of
implementing  the framers'  commitments  in this different world.  Applica-
tions  of the constitutional  requirements  may change, not because under-
lying  values  change,  but  because  our  understanding  of  how  best  to
implement  those  values  changes,  making  mechanical  adherence  to  old
understandings  inconsistent  with  fidelity.

C.  New  Circumstances, Old Commitments

We  are  concerned  with  the  task  of preserving  initial  constitutional
commitments  in  light  of changes  in  the constitutional  context.  In what
follows,  we  first  outline  some  relevant  initial  commitments,  and  then
sketch  two  types  of contextual  change  that make  new applications  neces-
sary  if these  old  commitments  are  to  be  maintained.

From  our focus  on  what the framers  said and  did, we  can identify a
number of values  that bear  on whether we  categorize  a  particular institu-
tion  as  "executive"  (and  hence  requiring  plenary  presidential  control)
and  that  affect  whether  a  particular  limit  on  presidential  control  is
"proper."  Unitariness  was  unquestionably  one  such  value.  As  we  have
seen,  the framers  rejected  a plural  executive,  and  the  Decision  of 1789
shows  that  for  some  decisions,  presidential  control  was  indeed  re-
quired.3 71  The  framers  believed  that  unitariness  advanced  the interests
of  coordination,  accountability,  and  efficiency  in  the  execution  of the
laws.  All  of these  policies  argued  against  a fragmented  executive.37 2  In
certain  cases,  it was  critical that the executive  be able  to act with dispatch

371.  See  supra text accompanying  notes  121-122,  131.
372.  See The Federalist No. 74 (Alexander Hamilton);  Strauss & Sunstein, supra note

11,  at  183-84.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  93 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

and without  dissent.37  To  account for those  cases,  the  framers  decided
that the  executive  structure  should be  unitary.

The  Vesting  Clause  of Article  II-by  placing  the  executive  in  one
rather  than  many  presidents-embodied  this judgment.  It is  therefore
clear  that  the  constitutional  text  and  structure  reflect  commitments  to
the unitary virtues  of coordination,  accountability,  and  efficiency in  gov-
ernment.  These  commitments  account  for  the  unitariness  of the  presi-
dency  and of the executive  power  across  a  certain  domain.

But it is  equally certain  that in some  cases other values  were relevant,
and  these  values  may at times constitutionally  trump unitariness.  On the
founding view,  efficiency not only justifies unitariness  but also occasional
legislative  departures  from  that notion;  it explains something of the  rela-
tive  independence  of  the  district  attorneys.3 74  So  too  does  fear  of
executive  and judicial  aggrandizement.  We  have  already  noted the com-
plexities  in  the Decision  of 1789,  but  one  lesson  of  that story  was  that
sometimes  the  values  of independence  from  the  President  could  right-
fully  trump  the interests  of unitariness.3 75  The  independence  of adjudi-
cative  officers  is  one  such  interest.  Maintaining  congressional  control
over  spending,  to  take  another  example,  led  the  framers  to  reduce
the  Treasury,  unitarian  considerations
executive  control  over 
notwithstanding.

3 76

From  these  distinct values  we  can  draw together two  that are for our
purposes  central.  First is a value  in accountability-where  no special rea-
son  existed  to separate  responsibility  from  the  President,  the  pattern  of
original  executive  structures  strongly  supports  the  conclusion  that  the
President remains  accountable  for the actions of government  officers. 3 "T
Of course,  the general  idea of accountability  is  embodied  not only in  the
allocation  of executive power, but also in  the grant of legislative  power to
Congress,  accompanied  by  a  ban  on  open-ended  delegations  of legisla-
tive  power.3 78  Second  is  a value  of avoiding  faction.37 9  This  goal  is,  of
course,  at the  center of the  constitutional  structure,  and it helps  explain
the system  of checks  and  balances  in general.38 0

Accountability  and  avoidance  of factionalism,  then, are  two  central
values of the framers'  original  executive.  Let us focus  now on two  sorts of

373.  The  structure  of  the  Departments  of War,  Navy,  and  Foreign  Affairs  (State)

evidence  this concern.  See  supra text accompanying  notes  121-122,  131.

374.  See  supra  text accompanying  notes 60-65.
375.  Recall  Madison's  comments 

regarding 

the  Comptroller, 

supra 

text

accompanying  notes  69-70,  128.

376.  See supra  text accompanying  notes  123-125.
377.  See,  e.g.,  The Federalist No.  77  (Alexander Hamilton).
378.  See infra  text accompanying  notes  478-479.
379.  See The Federalist No.  10  (James  Madison);  Cass R.  Sunstein, Interest Groups in

American  Public Law,  38  Stan.  L. Rev.  29,  39-43  (1985).

380.  See The Federalist Nos. 10, 51  (James Madison);Joseph M. Bessette,  Deliberative
Democracy-  The  Majority Principle in Republican  Government, in How Democratic is the
Constitution?  102,  109-11  (Robert A. Goldwin  & William  A. Schambra  eds.,  1980).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  94 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADINISTRATION

changes in  the current constitutional  context that may require accommo-
dation  to  continue  to preserve  these  two  original values.

The first, and least controversial,  type of change  is in  the functions of
what we  are  calling  administrative  agencies.  What agencies  do-the na-
ture of their power and  the way  that power is  exercised-is very different
now from  what  it was  at  the  framing  period.  Lawmaking  and  law-inter-
preting authority is  now concentrated  in an extraordinary  array of regula-
tory agencies.  This development has ensured that domestic policymaking
is  often  done,  not  at  the  state  level  or  even  through  Congress,  but
through  large  national  bureaucracies.3 81
This  massive  transformation 

in  the  institutional  framework  of
American  public law was  entirely unanticipated by the framers, and it fun-
damentally altered  the original constitutional  design.  We do not contend
that  administration  was  itself unanticipated,  or  that  at the  founding  pe-
riod it was  trivial.  On the  contrary,  the original  period  contained  a pre-
cursor of the modern  administrative  state.3 8 2  But what we  do  now is  not
what  was  done  then.  General  managerial  functions  were  not within  the
domain  of the  national  government,  much  less  the President.  Much  of
the  organization  of the  national  economy was  left  to  state  courts. 383  By
contrast,  the national  government  restricted  itself largely  to national  im-
provements,  subsidies, tariffs,  patents, tonnage,  and the disposal of public
lands.3 8 4  Whether  or  not Articles  I  and  II  were  designed  for  "congres-
sional  dominance," 38 5  it seems  clear  that  the  early presidency  involved
little  policymaking  role  in  domestic  affairs.

Things  are  of course  different today.  To  take just one example,  the
Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC)  sets national  policy with re-
spect to  broadcasting.  The  FCC is  not fully analogous  to  the administra-
tive  institutions  at  the  founding,  which  never  (or  almost  never 386)  had
such broad policymaking  discretion.  The problem  is intensified when we
recall  that  the FCC  is  merely  one  of a bewildering  array  of national  ad-
ministrative  entities  armed  with  similar  power.  Perhaps  the  immuniza-
tion  of such entities  from  presidential  authority would  now  compromise
constitutional  commitments,  indeed  the very commitments  that underlay

381.  This change is discussed  pointedly in TheodoreJ.  Lowi, The Personal  President

Power  Invested,  Promise  Unfulfilled  45-58  (1985).

382.  See generally Frank Bourgin,  The Great Challenge:  The Myth of Laissez-Faire  in
the Early Republic  (1989)  (reviewing national programs by early Presidents  in areas of land
development,  public  credit  facilities,  industrial  development,  and  transportation  system
improvements).

383.  See Stephen  Skowronek,  Building  a New American  State  27-28  (1982);  Cass  R.

Sunstein,  After  the  Rights  Revolution  17-18  (1990).

384.  See Lowi,  supra  note 381,  at 24.
385.  Id. at 34.
386.  The  qualification 

is  necessary  because  some  agencies  had  considerable
policymaking authority and a large degree of discretion as  well.  Consider the Department
of the Treasury  and  the  Bank  of the  United  States.  See  supra  text accompanying  notes
123-125,  139-143.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  95 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

the decision  to  create a  (kind of)  unitary presidency.  Consider the origi-
nal  interest in  coordination  and  the  extent to which  that interest  would
be  compromised  by  allowing  Congress  to  prevent  the  President  from
overseeing  environmental  or  energy  policy.3 8 7  For  this  reason,  some  in-
stitutions  currently denominated  administrative  could arguably  fall under
presidential  control as a matter  of constitutional  compulsion.  This is be-
cause  what  administrative  institutions  do  now  is,  in  nature  and  scope,
quite  different  from  what  administrative  institutions  did  then-indeed,
what  such  institutions  do  now  is  in  terms  of  sheer  importance  more
analogous  to what unquestionably  executive  agencies did at the founding
period.  We will lay principal  stress on this difference,  suggesting  that the
framers'  acquiescence  in allowing some  institutions  to be independent of
the  President  does not  entail  the  conclusion  that current, very  different
institutions  can  be similarly  independent.

Second,  and  more  controversially,  some  values  may  have  become
more  or less  important  because  we  now  have  a better  pragmatic  under-
standing  about  how  institutions  actually  function3 8 8  and  a  better  under-
standing  of  the  nature  of  the  values  at  issue.  This  is  the  lesson  from
experience.  Here  the  change  consists  not of new  institutions  raising  un-
foreseen  issues,  but instead  of new  understandings  of what  certain  gov-
ernmental  activities  entail.3 8 9  (Here  the  analogy is  to one  understanding
of what  happened  between  Brown  and  Plessy-that is,  a  new  view  of the
underlying  facts.)  At  one  time,  for  example,  it may  have  been  thought
that  an  independent  agency  would  best advance  the  policy  interests  of
program  X, but experience  reveals  that with independence,  an independ-
ent agency  is highly likely to fall victim  to factional  capture.3 90  Or it may
have  been  thought  that  some  sufficiently  protected  agencies  could  en-
gage  in  apolitical,  scientific,  technocratic  implementation  of the  laws3 91;
but now many believe that the notion  of purely apolitical implementation
is  impossible,  at  least  when  discretionary judgments  are  involved.  Of
course  assessments  of this kind should be made principally by nonjudicial
officials.  But they may  bear on constitutional  interpretation  as  well.3 92  If
either  change  occurred,  then  entities  that  Congress  legitimately  made
"independent" when  either view  reigned  must,  perhaps,  now be  placed
under  the wing of the President as a matter of constitutional  compulsion.

387.  Cf.  Breyer, supra  note  189,  at 39-42,  73-78.
388.  See,  e.g.,  Miller, supra note  1, at 55-57.
389.  This  is  more  controversial  because  some  would  say  that  such  changes  in
perception  call  for  constitutional  or  legislative  change,  not for  new  interpretations  by
courts.  But see the  discussion  of Erie  R.R. Co. v. Tompkins,  304 U.S.  64  (1938),  in Lessig,
supra  note  350, at 40-47.

390.  This  is the  influential  argument of Marver Bernstein.  See Marver  H. Bernstein,
Regulating  Business by Independent  Commission  282-87  (1955).  On  capture  in general,
see Kay  L.  Schlozman  & John T. Tierney,  Organized  Interests  and American  Democracy
(1986).

391.  See supra  text accompanying  notes  187-189.
392.  For a more  detailed  discussion  of this  issue,  see Lessig,  supra note  350.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  96 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

We  begin,  then,  with  the  values  of accountability  and avoidance  of
faction, and we are  confronted  with changes  in the types  of function per-
formed  by  modem  regulatory  agencies  and in  the  lessons  provided  by
experience  with  regulation.  Consider how these  two changes  might work
together  to suggest  that  the modem  executive  must be  strongly  unitary,
even  if the framers'  executive was  not.

In the  original  understanding,  officials who  exercise  the President's
enumerated powers  must operate under his control.3 9 3  But Congress was
originally  entitled  to  immunize  some  officials  from  presidential  control
when  it  thought  proper-in  particular,  if those  officials  operated  like
judges, or if their duties were  ministerial,  or  even  if (as in  the case  of the
Comptroller)  their  actions  were  discretionary  but  properly  separated
from the  President's.  All this of course operated  in the  context of a presi-
dency that had an  exceptionally  narrow range of discretionary  policymak-
ing authorities  in  the domestic  arena, at least compared  to what we  now
find  routine.394  Most of the functions  performed  by what we call  the fed-
eral  "executive  branch" were  originally  the province  of state  legislatures
and  state  courts,  which  had  principal  authority  over  regulation  of the
economy.3 95

Now consider the character  of the modem presidency.  In the after-
math  of the New Deal, administrative  agencies  carry  out a wide  range  of
highly  discretionary  policymaking  tasks  in  the  domestic  arena.  Because
of delegations  of discretionary authority to administrative agencies, 3 96 the
functions  of those who  execute  the law have  dramatically altered.3 9 7  Be-
cause  of this  discretionary authority, these  agencies  are now principal na-
lawmakers,  both  through
tional  policymakers-in  practice,  crucial 

393.  Control  in  this  context  means  at  least  that  the  President  has  the  power  to
discharge  at will.  It is acceptable  to constrain  the  power  to make  the  ultimate  decision.
See  the discussion  of Myers  v. United  States, 272  U.S.  52  (1926),  supra text accompanying
notes 98-108.  The  same is  true for officials  that Congress  has  seen fit to place  under  the
President.

394.  See  Lowi, supra note 381,  at 31-32.  Leonard White  provides a useful  contrast  in

the  example  of President  Monroe.  As  he writes:

Monroe  not only believed  that the President should allow Congress  to make
up its  own mind on domestic matters without influence from the Chief Executive;
with  an  occasional  exception  he  put  his  theory  into  practice.  The  greatest
political issue  of his day was the admission  of Missouri  and  the status of slavery in
Louisiana  Territory.  During  all  the  bitter  debates,  he  remained  silent  and
abstained  from interference  in  the  struggle.

White,  supra  note 65,  at 38-39.

early American  history).

395.  See Lowi,  supra note  381,  at 24  (itemizing some  national  and  state functions  in

396.  Some post-1960  delegations are far less broad, and embody  closer congressional
judgments  about  policy.  See  Cass  R. Sunstein,  Constitutionalism  After the  New Deal,  101
Harv.  L.  Rev.  421,  478-83  (1987).  But  the  aggregate  level  of discretionary  authority  is
extraordinarily  high, and this  is all  that is necessary  for our purposes.

397.  For a history  of this  delegation,  see Hart,  supra  note  73, at 70-109.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  97 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

regulation 9 8  and interpretation. 99  For example,  control of the environ-
ment  is  in  large  measure  a  policy  decision  of the  administrator  of the
Environmental  Protection  Agency.  Parallel  observations  might be  made
for  decisions  relating to  occupational  safety  and  health,  consumer prod-
ucts,  and energy,  including  nuclear  power.  The  same  is  true  of imple-
mentation  decisions.  Rather  than  being ministerial,  they  involve  highly
discretionary  choices  about  the content  of domestic  policy.

To say  this  is  not to  say  that administrators  at  the founding  had  no
policymaking power;  of course they did.  But it is  hard to dispute the view
that there has been  a fundamental  change  in the legal  context, involving
the scope and nature  of policymaking  discretion  that members  of admin-
istrative  agencies  now possess.  As the scope  of the discretion of adminis-
trators  has  increased,  their  function  has  dramatically  changed.  At  the
founding, ministerial functions  were freed from presidential  control,  and
a wide  range of administrative  tasks plausibly could  have been  considered
ministerial.  Similarly,  entities  that  performed judicial  functions,  or  that
engaged  in  tasks  related  to the purse, were  also free of executive  control.
But now many  administrators  exercise  what seem  uncontroversially  to be
"political" functions,  in the sense  that their actions involve  a great deal of
discretion  about policy and  principle in implementing  federal  law.  It re-
mains true that many administrators  also  adjudicate;  but the very process
of adjudication  frequently  involves  the creation  of national  policy under
vague  standards, as in, for example, the work  of the  National  Labor Rela-
tions  Board,  the  Federal  Communications  Commission,  the  Securities
and Exchange  Commission,  and  the Federal Trade  Commission.40 0

In short, in a period in which administrators  exercise a wide range of
discretionary authority, the very meaning of immunizing  them from pres-
idential control  changes dramatically.40 1  When fundamental  policy  deci-
sions  are  made  by  administrators,  immunizing  them  from  presidential
control would have  two significant  consequences:  first, it would  segment
fundamental  policy decisions  from direct political accountability and  thus
the  capacity  for  coordination  and  democratic  control;  and  second,  it
would  subject  these  institutions  to  the perverse  incentives  of factions,  by
removing  the insulating arm  of the  President, and  increasing  the oppor-
tunity for influence  by powerful  private groups. 40 2  Neither  of these  con-
sequences  was  favored  by  the  framers.  Indeed,  both  problems  were
specifically what  the framers  sought to  avoid.  For  both  these  reasons-

398.  See,  e.g.,  Hart, supra note  73, at 107-09  (detailing some regulations  Presidents

are permitted  by  law  to delegate).

399.  See, e.g.,  Martin v. Occupational  Safety & Health  Rev. Comm'n,  111  S.  Ct.  1171,

1176  (1991)  (finding that  interpretation  of statutes  is necessary  task  of OSHA).

400.  See,  e.g.,  id.  at  1177  (acknowledging  broader  powers  of  today's  regulatory

agencies  than  traditional  administrative  agencies).

401.  For  a  description  of the  rise  of regulation  contemporaneous  with  the  rise  of
independence,  see James T. Young, The Relation of the Executive  to the Legislative  Power,
1 Proc.  of the Am.  Pol.  Sci.  Ass'n 47,  47-48  (1904).

402.  See  infra  text accompanying  notes  431-433.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  98 1994

1991

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

retaining  accountability  and  avoiding  factions-an  interpreter  could
reasonably  conclude  either  that  it  makes  sense  to  understand  the  term
"executive"  to include more of the administrative  power than the framers
would have  (specifically)  included, or alternatively,  that a legislative  effort
to  insulate  what  is  misleadingly  labeled  "administration"  from  the
President  is  an  improper  exercise  of  legislative  authority  under  the
Necessary  and Proper  Clause.

All  this  describes  how  the  function  of administration  has  changed,
and in ways  that raise  doubts  about whether  independence  can be  given
to  administrators,  consistent  with  original  constitutional  commitments.
Now consider  a second  change,  one  equally important.

In  the  last  two  centuries,  there  have  been  large-scale  shifts  in  the
nature  of our understanding  of what the administrators'  power  is.  What
was striking about the nineteenth  century view was  the faith in  the ability
of administrative  bodies  to  stand  impartial  in  some  scientific  search  for
the  true  (rather  than  best)  policy judgment.  This  was  the  progressive
faith in administrative  expertise.4 03  As Grundstein,  a turn of the century
theorist, wrote:

Administration...  was  the realm  of the professional,  the scien-
tist and the neutral  technician,  in  the affairs  of government,...
set..,  apart from "Politics" in the sense that while the latter had
"to  do  with  policies  or  expressions  of the state  will"  administra-
tion  had  to  do with  their execution.404
But the post-New Deal view questions  the very presupposition of this
nineteenth  century  model-the  presupposition  that  the political  can  be
so  sharply separated  from  the administrative.  To be sure, many insist on
technocratic  rationality-on  the importance  of expertise  in  helping peo-
ple to make  informed judgments  about the relations between  means  and
ends.405  This  is  an  enduring  theme  in  administrative  law.  We  do  not
mean  to  disparage  the importance  of expertise  in  providing the founda-
tion for sound public judgments.  On the contrary, the  absence  of exper-
tise,  or the distortion  of expert judgment through  anecdote and interest-

403.  The classic account isJames M. Landis, The Administrative  Process (1938).  For a
modem appreciation  of the progressive faith, see Bruce A. Ackerman  & William T. Hassler,
Clean Coal/Dirty Air  4-7  (1981).

404.  Nathan  D.  Grundstein,  Presidential  Power,  Administration  and  Administrative
Law,  18  Geo. Wash.  L. Rev.  285,  289  (1950).  The nineteenth  century theorists'  view was  a
function  of their belief about  the  nature of the material  being  regulated.  Consider  one
nineteenth  century commentator

If we  examine  the  public  problems brought up  for discussion  in  the President's
message  it will  be  seen that  they  are  pre-eminently  industrial  or  commercial  in
character  and  that  they  are  technical  rather  than  popular.  The  numbers  and
importance of this  class  of public problems  are  growing by leaps and bounds,--a
fact which  necessarily brings  into greater prominence  the executive  as the expert
branch  of government.

Young, supra  note  401,  at 49.

61-63.

405.  See Ackerman  & Hassler,  supra  note 403,  at 26-27;  Breyer,  supra note  189,  at

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  99 1994

COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

* group power, is  an important obstacle to a well-functioning  system  of reg-
ulatory  law.40 6  But there  has been  an  unmistakable  and  we  believe  fully
warranted  diminution in the  progressive era's faith in the ability of exper-
tise  to  solve  regulatory  problems  on  its  own.  This  diminution  has
brought about a significant shift.  As  noted by (it is  reported) Judge Scalia
in  the per  curiam  decision  of a  three judge  district  court striking  a por-
tion  of the  Gramm-Rudman-Hollings  Act,

These  cases  reflect  considerable  shifts  over  the  course  of time,
not only in  the  Supreme  Court's resolutions  of particular issues
relating to  the removal  power, but more  importantly in the  con-
stitutional premises underlying  those  resolutions.  It is  not clear,
moreover,  that  these  shifts  are  at  an  end.  Justice  Sutherland's
decision  in  Humphrey's Executor, handed  down  the  same  day  as
A.L.A.  Schecter  Poultry  Corp.  v.  United  States,  295  U.S.  495
(1935),  is stamped with some  of the  political science  preconcep-
tions characteristic  of its era and not of the present day....  It is
not as  obvious today as  it seemed  in the  1930s  that there can  be
such  things  as  genuinely  "independent"  regulatory  agencies,
bodies  of  impartial  experts  whose  independence  from  the
President  does  not  entail  correspondingly  greater  dependence
upon  the committees  of Congress  to which  they are  then imme-
diately  accountable;  or indeed,  that  the  decisions  of such  agen-
cies  so  clearly  involve  scientific judgment  rather  than  political
choice  that  it  is  even  theoretically  desirable  to  insulate  them
from the  democratic  process.40 7

In a world where  administration  is conceived  as  apolitical,40 8  granting ad-
ministrators  relatively  independent  authority  could  be  thought  to  raise
few  constitutional  issues.  If  the  administrators  are  simply  executing  a
technical  skill, there is  little reason  to make  theirjudgment subject to the
review  of the  President.  In  such  a  world,  the  grant  of  authority  to  in-
dependent  commissions  could build directly  on two  precedents  provided
in  the framing  period-ministerial  duties,  which by definition  do  not in-
volve  discretion,  and  the  quasi-adjudicative  Comptroller.  The  Supreme
Court accepted  this  highly  technocratic  conception  of administration  in
Humphrey's Executor v.  United States,40 9 the  heyday of the progressive  model
within  the  judiciary.  On  progressive  assumptions,  Humphrey's Executor
builds  quite  directly  on framing  premises  and  precedents  insofar  as  the
Court  emphasized  quasi-legislative  and  quasi-adjudicative  functions-an

406.  See Ackerman  & Hassler,  supra note  403,  at 26-27; Breyer,  supra  note  189,  at

33-39.

407.  Synar v. United  States,  626 F. Supp. 1374, 1398  (D.D.C.)  (per curiam),  afFd sub

nom.  Bowsher  v.  Synar, 478  U.S.  714  (1986).

408.  This  was  the  battle  cry  of  the  nineteenth  century  constitutionalists  that  we

discussed  in Part II.  See  supra  text accompanying  notes  187-189.

409.  295  U.S. 602  (1935).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  100 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

irony in  view of the  widespread  view  that  the  case  was  a bizarre  and  un-
founded exercise  in  constitutional  innovation.4 10

But once this view bf administration  changes-once  one sees the na-
ture  of  administration  as  fundamentally  political-new  questions  are
raised  about  the  extent  to which  courts  may  permit  this  power  to be  in-
dependent  of the President.  Currently, a fundamental  premise of admin-
istrative law is  the  lawmaking ingredient  of practically every executive  act,
including,  in  Chevron U.S.A.  v. NRDC,41  the  act  of interpretation  itself.
In  such  a  period,  the  whole  notion  of independent  political  bodies  be-
comes  highly  problematic,  especially in  light  of founding  commitments.
The  presupposition  behind  independent  administration-what  made  it
capable  of drawing  on  analogies  like  the  Comptroller  General  and  the
Postmaster  in  the  founding period-is  no longer sustainable.  The  ques-
tion  for interpretation  is  how to  accommodate  this fundamental  change
in  understanding.

If  all  this  is  true,  an  argument  for  the  strongly  unitary  executive
under modem  conditions  takes  the  following form.  From  the  actual  ad-
ministrative  entities  that  the  framers  established,  we  can  infer  that  the
framers  did  not intend  to allow  administrative  officials  exercising  broad
policymaking  authority  to  operate  independently  of  the  President.41 2
With  respect  to  such  officials,  they  made  no explicit judgment, for  their
existence  was  not foreseen.  The  framers  anticipated  a  much smaller  na-
tional  government, in which states would  have  the fundamental  role and
in which Congress would  engage  in basic policymaking, and they believed
that  the  President  would  exercise  a good  deal  of discretionary  authority
only in international  relations. 413  The  execution  of federal  domestic  law
would often  be  mechanical,  and  crucially,  nonpolitical.  For  this  reason,
the  founding  commitment  to  a  unitary  executive  could  coexist  with  a
range  of federal  officials  not directly  subject  to presidential  control.

To  the  framers,  centralization  of executive  power  in  the  President
was indeed  designed  to  promote  accountability,  expedition,  and  coordi-
nation  in federal  law,  and  nothing we  have  said  questions  their  commit-
ment to a unitary  executive at this level  of generality.  Indeed,  these were
fundamental  constitutional  principles.  Our point is  only that the framers
did not believe  that those  principles would  be compromised  by insulating
particular  administrators  from  presidential  control.

410.  See, e.g.,  Miller, supra note  1, at 92-94  (describing Humphrey's Executor as  "one of
the  more egregious  opinions"  written by the Supreme Court); Van Alstyne, supra note 278,
at  116  n.51  (arguing  that  Humphrey's was  an  awkward  attempt  at  narrowing  without
overruling  the  embarrassing  decision  in Myers).

411.  467  U.S.  837, 842-45  (1984).
412.  A  qualification  is  necessary  here:  The early  Congress  did  allow  independence

with  respect to  control  over  the purse.  See  supra text accompanying  notes  121-143.

413.  As  discussed  above,  the  structure  of Article  II  provides  some  indication  of the
framers'  intent;  Article II gives the President "power" over foreign affairs, while  imposing a
"duty" on  the President to  carry out "Congress'"  laws.  See supra text accompanying  notes
119-121.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  101 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

It was  in  the nineteenth  century that one  of the features distinguish-
ing the framers'  world from ours  changed.  Here was the rise of a massive
federal  bureaucracy;4 14  but unlike  the legal  culture  today,  the  culture  of
the  nineteenth  century  theorists  was  firm  in  its  faith  in  the  scientific
model  of administration,  so  that  the  theorists  did not see  constitutional
problems  with  relatively  independent  agencies.  The  nineteenth  century
culture  could accommodate  the growth in bureaucracy by approving rela-
tively  independent  agencies  while  staying within  the bounds  of fidelity.

But for us,  the central fact of the eighteenth  century  executive  (lim-
ited  national  government  and  limited  delegations  to federal  administra-
tors)  has  changed,  and the central assumption  of the  nineteenth  century
solution  (neutral,  scientific  administration)  has failed.  For  now, we  not
only have  a large  administrative  bureaucracy,  but we also  have  profound
skepticism  about whether  it is possible  and desirable for that bureaucracy
to  operate free  from politicaljudgment.  EchoingJustice  Brandeis  (quot-
ing Justice  Holmes)  in  Erie R.R.  Co.  v.  Tompkins,4 15  we could  say  that  ad-
ministration "in the sense in which courts speak of it today" can no longer
be  understood  to  be  neutral,  or  scientific.  Politics  is  at  its  core,  in  the
sense  that valuejudgments  are pervasive  and democratic  controls on poli-
cymaking  are  indispensable. 4 16  This raises  a central  problem  for a  mod-
em bureaucratic  state.  The  question  the  interpreter must answer is  how
best to accommodate  this current skepticism-what structure  makes most
sense  of the  framers'  design,  given  the  change  in  the  extent  of the  bu-
reaucracy  and  the  change  in  our understanding  of what bureaucracy  is.
The answer to this question  is not simple.  No doubt our understand-
ings  are  complex and multiple, and no  doubt the principal place for reg-
istering  changes  in  understanding  is  the  legislature,  not  the judiciary.
Congress'  diminished  enthusiasm  for  the  independent  agency  form  at-
tests to the possibility that new views about expertise  and factionalism  can
influence  legislative  judgments,  informed  by  constitutional  considera-
tions,  about  appropriate  structures. 4 17  It would  be  possible  to  say  that
courts should not take  account of changed understandings  in the process
of  constitutional  interpretation.  But  it  is  also  possible  to  think  that
changes  of this  kind are  relevant  to interpretation  as well  as  to  lawmak-
ing, as the Court itself recently insisted in describing  the shifts from Pessy
to Brown and Lochner to  West  Coast Hotel.4 18

A structural  argument  for a unitary  executive,  then,  comes  down  to
this:  Where  the framers  allocated  a power  that  they thought  of as  polit-
ical,  that  power  was allocated  to people  who  were  themselves  politically
accountable.  This was part of the  fundamental  commitments  to account-

414.  See  Young, supra note  401,  at 47-48.
415.  304 U.S.  64,  79  (1938).
416.  It is not necessary  to  claim  that such  control must take  any  particular  form.
417.  See  Sunstein,  supra note  396,  at 478-83.
418.  See  Planned Parenthood v.  Casey,  112 S. Ct. 2791,  2812-14 (1992);  Lessig, supra

note  350,  at 27-31,  67-71.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  102 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

ability  and  avoidance  of  factionalism.  At the  founding period,  the  exist-
in  administration  could  not
ence  of  a  degree  of  independence 
realistically  have  been  thought  to  compromise  these  commitments.
Today,  by contrast,  a  strong  presumption  of unitariness  is  necessary  in
order  to promote  the  original  constitutional  commitments.  The  legisla-
tive  creation  of  domestic  officials  operating  independently  of  the
President  but  exercising  important  discretionary  policymaking  power
now  stands  inconsistent  with  founding  commitments.

It  follows  that  in  order  to  be  faithful  to  the  founding  vision  in
changed  circumstances,  courts  must  now bar  Congress,  at least as  a  pre-
sumption, from  immunizing from  presidential  control the activities  of of-
ficials  who exercise discretionary policymaking  authority-at least if those
officials  are  not adjudicators. 4 19  In  order  to  be  faithful  to  the  original
design, that is, the  interpreter must see as  part of the  constitutional struc-
ture a constraint not explicitly stated  in that design,  requiring that certain
kinds  of policymaking  remain  within  the  control  of the  executive.

This general  statement leaves  many unanswered  questions and  ambi-
guities,  and  we  will  address  some  of them  below.  But  the  basic  conclu-
sions  of the  argument are  not obscure.  To  the  extent that Congress  has
authorized  executive  officials  to  engage  in  adjudicative  tasks,  it may  im-
munize  those  officials from presidential  control by, for example,  prevent-
ing  presidential  interference  in  ongoing  cases  and  offering  "for  cause"
protection  against  discharge.  To  the  extent  that  an  employee  has  truly
ministerial  tasks,  and is  not engaged in  policymaking  activity, "for cause"
protections  are  entirely  acceptable.  The  Court was  correct  in Myers;  the
Civil  Service  Act  is  constitutional. 420  But  to  the  extent  that  an  agency
official  makes  discretionary  decisions  about the  content  of public  policy,
the  best reading of the  constitutional  plan is  that in  general,  the  official
may  not be  insulated  from presidential  supervision.  The  President  must
retain  the  power  to  discharge  him  if his  decisions  are  contrary  to  presi-
dential  dictates.

A  contrary  view,  set  out forcefully  by Abner  Greene,  could  also  be
suggested  by this same history--one  that argues  against a strongly unitary
executive. 42 1  Perhaps  the  original  design reflected  a  carefully  calibrated
set  of judgments  about  institutional  authority,  with  a  division  between
the  most  important
lawmaking  and  law  implementation;  perhaps 
changed  circumstance  was  the disturbance  of this calibration through the
delegation  of policymaking  authority  to the  President.  On this view,  the
key founding  commitments call for diffusion of power and for checks and

419.  Here  we  mean  adjudicators  in  the  sense  of  non-policymaking  adjudication
discussed  in Martin  v. Occupational  Safety  & Health  Rev.  Comm'n,  111  S. Ct. 1171,  1178
(1991).

420.  See  Myers  v. United  States,  272  U.S.  52  (1926).
421.  See Abner S. Greene,  Checks and Balances  in an Era of Presidential Lawmaking,

61  U.  Chi. L.  Rev.  123,  125-26  (1993).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  103 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

balances  between  the  legislature  and  the  executive. 422  The  principal
threat  of the post-New Deal period lies in the concentration of lawmaking
and law-executing  power  within  the  presidency.  To  restore  the  original
balance,  courts  must  now  allow  a  high  degree  of  independence  from
presidential  power, so  as  to prevent  what the framers  dreaded most:  the
concentration  of governmental  power  in  a  single  institution-here,  the
executive. 423

This  argument  also  stresses  the  need  to  maintain  fidelity  with  the
original constitutional  design.  It too is an argument of translation.  But it
takes  the post-New  Deal developments  as  a reason  for more  rather  than
less  caution about  unitariness in  administration.  The  new circumstances
mean  that  unitariness  is  a far  greater  threat  than  it once  was-not  that
unitariness  is a  constitutionally  compelled  solution.4 24

More  particularly,  this  view  fears  that  the  new  delegations  have
threatened to confer excessive  power on the  executive  branch-to create
an "imperial presidency."  The  changed circumstances  argue  in favor of a
narrow reading of "executive power"  and for broad  congressional  author-
ity  under  the  Necessary  and  Proper  Clause,  precisely  in  the  interest  of
maintaining  the  original  commitment  to  a  system  of  checks  and  bal-
ances.4 25  On  this  view,  congressional  power  to  insulate  administration
from presidential  control  is  a necessary  quid pro  quo for the  exercise  of
discretionary  lawmaking  power by  people  other  than  legislators. 426  The
rise of lawmaking  by  nonlegislative  bodies-most especially,  the  downfall
of the nondelegation  doctrine 427-makes 
it  especially  necessary  to  insist
on congressional  prerogatives  under the Necessary and  Proper Clause,  in
order to  prevent an  aggregation  of powers  in  the  presidency.  In  short,
Greene  urges, the post-New Deal  developments  mean  that modern inter-
preters  should  place  less  value  on  unitariness  than  did  the  framers,  be-
cause  of  the  need  to  maintain  fidelity  with  the  commitment  to  the
diffusion  of power.4 28

This  argument  is  hardly without force.  It shows  that there  is  no al-
gorithm for deciding how to maintain fidelity with  past instructions in  the
face  of changed  circumstances.  But we  do  not believe  that the argument

422.  See  id.
423.  See  id.
424.  See  id.
425.  See  id.  at 137-38.
426.  A  view  of this  kind  has  been  prominently  set out  by Justice  White.  See  INS  v.
Chadha,  462  U.S.  919,  967  (1983)  (White, J.,  dissenting)  (arguing  that  legislative  veto  is
appropriate  means  by  which  Congress  can  secure  accountability  of  executive  and
independent agencies  that have  significant  delegated  power).

427.  The  nondelegation  doctrine  bans  open-ended  grants  of discretionary  authority
to agencies.  See A.L.A.  Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States,  295 U.S.  495  (1935).  For
the brief history  of the doctrine-not  invoked  to invalidate  a statute  since Schechter itself-
see  Stephen  G.  Breyer  & Richard  B.  Stewart,  Administrative  Law  and  Regulatory  Policy:
Problems,  Text, and  Cases  66-91  (3d ed.  1992).

428.  See  Greene,  supra note  421,  at 141-42.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  104 1994

1994]

THE PRESDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

is ultimately persuasive.  The  first and  most fundamental  problem is  that
the  argument  treats  diffusion  of power as  an  end in  itself, rather  than as
an  instrument for serving various  purposes  connected with  the  preserva-
tion  of liberty.  The  second  problem  is  that  even  if broad delegations  of
authority  are  the  problem,  independent  agencies  are  not the  solution.

We can  make these points by considering two lessons of the  post-New
Deal  experience.  First,  there  is  the  problem  of administrative  accounta-
bility,  one  of  the  important  founding  values.  The  rise  of independent
regulatory  commissions  compromises  that value. 429  Second, there  is  the
problem  of faction,  the very problem  that  the  system  of checks  and bal-
ances  was intended  to solve.  To the  extent that we multiply  (and special-
ize)  the  bodies  exercising  lawmaking  power  (without a  presidential  or
congressional  check),  we  increase  geometrically  the  opportunities  and
the  costs  of faction.  From  the standpoint  of constitutional structure  and
constitutional  commitments,  the  creation  of a body of independent  enti-
ties  seems  to be  a cure  worse  than  the  disease.  Both  theory and  practice
support this  conclusion. 430

The  original  diffusion  of power  was  supposed  to  protect  liberty,  in
large  part by limiting the  authority of factions. 431  The rise  of a large  bu-
reaucracy immunized  from presidential  control  tends to endanger  rather
than  promote  that original  goal.4 32  Through  concentrating  power in  bu-
reaucracies  that combine  lawmaking  and  law-executing  authority, we  do
not promote  a healthy  system of checks  and  balances,  but instead aggra-
vate  the relevant  risks to liberty.4 33  The insulating  arm of the President is
not  free  from  risk.  But  because  the  President  has  a  national  constitu-
ency-unlike  relevant  members  of Congress,  who  oversee  independent

429.  Jerry  Mashaw  argues 

legislative
policymaking  discretion,  see Jerry L.  Mashaw, Prodelegation:  Why Administrators  Should
Make Political Decisions,  1 J.L. Econ. & Org. 81,  81-82  (1985); but the argument  depends
crucially  on the  assumption  of presidential  direction  of bureaucracy.

in  fiavor  of  administrative 

rather 

than 

430.  See Bernstein, supra note 390, at 291-97  (concluding that independent agencies
"have  proved  to  be  more  susceptible  to  private  pressures,  to  manipulation  for  private
purposes,  and  to  administrative  and  public  apathy  than  other  types  of  government
agencies");  Cass  R  Sunstein,  Paradoxes  of the  Regulatory  State,  57  U.  Chi.  L.  Rev.  407,
426-28,  439-40  (1990)  (arguing  that independent agencies have  been  "highly susceptible
to the  political  pressure  of well-organized  private  groups").
431.  See  The  Federalist  Nos.  47-51  (James Madison).
432.  See supra  note 429.
433.  See  Bernstein,  supra  note  390,  at 293.  Barry Weingast  and  Mark  Moran  have
independent  agencies  by  congressional
discussed 
committees,  noting  that committees  are  not the  same as  Congress.  Weingast  argues  that
there  is  too simple a slippage from legislative  control to  committee influence.  See  Barry R.
Weingast & MarkJ. Moran,  Bureaucratic  Discretion or Congressional  Control?  Regulatory
Policymaking  by  the  Federal  Trade  Commission,  91  J.  Pol.  Econ.  765,  777-79,  788-92
(1983)  [hereinafter  Weingast  &  Moran,  Bureaucratic  Discretion];  Barry  R.  Weingast  &
Mark J.  Moran,  The  Myth  of Runaway  Bureaucracy.  The  Case  of the  FTC,  Regulation,
May/June  1982,  at 33,  33-34 [hereinafter Weingast  & Moran,  Runaway Bureaucracy];  see
also  INS  v. Chadha,  462  U.S. 919,  946-48  (1983).

the  problems  of  control  over 

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  105 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

agencies  with  often  parochial  agendas-it  appears  to  operate  as  an  im-
portant counterweight  to  factional  influence  over  administration. 43 4

Perhaps Congress  can point to the need  to limit presidential author-
ity in  order  to support some  isolated  efforts  to  prevent concentration  of
power in the President.  We will offer some  examples  below.  But it seems
clear  that the  changed  circumstances  do notjustify  the  immunization  of
all  or  most bureaucratic  power from  the  President.  This  is  because  it is
hard to identify how independent  administration is  a realistic  solution  to
the  constitutional  problems  caused  by changed  circumstances.  Indeed,
independent administration would sacrifice  many values  the founders  saw
as  essential.

We  conclude  that  if the  framers  thought  that  the  realm  of  "execu-
tive"  power was  roughly  coextensive  with  the  realm  of political  choice,  it
makes  sense  to  say  that  most of modem  administration  must fall  under
the  power of the  executive;  and  this is  so  even  if the framers  had  a  rela-
tively  capacious,  but  not  specifically  constitutionalized,  conception  of
what counted as "the administrative."  Their conception  of administrative
(or  permissibly  nonexecutive)  power  certainly  did  not  extend  to  the
broad-scale  selection  of domestic  policies  for the  country  as  a whole.  If
we  are  to  translate  their  structural  choices  into  current  conditions,  we
may conclude  that a largely hierarchical  executive  branch  is  the best way
of keeping faith with  the original plan.  At least this is  so  if we are  asking
whether  the  President  has  a degree  of  removal  and  supervisory  power
over  people  who  are  authorized  to  make  high-level  discretionary  deci-
sions about  the content of national  policy.

IV.  CURRENT  ISSUES

In this section, we briefly discuss  the implications of our approach  on
the  resolution  of current  issues  involving  the  relationship  between  the
President  and  the administration.  Our goal is  not to  reach final  conclu-
sions about these questions, many of which would require far more elabo-
rate  treatment than  we  can  provide  here.  We are  concerned  principally
with  a  general  approach,  not with  specific  solutions.  We  are  attempting
to  see  how  the  argument  from  translation  might  bear  on  contemporary
disputes,  a  surprisingly  large  number  of which  are  unsettled.

A.  Constitutionality of Independent Agencies

We have noted that the 1980s saw a surprising rebirth of contestation
about  the issue  of presidential  control  over administration  of the  laws. 43 5
It is clear from  the recent  cases  that  the so-called  independent  agencies
are  constitutional-at  least in  the sense  that  Congress  has  the power  to
provide  that some  administrative  officers  do  not serve  at  the  pleasure  of

434.  See Frank H. Easterbrook,  Public Choice and  Our Vision  of the State, 107  Harv.

L. Rev.  (forthcoming  1994).

435.  See supra  notes  11-18  and  accompanying  text.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  106 1994

19941

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

the  President.4 36  To this  extent,  the  constitutional  assault  on independ-
ent administration, at least in its broadest forms, has been  decisively repu-
diated.  And  to  this  extent,  we  think  that  current  law  is  entirely
unobjectionable.  The  independent  agencies  perform  a large  number of
adjudicative  functions; consider  the  NLRB,  the FTC,  and the FCC.  More
important, and in  our view crucially, it is possible to interpret the statutes
conferring  independence  on  certain  agencies  in  such  a way  as  to  main-
tain  the  essentials  of presidential  power,  that  is,  the  power  necessary  to
maintain  basic presidential  authority over the  relevant areas.4 37  It  follows
from  this interpretation  that, for example, President Clinton has a degree
of supervisory authority  over the  FCC, the  FTC, and  the NLRB,  insofar as
broad policymaking  authority is involved.  This conclusion  is  inconsistent
with  current  understandings  in  Congress  and  the  executive  branch,43 8
but it is, in our view,  consistent with a proper understanding of the  consti-
tutional  scheme.

Insofar  as we  emphasize  this last point, we  claim  that complete  inde-
pendence  from the  President-if Congress  sought to create  it-would in
many cases raise  serious problems.  But the unitary structure for which we
argue  would produce  no question  about independence  in cases  in which
special  institutional  considerations  support  a legislative judgment  that  it
is proper to  achieve  a degree  of immunity  from  the  President.  Here  the
Necessary  and  Proper  Clause  provides ample  authority,  and here  the  ar-
gument from changed circumstances  is not decisive, since it does not sup-
ply  considerations  that  argue  sufficiently  against  limiting  presidential
authority.  The  Federal  Reserve  Board  is  a  good  example.  There  is  no
question  that  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  exercises  policymaking  author-
ity;  but just as  the  framers  sought to  insulate  the  Comptroller  from  the
President, and vested the  discretion  over  deposits in  the U.S. Bank  in the
Secretary  of  the  Treasury,43 9  so  too  the  value  of  separating  the  "purse
from the sword" wouldjustify  keeping the Federal Reserve  Board  (holder
of the  post-Keynesian  purse)  distant  from  the  President.

436.  See,  e.g., Morrison v. Olson,  487 U.S. 654  (1988)  (upholding constitutionality  of
independent  prosecutor);  Bowsher v.  Synar, 478  U.S. 714  (1986)  (upholding lawmaking
Comptroller General removable  only by congressional initiative, but limiting Comptroller's
ability  to perform  executive  functions).

437.  See  infra  Part IV.C.
438.  For  example,  in  their  Executive  Orders  requiring  administrative  agencies  to
undertake  cost-benefit  analyses  before  enacting  new  regulations,  both  President  Reagan
and President Clinton expressly exempted  those agencies that are considered independent
under  44 U.S.C.  § 3502(10)  (1988).  See  Exec.  Order  No.  12,866,  58  Fed.  Reg.  51,735
(1993)  (but  requiring  all  agencies  to  comply  with  regulatory  agenda  for  interagency
coordination);  Exec.  Order  No.  12,291,  3  C.F.R.  127,  128  (1981),  reprinted  in  5  U.S.C.
§ 601  (1988);  see  also  139  Cong. Rec.  12,909  (1993)  (statement  of Sen.  Exon, comparing
the  "independent  forum  of  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  to  the  politically
controlled  Department  of Transportation").

439.  See supra text accompanying notes  123-125,  139-143;  see also the  discussion  in

Froomkin,  supra  note  120,  at 810  & n.149.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  107 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

This is a historical  point; but it is supported by a distinctive  structural
consideration.  If  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  were  subject  to  day-to-day
presidential supervision,  there would  be a risk that in reality,  or in public
perception,  the  money supply would be manipulated  by the  President for
political  reasons.  Even  a perception  of this  sort would  have  corrosive  ef-
fects  on  democratic  processes;  it would  mean  that  the  state  of the  econ-
omy  would  be  perceived  to  be  an  artifact  of  short-term  partisan
considerations.  This would  be  intolerable  from  the  democratic  point of
view;  it  would  likely  have  adverse  effects  on  the  economy  as  well.
Congress could permissibly decide  that it is proper to prevent this state  of
affairs.  But this argument is limited  to  the  particular concerns  surround-
ing  the  Federal  Reserve  Board;  it  could  not easily  be  invoked  for  such
agencies  as  EPA,  OSHA,  or  even  the  nominally independent  NLRB.

To  be  sure,  it would  be  possible  to  say  that  independence  is  quite
generally  required  to  protect against  distortions  of elections  by political
interest.  If,  for example,  the EPA is  subject  to presidential  authority, per-
haps  environmental  enforcement  will  be  influenced  by  electoral  consid-
erations.  It would  be  most surprising if this  has never  happened  in  the
past.  But independence  would  pose  obvious  difficulties  for  a  range  of
constitutionally  recognized  policies such  as  coordination 4 40  and account-
ability.  The  risks  to  democratic  elections  are  far  greater  for  a  political
Federal  Reserve  than for  a political  EPA.  And if independence  were  ac-
ceptable for  the EPA,  it would  probably be  acceptable  nearly everywhere
else.  We do  not think  that the argument  that independence  is  necessary
should  be  accepted  without  a  very  strong  congressional  showing;  the
model  of the Federal  Reserve  could not be easily adopted elsewhere  with-
out compromising  central  (if translated)  constitutional  commitments.

B. 

Immunizing Specific Functions from the President

The  relevant  history suggests  that  Congress  may  indeed  immunize
some  specific  functions  from  the  President,  and  nothing  in  subsequent
circumstances  should  draw  this  conclusion  into  question.  As  we  have
seen,  the  framers  did  not  believe  that  prosecutorial  authority  need  be
concentrated 
the  Attorney
General. 44 '  Moreover,  our  argument  based  on  changed  circumstances
does  not lead  to  the  conclusion  that the Independent  Counsel  Act is  un-
constitutional.  We  have  emphasized  the  need  to promote  accountability
and  to limit factionalism  by ensuring that large-scale  domestic  policymak-

the  President  operating 

through 

in 

440.  Consider in  this  regard  the  large  number  of agencies  enforcing  environmental
policy and the importance  of a coordinating presidential  role in  order to produce  rational
regulation.  See generally Al  Gore, From Red Tape  to Results:  Creating a Government that
Works  Better  & Costs  Less  (National  Performance  Committee,  1993)  (concluding  that
helpful method  to  eliminate  waste  would be  to give  the President greater power);  see also
Breyer,  supra  note  189,  at  10-29  (cataloguing  problems  in  lack  of  coordination  and
systematization  of policy).

441.  See  supra Part II.A.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  108 1994

19941

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

ing  is not placed  in independent  actors.44 2  It  would  be  an  unwarranted
expansion  of the  argument  to  apply  it to  the  independent counsel,  who
does  not engage  in  domestic  policymaking  in  the  sense  in which  we  un-
derstand  that  term.44 3

There  is  a  further  consideration.  As  in  the  case  of  the  Federal
Reserve  Board,  a special  structural justification  applies  to  the  independ-
ent prosecutor.  The structural  consideration  lies in  the notion,  of course
familiar  to  the  framers,  that  no  person  should  be  judge  in  his  own
cause.44 4  It  is  at  least  unseemly4 45  to  say  that  the  prosecution  of high-
level executive  branch officials will be controlled by other high-level exec-
utive branch officials.  Congress  could reasonably  decide  that the appear-
ance or reality of favoritism  requires  an independent prosecutor for such
officials.  If the  congressional judgment is reasonable  on this point, courts
should defer, especially in light of the  complexity  and delicacy  of the un-
derlying  questions.  To be  sure,  many  people  have  offered plausible  ob-
jections  to  the  Independent  Counsel  Act,446  but  these  objections  raise
issues  of policy,  not of  constitutional  obligation,  at least in  light  of  the
Constitution's  structural  commitment  to  preventing  self-dealing  by gov-
ernment  officials.

The  Court's  validation  of the  Independent  Counsel  Act  is probably
the  largest and most controversial  innovation in  the  recent cases.  Before
1980,  there was general agreement  that executive  officers must be  under
the  authority  of  the  President;  the  Court  distinguished  Humphrey's
Executor from  Myers  on precisely  this  ground.447  Now  the  distinction  lies
elsewhere,  in  the  line between  independence,  which is  sometimes  consti-
tutional, and  encroachment, which is  not.44 8  On  the old view,  independ-
ent  agencies  performed  adjudicative  and  legislative  functions  as  well  as
executive functions, and it was  for this reason that they could be insulated

442.  See  supra text accompanying  notes  401-402.
443.  To say  this  is not to deny  that the independent  counsel has  discretion,  or to say
that the Act is  desirable as  a simple  matter of policy.  Note  too  that  the statute  upheld in
Morrison  v.  Olson,  487  U.S.  654  (1988),  allowed  the  Attorney  General  to  discharge  the
counsel for "good cause," a provision  that meant the counsel is not truly independent,  and
that therefore  makes  the  constitutional  issue  simpler.  See  infra  text accompanying  notes
465-466.

444.  See,  e.g.,  The Federalist No.  78,  at 467  (Alexander Hamilton)  (Clinton Rossiter

ed.,  1961).

445.  Cf. Ex parte  Siebold, 100 U.S. 371,  397-98  (1879)  (agreeing with Congress  that it
is most appropriate  for circuit  courts  to  appoint officers  to  monitor elections  for federal
officials).

446.  See  Brief  for  Edward  H.  Levi,  Griffin  B. Bell,  and  William  French  Smith  as
Amicus  Curiae  in Support of Appellant at 11,  Morrison v. Olson, 487  U.S. 654  (1988)  (No.
87-1279).

447.  See  Humphrey's  Executor  v.  United  States,  295  U.S.  602,  627 

(1935)
(distinguishing  Myers  on  grounds  that  office  of postmaster  is  purely executive,  unlike  a
commissioner  of FTC).

448.  See  infra  Part IV.E.  For an  earlier suggestion  to  this  effect,  see  Strauss,  supra
note  7,  at 667-68  (advocating  a separation  of function  and checks  and  balances analysis
rather  than  formal separation  of powers analysis).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  109 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW  REViEW

[Vol.  94:1

from the  President.  But after  Morrison v.  O1son,449  execution  of the laws
can  be  split  off from  the President  if the  splitting  does not  prevent  the
President from  performing his  "constitutionally  appointed  functions."45 0
This is a lamentably vague standard;  but it has considerable  historical  sup-
port insofar as it turns  on whether the  authority in  question  is within  the
Article  II  enumeration. 45'  For  present  purposes  our  conclusion  is  very
modest:  At  least  insofar  as  we  are  dealing  with  prosecutors  for  whom
there  is  a special  claim  for  independence-as  is  of  course  the  case  for
investigation  of high-level  presidential  appointees-some  degree  of inde-
pendence  is  constitutionally  acceptable.  Other  efforts  to insulate  prose-
cution  would be  more  difficult,  because  the  prosecutorial  power  is  now
intermingled  with  substantive  policymaking. 452

C.  What Does  "Good Cause" Mean?

In  Morrison,  the  Attorney  General  was  able  to  discharge  the  in-
dependent  counsel  for  "good  cause,"  and  the  Court  emphasized  this
point  in  upholding  the  (for  this  reason  misnamed?)  Independent
Counsel Act. 453  But  the  Court  has  not  said  what  "good  cause"  means.
The  Court has  also failed  to define  "inefficiency,  neglect of duty, or  mal-
feasance  in  office"-the  ordinary  standards  for  presidential  removal  of
members  of  the  independent  commissions. 45 4  Nor  does  anything  in
Humphrey's Executor speak  to  the particular  issue,  notwithstanding  some
casual  dicta  suggesting  a  high degree  of independence. 455

This is an  extremely  important matter.  There  is no controlling judi-
cial  decision  on  how  "independent"  the  independent  agencies  and  of-
ficers  can  legitimately  claim  to  be.  If  the  statutory  words  allow  for
considerable  presidential  removal  (and  hence  supervisory)  power,  the
notion  of independent administration  of the  laws can  be solved simply as
a matter of statutory construction.  Perhaps  Congress  has not, in fact,  cre-
ated  any truly  independent administrators.

We  think that  it would indeed  be  possible  to interpret  the  relevant
statutes  as allowing  a large  degree  of removal  and  supervisory  power  to
remain  in  the  President.  At  the  very  least,  the  statutory  words  do  not
entirely  immunize  commissioners  from  the  control  of the  President, but

449.  487 U.S.  654  (1988).
450.  Id.  at 685.
451.  See  supra Part II.B.
452.  Consider  environmental  policy, immigration  policy, and  the  "war on  drugs."
453.  487 U.S.  at 696.
454.  See,  e.g.,  15  U.S.C.  § 41  (1988)  (establishment  of FTC);  29  U.S.C.  § 661(b)
(1988)  (appointment  of commissioners  for OSHRC).  But see 26  U.S.C.  §  7443(f)  (1988)
(Tax  Court judges may be  removed  by  the President,  "after notice and opporlunity for public
hearing, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office,  but for no other reason."
(emphasis  added)).

455.  In  dicta,  Justice  Sutherland  describes  the  commissioners  of  the  FTC  as
"independent  of executive  authority,  except  in selection."  Humphrey's  Executor v.  United
States,  295  U.S.  602,  625  (1935);  see  also  Greene,  supra note  421,  at  166.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  110 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

instead allow him  to  remove  them  in  certain  circumstances.  Purely  as a
textual matter, the words  "good cause"  and "inefficiency,  neglect  of duty,
or malfeasance  in  office"  seem  best read  to  grant the President  at least
something  in  the way  of supervisory  and  removal  power-allowing  him,
for example,  to discharge,  as inefficient  or neglectful  of duty, those com-
missioners who  show lack  of diligence,  ignorance,  incompetence,  or lack
of commitment to  their legal  duties.  The  statutory words  might even  al-
low discharge of commissioners who have  frequently or on important oc-
casions acted in ways inconsistent with  the President's  wishes with  respect
to  what  is  required  by  sound  policy.  Perhaps  in  some  such  cases,  the
statutory  basis for  discharge  has been  met.

Of course,  the case  would be easier  if the  President could  show  that
the  officer's  policy judgments  amount  not just  to  policy  disagreements
but  to  unquestionable  inefficiency,  neglect,  or  malfeasance-because
they  reflect  (for example)  incompetence  or a refusal  adequately  to  con-
sider consequences.  But perhaps the President's power could  go further.
A  commissioner  of the FTC  might well,  for example,  be  thought to  ne-
glect her  duty if she  consistently  ignores  what  the  President  has  said,  at
least if what  the President has said is  supported  by law or by good policy
justifications.  At the minimum, we  suggest that the  statutory words  could
be  taken  to allow a degree  of substantive  supervision  by  the  President.

This  result  might  seem  strongly  counterintuitive  in  light of the  fre-
quent understanding  that independent  agencies  are  entirely immunized
from  presidential  policymaking. 456  But there  is  a  partial  precedent  for
precisely  this  conclusion:  Bowsher  v.  Synar.457  In  that  case,  the  Court
held  that  Congress  could  not delegate  power to  administer  the  Gramm-
Rudman-Hollings  Act to the Comptroller General,  because-and this  is a
central  claim-the  Comptroller was subject to  congressional  will.  In  the
Court's view,  those  who  execute  the  law must not be  subject to  the poli-
cymaking  authority  of the  Congress  except insofar  as  legislative  instruc-
tions  are  embodied  in  substantive  law. 458  The  relevant  statute  allowed
the  Congress  to  discharge  the  Comptroller  for "inefficiency,"  "abuse  of
office,"  "neglect of duty,"  or "malfeasance." 459  The  Court said  that these
words  conferred on  Congress  "very broad"  removal power and  would au-
thorize Congress to remove the Comptroller for "any number of actual  or
perceived  transgressions  of legislative  will."460

The  words  governing  congressional  power  over  the  Comptroller
General  and  presidential  power  over  independent  agencies  are  substan-
tially the same.  If those words have  the same meaning in these admittedly
different  contexts,  the  President  turns  out  to  have  considerable  power
over  the  commissioners.  If  the  words  have  the  same  meaning,  the

456.  See,  e.g.,  Humphrey's Executor, 295 U.S.  at 628;  see also  supra note  438.
457.  478  U.S. 714  (1986).
458.  See id.  at 726.
459.  31  U.S.C.  § 703(e) (1) (B)  (1988).
460.  478  U.S. at 729.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  111 1994

COLUMBIA LAW  REWEW

[Vol.  94:1

President  has  "very broad" removal  power over  the commissioners  of the
independent  agencies,  with  correlative  powers  of  supervision  and  gui-
dance.  It would follow that  the  independent agencies  are  in fact subject
to  a  considerable  degree  of presidential  control  "for any number  of ac-
tual  or  perceived  transgressions  of presidential  will."  They are  not, as  a
matter  of statute,  "independent" of him  at all.

This  is  an  adventurous  and  not unassailable  conclusion.  As  we have
noted, it is  inconsistent with the general 461 understanding that independ-
ent agencies  are  immune  from  the  policy  oversight  of the  President.  It
would  of course  be plausible  to suggest  that because  of the difference  in
the contexts,  the  same words  should have  different meanings.  Perhaps  a
statute  restricting  congressional  power  over  the  Comptroller  General
should  be  understood  to impose  thinner  limitations  than  a  statute  con-
trolling presidential  power over independent commissioners-even  if the
words  are  the  same.  Such  a  reading would hardly  be an  implausible  re-
construction  of legislative  goals.  Congress  unquestionably  created  many
of the independent agencies  in a period in which it sought to limit presi-
dential  supervisory  power.

In  view  of  what  we  see  as  the  constitutional  backdrop,  however,
courts  should probably  invoke  a  "clear statement"  principle;46 2 one  that
interprets  statutes  to  grant the  President  broad  supervisory  power  over
the  commissions.  On  this  approach,  courts  would  allow  the  President
such  power  unless  Congress  has  expressly  stated  its will  to  the  contrary.
Such  an  approach  would  minimize  the  risks of the  independent  agency
form  and  promote  coordination  and  accountability  in  government.  It
would  recognize  that  many  independent  agencies  perform  important
policymaking  functions,  and  that  the  performance  of such  functions  by
truly independent  agents  is  plausibly inconsistent  with  the constitutional
structure. 463  At the very least, we would require Congress  to speak  unam-
biguously  if it wants  to compromise  those  goals.4 4  These  suggestions  do
not  answer  the  question  of precisely  when  the  President  may  discharge
the  commissioners.  But  they  do  indicate  that  he  has far more  authority
than  is  usually thought.

461.  This  common  understanding  is  not,  however,  universal;  the  American  Bar
Association  appears  to agree  with the point we  are making here.  See American  Bar Assoc.
Recommendation,  reprinted  in  Strauss  & Sunstein,  supra  note  11,  app.  at 206-07.  The
Department  ofJustice  also  holds  this view.  See  Memorandum  for Hon.  David  Stockman
Director,  Office  of Management  and  Budget,  reprinted  in Peter  M.  Shane  & Harold H.
Bruff, The  Law  of Presidential  Power:  Cases  and  Materials  355,  357-58  (1988).

462.  Cf.  Kent v. Dulles,  357  U.S.  116,  129  (1958)  (declaring  the  Court will  construe

narrowly  all  delegated  powers  that may  curtail  citizens'  right to  travel).

463.  See  supra Part  V.A.
464.  See  also  Strauss  & Sunstein,  supra note  11,  at 197-205.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  112 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

D.  May  Congress Create Truly  Independent Administrators?

Suppose  that  the independent  counsel  could  never  be  removed  by
the Attorney  General,  even  "for good  cause."  Or suppose  that  Congress
amended  the statute governing  the FTC so  as  to provide  that the commis-
sioners are independent of both Congress  and the President, in the sense
that  they  could  be  removed  by  the  President  only for  "high crimes  and
misdemeanors"  or  "gross  misconduct  amounting  to  criminality."  Would
such  statutes  be  constitutional?

Nothing in  the relevant  cases clearly decides  these  questions.  Proba-
bly the  best answer  is  that  the  independent  counsel  must  be  removable
for "good cause"  in  order  to qualify  as  an  "inferior officer"  (and thus  be
appointable,  as  the  current  law  provides,  by judges465).  The  notion  of
"inferior"  implies  the  existence  of a  superior,  and  a  truly  independent
counsel-that  is,  one  not at  all  controllable  by the Attorney  General  or
the President-would have no superior.  We may therefore infer from the
Morrison Court's  emphasis  on  the  "good cause"  provision  that some  sort
of control  by  the  Attorney  General  (or otherwise  through  the  chain  of
command  headed by the  President) is  a constitutional  imperative  for "in-
ferior  officers."466  Nothing  we  have  said  here  is  inconsistent  with  this
understanding.

The  question is  more difficult  for the  Federal Trade  Commissioner.
He  is not an inferior officer appointed by judges,  and indeed he has been
appointed  through  the normal  channels,  that is, by the  President subject
to  advice  and  consent by the  Senate.  The  question  is  therefore  one  of
permissible  constraints  on  the  power  of  removal  and  supervision.  In
Bowsher and  indeed  Myers itself, Congress  reserved  to  itself a  role  in  re-
moval-raising  the problem  of encroachment 467-and  a  truly independ-
ent  commissioner  (or head  of OSHA,  or  the  EPA, or  the Department  of
Education)  would  not  suffer  from  that  infirmity.  On  the  question
whether  Congress  can  create  genuinely  independent  administrators,
there  is  precious  little guidance.

Probably  the  best  answer  is  that  as  a  general  rule  (and  subject  to
important  exceptions),  Congress  is  without  constitutional  power  wholly
to  immunize  administrative  officers  exercising  important  discretionary
policymaking  authority  from  presidential  control.  Congress  is  therefore
without  power  to  create  a  "headless  Fourth  Branch"  of  government.4 68

465.  See  U.S.  Const. art. II, § 2, cl.  2;  28  U.S.C. § 593(b)  (1988).
466.  See  Morrison  v. Olson,  487  U.S.  654,  691-93  (1987).
467.  See  Bowsher  v. Synar,  478  U.S.  714,  727  (1986)  (statute  made  Comptroller
General  removable  only at initiative of Congress);  Myers v. United  States,  272 U.S. 52,  107
(1926)  (Act required  consent of Congress  to remove  Postmaster).

468.  See  Freytag  v.  Commissioner,  111  S.  Ct.  2631,  2661 

(Scalia,  J.,
concurring)  (agreeing that ChiefJudge  of Tax Court is a "head of a department");  see also
FTC v. Ruberoid  Co., 343  U.S.  470,  487 (1952)  (Jackson, J.,  dissenting)  ("[Administrative
bodies)  have  begun to  have  important  consequences  on  personal  rights....  They  have
become  a veritable fourth branch of the  Government, which  has deranged our three-branch

(1991) 

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  113 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVEW

[Vol.  94:1

To be sure, true  independence  in  administration  does not create  the  dis-
tinctive  dangers  of  encroachment  and  aggrandizement; 46 9  but  it  does
threaten  the  core  constitutional  commitments  to political  accountability,
expedition  in  office,  and  coordinated  policymaking.  If  our  argument
from changed  circumstances  is  persuasive,  Congress  cannot properly  im-
munize  such  officers  from  the  President  without  violating  the  Vesting
Clause  of Article  II and thus exceeding  its power under the Necessary and
Proper  Clause.

There  are  important  exceptions  to  this  general  proposition.  These
would  include  (1)  purely  adjudicative  officers, 470  (2)  people  who  per-
form  ministerial  duties, 47 1 and  (3)  people  who perform merely  investiga-
tory and  reportorial  functions-recall  that  Congress  can  have  a staff.472
All  three  exceptions  have  historical  roots.  But  subject  to  these  excep-
tions,  we  believe  that  Congress  could  not create  fully  independent  offi-
cials  without  offense  to  the  constitutional  structure,  at  least  in  the
absence  of special  circumstances.  This conclusion  follows  from  the  con-
stitutional  commitments  to  coordination,  accountability,  and  prevention
of factionalism.

Whether  current  courts  should so  conclude  is  another  question.  It
may  be  that  in  light  of  the  difficulty  of  the  relevant  line-drawing
problems,  courts should  defer to  legislative judgments,  and  the  constitu-
tional  prohibition  should  be  under-enforced  by judges.4 73  Certainly
courts  should give  Congress  the  benefit  of the  doubt in  close  cases.

E. 

Independence Versus Aggrandizement

Here  we  arrive  at  a crucial  innovation  in  the  post-1980  cases-the
distinction  between  encroachment and  independence.  The  cleanest line
between  Bowsher and  Chadha on the  one hand  and Mistretta and  Morrison
on the  other is  that in  the first two cases  Congress  attempted  to give itself
a degree  of ongoing authority over the administration  of the laws. 474  The

legal  theories  much  as  the concept of a fourth  dimension  unsettles our  three-dimensional
thinking."  (emphasis  added)).
469.  See infra  Part IV.E.
470.  See supra  text accompanying  note 420.
471.  See id.
472.  This  was  the  meaning  of the  reference  to quasi-legislative  duties  in  Humphrey's
Executor, the  Court  was  not  discussing  rulemaking  power,  in  which  the  FTC was  not
engaged  at the  time.  See Humphrey's  Executor v. United States,  295 U.S. 602, 628  (1935).
473.  This is Justice  Scalia's approach  to  the  nondelegation  doctrine.  See  Mistretta  v.
United  States,  488  U.S.  361,  415-16  (1989)  (Scalia, J.,  dissenting);  see  also  Richard  B.
Stewart,  The  Reformation  of  American  Administrative  Law,  88  Harv.  L.  Rev.  1667,
1693-97,  1799-1800  (1975).

474.  Compare  Bowsher v.  Synar,  478  U.S.  714, 734  (1986)  (finding unconstitutional
simultaneous  grant  of executive  powers  to  and  retention  of  congressional  control  over
Comptroller  General)  and  INS  v.  Chadha,  462  U.S.  919,  959 
(finding
unconstitutional  congressional  reservation  of veto  power over  executive  decision  to  allow
deportable alien  to remain in United States)  with Mistretta, 488  U.S.  at 411  (upholding Act
limiting  President's  removal  power  over  Federal  Sentencing  Commissioners  to  "good

(1983) 

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  114 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

Court  has  firmly  set itself against  such  aggrandizement.  In  the  Court's
view,  independence  in  administration  is  one  thing;  congressional  en-
croachment  into  the  administrative  process  is  quite  another.  "Aggran-
dizement"  and  "encroachment"  are  defining  constitutional  evils.
Separation  of administration  from  the  President  and  Congress  does  not
involve  either  aggrandizement  or  encroachment,  and 
is  far  less
objectionable.

The  Court has  not given  a  clear  rationale  for this  sharp  distinction.
In  some ways  it seems  quite  puzzling.  For  one thing,  independence  can
be understood as  a form of aggrandizement.  Congress  might make agen-
cies  independent not to create real  independence,  but in order to  dimin-
ish presidential  authority over  their operations  precisely  in the  interest of
subjecting  those  agencies  to  the  control  of congressional  committees. 4 75
Independence,  in  short, might  be  a way  of  increasing  legislative  power
over  agencies.  More  fundamentally, the  distinction  sometimes  reads like
a kind  of "turf protection" model of the  Constitution,  one  that is  disasso-
ciated  from  text, history,  or structure,  and  also  from  any  underlying  val-
ues  that maintenance  of the  relevant "turfs" are  supposed  to preserve. 4 76
The  question,  in  short, is  this:  How  is  the  presence  of a  congres-
sional role in law-execution worse  than an absence  of a presidential  role?
It might  be  thought  that  the  two  pose  equivalent  risks  to  constitutional
commitments.

But  there are  in  fact plausible  structural  reasons  for  the  distinction.
First, congressional  control over  administration  creates  a specter  of com-
bination  of  lawmaking  functions  and  law-executing  functions.  The
decision  to  divide  the  two  is  unambiguous  in  the  Constitution,  and  that
decision  is  in turn  a  product of a belief that  the  division  is  an  important
guarantor  of private  liberty,  democratic  control  over  government,  and
protection  against  factionalism.  Encroachment  is  plausibly  a  greater
threat  to these  values  than  independence. 477

cause")  and Morrison  v.  Olson,  487  U.S.  654,  691  (1988)  (upholding Act  requiring  that
Attorney General  have "good  cause"  for removing  independent  counsel).

475.  See  Sunstein,  supra  note  430,  at  430;  Weingast  &  Moran,  Bureaucratic
Discretion,  supra  note  433,  at 768-70;  Weingast  & Moran,  Runaway  Bureaucracy,  supra
note  433,  at 33-34.

476.  See Rebecca L. Brown, Separated Powers and Ordered Liberty, 139 U. Pa. L. Rev.
1513,  1546-48  (1991)  (arguing  for  substantive,  individualist  approach  to  separation  of
powers  rather  than a structural  "turf "-oriented one).

477.  To  be  sure,  the  broad  discretionary  authority  of an  agency may  also  combine
functions.  But the Administrative  Procedure Act  (APA)  helps  counter this  problem, see 5
U.S.C.  §§ 554,  556,  557  (1988),  and  we  think  these  provisions  have  constitutional
foundations.  It  is not  an adequate  answer  to say  that  independence  itself threatens  this
value.  Independent agencies  are  subject  to a  degree  of internal  separation  of functions.
See id. §  554  (precluding agency employees  who engage in prosecution from  participating
or  advising  in  decisions).  This  provision,  together  with  other  safeguards  in  the APA,
counteracts  some  of the  risks  involved  in  combination  of execution  and  legislation.  We
think that  provisions  of this  kind  are responsive  to genuine  constitutional  concerns;  they

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  115 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

Second,  the prohibition  on congressional  participation  operates as  a
check  against  open-ended  delegations  of  power.  If Congress  may  not
delegate administrative  authority to its own agents, it is likely to be clearer
in delegating policymaking  authority in the first instance.  We  can  under-
stand the  Court's  hostility to  encroachment  as  having  roots in  the  struc-
tural  commitment  against  open-ended  delegations  of  authority,  a
commitment  with  clear  connections  to  the  goal  of providing  a  kind  of
accountability. 478  Congress  may be content not to set out law in advance
if it knows that it may control  implementation  decisions  on a case-by-case
basis.  Even  if  the  Court  will  not  play  a  large  role  in  enforcing  the
nondelegation  doctrine  directly, mostly for institutional  reasons, 4 79 it can
discipline  the  prospect  of delegation  through  institutionally  acceptable
devices  that  impose  incentives  on  Congress 
to  limit  the  scope  of
delegation.

Courts have  not yet explained  the distinction  between  independence
on the  one  hand  and  encroachment  and  aggrandizement  on  the  other.
We do not suggest that it should be made as critical as  the Supreme  Court
has made  it.  But if the foregoing  arguments  are right, the distinction  can
be explained  by reference  to constitutional  structure.  It makes  sense as a
means  of separating  functions and  discouraging  broad  delegation  of law-
making  authority.

F.  Cross-Branch Appointments

Morrison upholds  cross-branch  appointments,48 0  but  the  Court  was
properly cautious  about  the  basic idea, which  could  produce  many oddi-
ties.  Suppose, for  example,  that Congress  said that judges would  hence-
forth  appoint  the  Assistant  Secretaries  of State  and  Defense  and  the
Assistant  Attorneys  General.  In  such  cases,  there  would  have  to  be  an
implicit  structural  limit on  Congress'  power under  the  Inferior  Officers

have a kind of constitutional  status, not in the sense that courts  should mandate  them, but
in  the sense  that  they grow  out of constitutional  commitments.

478.  We  think that this idea does have roots in Article  I of the Constitution,  see A.L.A.
Schechter  Poultry  Corp. v United  States,  295  U.S. 495,  529  (1935)  (citing  Necessary  and
Proper Clause  as  support for prohibiting  congressional abdication  or transfer of "essential
legislative  functions");  TheodoreJ. Lowi, The End of Liberalism:  The Second  Republic of
the United  States 92-97  (2d ed. 1979)  (criticizing as  unconstitutional liberal  delegations of
power  by  Congress to  administrative  agencies);  see also  Theodore J.  Lowi,  Two  Roads  to
Serfdom:  Liberalism,  Conservatism  and  Administrative  Power,  36  Am.  U.  L.  Rev.  295
(1986)  (describing how broad  delegations  of power defeat the  rule of law  as embodied  in
the  Constitution),  even  though  we  do not believe  that courts  should  carefully  police  the
prohibition,  see Richard  B.  Stewart,  Beyond  Delegation  Doctrine, 36  Am.  U.  L. Rev.  323,
324  (1987)  (arguing against  court invalidation  of statutes based  on  over-delegation).

479.  See Mistretta  v. United States,  488 U.S.  361, 371-74  (1989); id. at 413-16  (Scalia,
J., dissenting)  (but concurring on fall of nondelegation doctrine);  Stewart, supra note 478,
at 326.

480.  See  Morrison  v. Olson,  487  U.S.  654  (1988).

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  116 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

Appointment Clause.4 8'  Otherwise  Congress  could wreak havoc with the
system  of checks and balances.

But  when  are  cross-branch  appointments  constitutional?  Probably
the  answer lies in  the Court's  emphasis  in Morrison on the absence  of an
"incongruity" in  the vesting of appointment power in another  branch.48 2
We  should  understand  the  term  to  refer  to  principles  of  constitutional
structure,  having  to do with  the integrity of each branch.  Where  there  is
incongruity,  the  Constitution  contains  a  structural  barrier  to  the  place-
ment of appointing authority.  It follows  that in the cases we have  hypoth-
esized,  there  would  be  a valid  objection  based  on  the  system  of checks
and balances.  But this  idea casts  no  doubt on Morrison itself.  Indeed, in
Morrison presidential  appointment might itself have  been incongruous  in
light of the obvious  conflict of interest.  The  congressional judgment was
permissible  only for this  reason.

If this is  the relevant  concern,  cross-branch  appointments  should be
permitted  only in  the  narrowest  circumstances.  On  this  view,  Morrison
was  a case  about  the  oddity  of allowing the  President to  be  the judge in
his  own  cause.  It does  not stand for any broader  proposition.

G.  Precisely Which  Officers May Be Protected with a Good Cause Standard?

Both  Mistretta and Morrison allow  certain  officials  exercising  impor-
tant  governmental  responsibilities  to be  immunized  from  plenary  presi-
dential  control.48 3  But it is surely true  that some  employees  must serve  at
the will of the President.  Without offering a detailed analysis  of the com-
plexities  here,  we suggest  that  there  are four  distinct categories  of cases,
and that  the  categories  should  be  treated  differently.

(1)  High-level officials who exercise foreign  affairs powers and other
authorities  included  in  the  enumerated  authority  of  the  President 484
must be at-will employees.  This much follows from adherence to the orig-
inal  understanding.  As  we  have  seen,  the  founding  belief  in  a unitary
executive  entailed  presidential  control  over  a  range  of important  func-
tions.485  Nothing in current circumstances  argues  in the other direction.
Thus  (to  take  the  two  principal  examples)  the Secretary  of State and the
Secretary  of Defense  must be  at-will  employees.

481.  See  U.S.  Const. art.  II,  §  2,  cl.  2.
482.  See  487  U.S.  at  676.  One  may  question,  however,  whether  this judgment  of
congruity is one the  Constitution allows  the Supreme  Court to make.  Article  II,  section  2,
clause  2  provides  that  Congress  may  "by  Law  vest  the  Appointment  of  such  inferior
Officers,  as they think prper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads  of
Departments."  The emphasized  language may indicate  that thejudgment as  to propriety  is
left to Congress  alone.  Consider section  3 of Article II, which provides  that the President
"may adjourn  them to such Time as  he shall  think proper," which likewise  would appear to
vest the judgment  in the President  alone.  See  also U.S.  Const. art. I,  § 9,  ci.  1  (states may
continue  migration  of people  as  they "think proper"  to admit).

483.  See  488  U.S. at 410;  487  U.S.  at 691.
484.  See  U.S. Const.  art. II, § 2.
485.  See  supra text accompanying  notes  121-122,  131.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  117 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

(2)  Good  cause  limitations  are permissible  for officers who  exercise
adjudicative  or ministerial  functions.  The  original  understanding  exem-
plified  this judgment,48 6  and  our  argument  for  changed  circumstances
does  not undermine  or  complicate  that  analysis.

(3)  The same conclusion  applies to those few officials  who have  the
sorts of conflicts  of interest exemplified by the Federal Reserve Board and
independent  counsels.  This conclusion  builds  on  historical  understand-
ings.48 7  It also  fits  comfortably with  current  institutional  arrangements.
(4)  Domestic officials  who do  not fall  within  (1),  (2),  or  (3)  may be
protected  by "good cause"  provisions, but for the  most part only  if those
provisions  are  interpreted  so  that  the  relevant  officials  are  controllable
through  general  policy  directions  of  the  President.  As  we  have  said,  a
good  cause  standard  should be  interpreted  to  allow for a high degree  of
presidential  supervisory  authority.488  At least in  most cases  involving  im-
portant policymaking functions, a removal  standard would  be unconstitu-
tional  if it were inconsistent with  this idea,  that is, if it entirely eliminated
presidential  control  over  general  policy  decisions. 
It  follows  that
Congress  could  allow many  officials  to  be  protected  by  a "good  cause"
provision-not  merely  the  heads  of  such  traditionally  "independent"
agencies  as  the FCC, FTC,  and  SEC,  but also  those  of (for example)  the
EPA  and  some  of the  Cabinet  departments  as well.  But  on  our  under-
standing, a good cause limitation does not immunize  the relevant  officials
from  the policy  direction  and  oversight  of the  President.48 9

CONCLUSION

The  framers  did  not  constitutionalize  presidential  control  over  all
that is now considered  "executive";  they did not believe  that the President
must have plenary power  over all we now think of as administration.  The
textual  argument  to  the contrary  uses  twentieth  century understandings
to  give  meaning  to  eighteenth  century terms.

With  respect  to implementation  of the  laws,  history suggests  that the
framers  understood  Congress  to  have  broad  power  to  structure  govern-
ment arrangements  as  it saw fit.  Many  prosecutors,  state as  well  as  fed-
eral,  were  free  from  the  control  of  the  Attorney  General  and  the
President.  The first Congress  also made the Comptroller free from presi-
dential  control,  because  some  of  his functions  were  related  to  those  of
Congress  and  the judiciary.  The  Postmaster General was  similarly immu-

486.  See  supra text accompanying  notes  103,  126-130,  236-248  (discussing  original
view  that  ministerial  functions,  and  also  those  involving  adjudicative  powers,  could  be
immunized  from  the President).

487.  See supra  note  137 and accompanying  text  (discussing founders'  desire  to keep
separate  the  purse  and  sword);  supra  text accompanying  note  444  (noting  Hamilton's
concern  that no  person should  be judge  in his own  cause).

488.  See  supra Part 1V.C.
489.  Of course, this notion  leaves  a degree  of vagueness,  and  it does not resolve  many

particular  issues  that  might arise  through  assertions  of presidential  authority.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  118 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

nized from presidential  control, because  of his  distinctive  role  in  spend-
ing taxpayer funds.  The Opinions Clause would be entirely superfluous  if
the  framers  understood  the  President  to  have  plenary  control  over  ad-
ministration;  why  would  the  framers  deem  it  necessary  to  give  the
President the power to demand written opinions from people over whom
he had full  control as a matter of constitutional  compulsion?  Finally, the
text and history of the Necessary and Proper Clause suggest that Congress
had  considerable  authority to  structure  the executive  branch  as  it chose.
In light of all these  considerations, our first goal has been to respond
to  the persistent  notion  that if we  care  about constitutional  text and his-
tory, independent  prosecutors  and  independent agencies  are  an  embar-
rassing accommodation  to  political  necessity,  or a shameful  compromise
with  expediency.  We have  shown  that  the  belief in  a strongly  unitary  ex-
ecutive  does  not  derive  from the  framers  themselves.

We  reach  this  conclusion  about  the  framers  with  reluctance.  The
belief in a strongly unitary  executive  has considerable  appeal.  It is simple
and unambiguous.  It fits well with  important political  and  constitutional
values,  including the interests  in  political  accountability,  in  coordination
of the law,  and in uniformity  in regulation.  Believing that these  interests
have  constitutional  status,  we  have  ventured  an  argument  on  behalf  of
the  strongly  unitary  executive,  one  that  emphasizes  changed  circum-
stances  and  an  interpretive  practice  concerned  with  fidelity  to  original
commitments  and labeled  here  as translation.

The  crucial  development  in  this  regard  is  the  downfall  of  the
nondelegation  doctrine  and  the rise  of unforeseen  administrative  agen-
cies  exercising  wide-ranging  discretionary  power  over  the  domestic
sphere.  In view of this  development, it would not be faithful to  the origi-
nal  design  to permit officers  in  the executive branch,  making  discretion-
ary judgments  about important  domestic  issues,  to  be  immunized  from
presidential control.  We have  therefore sketched an  argument  on behalf
of a  strongly unitary  executive,  in which  the President has  a high  degree
of supervisory  and  removal  authority  over  most  officials  entrusted  with
discretion  in  the  implementation  of federal  law.  We  have  applied  this
argument to  many areas  of current  dispute.

We  believe  that  this  view  is  consistent  with  constitutional  commit-
ments  and  that it maintains  fidelity with  those  commitments  in dramati-
cally changed  circumstances.  But it is important to acknowledge  that our
argument  is  based  on  a  distinctive  method,  one  that  rejects  ahistorical
claims about the unitary executive.  It follows that the constitutional com-
mitment  to  unitary  execution  of the  laws  should  not  be  rooted  in  the
supposed  mandates  of history.  It should be based instead on  the effort to
interpret  the  Constitution  faithfully  over  time, an  effort  that will  inevita-
bly  involve  a  large  measure  of  pragmatic  judgment,  and  historical
understanding.

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  119 1994

COLUMBIA LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

,4

4 )

Cu

-o

Uc I.

0.,

-

4

U 

0

0)4

40  c

04  -

044

Z44

0)-4

4)0

'v  0

0,

,.4

4

Cu

~c

U0

Cuu

0404

00 00 00
i'*

4.t.(l
0c  0  0

C"

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  120 1994

1994]

THE PRESDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

,0  10 

0. 

.0) 

V  W 

0 

Ej  11 

-

r. 

0

CLr~d 
cl 

0 

.

CC 
-0  mC.

0 

c

V. 

0 

" 

-

0~U

00

0)0) .

0  0 
0  0 

C)  -0  d 

bo 0 

0 

-

-

0 

CIS.0j

4- 
0 CC 

2
~ 

0 
d 

r.) 

00~
!2

- Wb E 
s.

w 

C/)i

0 

C~ 

a,

7 

&Q,  04 

0 

oVM

m 

0 

o 

bO  0 

0C1C0

.0,0. 

C)  U) 

"~ 

0 

-

...

~ 

0 

-

L. 

C- 

*

0  qw

0 

2

t4

W  U00 

0 

0d 

C) 

4

6,

cn 

U)d

0

0  o 

0 

-

*

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  121 1994

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  94:1

*  0 

t40 

-

-1

0

0 

w 

04  0 

-

0  bD

aC..

~ 

0- 

Qj 

00

v 

o 

0 

c  0 

Cd 

0

0

0 u
Ij8 

0~ 

~

0

00

0 

0

0 

o~  0  b 

)

0 

"  0 

o

E 

w  0 

0  CIS

CC

0

0 

m-5  Raa)m 

0

" 
AE E
040c

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  122 1994

1994]

THE PRESIDENT AND  THE ADMINISTRATION

C.

04

01

S.0
0~-

CS o 

C, 0
a

01 o

tm 

0 

0U

40 

w 01

0 

w

01~

0-0 U4 

1 

0

01

1. 

Lo

oo

-

c o  0 "0
..0  ~ 

1.

0

4. 

.

o~  C.

o  0

o  A~

C"

U

>, 

C.)

.)

cts 

01

.0  0

0 

o  -

01

10, 

0 

1

0 5 

z  0 

' 

0 

1 

0 r

S.~010

o 
UC 

01C. 

)

HeinOnline  -- 94 Colum. L. Rev.  123 1994

