 Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics Rules and Rulelessness Cass R. Sunstein Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Rules and Rulelessness" (Coase-Sandor Institute for Law & Economics Working Paper No. 27, 1994). Rules and Rulelessness Cass R. Sunstein Rules and Rulelessness Cass R. Sunstein* [T]he establishment of broadly applicable general principles is an essential component of the judicial process. [T]he highest ethical life of the mind consists at all times in the breaking of rules which have grown too narrow for the actual case —William James, Principles of Psychology Introduction There are two stylized conceptions of legal judgment. The first, associated with Jeremy Bentham and more recently with Justices Hugo Black and Antonin Scalia, places a high premium on the creation and application of general rules. On this view, public authorities should avoid “balancing tests” or close attention to individual circumstances. They should attempt instead to give guidance to lower courts, future legislators, and citizens through clear, abstract rules laid down in advance of actual applications. The second conception, associated with Blackstone and more recently with Justices Felix Frankfurter and John Marshall Harlan, places a high premium on law-making at the point of application through case-by-case decisions, narrowly tailored to the particulars of individual circumstances. On this view, public authorities should stay close to the details of the controversy before them, and avoid broader principles altogether. The problem with broad principles is that they tend to overreach; they may be erroneous or unreasonable as applied to cases not before the court. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics It would not be easy to overstate the importance of the controversy between the two views. Such issues arise in every area of law; they often involve fundamental liberties. Of course familiar understandings of the rule of law prize, as a safeguard of freedom, broad rules laid down in advance; but the American legal system also values close attention to the details of each case. In every area of regulation—the environment, occupational safety and health, energy policy, communications, control of monopoly power—it is necessary to choose between general rules and case-by-case decisions. Rules and Rulelessness vored or disfavored in the abstract; everything depends on whether, in context, rules are superior to the alternatives. The second involves a presumption in favor of what I will call privately adaptable rules—rules that allocate initial entitlements but do not specify endstates, and that harness private forces to determine outcomes. Privately adaptable rules are typically invoked in support of economic markets. I argue here that they also deserve an honored place in a legal system committed to a wide range of corrections to the operation of economic markets. Law has a toolbox, containing many devices. Lawyers have customarily opposed rules (“do not go over 60 miles per hour”) to standards (“do not drive unreasonably fast”), with rules seeming hard and fast, and standards seeming open-ended. There is indeed a difference between rules and standards. But the rules-standards debate captures only a part of what is at stake, and it is important to have a fuller sense of the repertoire of available devices. In this section I outline a number of them; my goal is only to clarify some terms that will come up throughout. First, however, a cautionary note. It will be apparent that whether a legal provision is a rule, a presumption, a principle, a standard, a set of factors—or something else—cannot be decided in the abstract. Everything depends on the understandings and practices of the provision. The American the people who Constitution, for example, says that “Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech.” This provision might operate as a rule if people take it as a flat ban on certain sorts of regulations. It could operate as a presumption if people see it as saying that Congress can regulate speech only if it makes a demonstration of harm of certain kinds and degrees. Or it could be a set of factors; once we parse notions like “abridging” and “the freedom of speech,” perhaps we will decide cases on the basis of an inquiry into two, three, or more relevant considerations. The content and nature of a legal provision cannot be read off the provision. It is necessary to see what people take it to be. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics gal provision. The second is the person or institution that is subject to the provision. The third is the person or institution charged with the power to interpret the provision. If we take a rule to be a provision that minimizes law-making power in particular cases (see below), a lawmaker may intend to issue a rule, but the interpretive practices of the interpreting institution may turn the provision into something very different. Whether a provision is a rule or not is a function of interpretive practices, and the lawmaker has limited power over those practices. By “untrammeled discretion,” I mean the capacity to exercise official power as one chooses, by reference to such considerations as one wants to consider, weighted as one wants to weight them. A legal system cannot avoid some degree of discretion, in the form of power to choose according to one’s moral or political lights. As we will see, the interpretation of seemingly rigid rules itself allows for discretion. But a legal system can certainly make choices about how much discretion it wants various people to have. Often a system of rules is thought to be the polar opposite of a system of untrammeled discretion. In fact there is no such polar opposition. Rules do not eliminate discretion. There is a continuum from rules to untrammeled discretion, with factors and standards (see below) falling in between. Rules and Rulelessness of law. By a system of rules, I therefore mean to refer to something very simple: approaches to law that make most or nearly all legal judgments under the governing legal provision in advance of actual cases.1 We have rules, or (better) rule-ness, to the extent that the content of the law has been set down in advance of applications of the law. In the extreme case, all of the content of the law is given before cases arise. This is an ambitious goal—impossibly ambitious. As we will see, no approach to law is likely to avoid allowing at least some legal judgments to be made in the context of deciding actual cases. Rules do not and indeed cannot contain all of the necessary instructions for their own interpretation. Nonetheless, it is possible to ensure that a wide range of judgments about particular cases will occur in advance. 1This understanding is close to that in Louis Kaplow, Rules and Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics they pass certain special tests. Or it could be quite complex, creating a formula for deciding who may drive. It might look, for example, to age; performance on a written examination; and performance on a driving test. Each of these three variables might be given a specified numerical weight. It is familiar to find rules that have explicit or implicit exceptions for cases of necessity or emergency. It is unfamiliar, indeed nearly impossible, to find rules without any such exceptions. For example, a person may be banned from taking the life of another; this is a rule; but self-defense is a valid excuse. Many constitutions allow abridgements of individual rights in case of emergency. The American Constitution allows the President to suspend the writ of habeas corpus in time of war. Other constitutions say that certain rights can be abridged under unusual circumstances. We might go so far as to say that almost all rules have at least some implicit exceptions. Rules and Rulelessness well convert the rule with exceptions into a complex rule, or a formula. A legal system may contain presumptions or presumptive rules. The law may presume, for example, that when the government regulates speech on the basis of its content, the regulation is unconstitutional. But the presumption might be rebutted by claims of a certain kind and strength, as when government can show a clear and present danger. The law might presume that an employer may not discriminate on the basis of race; but the presumption might be rebutted by a showing that, for example, a black actor is necessary to play the part of Othello. We might contrast both untrammeled discretion and rulebound ways of proceeding with approaches that allow particular judgments to emerge through the decisionmaker’s assessment and weighing of a number of relevant factors, whose precise content has not been specified in advance. The key point is that several factors are pertinent to the decision, but there is no rule, simple or complex, to apply. There is no rule because the factors are not described exhaustively and precisely in advance, and because their weight has not been fully specified. Hence the decisionmaker cannot rely simply on “finding the facts” and “applying the law.” The content of the law is not given; part of it must be found. There is a degree of ex post allocation of legal entitlements. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics content of the law is created in large part by those who must apply it to particular cases, and not by people who laid it down in advance. To a considerable extent, we do not know what the law is until the assessment of particular cases. Rules are often compared with standards.3 A ban on “excessive” speeds on the highway is familiarly thought to involve a standard; so too with a requirement that pilots be “competent,” or that behavior in the classroom be “reasonable.” As standards, these might be compared with a 55 miles per hour speed limit, or a ban on pilots who are Rules and Rulelessness over the age of 70, or a requirement that students sit in particular, assigned seats. In law, principles are often said to be both deeper and more general than rules. We might say that rules are justified by principles. The justification of the rule could be used to interpret its meaning; hence courts will resort to the principle in trying to understood the rule. For example, there is a principle to the effect that it is wrong to take human life without sufficient cause; the law implements this principle with a range of rules governing homicide. There is a prin Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics ciple to the effect that it is wrong not to keep your promises; hence the law contains a range of rules for enforcement of contractual obligations. A common use of the term “principle” in law involves the justifications behind rules. Rules and Rulelessness valid without consideration. In this usage, a principle is not distinguishable from a standard, and at some points below, I will use the terms interchangeably. The last category is not a simple alternative to the others. Sometimes a legal system proceeds by comparing the case at hand to a case (or to cases) that have come before. The prior case is inspected to see whether it “controls,” or should be extended to, the case at hand. The prior case will be accompanied by an opinion, which may contain a rule, a standard, a set of factors, or something else. The court deciding the present case will inspect relevant similarities and differences. That court, not bound by the previous opinion, may produce a rule, a standard, a set of factors, or something else. With analogy, we do not have a decision by rule, because the rule is not specified in advance of the process of analogical thinking. The rule emerges from comparison of cases, and it is applied only after it has been specified. Analogical thinking is rule-based (or standard-based) only in the sense that it depends on a rule (or a standard); but analogical thinking does not involve simple rule-application (or standard-application) because the rule (or the standard) is not given in advance. Analogical reasoning is thus not a form of rule-application. When courts proceed with analogies, then, the nature of the legal provision—its content and even its character as a rule, a standard, a set of factors—is not known before the analogical process takes place. The nature of the provision is specified in the case at hand by grappling with the precedent; we do not know what we have before the grappling occurs. It is unusual, however, for analogical thinking to yield rules. Most of the time, an analogy will produce a standard, one that makes sense of the outcomes in the case at hand and the case that came before. A system of rules is often thought to be the signal virtue of a system of law. Indeed, the rule of law seems to require a system of Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics rules.5 The idea has a constitutional source. The due process clause of the American Constitution is sometimes interpreted so as to require rules, or rule-like provisions, and to forbid a system based on analogies, standards, or factors. This is particularly important in the area of criminal justice and freedom of speech, where the “void for vagueness” doctrine requires clear rules before the state may regulate private conduct. Walt Whitman and Vachel Lindsay. . . . The difficulty is that these activities are historically part of the amenities of life as we have known them.” The ordinance was also unlawful because it put “unfettered discretion . . . in the hands of the Jacksonville police.” To say this is not to deny that the ordinance could serve important law enforcement purposes. The Court said: “Of course, vagrancy statutes are useful to the police. Of course, they are nets making easy the roundup of so-called undesirables. But the rule of law implies equality and justice in its application.” Notably, the Court quoted a law review article to the effect that “‘Algeria is rejecting the flexibility introduced in the Soviet criminal code by the ‘analogy’ principle, as have the East-Central European and black African states.” Many systems of criminal justice have made it an offense to engage in conduct that is “analogous” to what is specifically prohibited. The analogical principle has played a large role in Chinese criminal law.7 Apparently the Supreme Court believed that this analogical approach to the criminal law8 raises severe questions under the due process clause. a. Clear, general, publicly accessible rules laid down in advance. It is plain that the rule of law requires rules that are clear, in the sense that people need not guess about their meaning, and that are general, in the sense that they apply to classes rather than particular people or groups. Laws should be publicly accessible as well. It follows that there is a ban on “secret law.” Legal proscriptions must be available to the public. Of course vague laws—banning, for example, excessive or unreasonable behavior—are unacceptable, at least in the criminal context; they are akin to “secret law” in the sense that people cannot know what, specifically, they entail. The idea that law paper by Hungdad Chiu. 9I claim little originality here, drawing on Fuller, The Morality of Law, supra note 5, and Raz, in The Authority of Law, supra note 5. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics should be laid down in advance is associated with the notion that rules, to qualify as such, must specify outcomes before the point of application. When rules are operating, people who interpret or apply the law do not give content to the law in the encounter with particular problems. In many legal systems, of course, there is an occasional split between what the law says and what the law is, and often the split is severe. But the frequency of the phenomenon should not deflect attention from the fact that this is a failure of the rule of law. judicative officials. consistency in the law. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics Madison wrote: “The mutability of the laws of the States is found to be a serious evil. The injustice of them has been so frequent and so flagrant as to alarm the most steadfast friends of Republicanism. I am persuaded that I do not err in saying that the evils issuing from these sources contributed more to the uneasiness which produced the Convention, and prepared the public mind for a general reform, than those which accrued to our national character and interest from the inadequacy of the Confederation to its immediate objects.”10 Both of these phenomena—unstable law and inconsistent law—are part of the fabric of the modern regulatory state. Sometimes regulatory law changes very quickly, thus making it difficult for people to plan. Sometimes regulatory law imposes conflicting obligations, so that it is hard for people to know what they are supposed to do. These are important pathologies of modern law, and they produce high levels of inefficiency and injustice. agree on first principles. A great virtue of rules is that they circumscribe permissible grounds for both action and argument; in doing so, they reduce costs of many diverse kinds. I have said that in a heterogeneous society, containing people of limited time and capacities, this is an enormous advantage. It saves a great deal of effort, time, and expense. But by truncating the sorts of value-disputes that can arise in law, it also ensures that disagreements will occur along a narrowly restricted range. I now discuss some of the characteristic virtues of decisions according to rules. First, however, it is important to note that rules fall in several different categories. Here is a nonexhaustive account, tied to my special concerns here. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics tants are an example. And if each polluter felt free to revisit the justification for the rule, the prisoner’s dilemma might not be solved. The best solution is probably to fix a rule and to require everyone to adhere to it. through Societies can face similar problems. Perhaps good monetary policy for a certain period requires the Federal Reserve Board to do the same thing each month; suppose too that without a rule, and with particularized consideration of what to do each month, the Board would do inconsistent things. Adoption of a rule may ensure the requisite consistency. In this way, a rule may be a precommitment strategy that overcomes predictable problems with ruleless decisions. Rules might produce incompletely theorized agreements—agreements among people who disagree on questions of theory or on fundamental values. Rules might do this in three different ways. First, people can agree that a rule is binding, or authoritative, without agreeing on a theory of why it is binding, and without agreeing that the rule is good. Theories of legitimate authority are highly pluralistic, and acceptance of rules can proceed from diverse foundations. Second, people can often converge on a rule without taking a stand on large issues of the right or the good. Acceptance of precedents is a familiar practice. So too, people can urge a 60 miles per hour speed limit, a prohibition on bringing elephants into restaurants, a ten-year minimum sentence for attempted rape, and much more without taking a stand on debates between Kantians and utilitarians, and indeed without offering much in the way of general theory at all. Of course acceptance of any legal provision requires a reason or a principle; my point is only that a wide range of starting points can yield the same rule and even the same reason or principle, so long as these are described at a low or intermediate level of generality. When legislatures and bureaucracies issue rules, they can usually do so without getting into high-level theory. decisions in particular cases. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics public decisions by establishing the frameworks within which they can be made. Rules and Rulelessness given. An advantage of having a rule is that those who must interpret rules need not make difficult judgments about first principles. They can take those judgments as given, at least for the most part. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics benefits, low short-term costs, but high aggregate costs and low aggregate benefits; or in order to ensure against the kind of intrapersonal collective action problem that arises when he fails to take adequate account of what we might metaphorically see as the “successive selves” affected by his acts. law saying that discrimination against homosexuals will be prohibited where a three-part test so suggests, to a law saying that discrimination against homosexuals is always acceptable. We can still say, however, that factors will produce costs of certain kinds, and that these costs may be very high. Note in this regard that mechanical formulas often perform better than clinical discretion in the areas of medical diagnosis and college admission.12 2. Rules are impersonal and blind; they promote equal treatment and reduce the likelihood of bias and arbitrariness. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 3. Rules serve appropriately both to embolden and to constrain decision-makers in particular cases.14 A special advantage of rules is that judges (and others) can be emboldened to enforce them even when the particular stakes and the particular political costs are high. Rules that have been set out by the legislature or by the judges themselves may provide the basis for courageous decisions that might otherwise be difficult to reach and to legitimate. The fact that rules resolve all cases before the fact can thus make it possible for officials to stick with certain judgments when they should do so, but when they might be tempted to deviate. be binding, the law can usefully stiffen the judicial spine in cases in which this is a valuable guarantor of individual liberty against public attack. Congress, and others. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics calculus based on factors produces mistakes of various sorts, it is possible that the Court itself will escape the scrutiny it deserves. People may blame the lower-court judges assessing the factors, rather than the Court itself. official discretion in their particular case. Compare, for example, a mandatory retirement for people over the age of 70 with a law permitting employers to discharge employees who, because of their age, are no longer able to perform their job adequately. One advantage of the former over the latter is that if you are an employee, it is especially humiliating and stigmatizing to have employers decide whether you have been rendered incompetent by age. A rule avoids this inquiry altogether, and it might be favored for this reason even if it is both over- and under-inclusive. I now identify three arguments against rules. The first challenge is that rules embody “formal equality” and are for this reason too conservative, or too closely associated with excessively free markets; in this way rules are said to be sectarian after all. The second challenge is that rules cannot do what is claimed for them, since disagreements about foundational issues will indeed break out at the Rules and Rulelessness moment of application. The third challenge is that the generality of rules, and their blindness to particulars, is a political vice, because a just system allows equity, or adaptation to the particulars of individual cases. There is nothing in the first challenge, some important truth in the second, and some enduring wisdom in the third. Some people think that the requirements of the rule of law provide an important check on partisanship or selectivity insofar as these are reflected in law. On this view, the rule of law is a requirement of generality, and the requirement of generality forbids law from imposing selective benefits or selective burdens. In this notion lies much of the debate over the ideas of impartiality and neutrality in law. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics Justice Jackson took this seemingly mundane case as an occasion for celebrating the use of the equal protection clause as a guarantor of the rule of law, understood as a ban on selectivity. Justice Jackson began by contrasting the due process clause with the equal protection clause. The due process clause does not require equality; instead it imposes an absolute, flat barrier to legislative enactments. In this way it “leaves ungoverned and ungovernable conduct which many people find objectionable.” But the equal protection clause is not similarly disabling. “It merely means that the prohibition or regulation must have a broader impact.” The requirement of breadth in turn serves a democratic function. “[T]here is no more effective practical guaranty against arbitrary or unreasonable government than to require that the principles of law which officials would impose upon a minority must be imposed generally. Conversely, nothing opens the door to arbitrary action so effectively as to allow those officials to pick and choose only a few to whom they will apply legislation and thus to escape the political retribution that might be visited upon them if larger numbers were affected. Courts can take no better measure to assure that laws will be just than to require that laws be equal in operation.” In Justice Jackson’s view, a requirement of generality helps to flush out illegitimate reasons. If the law is imposed on some but not all, it may be based on prejudice. Perhaps the law is a means of oppressing a particular group; if it cannot be passed unless it is partial, we may suppose that it is undergirded by something other than the articulated justification. Perhaps it is a form of rent-seeking, or supported solely by private pressure. Rules and Rulelessness To know whether generality is required, we have to know whether there are relevant similarities and relevant differences between those burdened and those not burdened by legislation. No one thinks that “generality” should be required when there are relevant differences. No one supposes that the speed limit laws are unacceptable because they do not apply to police officers and ambulance drivers operating within the course of their official duties. Indeed, Justice Jackson did not vote to invalidate the New York law. “[T]he hireling may be put in a class by himself and may be dealt with differently than those who act on their own.” We should conclude that any requirement of equal treatment depends on a substantive theory establishing whether there are relevant differences between the cases to which a law is applied and the cases to which it is not. Sometimes the necessary theory is readily available. If a law says that in order to receive federal employment, everyone who is not white must take certain tests, we can easily see that the grounds for the distinction are illegitimate, and Justice Jackson’s analysis seems unimpeachable. But sometimes the plea for generality is based on controversial grounds. In such cases, the requirement of generality hides a range of substantive judgments, and those judgments cannot be supplied by the requirement itself. B. Is the Rule of Law Associated With Free Markets? These points provide reason to doubt Friedrich Hayek’s influential discussion of rules and the rule of law. Hayek identifies the rule of law with a norm of “impartiality.” Its antonym is a system of “planning,” in which the state picks winners and losers. Hayek associates the requirement of generality with that of impartiality. Because the rule of law does not pick out particular winners and 17See also Raz, The Rule of Law and Its Virtue, supra note 5. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics losers, it does not play favorites, and in this sense it is impartial. Hayek therefore concludes that there is a close association between the rule of law and free markets, both of which require generality. Here Hayek appears to be speaking of the related requirements of generality, impartiality, and equality; his argument is very much like that of Justice Jackson. Certain measures violate these requirements because they make arbitrary distinctions. But how do we know whether a distinction is arbitrary? How do we know whether the state can “control the access to different trades and occupations”? It is not impermissible for the state to require taxi drivers to show that they have good eyesight, or to ban people from practicing medicine without meeting certain requirements of medical competence. qualifications. But the rule of law, standing by itself, does not supply that theory. Of course government controls of prices and quantities are usually harmful or even disastrous, and much of what can be said against them relates to their rejection of the forces of supply and demand. But insofar as he is invoking the rule of law, Hayek’s claim is obscure. Price controls can satisfy all of the requirements described above; if the controls are stable, public, general, and so forth, they are consistent with the rule of law. The judgment that they are “arbitrary” stems not from the notion of the rule of law, but from an independent theory, grounded in ideas about efficiency and liberty, to the effect that the appropriate prices and quantities of goods and services are set by the market. That is a reasonable judgment, but it is not part of the rule of law. It is an independent point requiring independent defense. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics should be “blind.” Markets are similarly blind. Third, and perhaps paradoxically, Hayek is concerned to ensure against measures that impose inappropriate informational demands on government. Pricefixing is especially objectionable because it requires government to do something that it lacks information to do well. The same argument can be invoked on behalf of (at least many) rules. By setting out rules of the road, or requirements for the transfer of land, government can appropriately allocate informational burdens between itself and others. Rules and Rulelessness unqualified human good! It undoubtedly restrains power, but it also prevents power’s benevolent exercise. It creates formal equality—a not inconsiderable virtue—but it promotes substantive inequality by creating a consciousness that radically separates law from politics, means from ends, processes from outcomes. By promoting procedural justice it enables the shrewd, the calculating, and the wealthy to manipulate its forms to their own advantage. And it ratifies and legitimates an adversarial, competitive, and atomistic conception of human relations.”23 There is much to be said about this passage. For present purposes the key point is that the passage takes the rule of law to require much more than in fact it does. Does the rule of law forbid the pursuit of substantive equality through, for example, progressive income taxes, welfare and employment programs, antidiscrimination laws, and much more? Like Hayek, Horwitz appears to identify the rule of law with (a particular conception of) market ordering. The identification is unwarranted. A. Challenges Some people deny the feasibility of rules and the rule of law.24 Usually they focus on the internal point of view—on how lawyers and judges, operating within the legal system, figure out what rules mean. If rules are really understood as full ex ante allocation of legal rights, it is said, rules are impossible. Encounters with particular 23Morton Horwtiz, The Rule of Law: An Unqualified Human Good. 86 Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics cases will confound the view that things really have been fully settled in advance. In this view, the need for interpretation, and the likelihood of competing interpretations founded on disagreements about the good or the right, defeat the project of following rules. Rules and Rulelessness fact, it is not because there has been no resort to substantive argument, but because people agree on what substantive argument is persuasive under the circumstances. This is so not merely in the sense that people agree that as a moral matter, they ought to apply the law. It is so in the more fundamental sense that their view about what the law means has an important moral or political dimension. The positivist project of identifying the law by reference (solely) to its sources runs afoul of the fact that interpretation inevitably depends on something other than sources of law.25 And if this is true, ex post judgments are unavoidable. If contexts over substance are unavoidable, the project of rulefollowing and (a certain understanding of) the rule of law may well be threatened. At least this is so if such contests involve moral and political issues in particular cases, for if they do, the meaning of rules is determined by moral and political judgments at the point of application. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics familiar interpretive route— means that there is a possibility of an exception or an excuse everywhere. It means that even the most well-specified rules do not offer a full ex ante specification of legal rights. When an excuse is found insufficient—when Collins is not allowed an exemption from the speed limit law because he was late for work—it is not only because of the text, but also because of some judgment (usually tacit and rarely made in advance of the actual case) whether the application of the statute is absurd or grossly unjust. So long as we say that absurd applications will not be permitted, it always remains possible to urge, in the context of a case, that the particular application is absurd. C. The Rule of Law Chastened But Mostly Intact How damaging is this to the project of following rules, or to the rule of law? Certainly it suggests that for judges and administrators, the project of interpreting law solely by reference to ex ante judgments and sources will be incomplete. The sources may leave gaps to be filled at the point of application. But this is not as damaging as it seems. Almost all real-world cases involving the meaning of rules are very easy. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics Read literally, rules are often over- and under-inclusive if assessed by reference to their purposes. There is always a gap between the justification of a rule—usually taking the form of a standard—and the rule itself. Indeed, there is a plurality of justifications for every rule, with some very specific (“to ensure that the park is quiet”) to some very general (“to make the world better”). The gap between justification and rule is part of a familiar argument against rules, and perhaps an argument for an approach to rule-interpretation that allows exceptions in cases of absurdity or injustice. But it is not an argument that literal readings are not feasible.27 Courts might even seek to interpret words literally in all cases, and thus to avoid making any exceptions at all. This would be an odd interpretive strategy in light of the likely existence of at least a few truly compelling cases for exception. But the strategy is feasible. Recall here that a principal purpose of rules is to specify outcomes in advance of actual decisions, and note that mandatory rules are different from rules of thumb precisely because mandatory rules do not tell their interpreters and their objects to look at the rationale for the rule in particular cases. reference to rules. Whether rule-bound decisions are preferable to the alternatives is another question; it is to that question that I now turn. In many spheres of law, people do not rely on rules at all. A rulebook for telling jokes may be helpful; perhaps people who rely on such books are funnier than they would otherwise be; but if you really tried to tell jokes by following clear rules laid down in advance, you probably would not be very funny. There are no clear rules for dealing with friends in distress. Doctors are familiarly said to follow rules, and surely they often do; but some illuminating accounts treat medicine as largely a matter of casuistry, in which experienced people do not follow rules, but instead build up judgments analogically and from experience with past cases. They rely on rules of thumb rather than mandatory rules.28 They make judgments at the point of application. that justify them. If strictly followed, rules often produce significant error and hence arbitrariness in particular cases. As we have seen, the justifications that underlie the rules will not support all applications to which they apply by their terms. More generally, experience will turn up considerations or contexts that make it odd or worse to apply the rule to the particular case. For this reason it is sometimes inefficient to make decisions by rule, because any rule that people can generate will produce too much inaccuracy in particular cases. Perhaps any rule now available would produce inefficient outcomes, and perhaps particularized decisions would be better on this score. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics spicuous injustice in individual cases, and at least in principle, it is possible that the aggregate error rate would be lower with individualized decisions. Or consider the matter of criminal sentencing. While open-ended discretion has been persuasively criticized, it seems clear that the range of relevant variables is very wide, and that rigidly rule-bound decisions could produce much error and injustice. avoid rules altogether, or at least to create a few simple rules that allow room for private adaptation.30 C. Abstraction and generality sometimes mask bias. By ignoring individual circumstances, general rules can harm identifiable groups with distinctive characteristics, and in that sense reflect bias despite or even because of their generality. A familiar understanding of equality requires the similarly situated to be treated the same; a less familiar but also important understanding requires the differently situated to be treated differently, also in the interest of equality. General rules might abridge equality to the extent that they do not allow people to speak of relevant differences. 30See Richard Epstein, Simple Rules for a Complex World (forthcoming). 31See the illuminating discussion of human differences and capabilities i n Amartya Sen, Inequality Reexamined 79-87 (1993). Sen’s discussion of the crudeness of primary goods (if we attend to human diversity) is related to a characteristic challenge to rules (if we attend to the purposes of those rules). Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics in rule-like fashion, led the Environmental Protection Agency to stop listing pollutants at all. Thus “the act’s absolute duties to respond to danger prompted officials not to recognize the dangers in the first place.”33 E. Rules allow evasion by wrongdoers. necessary or appropriate to seek individualized tailoring. One conception of procedural justice—embodied in the due process clause—grants people a hearing in order to show that a statute has been accurately applied. Thus, for example, the Supreme Court has held that someone who is deprived of welfare benefits has a right to a hearing to contest the legitimacy of the deprivation.34 This understanding of due process fits well with a system of rules. The whole point of the hearing is to see whether the rule has been accurately applied. The hearing fortifies the rule. When rules fail, judges may rely on standards, or they may instead proceed through analogies, in which we do not know, in ad vance, whether we will have rules, standards, or something else. The problems with rules can push participants in law in the direction of standards, analogies, or some combination of the two. In Furman v. Georgia,35 the Supreme Court, following Papachristou, held that a rule-free death penalty violated the due process clause—not because it was excessively barbaric for the state to take life, but because the states allowed undue discretion in the infliction of the ultimate penalty of death. The problem with the pre1970 death penalty was therefore procedural. States did not limit the discretion of juries deciding who deserved to die. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics decide who would live and who would die. In this way, North Carolina attempted to apply sharp rule of law constraints to the area of death sentencing. is its failure to allow the particularized consideration of relevant aspects of the character and record of each convicted defendant before the imposition upon him of a sentence of death. . . . A process that accords no significance to relevant facets of the character and record of the individual offender or the circumstances of the particular offense excludes from consideration in fixing the ultimate punishment of death the possibility of compassionate or mitigating factors stemming from the diverse frailties of humankind. It treats all persons convicted of a designated offense not as uniquely individual human beings, but as members of a faceless, undifferentiated mass to be subjected to the blind infliction of the penalty of death. Woodson arose in an especially dramatic setting, but the Court’s preferred method—factors rather than rules—can be found in many areas of the both life and law. For example, the Court offers no rules for deciding how much in the way of procedure is required before the state may take liberty or property.37 Any “rules,” the Court suggests, would be too inaccurate and too insensitive to individual circumstance. Instead the Court requires an assessment of three factors: the nature and weight of the individual interest at stake; the likelihood of an erroneous determination and the probable value of additional safeguards; and the nature and strength of the government’s interest. This somewhat open-ended multifactor balancing test is quite different from what is anticipated in Papachristou. It sacrifices predictability for the sake of accuracy in individual cases. This is a pervasive choice in Anglo-American legal systems. What are the features of a system based on factors? 1. Multiple and diverse relevant criteria. It is obvious that in a system of factors, decisions are based on multiple and diverse criteria. No simple rule or principle can be applied to the case. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics relevant”—to show that new factors may come up. The legal terms are specific but nonexhaustive. Both of these strategies are pervasive in American law. Rules and Rulelessness arguing that their case is relevantly different from those that have come before. A litigant in case A can always say that in some particular way, his case is relevantly different from case B. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 7. Diversely valued goods and problems of commensurability. Usually the factors at work in the decisions I have in mind are valued in qualitatively different ways. Moreover, those factors cannot be placed on a single metric; they are not commensurable. To understand these claims, something must be said about diverse kinds of valuation and about the difficult problem of incommensurability. 38See Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics (1993); Amartya Sen, Plural Utility, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 83 (198283). procedures. It would be odd to say that this assessment can be made through lining up the relevant variables along any single metric. There is no scale by which it makes sense to weigh these matters. If we devise a scale, we will have to recharacterize the relevant goods in a way that changes their character and effaces qualitative differences. Perhaps this is justified for pragmatic reasons, but something will be lost as well as gained. All this leaves two questions. Under what circumstances is it appropriate to rely on factors rather than rules? And under what circumstances might a legal system be expected to do one rather than the other? It is unlikely that we will be able to generate a reliable and general positive theory on this topic. Legislation is a complex product of legislative self-interest, private influence, and public-spirited motiva in Cass R. Sunstein, 39More detailed discussion can be found Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics tions on the part of both legislators and those who influence them. Judicial choices between rules and factors are at least equally difficult to attribute to a single behavioral influence, or a set of behavioral influences. It is hard to imagine a simple testable hypothesis that would not be falsified by many results in the world. 40See Jon Elster, Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences (1989), making this claim much more generally. deciding on the particular applications; they must not only find the facts but also find the law. Consider, for example, the problems of deciding whether airline pilots over the age of 60 are still able to do their jobs competently. Such decisions will be time-consuming, may produce unequal treatment, and may create a lot of error under the pressure of the moment (mistaken stereotypes about people over 60, or misplaced sympathy for discharged employees). Such decisions may also impair predictability and thus create high costs for people trying to order their affairs under law. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics ized, hierarchical judiciary. In such a system, there will be some incentive for the Supreme Court to avoid making rules and to export the costs of rulelessness to others. But the incentive can be overcome by other considerations. I return to these points below. Some of these speculations are borne out by comparing the legal system in England with that in the United States.41 English law is far more rule-bound than American law. The Parliament is less likely to delegate discretionary authority to judges. For their part, English judges treat statutes as rules, interpreting them literally and generally refusing to investigate whether the particular application of the rule makes sense as a matter of policy or principle. In England, law-making and law-interpretation are far more rule-bound than in the United States, where law-making often takes place in the process of confrontation with particular cases. 41I draw in this section on the extremely illuminating discussion i n Patrick Atiyah and Robert Summers, Form and Substance in Anglo-American Law (1987). tive practices, which are themselves not easy to describe in light of the sheer size of the federal judiciary and the existence of sharp splits, on just this point, in the Supreme Court. Congress does overrule statutory decisions to which it objects. But it is not in the business of responding rapidly and regularly to particular cases in which literal interpretations misfire. Hence both law-making and law-interpreting practice are very different from what they are in England. How can a legal system minimize the problems posed by unreasonable generality on the one hand and those of potentially abusive discretion on the other? The best approaches involve (a) highly contextualized inquiries into the likelihood of error and abuse with either rules or rulelessness, and hence an “on balance” judgment about risk; and (b) a presumption in favor of a particular kind of rule, that is, the privately adaptable rule that allocates initial entitlements and does not specify outcomes. But there are other possibilities as well. Jeremy Bentham favored clear rules, laid down in advance and broadly communicated. In at least some of his writings, he also favored adjudicative flexibility, allowing judges to adapt the rules to the complexities of individual cases. Bentham was aware that rules could misfire as they encountered particular controversies, especially if we understand the notion of misfiring in utilitarian terms. In courts of law, he concluded, the rules would not be fully binding. This suggests a paradox: How could someone advocate clear rules without asking judges to follow them? Bentham’s ingenious answer involved the different audiences for law. The public would hear general rules; Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics the judges would hear individual cases.42 This is the important idea of an “acoustic separation” for legal terms, justified on utilitarian grounds. There is such a separation in many areas of law, including tax law and the law relating to excuses for criminality. 42See Gerald Postema, Bentham and the Common Law Tradition (1986). by exploring whether their justifications create absurdity or injustice, if the particulars of the case so suggest. We might even see a judicial (or administrative) power of this kind as part of the interpretation of rules, not as an authority to change rules. This power should be publicly known—a fully disclosed aspect of interpretation. In some contexts, of course, the possibility of changing rules, or of interpreting them with close reference to whether they make sense in particular circumstances, might be too damaging to the project of having rules. But this contextual judgment cannot be made in the abstract. Often a legal system should make the choice between rules and rulelessness on the basis of a contextual inquiry into the aggregate level of likely errors and abuses. I have suggested that when judges or other interpreters are perceived to be ignorant, corrupt, or biased, or in any case when they diverge in their judgments from the people who make rules, a legal system will proceed with rules. Even a poor fit, in the form of over- and under-inclusive rules, can be tolerated when individual decisions will be inaccurate as well. Thus we might find factors when there is no special reason to distrust those who will assess them. So too, individualized decisions are likely to be dispensed with when it is possible to come up with rules that fit well. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics It is also true that rules tend to make sense and to be adopted in the face of social consensus within the lawmaking body; decisions by factors are more probable when there is dissensus. It is not hard to obtain a ban on racial discrimination when people agree that this form of discrimination is illegitimate; it is much harder to obtain a similar ban on discrimination against the handicapped, where balancing tests are pervasive. Consider the fact that Congress often delegates discretionary power to an agency when it is unable to agree on the appropriate rule, because of social dissensus, and therefore it tells the agency to act “reasonably.” Examples include the areas of broadcasting regulation and occupational safety and health. This route is followed partly because factors, more conspicuously and regularly than rules, drive discretion underground. The costs of laying down rules are increased in the face of dissensus on their content, and this consideration increases the likelihood that we will see factors instead. Rules and Rulelessness even more likely to be successful with bureaucrats or judges). Consider laws governing the regulation of agriculture, which are often highly specific, in part because the farmers’ lobby is wellorganized, and because the opponents of such laws are not. The point also helps explain the dramatic difference between criminal liability, which is generally rule-bound, and criminal sentencing, which is generally based on factors. Part of the story is that Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics specificity is needed at the liability stage, so that people can plan accordingly, and so that the discretion of the police is sharply cabined. Both interests are far weaker at the sentencing stage. Planning is not so insistently at stake. The discretion of the sentencing judge or jury is less prone to abuse than the discretion of the police officer. Frustrating bureaucratic insistence on “the technicalities” may result simply because so many decisions must be made, and because individualized inquiry into whether technicalities make sense in particular cases is too time-consuming. Similarly, rules can be avoided when few decisions need to be made, or when each case effectively stands on its own. A more ambitious strategy might emerge from distinguishing between two sorts of rules.44 Some rules allocate initial entitlements—they unquestionably count as rules—but at the same time they maximize flexibility and minimize the informational burden on government, by allowing private adaptation to determine ultimate outcomes. Consider the rules of the road; taxes imposed on dangerous workplaces; rules allocating property rights and thus creating private property; or rules governing entry into agreements. These might be described as privately adaptable rules. By contrast, some laws do not merely allocate entitlements, but also minimize private flexibility by mandating particular end-states or outcomes. Consider price controls, or specified technology for new cars, or flat bans on the presence of carcinogens in the workplace. Rules that specify 44Related discussion can be found in Friedrich Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty (1960), distinguishing between “laws” and “commands.” This is a highly illuminating but also confused discussion; I have drawn on some of Hayek’s ideas but tried to reduce the level of confusion. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics end-states are common in modern regulation, in the form of “command and control” regulation that says exactly what people must do and how they must do it. We own property only because the legal system has allocated property rights to us. In this sense, property rights are anything but natural. Freedom of contract, as we understand and enjoy it, is not part of nature. It is a function of legal rules creating and constituting that form of freedom.47 The rules of private property and freedom of contract are rules, and they are legal in character. What I want to emphasize here is that these rules are distinctive in the sense that they allocate initial entitlements, allow private adaptation, and do not specify end-states. 45Hence the Coase theorem will sometimes be wrong insofar as it predicts the initial allocation of the entitlement will not affect outcomes. See Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law, 22 J Legal Stud 217 (1993). market-oriented of free market systems.48 (People in Eastern Europe, now undertaking the difficult task of creating markets, have seen this all too well.) Government can hardly avoid the task of creating rules allocating rights. 48See Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom 38-39 (1944): “The functioning of a competition . . . depends, above all, on the existence of an appropriate legal system. . . . In no system that could be rationally defended would the state just do nothing. An effective competitive system needs an intelligently designed and continuously adjusted legal framework as much as any other.” See also Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines 165-66 (1983): “Finally, the focus on entitlement has the effect of emphasizing legal rights. Other relevant factors, for example market forces, can be seen as operating through a system of legal relations (ownership rights, contractual obligations, legal exchanges, etc.). The law stands between food availability and food entitlement. Starvation deaths can reflect legality with a vengeance.” 49To be sure, restrictions on free alienability might be justified for many reasons, including collective action problems, externalities, difficulties with commodification, and so forth. I cannot discuss these issues here. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics they reduce the costs of rule-making and harness private information and preferences51 in the service of outcomes that are themselves not identified ex ante. 51Subject to the qualification in supra note 45. 52See Hayek, supra note 44; Richard Epstein, Simple Rules for a Complex the task of deciding to whom to allocate licenses. In making this decision, it has alternated between rules and factors. In using factors, the fcc has referred to local ownership, minority ownership, participation by owners in public affairs, broadcast experience, the adequacy of technical facilities, the background and qualifications of staff, the character of owners, and more. The problems with both rules and factors are entirely predictable—inaccuracy through excessive rigidity on the one hand, and discretionary, ad hoc, costly, potentially abusive judgments on the other. It is no wonder that both approaches have largely failed. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics D. Abolition Sometimes both rules and factors are intolerable; sometimes market forces cannot or should not be harnessed. Having eliminated both rules and factors, the law might use a lottery instead. (Of course the decision to hold a lottery is supported by a rule.) This is a characteristic approach to the military draft, where rule-bound judgments seem too crude, and where judgments based on factors are too obviously subject to discrimination and caprice. Lotteries are used in many other areas as well. Of course lotteries have an arbitrariness of their own, and for this reason, they may be an inferior approach. Rules and Rulelessness of people of this conclusion, the sources of the argument lie, I think, in evidence of this sort. A system committed to the rule of law is committed to limiting official discretion; but it is not committed to making every decision according to judgments that have been fully specified in advance. Nonetheless, rules are an admirable device for obtaining agreement on the content of law, and also for reducing discretion at the point of application. Often people can agree on rules when they disagree about general theory; they can agree that the rules are binding, that the rules are good, and that the rules have a certain identifiable meaning. Frequently a lawmaker adopts rules because rules narrow or even eliminate the range of disagreement and uncertainty faced by people attempting to follow or to interpret the law. This step has enormous virtues in terms of promoting predictability and planning and of reducing both costs and risks of official abuse. Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics necessary to debate issues of value and fact every time someone does something having social consequences. Because of their ex ante character, rules will usually be over-inclusive and under-inclusive by reference to the arguments that justify them. They will often be outrun by changing circumstances. Usually the crudeness of rules is tolerable, and most of the resulting inefficiency and injustice can be controlled through means short of abandoning rules. But, sometimes the crudeness of rules counts decisively against them. factors rules and in which both crudeness and Some of the most difficult issues in law involve the choice beseem in cases tween unacceptable—rules, because of their insensitivity to particulars that confound them; factors, because of the likelihood of arbitrariness and discrimination in application. The Benthamite strategy calls for ex ante rules for the public and ex post, case-by-case particularism for judges. I have questioned this strategy on both economic and democratic grounds; but sometimes flexible, contextual interpretation of rules, adapting the general to the particular, can bring about something like the best of both worlds. This Working Paper is a preliminary version of an article that will be published in 1996, The Tanner Lectures in Human Values. Readers with comments should address them to: Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence The Law School The University of Chicago 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, Illinois 60637 Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics (Second Series) 1. William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 4. Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Con 6. Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation 7. Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992). 12. Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 21. Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle 22. Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the 23. William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis 24. J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from 26. Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994).