University of Chicago Law School ersity
Cass R. Sunstein
POLITICAL EQUALITY AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
fied in principle may go terribly wrong in practice. Minimum wage laws, for example, appear to reduce employment.1 Stringent regulation of new sources of air pollution may aggravate pollution problems, by perpet-
By futile regulation, I mean measures that do not bring both of these phenomena. It is unfortunate but true that current camSome campaign finance regulation is amply justified in principle. As translated into disparities in political power. A well-functioning democone hand and political processes of voting and reason-giving on the other. Government has a legitimate interest in ensuring not only that
tile or self-defeating. To take a familiar example, it is now well-known that restrictions on individual expenditures-designed to reduce influence-peddling-can help fuel the use of political action committees (PACs), and thus increase the phenomenon of influence-peddling. This is merely one of a number of possible illustrations.
I can venture no exhaustive account here, and I attempt to describe possibilities rather than certainties. But one of my principal goals is to outline some of the harmful but unintended consequences of campaign finance restrictions. I conclude with some brief notes on what strategies might be most likely to avoid the risk of unintended (or intended but unarticulated) bad consequences. My basic claim here is that we might attempt to avoid rigid command-and-control strategies for restricting expenditures, and experiment with more flexible, incentive-based approaches. In this way the regulation of campaign expenditures might be brought in line with recent innovations in regulatory practice generally.8
A. Arguments for Campaign Finance Reform
In principle, the case for campaign finance regulation is very strong. We can identify at least three central grounds for such regulation.9 First and most obvious, perhaps, is the need to protect the electoral process from both the appearance and the reality of "quid pro quo" exchanges between contributors and candidates. Such exchanges occur whenever contributors offer dollars in return for political favors. The purchase of votes or of political favors is a form of corruption-a large issue in recent campaigns. Corruption is inconsistent with the view that public officials should act on the basis of the merits of proposals, and not on the basis of their personal economic interest, or even the interest in increasing their
campaign finances. Of course consideration of the merits will often involve people's preferences, and of course a willingness to pay cash may reflect preferences. But the link between particular cash payments and any responsible judgment about the merits is extremely weak. Laws should not be purchased and sold the spectre of quid pro quo exchanges violates this principle.
The second interest, independent of corruption, involves political equality. This is a time-honored goal in American constitutional thought." People who are able to organize themselves in such a way as to spend large amounts of cash should not be able to influence politics more than people who are not similarly able. Certainly economic equality is not required in a democracy but it is most troublesome if people with a good deal of money are allowed to translate their wealth into political influence. It is equally troublesome if the electoral process translates poverty into an absence of political influence. Of course economic inequalities cannot be made altogether irrelevant for politics. But the link can be diminished between wealth or poverty on the one hand and political influence on the other. The "one person-one vote" rule exemplifies the commitment to political equality. Limits on campaign expenditures are continuous with that rule.
The third interest is in some ways a generalization of the first two. Campaign finance laws might promote the goal of ensuring political deliberation and reason-giving. Politics should not simply register existing preferences and their intensities, especially as these are measured by private willingness to pay. In the American constitutional tradition, politics has an important deliberative function. The constitutional system aspires to a form of "government by discussion." Grants of cash to candidates might compromise that goal by, for example, encouraging legislatures to vote in accordance with private interest rather than reasons.
The goals of political equality and political deliberation are related to the project of distinguishing between the appropriate spheres of economic markets and politics.' In democratic politics, a norm of equality is important: disparities in wealth ought not lead to disparities in power over government. Similarly, democracy requires adherence to the norm of reason-giving. Political outcomes should not be based only on intensities of preferences as these are reflected in the criterion of private willingness to pay. Taken together, the notions of equality and reason-giving embody a distinctive conception of political respect. Markets are operated on the basis of quite different understandings. People can purchase things because they want them, and they need not offer or even have reasons for their wants. Markets embody their own conception of equality insofar as they entail a principle of "one dollar-one 'vote'" but this is not the conception of equality appropriate to the political sphere.
To distinguish between the market and politics is not to deny that an expenditure of money on behalf of a candidate or a cause qualifies as "speech" for first amendment purposes. Such an expenditure might well be intended and received as a contribution to social deliberation. Many people give money in order to promote discussion of a position that they favor. Indeed, we might see the ability to accumulate large sums of money as at least a rough indicator that large numbers of people are intensely interested in a candidate's success. If a candidate can accumulate a lot of money, it is probable that many people like what she has to say, or that even if the number of supporters is not so great, their level of enthusiasm is high indeed. In this way we might take the ability to attract a large amount of money to reveal something important-if not decisive-in a deliberative democracy. If and because political dissenters are able to attract funds, they might be able to do especially well in the political "marketplace." This possibility should hardly be disparaged.
In this regard, it is perhaps insufficiently appreciated that a system without limits on financial contributions favors people who can attract money without, however, simply favoring the rich over the poor. In theory, at least, some poor people may be able to attract a lot of money if their political commitments find broad support-from, say, a lot of relatively poor people, or from a smaller but intensely interested number of rich ones. Of course it is hardly unusual for a rich candidate to find it impossible to obtain sufficient funds, because other people are not at all interested in providing support. Many candidates with large personal fortunes have failed for just this reason.
These points are not decisive in favor of a system of laissez-faire for political expenditures and contributions. The correlation between public enthusiasm and the capacity to attract money is crude. There is a large disparity between donations and intensity of interest in a candidate. Candidate A might, for example, attract large sums of money from wealthy people but A's supporters may be less interested in her success than Candidate B's poorer supporters are interested in B's success, even though B's supporters donate less money.' Moreover, as I have emphasized, a democracy is concerned with much more than numbers and intensities of preferences.
At the very least, however, an expenditure of money is an important means by which people communicate ideas, and the First Amendment requires a strong justification for any government regulation of an important means of communication. We might therefore think of campaign finance laws as viewpoint-neutral and even content-neutral restrictions on political speech. At least if the laws are fair, the particular content of the speech-the message that is being urged-is irrelevant to whether the campaign finance restriction attaches. The area is especially difficult because while these restrictions can be severe, the government can point to strong reasons in their support. B. The Law
By far the most important campaign finance case is of course Buckley v. Valeo,16 which must now be counted as one of the most vilified Supreme Court decisions of the post-World War II era. I offer a brief summary. In Buckley, the Court invalidated all restrictions on campaign expenditures. According to the Court, such restrictions are a kind of First Amendment "taking" from some speakers, perhaps rich ones, for the benefit of others, perhaps poor ones. In the key sentence, the Court declared that "the concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of our society in order to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First Amendment." If the purpose of such laws were to increase political equality, they would be constitutionally unacceptable. The goal of political equality could not be invoked to stop people from spending money on themselves or on candidates of their choice. According to the Court, redistributive arguments for campaign finance laws are therefore impermissible they amount to a silencing of some for the benefit of others.'8
vent evasion of the limit on contributions. Second, the distinction is not crisp even if it is relevant. Suppose thatJones purchases an advertisement in the newspaper for candidate Smith. Might this not be thought a contribution? The slipperiness of the distinction has increased in light of the dramatic rise of political action committees (PACs), a development that, as we will soon see, was stimulated by Buckley itself.
PACs are created precisely in order to exert political influence as a result of financial contributions. This raises an obvious question: Is a grant of money to a PAC a contribution or is it an expenditure? It might be thought to be an expenditure if it does not involve the award of money to a particular, identified candidate many PACs are devoted to numerous candidates and to general causes. The grant of money to a PAC may thus not involve the risk of "corruption" in the simple sense of an exchange of money for political favors. On the other hand, the PAC could spend a great deal of money on behalf of one candidate it could be organized by a close friend or ally of the candidate it could be closely identified with one or a few candidates. Indeed, in practice a PAC could be nearly indistinguishable from the candidate herself. It is easy for candidates to find out who has given money to PACs, and to reward contributors accordingly. In addition, PACs often have unusual access to candidates. If we are concerned about disproportionate access and political influence based on financial contributions, we might well be concerned about PACs. In this light, concern about corruption, as well as political equality and political deliberation, would support treating grants of money to PACs as
Moreover, people usually know that contributions to PACs will go to certain candidates and not to others, and there is thus some risk of corruption here as well. A limit on contributions to PACs is far less intrusive than a limit on all expenditures it does leave the individual with the option of making ordinary expenditures on his own. Finally, PACs are often said to have unusual political influence and for this reason to be a distinctive threat to political equality and political deliberation -basic constitutional goals in a Madisonian system. For all these reasons, a limit on contributions to PACs should probably be thought very different from a limit on an expenditure by a candidate on her own behalf, or by an ordinary citizen purchasing an advertisement on her own behalf to help someone she likes. Related issues are of course raised by limits on contributions by PACs.
The Court has not clearly resolved the resulting conundrums. In the two key cases, it gave conflicting signals. First, it invalidated a $1000 limit on the amount of money that a PAC can give to promote the election of a candidate. In the Court's view, the PAC expenditure is core political speech, and because the money does not go directly to the candidate, the risk and reality of corruption are not at stake. After all, PAC expenditures are not coordinated with the campaign and are in that sense independent.
On the other hand, in the second case the Court upheld a $5000 limit on the amount of money an individual or group can give to any PAC.27 The Court said that this limit does not affect a wide range of other possible expenditures designed to advocate political views, and that Congress could reasonably decide that the limit was necessary to prevent evasion of the limits on direct contributions. The two cases are in obvious tension, and it is therefore unclear whether and how Congress may constitutionally limit contributions to or by PACs. This is an especially important question in light of the large and sometimes corrosive effects of PACs on the political process. C. Lochner, Redistribution, and Buckley
Let us put these various complexities to one side and return to the basic issue of political equality. In rejecting the claim that controls on financial expenditures could be justified as a means of promoting political equality, Buckley seems highly reminiscent of the pre-New Deal period. Indeed Buckley might well be seen as the modern-day analogue of the infamous and discredited case of Lochner v. New York,29 in which the Court invalidated maximum hour
A principal problem with the pre-New Deal Court was that it treated existing distributions of resources as if they were prepolitical and just, and therefore invalidated democratic efforts at reform.3 In a key Lochner era case, Adkins v. Children's Hospital, for example, the Court invalidated minimum wage legislation. In so doing, it said:
To the extent that the sum fixed by [the minimum wage statute]
exceeds the fair value of the services rendered, it amounts to a
compulsory exaction from the employer for the support of a
partially indigent person, for whose condition there rests upon
him no peculiar responsibility, and therefore, in effect, arbitrarily shifts to his shoulders a burden which, if it belongs to anybody, belongs to society as a The language of compulsory subsidy-of taking from some for the benefit of others-was central in the Lochner period.3 Regulatory adjustment of market arrangements was seen as interference with an otherwise law-
free and unobjectionable status quo. It was a state-mandated transfer of funds from one group for another, and this kind of mandate was constitutionally illegitimate.
To compress a long and complex story: This whole approach became unsustainable in 1937, when the legal culture came to think that existing distributions were a product of law, were not sacrosanct, and could legitimately be subject to governmental correction. Throughout the legal system, it was urged that property rights were a function of law rather than nature, and ought not to be immunized from legal change.3 Such changes would not be banned in principle, but would be evaluated on the basis of the particular reasons brought forward on their behalf. In President Roosevelt's words: "We must lay hold of the fact that economic laws are not made by nature. They are made by human beings."3 And the Supreme Court, overruling Lochner itself, offered an uncanny reversal of the Adkins dictum, arguing that "[t] he community is not bound to provide what is in effect a subsidy for unconscionable employers. "3T
In its essential premises, Buckley is quite similar to the pre-1937 cases. Recall that the Court announced that "the concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of our society in order to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First Amendment."3 It added that the "First Amendment's protection against governmental abridgement of free expression cannot properly be made to depend on a person's financial ability to engage in public discussion."3 The Buckley Court therefore saw campaign expenditure limits as a kind of "taking," or compulsory exaction, from some for the benefit of others. The limits were unconstitutional for this very reason. Just as the due process clause once forbade government "interference" with the outcomes of the economic marketplace, so too the First Amendment now bans government "interference" with the political marketplace, with the term "marketplace" understood quite literally. In this way Buckley replicates Lochner.
On the view reflected in both Buckley and Lochner, reliance on free markets is government neutrality and government inaction. But in the New Deal period, it became clear that reliance on markets simply entailed another-if in many ways good-regulatory system, made possible and constituted through law. We cannot have a system of market ordering without an elaborate body of law.40 For all their beneficial qualities, markets are legitimately subject to democratic restructuring-at least within certain limits-if the restructuring promises to deliver sufficient benefits. This is a constitutional truism in the post-New Deal era. What is perhaps not sufficiently appreciated, but what is equally true, is that elections based on existing distributions of wealth and entitlements also embody a regulatory system, made possible and constituted through law. Here as elsewhere, law defines property interests it specifies who owns what, and who may do what with what is owned. The regulatory system that we now have for elections is not obviously neutral or just. On the contrary, it seems to be neither insofar as it permits high levels of political influence to follow from large accumulations of wealth.
Because it involves speech, Buckley is in one sense even more striking than Lochner. As I have noted, the goal of political equality is timehonored in the American constitutional tradition, as the goal of economic equality is not. Efforts to redress economic inequalities, or to ensure that they are not turned into political inequalities, should not be seen as impermissible redistribution, or as the introduction of government regulation into a place where it did not exist before. A system of unlimited campaign expenditures should be seen as a regulatory decision to allow disparities in resources to be turned into disparities in political influence. That may be the best decision, all things considered but why is it unconstitutional for government to attempt to replace this system with an alternative? The Court offered no answer. Its analysis was startlingly cavalier. Campaign finance laws should b6 evaluated not through axioms, but pragmatically in terms of their consequences for the system of free
In principle, then, there are good arguments for campaign finance restrictions. Insofar as Buckley rejects political equality as a legitimate constitutional goal, it should be overruled. Indeed, the decision probably ranks among the strongest candidates for overruling of the post-World War II period. But there are real limits on how much we can learn from abstract principles alone. Many of the key questions are insistently ones of policy and fact. Was the system at issue in Buckley well-designed? How might it be improved? What will be the real-world consequences of different plans? Will they fulfill their intended purposes? Will they be selfdefeating? Might they impair democratic processes under the guise of promoting them?
My goal here is to offer a brief catalogue of ways in which campaign finance legislation may prove unhelpful or counterproductive. My particular interest lies in the possibility that campaign finance legislation may have perverse or unintended consequences. The catalogue bears directly on a number of proposals now receiving attention in Congress and in the executive branch. Of course it would be necessary to look at the details in order to make a final assessment. I am describing possibilities, not certainties, and a good deal of empirical work would be necessary to come to terms with any of them.
A general point runs throughout the discussion. Although I have criticized what the Court said in Buckley, considerable judicial suspicion of campaign finance limits is justified by a simple point: Congressional support for such limits is especially likely to reflect congressional self-dealing. Any system of campaign finance limits raises the special spectre of governmental efforts to promote the interests of existing legislators. Indeed, it is hard to imagine other kinds of legislation posing similarly severe risks. In these circumstances, we might try to avoid rigid, command-and-control regulation, which poses special dangers, and move instead toward more flexible, incentive-based strategies.
Unintended Consequences in Particular
1. Campaign Finance Limits May Entrench Incumbents. Operating under the rubric of democratic equality, campaign finance measures may make it hard for challengers to overcome the effects of incumbency. The problem is all the more severe in a period in which it is extremely difficult for challengers to unseat incumbents. Consider the following tables:
incumbent senators tend to have less difficulty in raising money than do members of the House of Representatives. Members of the House are therefore more dependent on PAC contributions. It should be unsurprising that while Senate bills propose a complete ban on multi-candidate PACs, the leading House bill proposes a much less draconian contribution limit of $2,500 per candidate. More generally, the current proposals do nothing to decrease the benefits of incumbency, and they may well increase those benefits.
Whether campaign finance limits in general do entrench incumbents is an empirical question. There is some evidence to the contrary. Usually the largest amounts are spent by incumbents themselves usually incumbents have an advantage in accumulating enormous sums, often from people who think that they have something to gain from a financial relationship with an officeholder. In these circumstances, one of the particular problems for challengers is that they face special financial barriers by virtue of the ability of incumbents to raise large sums of money. Probably the fairest generalization is that campaign finance limits in general do not entrench incumbents, but that there are important individual cases in which such limits prevent challengers from mounting serious efforts. In any case, any campaign finance reforms should be designed so as to promote more electoral competition.
2. Limits on Individual Contributions Will Produce More (and More Influential) PACs. - The early regulation of individual contributions had an important unintended consequence: It led directly to the rise of the political action committee. When individuals were banned from contributing to campaigns, there was tremendous pressure to provide a mechanism for aggregating individual contributions. The modern PAC is the result. Consider the following tables:
The post-Buckley rise of PACs has a general implication. If individual contributions are controlled while PACs face little or no effective regulation, there could be a large shift of resources in the direction of PACs. Of course a combination of PAC limits and individual contribution limits could counteract this problem. But limits of this kind create difficulties
3. Limits on "Hard Money"Encourage a Shift to "Soft Money."- In the 1980s, the tightening of individual contribution limits-"hard money"helped increase the amount of "soft money,"5 consisting of gifts to political parties. It should not be surprising to see that in recent years there has been an enormous increase in fund-raising by political parties, which dispense contributions to various candidates. In 1980, the two parties raised and spent about $19 million in 1984, the amount rose to $19.6 million in 1988, it increased to $45 million. Consider the following table:
In some ways the shift from hard to soft money has been a salutary development. It is more difficult for soft money contributors to target particular beneficiaries, and perhaps this reduces the risk of the quid pro quo donation. Reasonable people could believe that soft money poses lower risks to the integrity of the political process while also exemplifying a legitimate form of freedom of speech and association. But the substitution, if it occurs, means that any contribution limits are easily evaded. Candidates know, moreover, the identity of the large contributors to the party, and for this reason soft money can produce risks of corruption as well. 4. Limits on PACs Lead to an Increase in Individual Expenditures. - In the next few years, Congress may well impose limits on PACs, or even eliminate them altogether.56 If it does so, there will be pressure for more in the way of both individual contributions and individual expenditures. Limits or bans on PAC expenditures will increase the forms of financial help that Congress' original efforts in 1971 were specifically designed to limit It is ironic but true that new legislation designed to counteract PACs will spur the very activity against which Congress initially sought to guard.
For reasons suggested above, this development, even if ironic, may improve things overall. There is a good argument that PAC contributions are especially harmful to democratic processes, because they are particularly likely to be given with the specific purpose of influencing lawmakers. It is also the case that candidates who receive individual contributions are often unaware of the particular reason for the money, whereas PAC beneficiaries know exactly what reasons underlie any donation. For all these reasons, a shift from PACs to individual expenditures may be desirable.
On the other hand, PACs have some distinctive benefits as well. They provide a method by which individuals may band together in order to exercise political influence. Sometimes they offer a helpful aggregative mechanism of the kind that is plausibly salutary in a democracy. A shift from PACs to individual expenditures may be unfortunate insofar as it diminishes the power of politically concerned people to organize and pool their resources on behalf of their favored causes.
On balance, individual expenditures do seem preferable to PACs, because the most severe threats to the "quid pro quo" and public deliberation come from PAC money. Restrictions on PACs that move people in the direction of individual expenditures and contributions are therefore desirable. My point is only that there is a trade-off between the two.
5. Limits on PACs Can Hurt Organized Labor and Minority Candidates.
Sometimes minority candidates can succeed only with the help of PACs specifically organized for their particular benefit. For this reason, limits will in some circumstances diminish the power of minority candidates. The Congressional Black Caucus has expressed concerns over campaign finance regulation on this ground.5 Similar results are possible for PACs organized to benefit women. PAC restrictions may also hurt organized labor. Currently labor PACs spend most of their money on individual candidates, especially incumbent Democrats. By contrast, corporate PACs contribute about equally to Democrats and Republicans, and give substantial sums to the parties rather than to individual candidates. A ban on PACs may therefore diminish the influence of labor unions without materially affecting corporate PACs. Perhaps these effects are good or justified on balance. But many people who favor campaign finance regulation might be disturbed to see this effect.
6. Limits on PACs May Increase Secret Gifts. Many current interest groups appear unconcerned about PAC limits, even though their interests would appear to be jeopardized by the proposed limits. Perhaps it will be easy for them to evade any such limits, especially by offering "soft money" and also by assembling large amounts as a result of contributions from unidentifiable sources. We lack detailed evidence on this issue, but there is reason to think that the concern is legitimate. It is possible that limits on PACs will make it harder to identify sources of money without materially decreasing special interest funding. The current proposals do not respond to this risk.
7. Limits on Both PACs and Contributions Could Hinder Campaign Activity. - Most of the discussion thus far has been based on the assumption that campaign finance reform proposals would limit either PACs or individual contributions. In either case, limitations on one could lead to increased spending through the other. A third option might be to limit both PACs and individual contributions. But this option could quite possibly lead to a number of negative effects. If the limits were successful, campaign activity might be sharply limited as a whole.64 Any such limit would raise First Amendment problems and perhaps compromise democratic government.65 Alternatively, resources could be funneled into campaigns through "soft money," secret gifts, or other loopholes in the reforms.
B. Possible Strategies
What I have said thus far suggests considerable reason for caution about campaign finance proposals. It also suggests that those who design such proposals should be attentive to the risks of futile or self-defeating reform. I do not attempt here to describe a fully adequate regulatory system. But I will outline two possibilities that appear especially promising. Both of them respond to the largely unfortunate American experience with command-and-control regulation in the last generation. Such regulation-consisting of rigid mandates and flat bans-is peculiarly likely to be futile or self-defeating. Mandates and bans invite efforts at circumvention. Because of their rigidity, they tend to have unintended adverse consequences creative members of regulated classes are likely to come up with substitutes posing equal or greater risks.6 To say this is not to say that mandates and bans are necessarily inferior to alternatives. But it is to say that we ought to explore approaches that make self-interested adaptation less likely.
1. Incentives Rather Than Bans. - The Buckley Court was unwilling to accept a flat ban on expenditures. But it was quite hospitable to federal financing accompanied by viewpoint-neutral conditions-most notably a promise not to accept private money as a condition for receiving federal dollars.68 This model of incentives rather than bans has a number of attractions. For one, it survives even the rigid constitutional scrutiny of Buckley itself.
The system of incentives-in the form of federal financing accompanied by a promise not to accept private money-responds to the deepest concerns of people who are skeptical of flat bans. Some people argue that the acquisition of private sums can be at least a crude way to register public enthusiasm for a candidate, and to enable dissidents and outsiders to overcome the advantages of incumbency. A system of incentives leaves the private remedy intact. At the same time, such a system can help counteract the distortions built into exclusive reliance on private contributions. It does so by allowing electoral competition from people who are not well-financed.
To be sure, some people think that full federal funding is the best route for the future.70 But a system of incentives promoting public financing is more likely to be constitutional. Full federal funding would apparently foreclose private expenditures, in violation of Buckley a system of incentives does not eliminate private expenditures. Such a system allows the private check to continue to exist, a strategy that poses certain risks, but that has benefits as well. Finally, a system of incentives accomplishes many (if not all) of the goals of full public funding. It does this by encouraging candidates not to rely on private funds and by ensuring that people unable to attract money are not placed at a special disadvantage.
A system of incentives could take various forms. Adapting the model upheld in Buckley, the government might adopt a system of optional public financing, accompanied by (1) a promise not to accept or to use private money as a condition for receiving public funds and (2) a regime in which public subsidies are provided to help candidates to match all or a stated percentage of the expenditures of their privately financed opponents. Under (2), a candidate could elect to use private resources, but the government would ensure that her opponent would not be at a substantial disadvantage. Of course any such system would raise many questions. We would, for example, have to decide which candidates would qualify for support, and there is a risk that people would be unfairly excluded. We would also have to decide what sorts of disparities would be tolerable between candidates raising substantial private funds and candidates relying on government. I suggest only that it is worthwhile to explore a system in which candidates are encouraged but not required to accept only public funds, on the theory that such a system would be less vulnerable to the various risks that I have described in this essay.
2. Vouchers. - An alternative approach has been suggested by Bruce Ackerman. Ackerman argues for an innovative voucher system, in which voters would be given a special card-citizen vouchers in the form of red, white, and blue money-to be used to finance political campaigns. Under this system, regular money could not be used at all. Candidates could attract citizen vouchers, but they could not use cash. The goal would be to split the political and economic spheres sharply, so as to ensure that resources accumulated in the economic sphere could not be used for political advantage. Ackerman's approach is therefore closely connected to the goal of preventing economic inequalities-fully acceptable in the American tradition-from becoming political in nature.
Obviously a system of this kind could not be implemented simply. But it might have many advantages. Like any voucher system, such an approach would reduce some of the problems posed by centralized, bureaucratic control of finances and elections. The requirement that candidates use a special kind of "money" could much simplify administration
