Incommensurability and Valuation in Law
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein
Reviewed work(s):
Source: Michigan Law Review, Vol. 92, No. 4 (Feb., 1994), pp. 779-861
Published by: The Michigan Law Review Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1289693 .
Accessed: 27/12/2012 21:04

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

The Michigan Law Review Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Michigan Law Review.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

INCOMMENSURABILITY  AND  VALUATION 
IN  LAW 

Cass R. Sunstein* 

TABLE  OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION ............................................. 

I.  KINDS OF VALUATION ................................. 

A.  Definitions and Examples ........................... 
B.  Conflicts Among Kinds of  Valuation, with Special 
Reference to  Uses of Money ......................... 
C.  Clarifications and  Cautionary Notes  ................. 
D.  Social Science, Economics, and Diverse Kinds of 

Valuation .......................................... 

II.  INCOMMENSURABILITY 

................................. 

A.  A Provisional Definition ............................. 
B.  Valuation and  Commensurability .................... 
C.  Excluding Reasons for Action  ....................... 
D.  Incommensurability and Freedom ................... 
E.  Comparability, Transitivity, and Other Definitions .... 
F.  Scales and Choices .................................. 
III.  CHALLENGES AND STAKES ............................. 
IV.  LAW IN GENERAL ..................................... 
A.  Preliminaries ....................................... 
B.  The Expressive Function of Law ..................... 

V.  LAW  IN  PARTICULAR 

.................................. 
................. 

A.  Social  Differentiation 
B.  Religion, Civic Equality, and Political Liberalism ..... 
C.  Broadcasting and Free Speech, with a Note on Rights 

.............. 

G enerally ........................................... 

D.  Environmental Protection ........................... 
E.  Cost-Benefit Analysis ..................... 

........... 

780 
782 
782 

785 
790 

793 
795 
795 
799 
801 
805 
805 
808 
812 
818 
818 
820 
824 
825 
828 

829 
834 
840 

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn Professor of  Jurisprudence, University of  Chicago.  A.B.  1975, J.D. 
1978,  Harvard. -  Ed.  Participants in  workshops  at  the  Columbia, University  of  Chicago, 
Harvard, Hofstra, New  York  University, and Yale  Law Schools  provided extremely valuable 
help.  Bruce Ackerman, Albert Alschuler, Anne-Marie Burley, Ruth Chang, Jon Elster, Richard 
Epstein,  Stephen Gilles,  Abner  Greene,  Charles  Larmore, Larry Lessig,  Martha Nussbaum, 
Richard  Pildes,  Richard  Posner,  Eric  Rakowski,  J.  Mark  Ramseyer,  Joseph  Raz,  Henry 
Richardson, Stephen Schulhofer, David  Strauss, Lloyd  Weinreb, and Steven Winter provided 
helpful remarks on  a previous draft.  For financial support I  am grateful to  the Russell Baker 
Scholars Fund and the James H.  Douglas, Jr. Fund for the Study of  Law and Government. 

779 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

780 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

F.  Specific Performance, Damages, Private Law Remedies: 

Another View of the Cathedral ....................... 

G.  Feminism in Law ................................... 
H.  Blocked Exchanges ................................. 
I.  Legal Reasoning ..................................... 

VI.  CHOICES ............................................... 
A.  Which Kinds of  Valuation? 
B.  Choices Among Incommensurable Goods ............. 
C.  A Note on  Tragedy ................................. 

. ........................ 

CONCLUSION 

.................................. 

. 

843 
847 
849 
851 
853 
854 
856 
859 
860 

INTRODUCTION 

In this article I explore two claims and discuss their implications 
for law.  The first claim is that human values are plural and diverse. 
By this I mean that we value things, events, and relationships in ways 
that are not  reducible to  some larger and more encompassing value. 
The  second claim is  that human goods are not  commensurable.  By 
this I mean that such goods are not assessed along a single metric.  For 
reasons to be explored, the two claims, though related, are importantly 
different. 

These claims are emphatically not meant to deny the existence of 
grounds for evaluating private and public choices, both among kinds 
of valuation and among incommensurable goods.  But efforts to insist 
on a single kind of valuation and to make goods commensurable, while 
designed to aid in human reasoning, actually make such reasoning in- 
ferior to what it is when it is working well. 

For the moment these claims must remain obscure; I  will devote 
considerable space to the effort to make them more clear.  If they are 
plausible, views of this sort are likely to have important implications 
for law.  To be sure, endorsement of the two claims need not lead to 
any particular view about legal problems.  To  say that law ought to 
value something in a certain way, we need to make a substantive claim 
about some issue of the good or the right, and a mere reference to the 
diversity of values does not supply that claim.  Nonetheless, I hope to 
show that debates over ways of valuing things, and over issues of com- 
mensurability, help to reveal what is at stake in many areas of the law. 
A  unifying claim involves the expressive function  of  law - 
the law's 
role  in  reflecting  and  communicating  particular  ways  of  valuing 
human goods.  Many legal debates actually involve the  appropriate- 
ness of different kinds of valuation in different areas of law. 

For example, a liberal society containing diverse social spheres- 
families, markets, politics, religious organizations -  makes space for 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

781 

different kinds of  valuation.  With an understanding of  these diverse 
kinds, we will be able to see why voluntary exchanges should usually 
be protected, and also why they should sometimes be blocked.  Some 
otherwise puzzling anomalies in  the theory of  environmental protec- 
tion will  take on  new aspects.  An  understanding of diverse kinds of 
valuation will help shed light on certain claims about the nature of sex 
discrimination.  I suggest that a Kantian norm, having to do with ap- 
propriate ways  of  valuing  human  beings,  accounts  for  widespread 
views about abortion, the distribution of labor within marriage, sexual 
harassment, prostitution, pornography, surrogacy, and much else be- 
sides.  With an understanding of this sort, it will be possible as well to 
understand some features of practical reason in law, especially in the 
old  area of  analogical thinking, but  also  in  new  areas involving the 
theory and practice of the regulatory state. 

In pressing claims about incommensurability and diverse kinds of 
valuation, I have both a general target and a positive goal.  The target 
consists of monistic theories of value, particularly as these appear in 
the study of law.'  Monistic theories are pervasive; they have a strong 
philosophical pedigree; and, in various guises, they come up in many 
discussions of particular legal issues.  To be sure, it may seem that few 
people really subscribe to  such  theories.  Surely most  people do  not 
deny that human values are plural.  But there is a distinguished tradi- 
tion of thought, found in such diverse thinkers as Plato and Bentham,2 
that  insists  that  values  should  be  seen  as  unitary and  that  human 
goods should be seen as commensurable. In their most austere forms, 
these ideas are rarely endorsed explicitly in law; but more modest ver- 
sions play a large role in the legal context -  not simply in economic 
analysis,3 but also in some aspects of rights-based thinking insofar as it 
takes a  unitary value as  the  basis for  evaluating law.4  In  any  case, 
problems of commensurability have yet to  receive sustained attention 
in law; and it is important to see exactly how goods are diverse, and in 
what ways goods are incommensurable, even if some version of these 
claims might turn out, upon reflection, to be widely shared. 

1.  For a general account of and challenge to monistic theories, see ELIZABETH ANDERSON, 

VALUE IN ETHICS AND ECONOMICS 117-40 (1993). 

2.  On Plato, see MARTHA C. NUSSBAUM, Plato on Commensurability and Desire, in LOVE'S 
KNOWLEDGE 100, 106-24 (1990); David Wiggins, Weakness of  Will. Commensurability, and the 
Objects of Deliberation and Desire, 79 PROC. OF THE ARISTOTELIAN SOCY. 251 (1978-1979).  The 
best  discussion  of  Bentham  remains  JOHN STUART MILL,  MILL ON BENTHAM AND COL ERIDGE 
(F.R.  Leavis ed.,  1962) (1838). 

3.  See generally GARY S. BECKER, A TREATISE ON THE FAMILY (2d ed.  1991); RICHAR) A. 

POSNER, THE ECONOMICS OF JUSTICE (1981). 

4.  See RONALD DWORKIN, TAKING RIGHTS SERIOUSLY 180-83. 272-78 (1978) (applying a 

neo-Kantian value of  "equal concern and respect" to various legal problems). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

782 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

I  particularly want to  show  some distinctive ways in  which  eco- 
nomic analysis of law, and most forms of utilitarianism as well, miss 
important commitments of  a  well-functioning legal  system.  I  hope 
also to establish that a surprisingly wide range of legal disputes can be 
illuminated by  an  understanding of  incommensurability and  diverse 
kinds of valuation.  The value of this enterprise consists not in dictat- 
ing  particular conclusions,  which  depend on  the  details, but  in  en- 
abling  us  to  see  an  important basis  for  widespread concerns  and 
convictions.  I emphasize that to see values as incommensurable, and 
to say that people are really disputing appropriate kinds (not levels) of 
valuation, is not by itself to  resolve legal disputes.  It is necessary to 
say something about the right kind - 
and to investigate the particulars in great detail, in order to make pro- 
gress in hard cases in law.  But an understanding of  problems of  in- 
commensurability will make it easier to see what is at stake. 

to offer a substantive theory - 

This  article is  organized into  six  Parts.  The  first three Parts ex- 
plore some foundational issues.  Part I describes diverse kinds of valu- 
ation and responds to  the claim that we value different things in the 
same way.  Part II offers a working definition of incommensurability. 
Part III discusses an important challenge to the claims in Parts I and 
II.  It  also offers some notes on  the  stakes, attempting to  show  why 
these issues matter. 

Part IV makes general remarks about law, with particular empha- 
sis  on  law's  expressive function.  The  fifth and  most  detailed  Part 
surveys areas in which an understanding of kinds of valuation and of 
incommensurability may affect our understanding of law.  In this Part, 
I  discuss a  wide  range of  issues, including social differentiation, the 
Establishment Clause, political equality, cost-benefit analysis, contract 
remedies, environmental regulation, and  feminism.  The  sixth  Part 
ventures some preliminary remarks on  the important issue of  choice 
-  choice among different kinds of valuation and choice among incom- 
mensurable goods.  In the sixth Part, I  also offer a few notes on  the 
importance of the sense of tragedy in law. 

I.  KINDS  OF  VALUATION5 

A.  Definitions  and  Examples 

Human beings value goods, things, relationships, and states of af- 
fairs in diverse ways.6  Begin with the distinction between instrumen- 

5.  I owe much help in the discussion here to  ANDERSON, supra note  1, at  8-16.  Anderson 

uses the term modes of valuation to  refer to the same basic idea. 

6.  For an especially instructive discussion of this point, see id.  at  8-11.  See also MICHAEL 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

783 

tal  and  intrinsic  goods.  We  value  some  things  purely  or principally  for 
use; consider  hammers,  forks,  or  money.  But  we  value  other  things  at 
least  in  part for their  own  sake; consider  knowledge  or friendship.  Be- 
cause  it  is  so  pertinent  to  law,  the  distinction  between  instrumental 
and  intrinsic  value  will  play  an  important  role  here.  But  that  distinc- 
tion  captures  only  a  part  of  the  picture.  Intrinsically  valued  things 
produce  a  range  of  diverse  responses.  Some  bring  about  wonder  and 
awe; consider  a mountain  or certain  artistic  works.  Toward  some  peo- 
ple,  we  feel  respect;  toward  others,  affection;  toward  others,  love.  Peo- 
their  deity.  Some  events  produce  gratitude;  others 
ple  worship 
produce  joy;  others  are  thrilling;  others  make  us  feel  content;  others 
bring  about  delight.  Some  things  are valued  if they  meet  certain  stan- 
dards,  like  a  musical  or  athletic  performance  or  perhaps  a  pun.7 

Negative  valuations  are similarly  diverse.  To  lose  money  is  to  lose 
an  instrumental  good  - 
though  one  that  might  be  used  for  intrinsic 
goods,  like  the  preservation  of  human  life.  To  lose  a friend  is  a differ- 
ent  matter.  So,  too,  our  responses  to  intrinsic  bads  are  diverse.  We 
might  be  horrified  by  an  act  of  cruelty,  disgusted  by  an  ugly  scene, 
shocked  by  a  betrayal  of  friendship  or  love,  made  indignant  by  a  fail- 
ure of  respect,  frightened  by  the  prospect  of  loss,  angered  by  the  inflic- 
tion  of  a  wound,  saddened  by  undeserved  hardship,  or  frustrated  by 
the  failure  of  our  plans.  These  various  terms  themselves  include  a va- 
riety  of  experiences  that  embody  diverse  ideas  about  evaluation.  Not 
all  forms  of  sadness  -  very  much  an  umbrella  term  -  are  the  same; 
so  too  with  disgust  - 
compare  reactions  to  cruelty  and  reactions  to 
ugliness  -  and  so  on. 

There  are, then,  different  kinds  of  goods,  and  human  beings  experi- 
ence  their  lives  in  ways  that  reflect  a  wide  variety  of  kinds  of  valua- 
tion.8  The  term  is  meant  to  draw  attention  to  our  diverse  stances 
toward  relationships  or prospects,  or to  the  disparate  theories  of valua- 
tion  through  which  we  conceive  and  evaluate  relationships,  events,  or 
prospects.  Every  kind  of  valuation  embodies  a qualitatively  distinctive 
judgment  or  response.  People  react  to  events,  to  things,  and  to  one 
another  in  accordance  with  the  nature  and  clarity  of  distinctions 

STOCKER, PLURAL AND CONFLICTING VALUES 213 (1990); R.E.  Chang, Irredeemabilities and 
Constitutive Incommensurabilities or Buying and Selling Friends (July 1993) (unpublished man- 
uscript, on  file with author).  One could express the same general thought through a  reference 
not to diverse kinds of valuation, but to diverse goods.  For my purposes here, I do not believe 
that much is  at stake between the two  formulations.  I  refer to  kinds of  valuation because the 
term points explicitly to  the  interactive nature of  valuation; goods  are goods  for reasons that 
human beings attribute to  them. 

7.  See  ANDERSON,  supra note  1,  at  3-4. 
8.  Id.  at 6. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

784 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol.  92:779 

among  possible  kinds  of  valuation.  Someone  who  does  not  make  ap- 
propriate  distinctions  might  be  labeled  odd  or  even  weird.9  Someone 
who  does  not  make  enough  distinctions  might  seem  thick  or  obtuse. 
We  could  categorize  kinds  of  valuation  in  many  different  ways. 
For  purposes  of  law,  it  might  make  sense  to  focus  on  such  things  as 
love,  affection,  respect,  wonder,  worship,  and  use;10  these  notions 
come  up  in  many  places  of  legal  dispute.  But  each  of  these  terms  cap- 
tures  a  range  of  qualitatively  distinct  kinds  of  valuation.  Love  for  a 
parent  is different  from  love  for a child,  which  is in turn  different  from 
love  for  a  friend,  a  spouse,  a  pet,  or  a  house.  We  might  feel  wonder 
toward  an  act  of  selfless  courage,  and  also  toward  a  musical  perform- 
ance  or  a  beautiful  beach.  We  might  feel  awe  toward  an  athletic  per- 
formance  and  also  toward  a  mountain.  How,  and  how  finely,  we 
should  categorize  kinds  of  valuation  depends  on  the  uses  to  which  the 
categories  will  be put.  For  law  and  politics,  the  number  of  useful  cate- 
gories  is  undoubtedly  smaller  than  it  is  for  literature  or  poetry,  which 
may  be  especially  concerned  to  offer  fine-grained  accounts. 

In  one  setting  - 

say,  the  workplace  - 

Distinctions  among  kinds  of  valuation  are  highly  sensitive  to  the 
particular  setting  in  which  they  operate.  People  do  not  value  goods 
the  prevailing 
acontextually. 
kinds  of  valuation  might  be  quite  different  from  what  they  are  else- 
where  - 
say,  the  home  or the  ballot  box.  Moreover,  particular  goods 
typically  do  not  admit  of  a  single  kind  of  valuation.  The  prevailing 
kind  has  everything  to  do  with  the  relationship  among  the  various  ac- 
tors.  Thus  a cat  might  be  valued  in  a certain  way  by  its  owner,  but  in 
a different  way  by  a landlord,  and  in  still  a  different  way  by  a govern- 
ment  agency.  Much  of  social  differentiation  stems  from  this  percep- 
tion. 1  So,  too,  several  kinds  of  valuation  might  be  directed  toward  a 
single  object.  A  person  might,  for  example,  both  love  and  respect  a 
friend  or  a  lover. 

Different  kinds  of  valuation  cannot  without  significant  loss  be  re- 
duced  to  a single  "superconcept,"  like  happiness,  utility,  or pleasure.12 
Any  such  reduction  produces  significant  loss  because  it yields  an inad- 
equate  description  of  our actual  valuations  when  things  are going  well. 

9.  Cf  CHARLES TAYLOR, What  Is  Human  Agency?,  in  1 PHILOSOPHICAL PAPERS 15,  15-27 

(1985) (discussing evaluative depth). 

10.  Cf  ANDERSON, supra  note  1, at  8-11. 
11. See infra section V.A. 
12.  By  "reduced to" these things, I mean treated as simple aspects of  them, in a way that 
erases qualitative differences. Consider John Dewey's criticism of  utilitarianism's commitment 
to  the idea of  "a fixed, final and supreme end": 

Such a point of view treats concrete activities and specific interests not as worth while in 
themselves, or as constituents of happiness, but as mere external means to getting pleasures. 
The upholders of the old tradition could therefore easily accuse utilitarianism of making not 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

785 

The inadequate description will impair predictive accounts13 of human 
behavior.  It will  also impair normative judgments about ethics, law, 
and politics.  In making this latter point, I mean to reject relativist or 
purely conventionalist accounts of kinds of valuation'4 and to suggest 
that some kinds are more appropriate than others.  Judgments about 
what is  appropriate depend of  course on  theories of  the  good  or the 
right; from the bare fact that kinds of valuation are diverse, we have 
no basis for evaluating any legal or social practice.  But it is important 
to have diverse kinds of valuation - 
indeed we could not make sense 
of our lives without them -  and no matter what current conventions 
may be, some kinds are poorly suited to  some contexts because they 
produce inferior lives.  I begin to defend these controversial claims in 
more detail below.15 

B.  Conflicts Among Kinds of  Valuation, with Special Reference to 
Uses of Money 

Conflicts among diverse kinds of  valuation permeate private and 
public choice.  Suppose that Smith has arranged to have lunch with a 
friend today, but that he has become very busy and perhaps would like 
to cancel.  Suppose Smith thinks in this way:  if he cancels, his friend 
will be disappointed, because he would like Smith's company, and also 
a bit insulted, because it is cavalier and disrespectful to cancel lunch at 
the last minute.  Maybe Smith should make it up to  him, or provide 
compensation, by offering a nontrivial cash payment.  This would be a 
hopelessly inadequate response.  A  cash payment would be inconsis- 
tent  with  the  way that  someone  values a  friend.  Even  if  the  friend 
would  prefer $1,  or  $10,  or  $100,  or  $1000 to  lunch  with  Smith 
even though at some point the payment would in some sense be worth 
far more than the lunch and be readily accepted as an alternative 
the offer of cash would be perceived as an insult rather than as com- 
pensation.  In this context, the difference in kinds of valuation means 

only virtue but art, poetry, religion and the state into mere servile means of attaining sensu- 
ous enjoyments.... 

...  The idea of a fixed and single end lying beyond the diversity of human needs and acts 
rendered utilitarianism incapable of being an adequate representation of the modern spirit. 

JOHN DEWEY,  RECONSTRUCTION IN  PHILOSOPHY 180-81,  183  (1920). 

13.  Certain aspects of decision theory are untouched by these claims.  A purely ordinal rank- 
ing, for example, would be possible even if the point in text is right.  But the point may give us 
reason to question cost-benefit analysis, see infra text accompanying notes 235-42,  and also the 
Coase Theorem, see  infra text  accompanying notes  232-33  (discussing offer-asking disparity), 
without  necessarily questioning the  use  of  indifference curves and  utility  functions to  predict 
human behavior. 

14.  For  one  account  verging on  conventionalism, see  the  discussion  of  just  distribution 

within  caste  societies  in  MICHAEL WALZER, SPHERES OF JUSTICE 312-16  (1987). 

15. See infra Part II. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

786 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

that a financial exchange would be inappropriate. The kind of valua- 
tion  of  a  friend blocks  the  use  of  otherwise acceptable grounds for 
action.16  As we will see, the law is pervaded by principles of this kind 
-  principles that forbid resort to reasons for action that are accepta- 
ble in other contexts. 

The case is  not  exotic.  Similar issues permeate the exceptionally 
complex  cluster  of  social  norms  regulating the  appropriate use  of 
money as an incentive for action.  For example, if an employer tells 
you that, as an employee performing a certain job, you must spend a 
month away from your home and family, you might well agree.  But if 
someone tells you  that he  will pay you  a monthly salary in order to 
persuade you to spend a month away from home and family, you will 
probably feel  insulted  and  degraded, and  you  may  well  turn  him 
down.17 This second offer reflects an inappropriate valuation of  you 
and your family - 
it suggests that your relationship with your family 
is simply up for sale.  The employer's offer treats you as an object of 
contempt and perhaps ridicule.  In the first case, the same cannot be 
said.  Even though in the first case the relationship might be thought 
to have been "traded for" cash, the absence from family is a by-prod- 
uct of employment, rather than something brought about as an end in 
itself, desired for its own sake by one's boss.  To see the two cases as 
the  same  -  as instances  of  trade-offs  between  family  and  income  - 
is 
to overlook an important distinction in the meanings of the two offers. 
Or suppose that we feel awe toward something.  If we do, we will 
not  believe  that  it  should  be  valued  in  the  same  way  as  its  cash 
equivalent.  A  simple  or  flat judgment  that  a  mountain  is  "really 
worth" $10 million is inconsistent with the way that we (or most of us) 
value the mountain.  This is because the mountain is valued through a 
different kind of valuation from the $10 million; the former produces 
awe and wonder, whereas the latter is for human use - 
though admit- 
tedly $10 million may produce a (different) sort of awe and wonder as 
well.  These points hold even if many people might be indifferent be- 
tween  $10  million  and  the  mountain in  the  sense  that  they  do  not 

16.  See infra the discussion of exclusionary reasons in section II.C.  Note  in this regard the 
social norm requiring that, in some circumstances, gifts should not take the form of cash, which 
is regarded as excessively impersonal.  As compared with a gift of (say) $30, a gift of (say) a tie 
costing $30 establishes a distinctive and often preferable relationship between the recipient and 
the giver -  even if in some contexts $30 in cash would be worth more to the recipient than the 
$30 tie, and even if in some contexts a gift of $30 would be less costly, to the giver, than the gift 
of a $30 tie.  This point is interestingly missed in Joel Waldfogel, The Deadweight Loss of Christ- 
mas,  83  AM. ECON. REV. 1328,  1336 (1993),  which  finds four billion dollars in annual dead- 
weight losses from noncash gifts and which assumes that cash gifts are always more efficient and 
therefore generally preferable. 

17.  The  example  comes  from  JOSEPH RAZ,  THE  MORALITY OF FREEDOM 348-49  (1986). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

787 

know which they would choose if both were offered; even if $10 mil- 
lion  is  in  some sense the right amount to  invest in protection of  the 
mountain from degradation; and even if, as seems clear, infinite valua- 
tion of the mountain would be an irrational allocation of scarce social 
resources.  The  point  does  not  suggest that  pristine areas cannot be 
degraded.  But it does have a range of important and sometimes over- 
looked  consequences  for  how  people  involved  in  the  legal  system 
might  think about environmental protection.'8  It  also  suggests that 
indifference curves have quite limited purposes and that they may be 
misleading on some important matters.  It may even suggest that we 
should question the whole notion of indifference curves.  Some people 
may not be "indifferent" between two goods even though they do not 
think that one is better than another.19 

Attention  to  diverse kinds of  valuation casts general light on  the 
phenomenon of exchanges that are blocked by social norms.  If some- 
one offers to pay an adult neighbor to mow his lawn, the neighbor will 
often regard the request as an insult, because it reflects an inappropri- 
ate valuation of the neighbor. The request embodies an improper con- 
ception  of  what  the  relationship is,  or  of  the  attitude  with  which 
neighbors render services for  each  other.  The  impropriety remains 
even if the offeree ordinarily would regard the offered wage as a fair 
price for an hour of mowing services.  In an extreme case, if someone 
asks an attractive person (or a spouse) for sexual relations in return for 
cash, the same would be said even more vehemently.  Because of the 
existence of diverse kinds of valuation, we may not be able to genera- 
lize acontextual preferences from particular decisions.  The point bears 
on law as well.  For example, decisions not to insure certain goods- 
freedom from pain and suffering, the well-being of  one's children - 
need not  suggest a  global judgment about whether injuries to  those 
goods deserve compensation.20 

There is often a connection between blocked exchanges and ideas 
about equal citizenship.  The exchange may be barred by social norms 
or law because of a perception that, while there may be disparities in 
social wealth, the spheres in which people are very unequal ought not 

18. See infra section V.D. 
19. See infra notes 91-105 and accompanying text.  For challenges to utilitarianism based on 
rejection of the claim that goodness is always of a particular kind, see ANDERSON, supra note  1; 
Judith J.  Thomson,  Goodness and  Utilitarianism, PROCS. &  ADDRESSES OF THE AM.  PHIL.. 
ASSN., Oct.  1993, at  145. 

20.  See STEVEN SHAVELL, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF ACCIDENT LAW  153-54,  228-35,  245- 
54 (1987); Steven P. Croley & Jon D.  Hanson,  What Liability Crisis?, 8 YALE J. ON REG.  1, 57- 
67 (1991); cf  George L. Priest, The Current Insurance Crisis and Modern Tort Law, 96  YALE 
L.J.  1521, 1553 (1987).  I am grateful to Jon Hanson for a helpful discussion of  this point. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

788 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

to  invade  realms  of  social  life  in  which  equality  is  a  social  goal.21 
Often  this  idea  comes  from  the  existence  of  a  kind  of  valuation  based 
on  equal  respect.  The  legal  prohibition  on  vote  trading  is  an  example. 
So  too  with  certain  complex  social  bans  on  the  use  of  wealth  to  buy 
services  or goods  from  other  people,  such  as a shoveled  walk  or a body 
part.22  An  intricate  web  of  norms  covers  the  exchange  of  money 
among  both  friends  and  strangers.  Some  of these  norms  are connected 
with  the  principle  of  civic  equality.  Monetary  exchange  would  reflect 
forms  of  inequality  that  are not  legitimate  in  certain  spheres.  In  mak- 
ing  these  points,  I am  disregarding  many  complexities,  and  I  have  not 
tried  to justify  any  particular  set  of  outcomes  in  hard  cases.  I want  to 
suggest  only  a general  point:  the  refusal  to  allow  economic  exchanges 
is  often  based  on  familiar  notions  of  equality  that  such  exchanges 
would  compromise. 

There  is  a  further  point.  We  should  distinguish  between  cases  in 
which  a monetary  offer is  entirely  inappropriate  - 
say,  a  large  check 
offered  in  exchange  for  an  academic  article  endorsing  the  offeror's  po- 
sition  -  and  cases  in  which  the  monetary  sum,  while  appropriately 
offered,  does  not  reflect  a full  or fully  accurate  valuation  of  the  item  in 
question.  Artists,  actors,  and  teachers  might  well  believe  that  dollar 
sums  cannot  truly  reflect  the  social  value  of  what  they  produce 
certainly  in  the  sense  that  money  is  not  valued  in  the  same  way  as  art 
or education  -  without  believing  that  monetary  compensation  itself  is 
inappropriate.  It  is  a pervasive  and  intriguing  feature  of  markets  that 
financial  compensation  is  challenged  as  too  low,  rather  than  as  inap- 
propriate,  or  indeed  willingly  accepted,  even  in  contexts  in  which  the 
transaction  involves  a  good  that  is  not  valued  in  the  same  way  as 
money.  But  it  is  equally  intriguing  to  note  the  occasional  presence  of 
norms  and  law  that  block  exchanges  on  the  grounds  of  an inappropri- 
ate  kind  of  valuation. 

An  understanding  of  diverse  kinds  of  valuation  thus  helps  explain 
the  anticommodification  position  for  law  or  social  norms  - 
the  view 
that  some  things  ought  not  to  be  traded  on  markets  and  that  market 
exchanges  should  therefore  be  prohibited.23  The  objection  to  com- 
modification  should  be  seen  as a special  case  of  the  general  problem  of 
diverse  kinds  of valuation.  The  claim  is that  we  ought  not  to  trade  (for 

21.  This theme recurs in WALZER, supra note 14.  See especially his discussion of the case of 

the company town of Pullman, Illinois.  Id.  at 295-303. 

22.  I do  not mean to  approve of  the blocking of  these exchanges, a matter that turns on  a 

complex range of considerations. See infra section V.H. 

23.  See  STEVEN  KELMAN,  WHAT  PRICE INCENTIVES? 54-83  (1985);  Margaret J.  Radin, 

Market-Inalienability, 100 HARV.  L. REV.  1849 (1987). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

789 

example) sexuality or reproductive capacities on markets because eco- 
nomic valuation of  these "things" is inconsistent with and may even 
undermine their appropriate kind (not level) of valuation.24 The ob- 
jection is not that markets value sexuality "too much" or "too little"; 
it  is  that  markets value  these  activities  in  the  wrong  way.  Judge 
Posner's well-known writings on the "baby market"25 do not quite ad- 
dress this particular objection.  A judgment about the appropriate way 
of  valuing babies must itself be defended on  some basis, and such  a 
judgment does not automatically lead to a particular view about legal 
rules for adoption or the sale of young children.  But the question of 
appropriate kinds of valuation plays a major role in these debates.26 
Thus far I have dealt with cases that involve objections to the kind 
of  valuation expressed through cash payments.  But we  can think of 
many cases not involving the issue of monetary equivalence.  Imagine, 
for example, that John treats a beautiful diamond in the same way that 
most people treat friends, or that Jane values a plant in the same way 
that most people value their children, or that Sandy values her car like 
most people value art or literature.  All  of us know people with occa- 
sional tendencies of this sort.  Indeed, all of us are people with occa- 
sional  tendencies of  this  sort.  But  sometimes  an  improper kind  of 
valuation seems odd, or disrespectful, or even pathological -  and all 
these in part because it makes it impossible to sustain certain sorts of 
desirable social  relationships.  Disputes  over  law  and  social  norms, 
which are related and sometimes mutually enforcing behavioral influ- 
ences, often reflect disagreements over proper kinds of valuation, with 
adjectives of this sort moving to the fore. 

Consider, for example, the animal rights movement.  Some people 
think that animals should be treated with dignity and respect, and not 
as  if  they  exist solely  for human consumption and use.27 This  view 
need not entail the further claim that animal life is infinitely valuable. 

24.  We should be wary, however, of  a rapid movement from judgments about appropriate 
kinds of valuation to a particular position about law.  See infra notes  134-40  and accompanying 
text.  This is  a basis, I  think, for questioning some of  the applications of the general claims in 
ANDERSON, supra note 1, at  168-89 (discussing surrogate motherhood), 203-10 (discussing envi- 
ronmental regulation). 

25.  See  RICHARD A.  POSNER, SEX AND REASON 409-17  (1992);  Elisabeth M.  Landes & 
Richard A. Posner, The Economics of the Baby Shortage, 7 J. LEGAL STUD. 323 (1978); Richard 
A.  Posner, The Regulation of the Market in Adoptions. 67 B.U.  L. REV. 59 (1987). 

26.  See the discussion of symbolic value in ROBERT NOZICK, THE NATURE OF RATIONAL- 

ITY 26-35  (1993). 

27.  See generally PETER SINGER, ANIMAL LIBERATION (1975); see also PAUL W. TAYLOR, 

RESPECT FOR NATURE (1986) (arguing that humans owe duties to all living things); Laurence A. 
Tribe,  Ways Not  To  Think About Plastic  Trees, 83  YALE L.J.  1315 (1974)  (challenging the 
"homocentric" nature of environmental law). ROBERT E. GOODIN, GREEN POLITICAL THEORY 
(1992)  provides a good overview of related issues. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

790 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

It  is best  taken  as a recommendation  of  a shift  in  the  kind  of  valuation 
of  animals,  accompanied  by  a judgment  that  the  new  kind  will  have 
consequences  for  what  human  beings  do.  The  recommendation  may 
be  based  on  the  view  that  if  we  see  animals  (and  nature)  in  this  way, 
we  will  solve  collective  action  problems  faced  by  human  beings  in pre- 
serving  animal  life  that  is  important  for  human  lives;  it  may  be  based 
on  a  noninstrumental  effort  to  extend  ideals  of  basic  dignity  to  all  liv- 
ing  things.28  I reiterate  that  substantive  judgments  of this  sort  must  be 
defended;  by  itself,  the  reference  to  diverse  kinds  of  valuation  gets  us 
nowhere.  The  important  point  is  that  such  judgments  are  a  frequent, 
though  often  overlooked,  part  of  social  and  legal  discussion. 

The  existence  of  diverse  kinds  of  valuation  explains  a good  deal  of 
private  behavior.  Norms  governing  address  provide  a  familiar  exam- 
ple.  By  using  some  part  of  a name  - 
last  name  preceded  by  "Profes- 
sor,"  "Doctor,"  "Mr.,"  "Ms.,"  "Mrs.,"  "Miss";  last  name  by  itself; 
first  name;  nickname  or  diminutive;  some  term  of  endearment  -  a 
good  deal  of  signaling  takes  place  about  prevailing  kinds  of  valuation. 
Some  of  these  signals  connote  respect  and  admiration;  others  show 
contempt;  others  show  affection  or  love.  Of  course  different  cultures 
vary  greatly  on  this  score,  and  of  course  individual  relationships 
change  over  time  from  one  kind  to  another.  Note  in  this  regard  that 
the  Constitution  forbids  both  the  federal  government  and  the  states 
from  conferring  any  "Title  of  Nobility."29  In  this  way,  it  commits 
itself  to  a  certain  view  of  equality  among  human  beings.  Though  the 
provision  may  seem  like  a  historical  curiosity  to  current  observers,  to 
the  Framers  it crucially  exemplified  this  view;  as we  will  see,30 it is the 
forerunner  of  the  Equal  Protection  Clause,  with  a  close  connection  to 
judgments  about  appropriate  kinds  of  valuation. 

C.  Clarifications  and  Cautionary  Notes 

Three  major  clarifications  are  necessary  here.  First,  my  claim 
about  diverse  kinds  of  valuation  has  largely  been  a  claim  about  wide- 
spread  current  attitudes.  I do believe  that  those  attitudes  go  very  deep 
and  that  it  would  be  quite  impossible  to  make  sense  of  our  experience 

28.  On intrinsic value and the sanctity of life, see RONALD DWORKIN, LIFE'S DOMINION 67- 
101 (1993).  Dworkin's claim that life is "sacred" or "inviolable" is best taken, I think, as a claim 
about the appropriate kind of valuation of life, and his description of certain courses of action as 
showing "contempt" for life is highly compatible with the account I offer here. 

29.  U.S. CONST. art. I, ? 9, cl. 8.  For a description of the antiaristocratic tendencies of polit- 
ical  thinking in  the  Revolutionary period, see  GORDON S.  WOOD, THE RADICALISM OF THE 
AMERICAN REVOI-UTION 145-68,  229-43,  271-86 (1992). 
30.  See infra notes  179-81 and accompanying text. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

791 

without  reference  to  diverse  kinds  of  valuation.3'  But  I  do  not  intend 
to  offer  anything  like  a  transcendental  or  metaphysical  claim  about 
valuation;  I  am  speaking  about  how  we  value,  not  about  nature  or 
about  valuation  of  goods  apart  from  human  attitudes. 

Nor  are  existing  kinds  of  valuation  fixed  and  immutable.  Norms 
change,  and  prevailing  social  conceptions  about  kinds  of  valuation 
change  as  well.  Shifts  from  one  kind  of  valuation  to  another  are  per- 
fectly  commonplace,  both  at  the  individual  and  social  level.  Respect 
can  turn  into  love;  love  can  turn  into  use;  use  can  become  love;  love 
can  become  respect;  love  may  or  may  not  be  accompanied  by  respect; 
respect  can  become  affection;  so  too  for  love.  Within  societies,  kinds 
of  valuation  change  over  time.  The  shift  from  feudalism  to  capitalism 
can  hardly  be  described  in  a  sentence,  but  one  of  its  features  involved 
changes  in  kinds  of  valuation  of  work  and  workers,  and  this  was  a 
prime  area  of  contestation.32  Marriage  may  once  have  involved  more 
use,  and  less  love  and  affection,  than  it  now  does.33  The  abolition  of 
slavery  represented  a shift  from  use  to  a certain  measure  of  respect;  so 
too  with  the  attack  on  racial  hierarchy  in  the  aftermath  of  Brown  v. 
Board  of  Education.34  Much  of  the  change  in  race  relations  in  the 
South  involved  a  shift  from  connections  built  on  deference  and  what 
was  believed  to  be  a sort  of  affection  to  principles  of  civic  equality  and 
respect.35 

Some  of  the  most  heated  disputes  about  law  and  policy  actually 
turn  on  the  appropriateness  of  a  shift  from  one  kind  of  valuation  to 
another.  In  labor  law,  for  example,  many  important  controversies  in- 
volve  the  appropriate  kind  of valuation  of workers.36  The  dispute  over 
at-will  employment  seems  to  turn  in  part  on  this  issue.  Critics  of  the 
at-will  rule  claim  that  the  rule  reflects  an inadequate  kind  of  valuation 
of  workers  because  it  subjects  them  to  the  whim  of  employers.37  Here 
too  notions  of  equality  are at work  in  calling  into  question  certain  vol- 

31.  This view is defended in ANDERSON, supra note  1, at 65-90. 
32.  See  KARL  POLANYI, THE  GREAT  TRANSFORMATION 33-102  (1944). 
33.  See, e.g. POSNER, supra note 25, at 36- 50 (sketching a history of Western sexual mores). 
For an argument against the use of women by men within the family, and in favor of  norms of 
equality  and  respect,  see  SUSAN M.  OKIN, JUSTICE, GENDER,  AND THE FAMILY 134-69  (1989). 

34.  347 U.S.  483 (1954). 
35.  See generally RICHARD KLUGER,  SIMPLE JUSTICE (1976). 
36.  This is a general theme of  Mark Barenberg, The Political Economy of  the  Wagner Act: 

Power, Symbol, and  Workplace Cooperation, 106 HARV. L. REV. 1379 (1993). 

37.  See Jack M. Beermann & Joseph W. Singer, Baseline Questions in Legal Reasoning:  The 
Example of Property in Jobs, 23 GA. L.  REV.  911 (1989); Lawrence E.  Blades, Employmenit at 
Will vs. Individual Freedom: On Limiting the Abusive Exercise of Employer Power, 67 COI.UNM. L. 
REV. 1404 (1967). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

792 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

untary exchanges.38 

Much of  the  theory of  environmental protection involves similar 
issues.  It is not entirely accurate to say that environmentalists value 
pristine areas "more" than do economists.  It is also important to say 
that environmentalists value pristine areas in a different way.  Whereas 
economists tend to think of the environment as something for human 
use and exploitation,39 environmentalists tend to claim that we should 
view the environment with awe and wonder or value it for its own sake 
rather than  as  an  instrumental good.40  The  debates over  pollution 
taxes and tradable emissions permits are partly debates over kinds of 
valuation.41 Of course it is unclear how these different kinds of valua- 
tion will or should affect environmental policy, a point to which I will 
return.42 

Second, the existence of diverse kinds of valuation does not by it- 
self  have any  clear implications for  law,  policy,  or  even  social  atti- 
tudes.  There is a difference between how people should value and how 
law should value.  I do not claim that, because people now value rela- 
tionships, events, objects, or each other in certain ways, it follows that 
law  should adopt those diverse kinds of  valuation.  We  need not  be 
conventionalists.  If a particular kind of valuation were really superior 
with respect to  what is appropriately valued in public or private life, 
the  law  might well  adopt that kind of  valuation notwithstanding its 
inconsistency with prevailing social norms.  A  good deal of constitu- 
tional law  can be taken as an effort to  constrain prevailing kinds of 
valuation; this is  true both for principles of  religious liberty and for 
antidiscrimination norms.43 Or law might embody a certain kind of 
valuation precisely because it is law; we might think that cost-benefit 
analysis is appropriate for law even if we think that it is inappropriate 
for spouses or parents.  If we are to draw conclusions about appropri- 
ate law, policy, and norms, it is because our best account of the good 
or  the right supports a  particular constellation of  kinds of  valuation 
and because we are able to show that a particular constellation makes 

38.  Compare Blades, supra note 37 with Richard A.  Epstein, In  Defense of  the Contract at 
Will, 51 U. CHI. L. REV. 947 (1984).  This dispute implicitly involves diverse kinds of valuation. 
Epstein's view rests on a monistic conception of value in which workers "trade off" goods along 
a single metric; Blades does not directly address this question but appears to take a stand in the 
other direction. 

39.  See, e.g., WILLIAM J. BAUMOL & WALLACE E. OATES, THE THEORY OF ENVIRONMEN- 

TAL POLICY (2d ed.  1988). 

40.  See, e.g.,  GOODIN, supra note 27,  at  8  ("The value of  nature is  no  longer regarded as 

wholly reducible to its value to God or to humanity."). 

41.  See KELMAN, supra note 23, at  1-11. 
42.  See infra section V.D. 
43.  See infra section V.B. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

793 

sense for law.44 I return to this complex issue in Part IV. 

Third, those  who  believe that  goods  are valued in  different ways 
need not reject the possibility of rational choice or even some form of 
trade-off among them.45 On the contrary, believers in diverse kinds of 
valuation would  do  well  to  insist  that  choices  occur  and  that  they 
might well be judged rational or not.  People choose among differently 
valued goods all the time, and these choices are not immune from eval- 
uation on  rational grounds.  My  affection for my dog  and my desire 
for more cash reflect different kinds of valuation, but it would be quite 
irrational for me to allow my dog to be sold for fifty dollars.  (If I were 
desperately poor, and if my family were ill and suffering, it could also 
be irrational for me to refuse to trade my dog for one million dollars, 
notwithstanding the presence of distinct kinds of valuation.)  Someone 
might well sell for a price the products of her capacity to play Mozart 
-  musical  performances  -  or  to  write  poetry,  notwithstanding 
the 
fact that she values her capacity as something other than an income- 
producing asset.  In some circumstances it would surely be irrational 
for a musician to refuse to perform for a fee.  These claims about ra- 
tionality need to be explained in some detail, but they should be suffi- 
cient to  show that there may indeed be a point to  deliberating about 
cases that involve goods that are valued in different ways.46 

D.  Social Science, Economics, and Diverse Kinds of  Valuation 

Is it useful to note that kinds of valuation are diverse and plural? 
Perhaps it is not.  Perhaps we can make good predictions about social 
life simply by assuming that there is a single kind of valuation.47 On 
this  view, a  claim about diverse kinds of  valuation may usefully de- 
scribe people's internal lives; it may have deeper psychological truth; it 
may better account for how lives and choices are actually experienced. 
But  it  is  fully dispensable for social  scientists and lawyers, who  can 
work with  an  assumption of  "as if  unitariness" - 
that  is,  who  can 
assume that people act as if they value all things in the same way, and 
who can make accurate predictions with that assumption.  So long as 
we  can model choices - 
social scientists need not worry about what I have said here. 

so  long as ordinal rankings are possible 

44.  See the discussion of lexical ordering, infra text accompanying notes 206-10. 
45.  See the attack on  incomparability in Chang, supra note 6, at  1-4,  15-25. 
46.  This suggestion is contrary to the claim in Donald H. Regan, Authority and  Value.  Re- 
flections on Raz's Morality of Freedom, 62 S. CAL. L. REV. 995,  1058 (1989).  See infra Part III. 
47.  See, e.g., Douglas Baird et al., Strategic Behavior and the Law (forthcoming 1994) (man- 
uscript at  1-56, on file with author) (using simplified assumptions in game-theoretic analysis to 
predict consequences of alternative tort regimes). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

794 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol.  92:779 

This  conclusion  seems  partly  right.  If we  assume  that  people  want 
to  maximize  one  thing  -  utility,  value,  welfare,  well-being  -  we 
might  well  be  able  to  make  good  predictions  of  various  sorts.48  We 
might  be  able  to  say  what  sorts  of  legislation  will  be  enacted  in  what 
circumstances.  People  do  make judgments  among  goods,  and  if so  we 
need  not  decide  whether  they  value  these  goods  in  the  same  way. 
Much  of  social  science  proceeds  through  simplifying  assumptions, 
even  with  respect  to  nonmarket  transactions.  To  the  extent  that  we 
can  make  accurate  predictions  by  assuming  unitariness,  we  can  indeed 
dispense  with  claims  about  diverse  kinds  of  valuation.49 

But  I believe  that,  with  the  assumption  of  a  unitary  kind  of  valua- 
tion,  We will  sometimes  offer inadequate  predictions,  explanations,  and 
recommendations  for law.  The  idea  of  "revealed  preferences"  is a pre- 
dictive  failure;  to  make  predictions  from  choices,  we  need  to  offer  an 
account  of  what  lies  behind  choices,50  and  that  account  must  take  into 
consideration  what  I  am  discussing  here.  Behavior  is  often  a  product 
of  judgments  about  what  kinds  of  valuation  are  appropriate  under 
what  circumstances.  As  we  will  see,  some  of  the  "demand"  for  envi- 
ronmental  regulation  is  best  understood  as  a response  to  claims  about 
the  need  to  value  things  in  different  ways.51  Much  of  individual  con- 
duct  is best  understood  in  similar  terms.  We  might,  for  example,  puz- 
zle  a  great  deal  over  the  existence  of  social  norms  without  apparent 
"maximizing"  explanations.52  Consider  a  few  examples:  the  norm  in 
favor  of  voting,  norms  of  dress  and  etiquette,  norms  of  vengeance, 

48.  An influential approach comes from the idea of revealed preferences, popular within eco- 
nomics.  On this view, we do  not hypothesize any supervalue such as utility, but work instead 
with a  rank ordering of  individual preferences, based on  actual choices (revealed preferences). 
This approach will  not  work.  We  cannot get a  good sense of  what people value simply from 
choices since choices are a function of context and since they are inarticulate -  poor predictors 
of future behavior -  without some account of what lies behind them.  See Amartya Sen, Internal 
Consistency of Choice, 61 ECONOMETRICA 495 (1993).  Sen shows that even the weakest axioms 
of revealed preference theory can fail.  For example, it is usually assumed that if someone prefers 
A to B  in a situation of binary choice, he should also prefer A to B if some third alternative C is 
introduced. But this is wrong.  Someone may prefer A to B, but B to A and C, because the choice 
of A over B shows no global or acontextual judgment.  For example, the choice of A (a medium 
sized piece of cake) over B  (a large piece of cake) may reflect a desire to be moderate, a desire 
that can also justify the choice of B over A and C (a huge piece of cake).  Id. at 498- 503.  Thus we 
cannot rank order individual preferences on the basis of choices alone or without some account 
of  what  values underlie choices.  See  also  RAZ, supra note  17, at  327; Richard H.  Pildes  & 
Elizabeth S. Anderson, Slinging Arrows at Democracy: Social Choice Theory, Value Pluralism, 
and Democratic Politics, 90 COLUM. L. REV. 2121 (1990). 

49.  The most striking example here is Gary Becker, who assumes a single kind of valuation 

in his work on nonmarket behavior, most notably in BECKER, supra note 3. 

50.  See supra note 48. 
51.  See  infra notes 231-33  and accompanying text; see also Cass R.  Sunstein, Endogenous 

Preferences, Environmental Law, 22 J. LEGAL STUD. 217, 248-53 (1993). 

52.  See JON ELSTER, THE CEMENT OF SOCIETY 97-152 (1989); JON ELSTER, SOIOMONIC 

JUDGMENTS 32-35  (1989). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

795 

norms against sale.53 Some anomalies in expected utility theory might 
result from diverse kinds of  valuation.54 There is much more to  say 
about these complex matters.  Nothing  said in this paragraph refutes 
the possibility of complete ordinal rankings.  But we can make some 
progress in thinking about human behavior by examining the role of 
diverse valuations. 

In this light, we can also make sense out of a familiar debate within 

the  legal  culture.  In  some  subjects -  contracts, torts,  property 
people often propose that something important - 
like a risk to life or 
health - 
is in some deep sense equivalent to a certain amount of cash. 
At this point, some participant in the conversation (perhaps a student) 
rejects the proposal, whereupon the original speaker suggests that the 
resistance must depend on a claim of infinite valuation, at which point 
it  is  clear  that  the  original proposal was  correct.  But  perhaps the 
resistance rests on a claim about appropriate kinds, not levels, of valu- 
ation.55 If so,  the  participant who  is  making this  claim has a  lot  to 
explain.  She has to explain how to make choices among goods that are 
valued in  different ways.  But  at least we  will  be  able to  understand 
what she is saying. 

We might also begin to see why it might be jarring to conceive of 
the various harms imposed by law as simple "costs."  This formulation 
begs important questions and ignores qualitative distinctions.  It does 
so by assuming a unitary kind of valuation.  In that way, this formula- 
tion  loads the dice - 
that is,  it  prejudices analysis by  pointing it  in 
certain controversial directions.  As we will see, the point bears on the 
question of commensurability.56 

II. 

INCOMMENSURABILITY 

A.  A Provisional Definition 

The subject of incommensurability raises many complexities, and I 
want to bracket at least some of the philosophical debate here, concen- 
trating instead on what is particularly relevant to law.57 Begin with a 

53.  Many of these are subject to intriguing, but in my view incomplete, analysis on economic 
or utilitarian grounds.  See, e.g., RICHARD A.  POSNER, LAW  AND LITERATURE 26-70  (discuss- 
ing vengeance). 

54.  Consider offer-asking disparities and wide variations in expenditures per life saved.  See 

infra note 219 and accompanying text. 

55.  The  point  seems  to  me  to  require some  qualifications of  the  discussion  in  Gul)o 
CALABRESI, THE  COSTS OF ACCIDENTS 16-20  (1970)  (discussing  trade-offs  between  human  fa- 
talities and offsetting social benefits). It also helps explain the account of the "sacred" in DWOR- 
KIN, supra note 28, at 68-101. 

56.  See infra notes 231-33  and accompanying text. 
57.  For  discussions of  commensurability, see  ANDERSON, supra note  1, at  44-73;  JAMi:S 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

796 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

rough working definition, designed especially for the legal context: In- 
commensurability occurs when the  relevant goods cannot be  aligned 
along a  single metric without doing  violence to our considered judg- 
ments about how these goods are best characterized. Let me briefly de- 
scribe  the  four  major  elements  of  this  definition.  First,  by  "our 
considered judgments," I mean our reflective assessments of how cer- 
tain relationships and events should be understood, evaluated, and ex- 
perienced. Such reflection involves identifying the nature and depth of 
various goods in our lives. 

Second, the notion of a "single metric" should be understood quite 
literally.58 By this I mean a standard of valuation that (1) operates at 
a workable level of specificity; (2) involves no qualitative distinctions; 
and (3)  allows comparison of  different goods along the same dimen- 
sion.  One example of a real-world metric - 
indeed the most impor- 
tant for present purposes - 
is money.  Ten dollars and $100 can be 
confidently measured by such a standard, so that ten dollars is simply 
a  small  quantity of  the  same  thing  of  which  $100  is  a  substantial 
amount.  If  two  goods  are  fungible, they  are  also  commensurable. 
Other metrics include feet, yards, pounds, and of course meters.  The 
difference between lengths  of  ten  yards and  100  yards, or  between 
1000 pounds and 400 pounds, involves no qualitative distinctions. 

An  important and contested utilitarian claim is that "utility" fur- 
nishes a single metric along which goods can be evaluated. Some utili- 
tarians believe that  a  single  metric is  indeed available for  ordering 
valuations.  The great utilitarian John Stuart Mill, of course, was un- 
willing to  commit himself fully to  this view.59 I  use the term metric 

GRIFFIN, WELL-BEING 75-92  (1986); NUSSBAUM, supra note 2, at  106-24; RAZ, supra note  17, 
at  321-66;  STOCKER,  supra note  6,  at  130-207; CHARLES TAYLOR, The Diversity of  Goods, in 
PHILOSOPHY AND THE HUMAN SCIENCES 230, 243 (1985); Elizabeth Anderson,  Values, Risks, 
and Markets Norms, 17 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 54, 57-59 (1987); Pildes & Anderson, supra note 48, 
at 2145-66;  Amartya Sen, Plural Utility, in 81 PROC. OF THE ARISTOTELIAN SOCY. 193, 197-89 
(1981); Richard Warner, Incommensurability as a Jurisprudential Puzzle, 68 CHI.-KENT L. REV. 
147 (1992); Richard H. Pildes, Conceptions of  Value in Legal Thought, 90 MICH. L. REV. 1520 
(1992) (book review); cf  Radin, supra note 23.  Compare the discussion of an "integrated person- 
ality" in Frank Hahn, Benevolence, in THOUGHTFUL ECONOMIC MAN 7, 8 (J. Gay T. Meeds ed., 
1991) (asserting intrapersonal comparability of  options  grounded in  self- and  other-regarding 
motives) with the response in Amartya Sen, Beneconfusion, in THOUGHTFUL ECONOMIC MAN, 
supra, at  12, 12-14 (denying this thesis). 

58.  Charles Larmore says that incommensurability occurs when there is  no  "common de- 
nominator of value," an understanding that parallels the notion of a metric, but is not identical to 
it.  Charles Larmore, Pluralism and Reasonable Disagreement,  11 Soc.  PHIL. & POLICY (forth- 
coming  1994) (manuscript at 65, on file with author).  At  least for purposes of law, I think that 
the notion of a single metric is more useful than that of a common denominator of  value.  We 
could identify common denominators of value at a high level of generality -  excellence, generos- 
ity,  and so  forth -  but because such common denominators, including qualitatively different 
features, can be found for most legal problems, the term may lead to confusion. 

59.  See JOHN STUART MILL, UTILITARIANISM 

(Oskar Priest ed.,  1957) (1861). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

797 

largely because of  the  special importance of  the  metric of  dollars to 
law.  As we will see,60 the use of a single metric is often unhelpful for 
law,  and this  point  has  a  wide  range of  consequences for particular 
legal disputes.  Under this general definition of metric, many possible 
standards  - 
excellence,  well-being,  affective  allegiance  - 
count  as 
criteria, but not as metrics.  Kinds of valuation - 
love, respect, won- 
der, worship -  embody no metric at all.61 

Third, with the phrase "doing violence," I mean to suggest that the 
use  of  a single metric is inconsistent with the way certain goods  are 
actually experienced, or tend to be experienced when people's lives are 
going well.  The phrase is intended to show that a single metric, nomi- 
nally descriptive of experience, would actually transform it, in a way 
that would make a great deal of difference. It would make a great deal 
of difference because it would elide certain qualitative differences that 
are important in both life and law.  We might label many choices in- 
volving commensurable goods investment decisions. The decision how 
to invest so as to maximize expected return does indeed involve com- 
mensurable goods.  Some people write as if all or most decisions have 
this form -  as if all or most decisions are investment decisions.  Some 
people write as if life is full of investment decisions, so that a decision 
made in one context will  show a global, acontextual judgment about 
valuation.62 It is these points that I am rejecting here.  If we saw all 
human decisions as investment decisions, we would make human ex- 

It is quite compatible with the principle of utility to  recognize the fact that some kinds of 
pleasure are more desirable and more valuable than others.  It would be absurd that, while 
in  estimating all  other things quality is  considered as  well  as  quantity, the  estimation of 
pleasure should be supposed to depend on quantity alone. 

Id.  at  12.  See also Mill's criticism of  Bentham: 

Nothing is more curious than the absence of recognition in any of his writings of the exist- 
ence of  conscience, as a thing distinct from philanthropy, from affection for God  or man, 
and from self-interest in this world or in the next  .... 

Nor  is  it  only  the  moral part of  man's nature .  . .that  he  overlooks; he  but  faintly 
recognises, as a fact in human nature, the pursuit of any other ideal end for its own sake. 
The sense of honour, and personal dignity ...  the love of beauty, the passion of the artist; the 
the love of action . . . the love of ease:  -  None  of 
love of order ... 
these  powerful constituents of  human  nature are thought  worthy  of  a  place  among  the 
"Springs of Action;" .... 
MILL,  supra note 2, at 66-68. 

the love of power ... 

Other  general  meditations  on  this  theme  appear  in  JOHN  STUART  MILL,  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 
(1873); for an illuminating discussion see Elizabeth Anderson, John Stuart Mill on Experiments 
in Living, 102 ETHICS 4  (1991). 

60.  See infra Part V. 
61.  Hence ordinal rankings do  not produce commensurability as I  understand it here. 
62.  See, e.g., W. KIP VISCUSI, FATAL TRADEOFFS 34-74  (1992) (discussing risk trade-offs). 
Compare Viscusi's analysis with Amartya Sen, Freedom and Needs, NEW REPUBL.IC, Jan. 10 & 
17, 1994, at 31, 32-33 ("There are deep and fundamental and intuitively understood grounds for 
rejecting the view that confines itself merely to  checking the parity of  outcomes, the view that 
matches death for death, happiness for happiness, fulfillment for fulfillment, irrespective of how 
all this death, happiness, and fulfillment comes about."). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

798 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

perience  barely  recognizable.  There  is  an  additional  point.  Particular 
choices  reflect  the  context  in  which  they  are  made,  and  those  choices 
rarely  reveal  a  general  statement,  reflecting  an  acontextual  considered 
judgment  about  valuation. 

Finally,  by  "doing  violence  to  our  considered  judgments,"  I  mean 
disrupting  our  reflective  assessments  of  how  certain  relationships  and 
events  should  be  understood,  evaluated,  and  experienced.  To  see  dat- 
ing,  for  example,  as  "participation  in  the  marriage  market"  may  be 
inconsistent  with  prevailing  convictions  about  what  dating  behavior 
entails. 

Incommensurability 

in  this  very  thin63 sense  is  a familiar  phenom- 
enon.  Indeed  it  seems  that  it  is  closer  to  the  rule  than  the  exception. 
A  decision  whlether to  vacation  at  the  beach  in  the  Indiana  Dunes  or 
in  Florence  entails  no  single  metric.  So  too  with  the  decision  whether 
to  see  a  movie  about  dinosaurs  or  instead  about  Wittgenstein.  So  too 
with  a  decision  whether  to  reduce  permissible  exposure  levels  to  ben- 
zene  in  the  workplace  to  one  part  per  million. 

We  might  also  believe  that  goods  are comparable  without  believing 
that  they  are  commensurable  - 
that  is,  we  might  think  that  choices 
can  be  made  among  incommensurable  goods,  and  that  such  choices 
are  subject  to  reasoned  evaluation,  without  believing  that  the  relevant 
goods  can  be  aligned  along  a  single  metric.64  Incommensurability 
is  still  an 
need  not  entail  incomparability.  But  incommensurability 
important  part  of  practical  reason  in  life  and  law.  For  example,  some 
people  do  not  believe  that  any  unitary  metric  can  capture  their  diverse 
valuations  of  music,  friendship,  and  work.  It  also  seems  possible  that 
different  forms  of  music,  or  different  kinds  of  work  and  friendship, 
cannot  be made  commensurable  in this  way.  To  be sure,  we  can  imag- 
ine a life or a world  in which  valuation  along  a single  metric  would  not 
be  experientially  false.  Certainly  we  can  imagine  social  changes  in 
things  become  commensurable,  and 
which  some  incommensurable 
vice  versa.  Some  such  changes  have  undoubtedly  occurred,  and  in- 
life  or 
deed  are  occurring  all  the  time.  But  a  fully  commensurable 
world  would  be  the  stuff  of  science  fiction.  It  would  change  experi- 

63.  This sense of  incommensurability is  different from the  sense captured in  the  idea that 
"conceptual schemes" or "paradigms" are incommensurable. Cf  DONAL D DAVIDSON, On the 
Very Idea  of  a  Conceptual Scheme,  in  INQUIRIES INTO TRUTH AND INTERPRETAT-ION 183 
(1984) (analyzing and criticizing the latter claim). 

For a much thicker notion of incommensurability involving value-incomparability, see RAz, 

supra note  17, at 321-66. 

64.  Incommensurability and  incomparability are used interchangeably in  many places, in- 
cluding Raz, supra note 17, at 322.  The two are distinguished in STOCKER, supra note 6. at  175- 
78; Larmore, supra note 58, at 61; Chang, supra note 6, at 2-4. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

799 

ence, not "just" words.65 An  argument on its behalf would call for a 
large-scale revision of current experience. 

B.  Valuation and  Commensurability 
What is the relationship between kinds of valuation and commen- 
surability? It may be tempting to think that there is incommensurabil- 
ity  if and only if diverse kinds of valuation are at work.  There is an 
association between  these  two  ideas.66  But  they  are not  the  same. 
Two  points are relevant here.  First and most important, cases of in- 
commensurability can occur even within the same kind of valuation. 
A parent may value one child in the same way that she values another 
child, but the two may be incommensurably valued in the sense that 
they are not valued along the same metric.  The valuation of one can- 
not be understood as simply some fraction of the valuation of another. 
There  is  nothing  like  fungibility.  There  are  important  qualitative 
distinctions. 

Consider in this regard the mother's dilemma in Sophie's Choice:67 
which of her two children should be handed over to the Nazi  officer? 
The  dilemma is  tragic partly because the  two  lives are not  fungible. 
The mother is forced to assume personal responsibility for the loss of a 
life for which there is no substitute.  This is a common though usually 
less  excruciating phenomenon  in  the  presence of  multiple  intrinsic 
goods, when we might have a single kind of valuation, or a few such 
kinds,  without  a  metric for  decisions.  Indeed we  might  think  that 
commensurability in the sense used here can occur only in the case of 
instrumental goods having many possible uses. 

Second, some people might think that goods  are commensurable 
even if they are valued in different ways.  Consider the suggestion that 
a single metric is available with which to align our different kinds of 
valuation.  For  example,  Mozart  may  be  valued  in  a  different way 
from Bob Dylan, but there may be a metric by which to value different 
composers; and, along that metric, Mozart may be superior to Dylan. 
(I  believe that  any  such  metric would  be  false to  our  experience of 
music, and hence I do not think that this sort of approach will work; 

65.  See the tale of the super-Benthamites in HILARY PUTNAM, REASON, TRUTH, AND HIS- 

TORY 139-41  (1983); cfJ ELSTER, THE CEMENT OF SOCIETY, supra note  52: 

It would be misleading to  say that people throughout the  Roman Empire believed in the 
"same" gods, while perhaps worshipping them in different ways, as people who live in differ- 
ent parts of a country see the "same" mountain from different perspectives  ....  Practices at 
opposite ends of the empire might have little but the names of the gods in common. 

66.  See, e.g.,  ISAIAH BERLIN, Two Concepts of Liberty, in  FOUR ESSAYS ON LIBERTY 118, 

Id.  at 249. 

169-72 (1969). 

67.  WILLIAM STYRON, SOPHIE'S CHOICE (1979). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

800 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

but I am trying here to show how the two claims might be separated.) 
In any case some people think that there are diverse values -  pleasure 
from a warm sun, gratitude from unexpected kindness, and so forth 
while also believing that these can all be reduced to a general concept 
like utility, happiness, or pleasure.  Utilitarians need not deny the di- 
versity of human goods, or that pleasures and pains come in different 
forms.68 

The  claim  of  incommensurability is  that  no  unitary metric  ac- 
counts for how we actually think and that the effort to introduce one 
misdescribes experience. There is a further claim (of course requiring 
an independent defense) that the misdescription can yield both inaccu- 
rate predictions and bad recommendations for ethics and politics.69 It 
would do so even if human beings also should decide, free from met- 
rics  but  equipped with  reasons, in  favor of  some  relationships and 
events instead of  others, and even in  favor of  Mozart over Dylan  if 
some such judgment becomes useful.70 Recall that incommensurabil- 
ity, as I have defined it, does not entail incomparability. It may be, for 
example, that there are describable and workable criteria for finding a 
composer to be good, and that these criteria, while hardly algorithmic, 
make it  possible to  say that some  composers are better than others. 

68.  Hence Mill: 
The ingredients of happiness are very various, and each of them is desirable in itself, and not 
merely when considered as swelling an aggregate.  The  principle of  utility does  not  mean 
that any given pleasure, as music, for instance, or any given exemption from pain, as  for 
example health, are to be looked upon as means to a collective something termed happiness, 
and to  be desired on  that account.  They are desired and desirable in and for themselves; 
besides being means, they are a part of the end. 

MILL, UTILITARIANISM, supra  note  59,  at  179.  J.J.C.  Smart,  more  cautious  on  this  point,  simply 
states:  "[T]he more complex pleasures are incomparably more fecund than the  less  complex 
ones; not  only  are they  enjoyable in  themselves but they  are a  means to  further enjoyment." 
J.J.C.  Smart, An  Outline of  a  System of  Utilitarian Ethics,  in  J.J.C.  SMART &  BERNARD 
WILLIAMS, UTILITARIANISM: FOR  AND  AGAINST  (1973). 
might not see "utility" as a metric at all. 

In  light  of  these  descriptions  we 

69.  Sometimes, however, it may be pragmatically valuable to construct a metric consisting of 
heterogeneous items.  The "human development index" used by the United Nations to measure 
well-being by amalgamating literacy, longevity, and per capita income, provides a useful exam- 
ple.  See  U.N.  DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME, HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 10 (1993).  Simi- 
larly, the  National  Football League measures quarterback proficiency with an  index based on 
heterogeneous qualities, including completion percentage, average gain per attempt, touchdown 
percentage, and interception percentage. See  Dan  Pierson, Harbaugh Passes the Ratings Test, 
CHI. TRIB., Nov.  4,  1990, at C9.  The risk with both indices is that the aggregate numbers may 
deflect attention from important qualitative differences. Under the  1993 UNDP  Report, for ex- 
ample, the United States ranks sixth overall, but it ranks first in educational attainment and in 
per capita income, and seventeenth in longevity, in part because of high rates of infant mortality 
and violent crime; it is this disaggregated data that is most informative. See Cass R.  Sunstein, 
Well-Being and the State,  107 HARV. L. REV. (forthcoming 1994) (manuscript at  18-21, on file 
with author).  Much the same could be said about quarterbacks. 

70.  These points leave many complexities.  Perhaps the best standard is a general concept of 
excellence (for music) or  well-being (for human beings), amounting to  an  index of  differently 
valued qualities.  But a concept of this sort ought not to count as a metric as I understand it here. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

801 

Indeed, it seems clear that this is the case.  We can make similar argu- 
ments about hard cases in law, a point taken up in more detail below.71 

C.  Excluding Reasons for Action 

Some of the most intriguing instances of incommensurability arise 
when the relevant kind of valuation not only prevents use of a single 
metric, but also excludes certain reasons for action altogether.72 We 
need to introduce here the important notion of exclusionary reasons. 73 
Sometimes social  custom  or  law  invokes a  second-order reason that 
excludes certain first-order reasons for action, even if those reasons are 
perfectly legitimate in some settings.  In such cases, the basic goal of 
the custom or laws is to  prohibit people from making choices on the 
basis of  certain identifiable considerations.  Those considerations are 
ruled off limits; they are not merely found insufficiently weighty. 

Someone may, for example, value loyalty to a lover or spouse in a 
way that absolutely precludes the acceptance of favors, or cash, as a 
reason for infidelity. The kind of valuation of the person and relation- 
ship rules out a set of reasons that would be perfectly legitimate bases 
for action in other contexts.  The particular kind of valuation is incon- 
sistent with allowing the admission of certain otherwise conventional 
reasons for behaving in a certain way.  The same idea permeates the 
legal system.  Thus, for example, a jury in a tort case is not ordinarily 
permitted to take into account a defendant's wealth; in interpreting a 
statute, a judge is usually not supposed to consider what she thinks a 
good statute would say.74 Companies may not invoke the need to in- 
crease  employment  - 
as  a 
ground to engage in price fixing.75 In the law of free speech, offense at 
the content of ideas is not a legitimate reason to regulate speech, even 
if  the  offense is  very  widespread and  intense.76 Administrative law 
consists in large part of the identification of a range of statutorily irrel- 

ordinarily  an  important  social  goal  - 

71.  See infra Part V. 
72.  The  treatment of  incommensurability in  the  legal  context  in  Warner, supra note  57, 
makes extensive use of this notion.  See also the discussion of constitutive incommensurabilities 
in  RAZ, supra note  17, at 345-53. 

73.  See JOSEPH RAZ, PRACTICAL THINKING AND NORMS 35-48  (1975).  The idea is contro- 
versial.  See  William A.  Edmunson, Book Note,  12 LAW & PHIL. 329 (1993)  (reviewing 1990 
republication of RAZ, supra). 

74.  I  overlook some  complexities here,  discussed in  RONALD DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE 
313-54  (1986).  See  also  Cass  R.  Sunstein, Interpreting Statutes in  the Regulatory State,  103 
HARV. L. REV. 405 (1989). 

75.  Indeed, under current antitrust law,  no  social  goal,  however worthy, can justify  price 
fixing; all price-fixing agreements are per se illegal because of their presumptively anticompetitive 
potential.  See, e.g., Arizona v. Maricopa County Med. Socy., 457 U.S. 332 (1982); United States 
v.  Socony-Vacuum Oil Co.,  310 U.S.  150 (1940). 
76.  Cohen v. California, 403  U.S.  15 (1971). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

802 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

evant  factors  -  bases  for  decision  that  may  not  be  introduced  at  all, 
however  pertinent  they  may  seem  in  the  abstract.77 

Sometimes  the  very  admission  of the  relevant  reasons  is entirely  off 
limits.  Sometimes  the  reasons,  though  usually  barred,  may  be  intro- 
duced,  but  only  if  they  are  extraordinarily  strong  in  the  specific  case. 
This  is  a  characteristic  structure  of  legal  protection  of  constitutional 
rights  under judge-made  doctrine.78  I  want  to  claim  that,  in  both  in- 
stances,  we  have  a  form  of  incommensurability  as  I  understand  it 
here.79 

Consider a  general example.  One  might  think that,  in  constitu- 
tional law, intrusions on certain rights are acceptable only if govern- 
ment can generate an interest both of a certain type and of a certain 
strength.80 In an interesting discussion of the First Amendment, for 
example, John  Rawls  argues that  the  mere existence of  a  clear and 
present danger of some sort will not justify government suppression of 
speech.8'  On his account, government must show a clear and present 
danger to the democratic order itself.82 As I read him, Rawls does not 
mean to argue that this is simply a greater degree of danger than any 
other; instead he means to argue that, to regulate political speech, gov- 
ernment needs an  interest of  a  particular sort.  Whether or  not  the 

77.  See, e.g., National Resources Defense Council v.  EPA,  824 F.2d  1146 (D.C.  Cir.  1987) 
(holding that EPA may consider cost and feasibility in setting emissions standards under Clean 
Air  Act); National Coalition Against the  Misuse of  Pesticides v.  Thomas, 809 F.2d  875 (D.C. 
Cir.  1987) (holding that EPA  must give greater weight to statutorily specified factors than un- 
specified factors in issuing pesticide regulations under the Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act); D.C. 
Fedn. of Civic Assns. v. Volpe, 459 F.2d  1231, 1246-49 (D.C. Cir. 1971) (treating pressure from 
individual congressional representatives as  improper basis  for  approving bridge construction 
project). 

78.  See, e.g.,  Califano v.  Goldfarb, 430  U.S.  199 (1977)  (requiring gender classifications to 
serve important governmental objective); Roe  v. Wade, 410 U.S.  113 (1973) (requiring compel- 
ling state interest for regulation of abortion); Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444 (1969) (requir- 
ing imminent threat of  lawless action for regulation of public speech). 

79.  This is not simply a problem of lexical ordering, unless that notion is understood to entail 

a commitment to incommensurability. See infra notes 206-10  and accompanying text. 

80.  See supra note  78.  Consider other examples.  One might think that the  right kind of 
valuation of promise-keeping forbids someone from breaching a contract merely because changed 
circumstances have rendered performance significantly more costly.  Here too the argument is far 
from self-evident, but one could imagine a conception of promise-keeping that would have this 
consequence.  Indeed, these ideas appear at work in current law.  See Warner, supra note 57, at 
165-67.  Similarly, some people might believe that the appropriate kind of valuation of the envi- 
ronment forbids the use of cost-benefit balancing as a reason for allowing people to be exposed to 
significant safety risks.  Cf. American Textile Mfrs. Inst. v. Donovan, 452 U.S. 490,  509 (1981) 
(holding cost-benefit analysis unnecessary to justify occupational health standard).  It would not 
be simple to spell out this argument, but perhaps an industry should be barred from deliberately 
subjecting people to certain risks without their full knowledge and consent, when the ground for 
the  decision  is  that  the  costs  of  eliminating those  risks outweigh  the  benefits, economically 
defined. 

81.  See  JOHN RAWLS.  POLITICAL LIBERALISM 348-56  (1993). 
82.  Id.  at 354. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

803 

argument  is  right,  it  shows  that  we  might  want  to  impose  constraints 
on  the  sorts  of  interests  that  can  be  invoked  to  justify  restrictions  on 
constitutional  rights.83 

The  exclusion  of  certain  reasons  for  action  is  an  extreme  case  of 
the  more  conventional  and  modest  sort  of  incommensurability  I  am 
describing  here.  It  is  of  course  possible  to  deny  that  two  items  X  and 
Y  can  be  aligned  along  a  single  metric  while  also  believing  that  an 
especially  large  amount  of  X  is  worth  more  than  an  especially  small 
amount  of  Y  One  might  believe,  for  example,  that  a pristine  area and 
in  value,  while  also  thinking  that  dollars 
cash  are  incommensurable 
are  not  excluded  as  reasons  for  action,  and  that  one  would  allow  deg- 
radation  of  a  pristine  area  if  an  enormous  amount  of  money  were  at 
stake.  This  is  especially  true  to  the  extent  that  money,  which  is  by 
definition  only  of  instrumental  value,  can  be  devoted  to  enterprises 
that  are  of  intrinsic  value,  like  the  protection  of  wildlife  or  of  other 
environmental  goods.  Consider  here  the  controversial  but  reasonable 
efforts  to  claim  that,  while  OSHA  may  not  base  outcomes  on  cost- 
benefit  analysis  (that  is,  trade  off  life  for  dollars),  it  may  engage  in 
"risk-risk"  analysis  (that  is,  compare  one  risk  to  life  and  health  with 
another).  On  this  view,  OSHA  may  take  into  account  the  possibility 
that  regulation  that  produces  unemployment  and  poverty  imposes 
greater  risks  to  life  and  health.84 

There  is  a  further  and  closely  related  point.  Many  problems  of 
incommensurability  arise  because  of  a conviction  that  an  event,  a  per- 
son,  or  a  relationship  is  intrinsically  good,  or  an  end  in  itself,  rather 
than  something  properly  treated  as a means  to  some  other  generalized 
end,  such  as wealth  or  utility  or maximized  value.85  It  is  easy  to  use  a 
single  metric  when  all  human  events  are  seen  as  instrumental  to  im- 

83.  A  familiar version of  this  idea is  the  notion  that "administrative convenience" cannot 
justify discrimination or intrusion on  rights, even if the  inconvenience is  very great.  See, e.g., 
Craig v.  Boren, 429  U.S.  190,  198 (1976) (rejecting statute establishing different legal drinking 
ages for males and females based on highway safety concerns); Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 
677,  690-91  (1973)  (rejecting statute that  accorded differential treatment to  male  and  female 
members  of  armed  services);  Goldberg  v.  Kelly,  397  U.S.  254,  266  (1970)  (holding  that 
pretermination hearing is required before state can halt welfare benefits). 

Many constitutions allow abridgment of rights only for reasons that are compatible with the 
operation of a democratic society.  See, e.g., CAN. CONST. (Constitution Act,  1982) pt. I (Cana- 
dian Charter of Rights and Freedoms), ?  1 (guaranteeing the rights and freedoms set out therein 
"subject only  to  such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a 
free and democratic society").  In this way, they mark out a limit not simply on the weight but 
also on the nature of the reasons that may be invoked to  support intrusions on  rights. 

84.  See  the  proposed OSHA  regulations in  57  Fed.  Reg.  26,002,  26,006  (1992).  See  also 
International  Union  v.  OSHA,  938  F.2d  1310,  1326-27  (D.C.  Cir.  1991)  (Williams,  J., 
concurring). 

85.  Warner, supra note 57, at  157.  See also Mill's notations on Bentham.  Mll.  ,  supra note 

2, at 66-70. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

804 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

provements along a unitary dimension.86 If we thought, for example, 
that all acts were attempts to increase social utility -  defined, say, as 
aggregate human happiness - 
then it would be utility that would be 
of  intrinsic value, and all else would be instrumental to  it.  Analysis 
might therefore be greatly simplified. The same is true of some under- 
standings of  maximized wealth.  Often issues of  incommensurability 
arise because of the presence of a range of intrinsic goods that are not 
seen as means to some other end, particularly in law. 

An example may help.  Of course a society cannot spend an infinite 
amount  of  resources to  improve  workplace safety  and  hence  must 
make complex trade-offs. But many people find it jarring to hear that, 
in light of actual occupational choices, a worker values his life at (say) 
eight million dollars, or that the protection of a life is  "worth" eight 
million dollars.87 These claims are jarring not because we believe infi- 
nite  social  resources should be  devoted to  occupational safety.  The 
claims are jarring because of  the widespread perception that a life is 
not instrumental to some aggregate social goal, but worthy in itself - 
a belief in tension with applying the language of prices to human life. 
This is a plausible concern even if one ultimately concludes that (say) 
an eight million dollar expenditure is fully appropriate in cases of lives 
at  risk.  Certainly intrinsic goods do  not  have infinite value for pur- 
poses of law and policy.  But even though they do not, the fact that we 
find it jarring to  hear that  a  life  is  "worth" a  specified amount  of 
money is socially desirable, and not a product of simple confusion. 

In sum, the recognition of an intrinsic good may entail an evalua- 
tive  attitude that  is  incompatible with  the  use  of  certain reasons to 
compromise  it.88  For  example,  the  intrinsic  -  rather  than  instrumen- 
tal -  values at stake in a parent-child relationship generally preclude 
compromising that relationship for cash, unless, perhaps, the cash can 
be  used for other important intrinsic goods.  The  same may well  be 
true of equal liberty or of  much of  what falls within the category of 
rights.  Commensurability will not obtain in a world of multiple intrin- 
sic  goods,  which  is  emphatically not  to  say  that  we  do  not  choose 
among intrinsic goods,  or  that rationality does  not  help in  selecting 
various courses of action. 

86.  See ANDERSON, supra note  1, at 37-38,  45-46. 
87.  See VIscusi,  supra note 62, at  17-33. 
88.  Consider in this regard Bernard Williams's remark: 
It could be a feature of a man's moral outlook that he regarded certain courses of action as 
unthinkable, in the sense that he would not entertain the idea of doing them ....  Entertain- 
ing  certain alternatives, regarding them  indeed as alternatives, is  itself something that he 
regards as dishonourable or morally absurd. 

Bernard Williams, A Critique of  Utilitarianism, in SMART & WILLIAMS, supra note 68, at 75, 92. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

805 

D.  Incommensurability and Freedom 

It might be tempting to think that incommensurability works as a 
barrier to certain forms of freedom - 
to the use of a single metric, to 
certain sorts of exchange, to  certain reasons for action.  This is true; 
we have seen cases in which a recognition of incommensurability stops 
people from doing things.  But it is also plausible to see incommensu- 
rability as  constitutive  of  some  valuable forms  of  freedom.  These 
forms are not easily dispensable. The presence of incommensurability 
helps make possible certain relationships, attachments, and attitudes 
that would otherwise be unavailable.89 

If  friendship and  cash  were  commensurable, or  if  a  park  and 
$100,000 were valued in the same way, we could not have certain atti- 
tudes  toward  friendship  and  toward  parks.  Indeed,  if  parks  and 
$100,000 could be aligned along the same metric, parks would not be 
parks as we now understand them.  If speech were valued in the same 
way  as forks, we  could not  understand political freedom in  the  way 
that we  now do.  Incommensurability operates as an obstacle to  cer- 
tain sorts of  behavior; but it  constitutes others, and makes them an 
option for us.  For this reason, both social norms and life might insist 
that  incommensurability of  various sorts  is  desirable as  a  means of 
maintaining attitudes and relationships that are parts of good lives.  I 
will return to this point below.90 

E.  Comparability, Transitivity, and Other Definitions 

The definition I have offered has a relation to Joseph Raz's impor- 
tant and influential discussion of the problem.91 Raz offers a distinc- 
tive understanding of incommensurability. He says that "A and B are 
incommensurate if it is neither true that one is better than the other 
nor true that they are of equal value."92 To this definition, Raz adds a 
claim  about the  "mark" of  incommensurability: "Two valuable op- 
tions are incommensurable if (1) neither is better than the other, and 
(2) there is (or could be) another option which is better than one but is 
not better than the other."93 

These statements point  to  an  extremely puzzling state of  affairs. 
How  could  one  option  be  neither worse  than,  nor  better than,  nor 

89.  See  RAZ,  supra note  17, at 345-57. 
90.  See infra Part V. 
91.  See  RAZ,  supra note  17, at 325.  According to Raz, "[t]he test of incommensurability is 
failure of transitivity." Id.  Compare the discussion in ANDERSON, supra note 1, at 55 - 59, which 
analyzes incommensurability in terms of diverse standards yielded by a single scale of  value. 

92.  RAZ, supra note  17, at 322. 
93.  Id.  at 325. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

806 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

equal to another? Isn't this a failure of rationality? If two options are 
neither better nor worse than one another, how could some third op- 
tion be better than one but not better than the other?  In beginning to 
answer these questions, Raz notes that sometimes value is a function 
of  several diverse criteria.  This is  true, for example, with  respect to 
judgments about the excellence of a novel.  Our understanding of the 
criteria that make up excellence in a novel may impair efforts to pro- 
duce a complete ranking.  It could thus be wrong to say that Dickens 
is better or worse than Joyce, and also wrong to say that Dickens and 
Joyce are (even roughly) equal in value.  Any of these three possibili- 
ties could reasonably be thought obtuse.  Dickens  and Joyce are not 
roughly equal in value because, on one view of their merit, the choice 
for either one over the other could be supported by very different and 
quite substantial reasons.94 

Some further examples may help.  Smith may have no clear prefer- 
ence between lunch  with  a  friend and  a  fifty dollar gift; the  one  is 
neither better nor  worse than  the  other.  Nor  are the  two  equal in 
value.  At  the same time, Smith would prefer a sixty dollar gift to  a 
fifty dollar gift.  But Smith has no clear preference between lunch with 
a friend and a sixty dollar gift; the one is still neither better nor worse 
than the other.  Or there is  a  political initiative that seems to  Jones 
neither better nor worse than another:  a reduction in the staff of the 
White  House  by  ten  percent, and  a  new  restriction on  lobbying by 
government employees.  Jones would prefer a fifteen percent reduction 
in the staff of the White House to a ten percent reduction.  But Jones 
does not think that a fifteen percent reduction in the White House staff 
is better or worse than a new restriction on  lobbying by government 
employees.  When incommensurability occurs, Raz claims,95 there is a 
failure of transitivity: A is neither better nor worse than B; AI  is better 
than A; but Al  is  neither better nor worse than B.  If  it  occurs, the 

94.  I am therefore questioning the familiar idea that an agent is able to say, for any given pair 
of  options, whether he  prefers the  first to  the second,  the second  to  the  first, or is  indifferent 
between them.  An agent may not regard one option as more valuable than the other and yet also 
not be indifferent between them.  Agents remain able to choose between them, perhaps because of 
reasons grounded in expressive differences, as suggested in  ANDERSON, supra note  1, at  59, or 
because of psychological factors, as Raz suggests. See RAZ, supra note 17, at 32.  It also remains 
possible that we can generate a utility function on the basis of choice, either retrospectively or 
prospectively. See infra text accompanying note  105. 

95.  It is possible, however, to question whether Raz is really describing a failure of transitiv- 
ity.  Such a  failure might be thought to  assume commensurability; the concepts of  transitivity 
and intransitivity seem to work only with commensurable things.  The problem discussed in the 
text is a special case in which relevant goods are not equal in value, but are not better or worse 
than one another.  Perhaps real failures of transitivity cannot occur in this setting.  I am grateful 
to Jon Elster for pressing this point.  For a helpful discussion, see Joseph Raz,  Value Incommen- 
surability:  Some  Preliminaries,  86  PROC. OF THE ARISTOTEILIAN SOCY. 117,  123-24  (1986). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

807 

apparent failure of  transitivity is  troubling to  many  understandings 
about rational choice, but we can imagine many settings in which the 
failure seems to  appear.96 

It is right but not really responsive to say that, once the amounts 
change,  assessments of  these  problems change as  well.  To  be  sure, 
Smith might unambiguously prefer $1000 to  lunch with  a  friend, or 
the lunch to five dollars.  It is true that Jones's uncertainty might dissi- 
pate  if  she  is  asked to  choose  between  a  fifty percent reduction in 
White House staff and a new restriction on lobbying.  But these truths 
do not undermine the basic claim, which is vindicated if some appar- 
ent failures of transitivity can be found.  To insist that such apparent 
failures occur, it is not necessary to say that people will not find large 
amounts of  one  good  better than  smaller amounts of  another with 
which  it  is  not  commensurable.97 Below  I  will  take up some  of  the 
ambiguities in this argument.98 

Raz's  formulation is  related to  the  definition I  have  offered.  If 
there were a metric along which all judgments could be aligned, transi- 
tivity  would  always be  found.  A  problem of  intransitivity can  arise 
when the use of a unitary metric does violence to our considered judg- 
ments.  Thus A  might be  incommensurable with B,  because the  two 
cannot be assessed along the same metric; but C might be better than 
A, because it can be assessed along the same metric as A,  without 
and this is the key point -  being better than the differently valued B. 
But  the  approach I  am offering has  some  differences from Raz's 
formulation.  Raz  does  not  speak  of  metrics; he  addresses a  much 
larger problem than I  identify here, and his  claim is,  I  think, much 
more ambitious (and hence more controversial).  One can admit the 
failure of metrics in the sense in which I use the term while also deny- 
ing  the  possibility of  failures of  transitivity.99 Although  Raz  insists 

96.  See  Sen, supra note 48,  at 498-503.  Compare the failures of  transitivity as outlined in 
DOUGLAS D.  DAVIS & CHARLES A.  HOLT, EXPERIMENTAL ECONOMICS 468-72 (1993); Daniel 
Kahneman  &  Amos  Tversky,  Prospect  Theory:  An  Analysis  of  Decision  Under  Risk,  47 
ECONOMETRICA 263 (1979). 

97.  It is important to distinguish this point from the fact that two things can appear neither 
better nor worse than each  other simply because of  a  lack of  full  information.  We  might be 
indifferent between being tall  and being thin, just  because we  do  not  know enough about the 
relevant options, which have been described too  abstractly.  We might be indifferent between a 
dozen widgets and a dozen pidgets, simply because the statement of this choice leaves us ignorant 
of  so much. 

It is also important to distinguish between incommensurability and a situation in which peo- 
ple's preferences are incomplete.  People may prefer A over C, C over E, B over D, and D over E: 
but they  may not  have a  preference between A  and B,  A  and D,  B  and  C, or  C and D.  The 
problem of incompleteness is different from the problem discussed in text. 

98.  See infra text accompanying notes  130-31. 
99.  See supra note 95. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

808 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

that incommensurability does not preclude choice,10? he identifies in- 
commensurability with incomparability; the identification is also sug- 
gested by the use of the word better in the statement quoted above.101 
Thus Raz says that incommensurability "marks the inability of reason 
to  guide  our  action."'02  For  Raz,  we  can  make  and  even  predict 
choices,  perhaps by  reference to  psychological  factors,  even  in  the 
midst of widespread incommensurabilities, and in the absence of rea- 
son-guided outcomes.103 Choices may have causes, and hence be pre- 
dictable, without reasons.104 

But there is yet another possibility: goods may be incommensura- 
ble in something very much like Raz's sense without being incompara- 
ble,  in  the  sense  that  we  cannot  choose  among  them  for  good 
reasons.105 There may be incommensurability between goods A and B 
even though there are good (nonalgorithmic) reasons for choosing one 
over the other, and in this sense for thinking that one is better.  Op- 
tions can be incommensurable in this way while still being very much 
subject to reasonable choice (and to evaluation and certainly to ordinal 
ranking). Indeed, reasonable choices among incommensurable options 
are the  stuff not  merely of  law,  but  of  everyday life.  It  remains to 
provide a  description of  what  accounts  for  those  choices.  But  we 
might conclude that, when incommensurability in Raz's sense occurs, 
reasons are likely to be available by which to  choose among options. 
Incomparability need not be involved. 

F.  Scales and Choices 

This  way  of  understanding things  is  supported  by  Elizabeth 
Anderson's  illuminating discussion  of  the  problem.  In  Anderson's 
view, "[t]wo goods are incommensurable with respect to some scale if 
one  is  neither better, worse, nor  equal in  value to  the  other in  the 
respects measured by the scale."106 Anderson says that the problem of 
incommensurability tends  to  arise  when  three  conditions  are  met. 
First, the  relevant goods  meet the  scale's standard in  quite different 

100.  RAZ, supra note  17, at  339; see  also  Joseph Raz,  Mixing  Values, 65  PROC. OF THE 

ARISTOTELIAN SOCY. 83 (1991). 

101. See supra text accompanying note 93. 
102.  RAZ, supra note  17, at 334. 
103. Id.  at 339. 
104.  Decision  theory seems to  be  untouched by  Raz's account:  "We are, it  is essential to 
remember, inquiring into the structure of practical reasoning, i.e. of the ways people conceive of 
themselves and their options and judge them."  Id. 

105.  See  the  instructive discussions in  T.K.  Seung &  Daniel  Bonevac, Plural  Values and 

Indeterminate Rankings, 102 ETHICS 799 (1992).  See also GRIFFIN, supra note 57, at 77. 

106.  ANDERSON, supra note  1, at 55. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

809 

ways.  Second,  there are  no  large-scale differences in  the  degree to 
which each good meets the standard in its own way.  Third, the way 
one good meets the standard is not categorically superior to the way 
the other good meets the standard.107  Possible examples include artis- 
tic  excellence, individual well-being, and generosity.  Picasso may be 
neither equal to nor better or worse than Velasquez in terms of artistic 
excellence.  If Picasso had been a little bit better than in fact he was, 
this  could  still  be  the  case.  A  decision to  become a  lawyer in  New 
York may be incommensurate, in terms of individual well-being, with 
a decision to  become an artist in a small town in Colorado.  A  well- 
known philanthropist is neither more nor less generous than someone 
who does innumerable small favors for his friends; nor is it true that 
the two are equally generous. 

As  Anderson suggests, incommensurability always operates with 
respect to some scale.  Whether there is commensurability depends on 
the particular scale that is in use.  Scales are of course not metrics in 
the sense in which I have used that term.  A metric is designed to erase 
qualitative differences, most notably the problem of how  goods meet 
the metric's standard.  We know that good A  costs  $100 and good B 
$500; no question of qualitative difference arises.  Scales, in contrast, 
can exist without metrics, and there may be  diverse ways to  meet a 
scale's standard. Problems of incommensurability cannot occur when 
we  are using a  metric (dollars, yards).  But such problems may well 
arise when we are using a scale (artistic excellence, generosity). 

As  Anderson also  suggests, rational choice  can  occur among in- 
commensurable options, not because one option has a higher abstract 
"value" than  another, but  because of  expressive considerations that 
help us decide what option makes most sense in situations of choice.108 
Those  expressive considerations give  diverse values their point; they 
focus attention on how it is that different goods are appropriately val- 
ued.  For  example, someone facing an  important career choice  may 
perceive a  problem of  incommensurability, but  may  nonetheless be 
able to choose rationally - 
that is, on the basis of reasons.  For exam- 
ple, the agent may be committed to an ideal about what sort of person 
she should be.  She may find that one choice damages her most impor- 
tant ends.  She may see that her own motivations, with respect to one 
choice, are founded on bad reasons, such as unjustified fear.  She may 
be able to see that one choice makes more narrative sense of her life. 09 

107. See id. 
108. Id.  at 59-64. 
109. See id. at 60. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

810 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

Unlike  Raz,  Anderson  claims  that  choices  among  incommen- 
surables can be based on  an assessment of  reasons.  There are many 
complexities in this account, and I  cannot explore them here.  But I 
think that something like it is fundamentally correct and that it also 
has close parallels in hard cases in law."0 

We are left at this stage with an obvious question: Does the fact of 
choice show that options are commensurable after all?  I do not think 
that it does, for choice can occur among incommensurable goods.  We 
should not identify the actuality of choice with a claim of commensu- 
rability.  It is odd and unnecessary to say that commensurability nec- 
essarily "lies behind" or "justifies" all rational or irrational choices.' 1 
We choose  whether to  take an exciting job  in  a  new  city,  when the 
move would unsettle our family; we decide hard tort cases; we choose 
between work and leisure; we decide how much to spend to promote 
worker safety or energy conservation. These choices are based on rea- 
sons  and  evaluated by  reference to  them.  Commensurability is  not 
required for choice. 

A  claim of  radical incommensurability would  deny  this  possibil- 
ity.' 2  On this view, choices among incommensurable options are im- 
possible  on  rational  grounds,  or  relevant  goods  are  so  radically 
incommensurate that there is no process by which human beings can 
reasonably choose  among them.  Reasons run out.  I  think that it  is 
very rare for this  form of  incommensurability to  occur in  the  intra- 
personal case.  People often face incommensurability -  either in the 
sense that I have emphasized or in the Raz-Anderson sense -  without 
being at all paralyzed about what to  do,  and while thinking, rightly, 
that their judgments are based on reasons.  But the interpersonal case 
is different, and this point is important for law.  In some contexts, peo- 
ple who sharply disagree do seem to be close to the unhappy state of 
radical incommensurability. This is so in the sense that they appear to 
belong to different cultures, and the difference makes it hard for them 
to reason together.  If two people value something in entirely different 
ways -  a religious object, an act of apparent discrimination, a form of 
liberty, the  free market - 
they  may  be  unable to  talk  to  one  an- 

110.  Cf  infra section V.I (discussing the role of analogical reasoning in law). 
111.  Cf  RAZ, supra note  17, at 327: 
The mistake in this thought is that it assumes that there is a true value behind the ranking of 
options, and that the ranking is a sort of technique for measuring this value.  It is true of 
course that when we  express a judgment about the  value of  options we  strive to  identify 
what is true independently of our valuation.  But the ranking which determines the relative 
value of options is not a way of getting at some deeper truth, it constitutes the value of the 
options. 

112. See id. at 329; Pildes & Anderson, supra note 48,  at 2158-66. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

811 

other.  13 Indeed, we may say that one of the marks of a genuine cul- 
tural  difference is  sharp  or  unbridgeable distinctions  in  kinds  of 
valuation. 

Most of the time, however, radical incommensurability is not pres- 
ent.  Both people and societies do make choices among incommensu- 
rable goods, and they do so on the basis of reasons.  Indeed, this is a 
principal task for practical reason, especially in law.  It follows that we 
should not identify the existence of good  reasons for action with the 
existence of a unitary metric.  Some choices among incommensurable 
goods are rational, and others are not, because of the connection be- 
tween any particular choice and the achievement of good lives or good 
societies (these  are of  course vague ideas,  on  which  I  will  say  a  bit 
more in Part III).114  A  decision to work through lunch is incommen- 
surable with the option to have lunch with a good friend in town just 
for the day, but it  may well be irrational, in  these circumstances, to 
work through lunch.  Economic growth is incommensurable with the 
reduction of race discrimination, but it may well be irrational to refuse 
to  outlaw race discrimination even if that step involves some loss  in 
social wealth.  A  resistance to these claims about rationality would be 
based on a highly sectarian conception of what rationality is - 
that is, 
a conception that begs the question on the commensurability issue by 
assuming that there cannot be rationality without commensurability. 
If  grounds exist  for  evaluating choices  among  incommensurable 
goods, it is reasonable to think that a second-order desire or goal - 
to 
be a good person, to have a fair society, to hear an excellent composer 
-  provides a framework for evaluating seemingly diverse and plural 
goods.  If described at a low or intermediate level of abstraction, how- 
ever, our higher-order goals are themselves plural and incommensura- 

113.  This may be so in the sense that mutual understanding is impossible and hence conflicts 
cannot  be  resolved, or  in  the  sense  that  some  third-party observer may  have  a  hard time  in 
resolving their conflict in view of the difference in kinds of valuation.  In this light, perhaps one 
of the goals of the "overlapping consensus" sought by political liberalism is to avoid a situation in 
which resolution must be sought amidst conditions of radical incommensurability. For a discus- 
sion of overlapping consensus, see RAWLS, supra note 81, at 133 -72; see also the discussion of the 
Establishment Clause, infra text accompanying notes  175-77.  Of course it is possible that one 
participant in the discussion is wrong even if, or because, he is not subject to persuasion; he may 
reject reason-giving altogether or be  unable to  see  good  reasons even  when they  are invoked. 
Hence relativism is not justified by the existence of radical incommensurability. 

114.  I am questioning here Raz's suggestion that cases of  incommensurability "mark[ ] the 
inability of  reason to  guide our action," RAZ, supra note  17, at  334,  and that  "in the  choice 
between the incommensurate options reason is unable to  provide any guidance," id. at 334 n. l, 
though I am not sure that Raz's subtle discussion is really at odds with what I am saying here. 
See id. at 339 ("Saying that two options are incommensurate does not preclude choice.  Rational 
choice is action for (what the agent takes to be) an undefeated reason.").  See also Joseph Raz, 
supra note  100, for some clarifications and a discussion of how comparisons occur among goods 
that are valued in different ways. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

812 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

ble,  even  though  there  is  still  choice  and  even  reasonable choice. 
Nevertheless, it  is certainly plausible to  say that, if the second-order 
goal operates at a high level of abstraction, we can generate criteria for 
private and public choice that do help in the assessment of diverse and 
plural goods.  This is a promising strategy;15  but the relevant criteria 
cannot be fairly characterized as a  metric.  I  will  say more on  these 
points below.  16 

III.  CHALLENGES  AND  STAKES 

Some people may find claims about incommensurability, and dis- 
tinctions among kinds of  valuation, to be abstruse or of no  practical 
use.  Perhaps we are dealing here with a linguistic or rhetorical debate, 
one that has no consequences for law, ethics, or politics.  Or perhaps it 
is possible to translate relevant descriptions into different terms with- 
out losing anything important. 

Begin with the question whether claims of incommensurability are 
right  as  a  description of  how  people  perceive certain  situations of 
choice.  Donald Regan, for example, says that when someone refuses 
to specify the monetary value of friendship, "I think what such a per- 
son is most likely to mean is that friendship is more valuable than any 
amount of  money, or in  other words, that the  value of  friendship is 
incomparably greater." 17  With respect to social disapproval of a par- 
ent's  "purchasing" children, Regan  thinks  that  "it  is  closer  to  the 
truth to say that we regard the value of parenthood as incomparably 
greater than the value of money, than to say that we regard these val- 
ues as incommensurable.""18 Regan also thinks that the fact that peo- 
ple deliberate hard and long  about choices among incommensurable 
values weakens the claim of incommensurability, since "[t]he decision 
process would necessarily be arbitrary. So what is the point?"119 

Regan's challenge to incommensurability, as a description of what 

115.  Instances of this strategy include the discussion of primary goods in RAWLS, supra note 
81, at  178-90; the discussion of capabilities in Amartya Sen, Capability and  Well-Being, in THE 
QUALITY OF LIFE 30 (Martha Nussbaum & Amartya Sen eds.,  1993); and the similar discussion 
in Martha Nussbaum, Aristotelian Social Democracy, in LIBERALISM AND THE GOOD 203, 217- 
40  (R.  Bruce Douglass  et al. eds.,  1990).  Mill's form of  utilitarianism, with its recognition of 
diverse kinds of valuation and of intrinsic goods, comes close to this general view.  See supra note 
59.  Cf  MILL, supra note 2, at 90-91  ("We think utility, or happiness, much too complex and 
indefinite an end to be sought except through the medium of various secondary ends, concerning 
which  there  may  be,  and  often  is,  agreement among  persons  who  differ in  their  ultimate 
standard."). 

116. See infra section V.E. 
117.  Regan, supra note 46, at  1058.  Chang, supra note 6, at  11-16, offers a similar analysis. 
118.  Regan, supra note 46,  at  1068-69. 
119. Id.  at  1063. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

813 

people mean, what they experience, and how they really think, seems 
to  me  unsuccessful.  Let us  take the  example of  friendship.  We can 
certainly imagine someone who thinks that the value of friendship, or 
the  value of  a  particular friendship, is just  greater than the  value of 
any sum of money.  But many people do not think in this way.  Some 
people -  perhaps especially desperately poor people -  might be will- 
ing  to  sacrifice a  friendship in  return for a  great deal of  money.  In 
such cases, friendship does not appear "more" valuable than money. 
In  purely quantitative terms, the  friendship appears "less" valuable 
than  the  sum  of  money  involved.  Yet  those  who  accept  the  trade 
might nonetheless find it disturbing -  because, I think, the friendship 
is not more valuable or less valuable, but differently valuable, and we 
do  violence to  the  way  that  it  is  valuable if  we  trade it for  money 
straight-up. Friendship involves companionship, and it is in the very 
nature of  companionship to  be  beyond purchase.  Recall  that  some 
incommensurabilities are freedom-producing, because they allow cer- 
tain  relationships  and  attachments  that  would  otherwise  be 
impossible. 20 

Or take the issue of parenthood.  A  parent who is asked to trade a 
child for some sum of money might well react with outrage and shock 
and regard the request as insulting.  This reaction is not that of some- 
one asked to sell something very valuable at a discount -  of someone 
asked to sell an expensive suit for a dollar.  The recipient of the offer 
objects not because the amount offered is unconscionably low, but be- 
cause the kind of valuation is grotesquely unsuitable.  The experience 
of  parenthood is  inconsistent with having an evaluative attitude that 
would  permit consideration of  dollar compensation for  its  sacrifice. 
The experience of parenthood rules that alternative off limits.  It is this 
important point of the subject that Regan's challenge misses. 

I  do  not  suggest that  Regan  describes a  conceptually impossible 
attitude toward things.  We could imagine someone who believed sim- 
ply  that friendship and parenthood were especially valuable versions 
of  the same thing of which money is just  another instance.  But this 
view would  not  simply describe existing attitudes.  It  would call  for 
their renovation, and in an extremely dramatic way.'12  If people re- 
ally valued friendship, parenthood, and money in the same way, they 
would be fundamentally different from what they now  are.  In  some 
guises, this  would  be the  stuff of  science fiction or  horror.  In  some 

120. See supra note  89 and accompanying text. 
121.  See the discussion of Plato's proposal to this effect in NUSSBAUM, supra note 2, at  119- 

23.  To  the same effect see also RAZ,  supra note  17, at 357; Anderson, supra note 59. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

814 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

areas of life or law, the renovation may be justified, all things consid- 
ered.  But it would be a renovation nonetheless. 

A tempting response is that the stakes here are purely linguistic- 
a  matter  of  rhetoric, not  substance.  Perhaps people  who  disagree 
about kinds of  valuation, and about commensurability, are just  dis- 
agreeing about how to talk.  Certainly recognizable emotions and sen- 
timents  underlie  these  disagreements.  But  perhaps  substantive 
analysis can ultimately proceed in  the same way however we  decide 
these matters.  Even if legal and policy arguments based on commen- 
surability meet a good deal of verbal resistance at the outset, perhaps 
rational argument can overcome the resistance. 

For example, economic analysis of nonmarket relations often runs 
into difficulty because of such initially jarring terms as "investment" in 
one's  children,  the  notion  that  education  is  a  way  of  improving 
"human capital," and the idea of a "marriage market."122 The terms 
seem to  suggest that  intrinsic goods  are of  only  instrumental value. 
But once we think about these issues, we can see that these terms are 
simply a means of describing real-world phenomena, and of doing so 
in  a  way  that  makes complex, seemingly intractable problems more 
manageable. 

In particular, consider the striking change in reactions to the rec- 
ommendation on behalf of transferable pollution rights in environmen- 
tal law.123 The government creates such rights by licensing firms to 
emit a certain level of pollution and then granting them the right to 
sell part or all of that license for a fee.  Initially many people resisted 
the idea that one could pollute for a price -  as if the idea were itself 
offensive to the proper kind of valuation of the environment, and as if 
environmental degradation should be treated as if it were incommen- 
surable with cash.124 But now a general consensus has emerged that 
along all or almost all relevant dimensions -  both economic and envi- 
ronmental -  a system of economic incentives is superior to command- 
and-control regulation.125 There seems to have occurred a process of 
learning through  which  people  are  no  longer  so  disturbed by  the 
redescription of  the  environmental problem in  terms that  tend, per- 
haps, to assume commensurability and unitary kinds of valuation. 

This  example suggests that  the  assumption of  commensurability 

122. See generally BECKER, supra note 3. 
123. See  Bruce A.  Ackerman & Richard B. Stewart, Reforming Environmental Law.  The 

Democratic Case for  Market Incentives, 13 COLUM. J. ENVTL. L.  171, 188-98 (1988). 

124.  The best discussion is  KELMAN, supra note 23, at 54-83. 
125. See,  e.g.,  supra note  123; see  also  Cass  R.  Sunstein, Administrative Substance.  1991 

DUKE L.J. 607, 634-40  (discussing advantages of incentives). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

815 

aids  positive  and  normative  analysis,  and  that  people  who  reject  that 
assumption  should  spend  their  time  on  more  important  matters. 
There  is  something  in  this  response.  It  should  go  without  saying  that 
economic  descriptions  of nonmarket  relationships  are often  highly  illu- 
minating,  partly  because  they  produce  testable  hypotheses  and  use- 
fully  model  how  private  and  public  choices  are  made  amidst  scarcity 
even  without  dollar  exchanges.  Just  as it is possible  to  engage  in social 
science  under  an  assumption  of  "as  if  unitariness,"  so  too  it  is  fully 
possible  for  lawyers  and  policymakers  to  act  on  the  assumption  of  "as 
if  commensurability." 
In  modeling  and  predicting  choices  among  in- 
commensurable  goods,  much  progress  can  be  made  through  the  sim- 
plifying  assumption  that  everything  is  aligned  along  a  single  metric. 
Or  we  might  dispense  with  talk  of  metrics  and  simply  try  to  rank 
choices.  This  enterprise  does  not  seem  threatened  in  any  way  by  what 
I  have  said  here. 

- 

But  we  can  acknowledge  all  this  while  also  insisting  that  certain 
redescriptions  of  human  phenomena  -  redescriptions  that  push  in the 
direction  of  commensurability 
are  far  from  unimportant.  The 
redescriptions  are  important  both  because  they  describe  in  inadequate 
ways  and because  they  do  not  merely  redescribe.126  They  also  have  an 
important  constitutive  dimension  - 
that  is,  they  may  help  transform 
how  (but  not  necessarily  how  much)  we  value  or  experience  various 
events  and  relationships.127  Thus,  for  example,  one  might  happily  en- 
dorse  economic  incentives  in  the  environmental  area while  also  insist- 
ing  that  environmental  amenities  ought  to  be  valued  in  a  distinctive 
way,  and  that  there  is no  metric  along  which  to  align  our  diverse  valu- 

126.  Consider, for example, Becker's characterization of the "marriage market": 
[A]n efficient marriage market assigns imputed income or "prices" to  all participants that 
attract them  to  suitable polygamous or monogamous marriages.  Imputed prices are also 
used to match men and women of  different qualities:  some participants .  .  . choose to  be 
matched with "inferior" persons because they feel "superior" persons are too expensive.... 

[A]n efficient marriage market usually has positive assortative mating, where high- 
quality men are matched with high-quality women and low-quality men with low-quality 
women, although negative assortative mating is sometimes important. 

.. 

BECKER, supra note 3, at  108.  See also the astonishing discussion in Waldfogel, supra note  16. 
127. See PUTNAM, supra note 65, at  139-41  (examining the transformative effect of life as a 
"super-Benthamite"); James B. White,  What Can a Lawyer Learn from  Literature?, 102 HARV. 
L. REV. 2014, 2020-24 (1989) (book review) (comparing different effects of seeing the practice of 
law as a science or as an art).  Consider, in this light, the following passage: 

It has, however, been demonstrated that many esoteric things may be evaluated on a numer- 
ical  scale:  for example, the  quality of  wine,  a  musical  performance, commodity  testing, 
etc....  When we are first confronted with such numerical evaluations they look strange and 
unfamiliar.  When we have got  some experience with this type of  rating, they become in- 
grained in our value pattern and we begin to think in those numerical terms.  Hence, we do 
not reject the idea that more general situations may be evaluated by human beings in terms 
of  numbers on a numerical scale .... 

B.M.S. van Praag, The Relativity of the  Welfare Concept, in THE QUALITY OF LIFE, supra note 
115, at  362, 363. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

816 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

ations of the various goods at stake -  higher gross national product, 
lower employment, cleaner air, and so  forth - 
in stringent environ- 
mental proposals.  An insistence on these points should lead to better 
thought about the relevant values, and it will likely lead to better out- 
comes as well. 

Let us return to some familiar economic redescriptions of human 
endeavors.  If  someone really thought about dating and romance as 
participation in "a marriage market," he would be a strange creature 
indeed (and unlikely, perhaps, to  fare especially well  in  the  relevant 
practices).  If  someone  thought  that  she  was  "selling" an  idea,  she 
would have an odd conception of intellectual life and perhaps be un- 
able fully to  participate in it, because she would be rejecting its own 
foundational norms.  If a parent thought that, through the provision of 
love  and  education,  he  was  simply  "investing" in  his  children,  he 
would have an odd and barely recognizable understanding of the pa- 
rental role.  No  one should deny what seems obvious - 
that people 
often learn at least partly because of the economic benefits of learning. 
But if someone really thought that learning was solely a matter of "in- 
vesting in human capital," she would have a  thin and even debased 
conception of the purpose of learning.  She would be thinking of her 
own capacities and hopes as a sort of commodity, like a bit of silver or 
gold -  or perhaps as a simple source of commodities, like a tractor or 
an oil well.  It is difficult even to imagine the self-conception entailed 
by this view.  To think and talk in these terms may have unfortunate 
consequences for both thought and action.128 At  the same time, cer- 
tain  values  -  parenthood,  education,  and  so  forth  -  may  be  ade- 
quately realized only if people refuse to contemplate certain choices or 
attitudes.  It is in this sense that incommensurability is constitutive of 
our values129 and not easily dispensable. 

It is sometimes said that trade-offs of the relevant sort are happen- 
ing "implicitly" all the time.130 People may not trade dollars for lunch 

128.  Cf  GERALD  J.  POSTEMA,  BENTHAM  AND  THE  COMMON  LAW  TRADITION  335  (1986) 
("[B]ecause they do not merely ascribe properties to objects, but instruct us about how to think 
about  them,  characterizations do  not  leave  the  phenomena unchanged.").  In  the  same  vein, 
Bernard Williams suggests that use of the utilitarian method leads one to 

provide those things [susceptible to utilitarian calculus] with prestige, to give them an unjus- 
tifiably large role in the decision, and to dismiss to a greater distance those things which do 
not respond to the same methods. ...  To regard this as a matter of half a loaf, is to presup- 
pose both that the selective application of those techniques to some elements in the situation 
does not in itself bias the result, and also that to take in a wider set of considerations will 
necessarily, in the long run, be a matter of more of the same; and often both of those presup- 
positions are false. 

See Williams, supra note 88, at  148. 

129. See RAZ, supra note  17, at 345-53  (discussing constitutive incommensurabilities). 
130. See,  e.g.,  BECKER, supra note  3, at  24  (characterizing "children, prestige and health, 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

817 

engagements with friends, but they do trade off a range of variables in 
deciding when and with whom to have lunch, and some of these vari- 
ables are financial.  Indeed, it would not be odd for a busy lawyer to 
cancel  lunch  with  a  friend, with  a  promise to  buy  lunch  next  time. 
People may not think that they are "investing" in their children, but 
they  do  allocate limited resources among, for example, leisure, con- 
sumer goods, vacation, and education for their offspring.  But much 
depends on  what the  ambiguous word  "implicitly" means.  The fact 
that the trade-off is not made explicitly is hardly a matter of indiffer- 
ence.  When the trade-off is made only "implicitly," it is not well-de- 
scribed as an ordinary trade-off at all.  The  actor may be showing a 
commitment to a certain set of judgments about how relationships and 
prospects should be valued, and if the trade-offs were made explicitly, 
that commitment would be undermined or even violated.  The explicit 
trade is not equivalent to the implicit one; the absence of explicitness 
maintains  certain  social  norms.  In  an  analogous  context,  Holmes 
wrote,  "[e]ven a  dog  distinguishes between being stumbled over and 
being kicked";131 the difference between a trip and a kick - 
identical 
in effect but conveying very different attitudes - 
is related to the dif- 
ference between an  implicit and  an  explicit trade.  In  these  circum- 
stances,  it  is  hopelessly  underdescriptive to  claim  that  someone 
"implicitly" trades off (say) cash and friendship in making lunch deci- 
sions, even though this way of seeing things might be quite helpful for 
predictive purposes. 

Economic  or  utilitarian descriptions of  human behavior are un- 
likely  by  themselves to  alter social  norms or  law  in  any  significant 
way.132 But social norms are in a constant process of evaluation and 
flux, and the description of kinds of valuation is one method by which 
norms are created and altered.  The making of law reflects this process 
of description and valuation; law can have effects on kinds of valuation 
as well.133  Indeed, many of the sharpest disputes in law relate to the 
appropriate kinds of valuation to bring to bear on disputed problems. 
Here a pervasive question is what sorts of valuations the law ought to 
encourage or extinguish. 

altruism, envy and pleasures of the senses" as "commodities"); RICHARD A. POSNER, ECONOMIC 
ANALYSIS OF LAW 4  (4th ed.  1992); Chang, supra note 6, at  12-13, 20. 
131.  OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, THE COMMON LAW 3 (1881). 
132.  Note, however, the fact that students in economics appear to engage in altruistic behav- 
ior less frequently than others, and thus to  fail to  adhere to  social norms that solve  collective 
action problems.  See Robert H.  Frank et al., Does Studying Economics Inhibit Cooperation?, J. 
ECON. PERSP., Spring 1993, at  159 (answering title question in the affirmative). 

133.  This is  a difficult empirical question.  For a skeptical view, see generally GERALD N. 

ROSENBERG,  THE  HOLLOW  HOPE  (1991). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

818 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

If kinds of valuation matter to  human life, judgments about such 
kinds will matter a great deal to law as well.  And,  in many areas of 
law, the question of commensurability occupies a surprisingly impor- 
tant place. 

IV.  LAW  IN  GENERAL 

A.  Preliminaries 

The diverse kinds of valuation do not map neatly onto legal catego- 
ries.  We cannot say that, because people value different events in dif- 
ferent ways, it follows that law should have a particular content.  Nor 
can we draw lessons for law from the bare fact of incommensurability 
in any of the senses discussed here.134 This is so for several reasons. 
First, we need an account of which kinds of valuation are appro- 
priate in order to make recommendations for law.135 We are not and 
should not be agnostics or skeptics about appropriate kinds of valua- 
tion; they can be evaluated on the basis of reasons.136 Nor should we 
be simple conventionalists, thinking that, because people value a cer- 
tain thing in a certain way, the law ought to do so as well.  Of course 
democracy has its claims; but there may be good reason to challenge 
any particular popularly endorsed judgment on kinds of valuation.  In- 
deed, some aspects of  constitutional law represent an effort to  disci- 
pline democratic discussion by limiting possible kinds of valuation, on 
the ground that they are too sectarian or inconsistent with principles 
of  civic  equality.137 When  there  are no  constitutional barriers, the 
democratic process is formally unconstrained, but an important part 
of democratic debate consists of challenges to kinds of valuation that 
prevail among the democratic majority. 

Any judgments about appropriate kinds of valuation are of course 
a  complex  matter.  This  is  so  not  least because, in  a  heterogeneous 
society,  the  state ought  to  allow  a  wide range of  diverse valuations. 
The regulation of valuations can be a stifling matter.138 At  least as a 

134.  Here I am questioning some apparent suggestions in Warner, supra note 57, at  157-67, 
and Pildes & Anderson, supra note 48,  at 2154-55.  See also supra note 24 and accompanying 
text. 

135. There are lurking questions here on  underlying criteria.  1 am assuming that a theory 
that can make no sense of our experience is vulnerable for that reason.  In speaking of our experi- 
ence, I am relying on our deepest self-understandings. These understandings, I suggest, would be 
violated by certain forms of monism. 
136. See infra section VI.B. 
137. See infra sections V.B and V.C. 
138.  This is not to deny that the state inevitably has large effects on kinds of  valuation be- 
cause of  law's expressive function.  See infra section IV.B.  Respect for diverse valuations is a 
theme in  RAWLS, supra note  81,  at  190-200  (arguing that a  liberal political regime preserves 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

819 

presumption, the state ought to allow people to value in the way that 
they  see best.  These considerations, however, do  not  imply that the 
state should remain agnostic about proper kinds of valuation.  Incom- 
mensurabilities -  even of the form that block certain reasons for ac- 
tion  -  are not  merely freedom-reducing, but  constitutive of  certain 
sorts of freedom, for they make possible certain valuable relationships 
and commitments.  Moreover, a state will have a hard time if it seeks 
to be entirely neutral about valuations.  Global neutrality is impossi- 
ble.139 The state has to  make decisions about how  to  allocate rights 
and entitlements; it has to decide what can be traded on markets and 
what will be subject to politics, and these decisions inevitably will take 
some sort of stand on appropriate valuations. 

Second, a judgment about the appropriate kind of valuation, even 
if it can be reached and persuasively defended, need not entail a partic- 
ular conclusion for law.  For example, it might be shown that prostitu- 
tion entails an improper valuation of human sexuality, but this need 
not mean that prostitution should be outlawed.  To justify outlawing 
prostitution, we must make an additional set of arguments about both 
the likely effectiveness of the ban and the principle that supports use of 
the  coercive  power  of  the  state.  Or  we  might  think  that  the  best 
human life involves a certain way of valuing the environment, without 
thereby rejecting, for example, tradable emissions permits as a regula- 
tory tool.  Perhaps tradable permits do not affect valuations of the en- 
vironment; perhaps any such effects are minimal and well justified by 
the various gains.  Or we might believe that animals deserve considera- 
tion and therefore ought not to be eaten, but also believe that the law 
should  not  require  vegetarianism.  State-compelled  vegetarianism 
might  well  be  ineffectual and  inconsistent  with  individual  liberty, 
rightly conceived.  These examples show that any general claim about 
the  right kind of  valuation needs a great deal of  supplementation to 
result in concrete recommendations for law and policy.  There are also 
recurring questions about the feasibility of various legal strategies. 

More generally, we can defend one kind of valuation for law and 
government and other kinds for family, church, and civil society.  The 
law might, for example, insist on calculating the value of human life 
through conventional economic measures.  The  calculation might be 
acceptable if there is an "acoustic separation"'40 between legal meas- 

diverse conceptions of  the good).  For a more explicit discussion of diverse valuations, see also 
RAZ, supra note  17, at 321-66. 

139.  See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, THE PARTIAL CONSTITUTION 162-94 (1993), for citations and 

discussion. 

140.  Cf  Meir Dan-Cohen, Decision Rules and  Conduct Rules:  On Acoustic Separation in 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

820 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

ures and private life.  At  least if the measures do not affect prevailing 
kinds of valuation and can operate autonomously in their own sphere, 
the  law may be acceptable even if  it  does  not  reflect an appropriate 
kind of valuation for other contexts. 

Third, the legal system has crude remedial tools.  Usually it must 
use monetary remedies.  In view of this limitation, the fact that these 
remedies are not commensurable with some harms is often merely an 
interesting theoretical point.  When someone has lost an arm, or when 
a  river has been polluted, the legal system has to  work with money. 
The  tools  of  the  legal system lack sufficient refinement fully  to  take 
account of  diverse kinds of  valuation.  What can be  said about per- 
sonal valuations cannot be said about legal institutions.  It may follow 
that public policy ought to operate on the assumption of commensura- 
bility even if human beings should not; or it may follow that the legal 
system often  must put  problems of  incommensurability to  one  side, 
leaving those problems for ethics rather than for law. 

These disclaimers are important.  Nonetheless, the fact of incom- 
mensurability, and the existence of diverse kinds of valuation, do help 
illuminate a wide range of disputes about the substance of law, about 
legal institutions, and about legal reasoning.  In the next section, I of- 
fer several examples of  pertinent legal debates.  My  goal is  emphati- 
cally not to  resolve these debates.  To  do  this  I  would have to  say a 
great deal more than I will be able to do here.  I intend only to suggest 
that an understanding of questions of commensurability and appropri- 
ate kinds of valuation helps explain the nature of these debates. 

B.  The Expressive Function of Law 

A  unifying theme for the  discussion is  the expressive function  of 
law. 141  When evaluating a legal rule, we might ask whether the rule 
expresses an appropriate valuation of an event, person, group, or prac- 
tice.  The point matters for two reasons.  The first and most important 
is based on a prediction about the facts:  an incorrect valuation may 
influence social  norms and  push  them  in  the  wrong direction.  For 
example, if the law says that the act of murder can or cannot be met 
with  the  death penalty, social norms may be  influenced.  If  the  law 
say,  reproductive  capacities  -  as  a com- 
wrongly  treats  something  - 

Criminal Law,  97  HARV. L.  REV. 625,  625-34  (1984)  (distinguishing between decision rules 
addressed to officials and conduct rules addressed to  the public). 

141.  I am indebted here to ANDERSON, supra note 1, at 17-43; Jean Hampton, An Expressive 
Theory of Retribution, in RETRIBUTIVISM AND ITS CRITICS 1 (Wesley Cragg ed.,  1992); Richard 
Pildes, The Unintended Cultural Consequences of Public Policy, 89 MICH. L. REV. 936 (1991). 
See  also  NOZICK, supra note  26,  at  48-50  (discussing symbolic effects of  decisions as  part of 
decision value). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

821 

modity, the social kind of valuation may be adversely affected.  If the 
law  mandates  recycling,  subsidizes  national  service,  or  requires 
mandatory pro bono work, it may have healthy effects on social valua- 
tions of the relevant activities.  It is appropriate to evaluate the law on 
this ground.142 

We can go further. Some people seem to think that it is possible to 
assess law solely on the basis of consequences - 
that an open-ended 
inquiry into  consequences is  a  feasible way of  evaluating legal rules. 
But this is not actually possible.  The effects of any legal rule can be 
described in an infinite number of ways.  Any particular characteriza- 
tion or accounting of consequences will rest not on some specification 
of  the brute facts; instead it will be mediated by a set of (often tacit) 
norms determining how to describe or conceive of consequences.  Part 
of the expressive function of law consists in the identification of what 
consequences count and how they should be described.  Because any 
conception of consequences is interpretive and thus evaluative in char- 
acter, simple consequentialism is not a feasible project for law. 

The point emerges from an important development in  the law of 
standing.  In 1970, the Supreme Court decided that people would have 
standing to challenge government action if they could show an "injury 
in fact"; a legal interest was not required.143  The Court's goal was to 
ensure that standing decisions would rest solely on  facts, without an 
inquiry into values or law.  It is, however, quite impossible to decide 
whether there is  "injury in  fact" without  values or  law.144 Anyone 
who initiates a lawsuit believes that he is injured; the question is which 
consequences or injuries count and how they are to be characterized. 
Jones  likes  classical  music,  and  he  is  unhappy  about  the  Federal 
Communication Commission's decision to  award a  license to  a  rock 
music station on  104.3 FM.  Is his injury the actual unavailability of 
classical music in the area? His diminished opportunity to hear classi- 
cal  music?  The  unavailability of  classical music  on  104.3 FM?  Of- 
fense at the presence of rock music on the airwaves? To answer such 
questions, we cannot look only at consequences or facts.  We have to 
make  some  sort  of  judgment  about  which  consequences count  and 
how to describe them. 

The point can be generalized far beyond the law of standing.  Any 

142. See Pildes, supra note  141. 
143.  Data Processing v. Camp, 397 U.S.  150,  152 (1970). 
144. See William A.  Fletcher, The Structure of Standing, 98 YALE L.J. 221, 230-34  (1988); 
Cass R. Sunstein, Standing Injuries, 1993 SuP. CT. REV. (forthcoming) (manuscript at  10-12, on 
file with author); Cass R. Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan, 91 MICH. L. REV. 163, 188-92 
(1992). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

822 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

description  of  the  effects  of  some  legal  rule  is  a  product  of  expressive 
norms  that  give  consequences  identifiable  social  meanings  - 
including 
norms  that  deny  legal  significance  to  certain  consequences.  We  can 
therefore  see the  expressive  function  both  in the  effects  of law  on  social 
attitudes  and  in  the  use  of  law  to  decide  what  sorts  of  consequences 
matter  for  legal  purposes.  When  it  seems  as if  we  can  talk  about  con- 
sequences  alone,  it  is  only  because  the  mediating  expressive  norms  are 
so  widely  shared  that  there  is  no  controversy  about  them.145 

I  have  emphasized  the  possibility  that  the  kinds  of  valuation  re- 
flected  in law  will  affect social  valuations  in general.146  Sometimes  this 
claim  is  right;  valuations, 
like  preferences  and  beliefs,  are  not  a 
presocial  given,  but  a product  of  a complex  set  of  social  forces,  includ- 
ing  law.  But  sometimes  law  will  have  little  or  no  effect  on  valuations. 
Society  is  filled  with  legal  provisions  for  market  exchanges  of  goods 
and  services  - 
like  pets  and  babysitting,  for  example  - 
that  are  val- 
ued  for reasons  other  than  use.  Market  exchange  need  not  affect social 
valuations;  certainly  intrinsic  goods  are  purchased  and  sold.  The 
question  therefore  remains  whether  the  claimed  effect  on  social  norms 
will  occur.  It  is  fully  plausible,  for  example,  to  say  that,  although  a 
law  that  permits  prostitution  reflects  an inappropriate  valuation  of sex- 
uality,  any  adverse  effect  of the  law  on  social  norms  is so  small  as to  be 
an  implausible  basis  for  objection. 

But  there  is  a second  ground  for  endorsing  the  expressive  function 
of  law,  and  this  ground  does  not  concern  social  effects  in  the  same 
sense.  The  ground  is  connected  with  the  individual  interest  in  integ- 
the  brief  but  suggestive  discussion  by  Bernard 
rity.  Following 
Williams,147  we  might  say  that  personal  behavior  is  not  concerned 
solely  with  producing  states  of  affairs,  and  that,  if  it  were,  we  would 
have  a  hard  time  in  making  sense  of  important  aspects  of  our  lives. 
There  are  also  issues  involving  personal  integrity,  commitment,  and 
the  narrative  continuity  of  a  life.  Williams  offers  several  examples. 
Someone  might  refuse  to  kill  an  innocent  person  at  the  request  of  a 

145.  A broad conclusion seems to follow.  There is no form of consequentialism that is non- 
sectarian.  Every form embodies a controversial claim about the  right or  the good.  This is  of 
course a familiar point for utilitarians, whose consequentialism is made workable only through a 
set of defining commitments. 

146.  In a similar vein, Bernard Williams criticizes utilitarianism as trading on 
the illusion that preferences are already given, that the role of the social decision process is 
just to follow them.  There is no such thing as just following.  To engage in those processes 
itself doing something; it is choosing 
which utilitarianism regards as just "following" is ... 
to endorse those preferences, or some set of them, which lie on the surface, as determined by 
such things as what people at a given moment regard as possible -  something which in its 
turn is affected by the activities of government. 

Williams, supra note 88, at  147-48. 

147. Id.  at  108-18. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

823 

terrorist, even if the consequence of the refusal is that many more peo- 
ple will be killed.  Or a pacifist might refuse to take a job in a muni- 
tions factory, even if the refusal will have no salutary effects. 

Our responses to these cases are not adequately captured in purely 
consequentialist terms.148  Now  it is possible that, for example, the re- 
fusal to kill an innocent person is consequentially justified on balance, 
for people who refuse to commit bad acts may cultivate attitudes that 
lead to  value-maximizing behavior.149  But this is  a  complex matter. 
My point is only that consequentialist accounts do not fully describe 
our evaluative attitudes toward such acts. 

Moreover, the  expression of  the  appropriate evaluative attitude 
should be understood as a human good, constitutive of desirable char- 
acteristics.  By making certain choices and not others, people express 
various conceptions both of themselves and of others.  This is an inde- 
pendently important matter.  We should agree on this point even if we 
also believe that consequences count (mediated as they are by expres- 
sive norms) and that people ought not to be fanatical. 

There is a rough analog at the social and legal level.150 A  society 
might identify the kind of valuation to which it is committed and insist 
on that kind, even if the consequences of the insistence are obscure or 
unknown.  A  society might, for example, insist on an antidiscrimina- 
tion law for expressive reasons even if it does not know whether the 
law actually helps members of minority groups.  A  society might pro- 
tect endangered species partly because it believes that the protection 
makes best sense of its self-understanding, by expressing an appropri- 
ate valuation of what it means for one species to eliminate another.  A 
society might endorse or reject capital punishment because it wants to 
express a  certain understanding of  the  appropriate course of  action 
after one person has taken the life of another. 

148.  Consider these remarks by a participant in civil rights demonstrations: 
If I had known that not a single lunch counter would open as a result of my action I could 
not have done differently than I did.  If I had known violence would result, I could not have 
done differently than I did.  I am thankful for the sit-ins if for no other reason than that they 
provided me with an opportunity for making a slogan into reality, by turning a decision into 
an action.  It seems to  me that this is what life is all about. 

JAMES MILLER, "DEMOCRACY IS IN THE STREETS" 52 (1987).  Compare Herbert Simon's con- 
cern that the  1960s student movement was "plagued by Expressionism": 

We are all  Expressionists part of  the  time.  Sometimes we just  want to  scream loudly at 
injustice, or to stand up and be counted.  These are noble motives, but any serious revolu- 
tionist  must often  deprive himself of  the  pleasures of  self-expression.  He  must judge  his 
actions by their ultimate effects on  institutions. 
HERBERT SIMON, MODELS OF MY LIFE 281 (1991). 

149.  See ROBERT FRANK, PASSIONS WITHIN REASON 43-70  (1988) for one such argument. 
150.  There are differences as  well.  Perhaps we ought  not  to  want to  coerce a  minority to 
make "statements" with which it disagrees.  Or perhaps it can be unnecessary and even oppres- 
sive to insist on social "integrity" in a heterogeneous nation. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

824 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

The point bears on the cultural role of adjudication and especially 
of Supreme Court decisions.  The empirical effects of those decisions 
are highly  disputed.151 When  the  Supreme Court says  that  capital 
punishment is unconstitutional, that segregation is unlawful, that cer- 
tain restrictions on hate speech violate the First Amendment, or that 
students  cannot  be  asked  to  pray  in  school,  the  real-world conse- 
quences may be much smaller than we think.  But the close attention 
paid to the Court's pronouncements may well be connected with their 
expressive or symbolic character.'52 When the  Court makes a  deci- 
sion,  it  is  often  taken to  be  speaking on  behalf of  the  nation's basic 
principles and  commitments.  This  is  a  matter of  importance quite 
apart from consequences, conventionally understood.  It is customary 
and helpful to point to the Court's educative effect.'53 But perhaps its 
expressive effect, or  its  expressive character, better captures what  is 
often at stake. 

I do not claim that the expressive effects of law, thus understood, 
are decisive or that they cannot be countered by a demonstration of 
more conventional bad consequences.  Indeed, I think that this under- 
standing of  the  expressive function, unaccompanied by  educative ef- 
fects, ought to play little role in deciding on the content of law.  There 
is  a  further  point.  As  noted  above  -  and  it  is  important  here  -  we 
might insist on a sort of acoustic separation between the domain of law 
and other spheres, hoping and believing that the kind of valuation ap- 
propriate to government will not affect the generally prevailing kind. 
If OSHA engages in cost-benefit analysis, surely people will not begin 
to  think of their spouses as commodities.  But  I  do  suggest that the 
expressive function is  a  part of  political  and  legal  debate.  Without 
understanding the expressive function of law, we will have a hard time 
in getting an adequate handle on public views with respect to, for ex- 
ample, civil rights, prostitution, the environment, endangered species, 
capital punishment, and abortion. 

V.  LAW IN PARTICULAR 
In this Part, I discuss a number of areas of law in which kinds of 
valuation are at stake.  In some of these areas, issues of commensura- 
bility also move to the fore.  Of course there are important differences 

151.  See supra note  133 and accompanying text. 
152.  This argument plays a role on both sides of the "speech codes" debate.  See the discus- 
sion in Henry Louis Gates, Let  Them Talk, NEW REPUBLIC, Sept. 20 & 27,  1993, at 37 (1993) 
(reviewing  MARI  J.  MATSUDA  ET  AL.,  WORDS  THAT  WOUND:  CRITICAI  RACE  THEORY,  AS- 
SAUL.TIVE  SPEECH  AND  THE  FIRST  AMENDMENT 

(1993)). 

153.  See  generally  Christopher  Eisgruber,  Is  the Supreme  Court  an  Educative  Institution?.  67 

N.Y.U.  L. REV. 961 (1992). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

825 

among these areas, each of which raises distinctive issues of  its own. 
Some of  the issues are connected to  problems of  individual or social 
choices amidst scarcity; others are not.  But I believe that it is impossi- 
ble to obtain a full understanding of these areas of law without refer- 
ence to ideas of this general sort.  In this sense, these very diverse areas 
share a common subject.  They are united by the presence of impor- 
tant  questions  about  appropriate  kinds  of  valuation  and  about 
commensurability. 

A.  Social Differentiation 

especially  religious  organizations 

A liberal society allows a high degree of social differentiation.'54 It 
includes the political sphere, the family, markets, intermediate organi- 
zations  - 
and  much  more. 
Michael Walzer's influential book155 offers an instructive discussion of 
these different "spheres." It would be especially valuable to be able to 
understand the  social function or purpose of  this sort of  differentia- 
tion.  Why might it be a good thing to carve life up in this way?  And 
what exactly is the role of law in this endeavor? 

- 

The liberal commitment to social differentiation can be understood 
as  an  effort to  make appropriate spaces for different kinds of  valua- 
tion.156  Without accepting naive conceptions of the public-private dis- 
tinction, we can see the family as the characteristic liberal sphere for 
the expression of love.  At  its best, politics embodies the forms of re- 
spect entailed by processes of reason-giving.'57 In many intermediate 
organizations, people express affection and  admiration.  In  religious 
organizations, the prevailing kind of valuation is usually one of wor- 
ship and reverence. The market is typically the sphere for use.  Things 
bought and sold on markets are typically valued in the way associated 
with  pure commodities, although it  is  important and  also  true that 
many things sold on markets -  music, vacations in beautiful places, 
art, childcare -  are valued for reasons other than simple use. 

Law plays an important and often overlooked role in the construc- 
tion and maintenance of these various spheres, which are anything but 

154. See  DON HERZOG, HAPPY SLAVES 148-81 (1989) (describing liberal state's neutrality 
on competing conceptions of the good); Richard Pildes, Separate Spheres of Constitutional and 
Political Value (Dec.  1,  1992) (unpublished manuscript, on file with author). 

155.  WALZER, supra  note  14. 
156. See  ANDERSON, supra note  1, at  143 (discussing sphere differentiation); Pildes, supra 

note  154, at 47-54. 

157.  See the discussion in Bruce Ackerman, Crediting the Voters. A New Beginniingfor Cam- 
paign Finance, AM. PROSPECT, Spring 1993, at  77, favoring a system of campaign finance that 
separates ordinary money from the "red, white, and blue" money to be used in elections.  This is 
a  method for preserving spaces for different kinds of  valuation. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

826 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

natural. We know far too little to say that, in the state of nature, there 
is any such division (though there may well be antecedents158). Mar- 
kets are of course a function of the law of property, contract, and tort, 
without which  voluntary agreements would  not  be  possible.159  It  is 
law that decides what can be traded on markets, and how trades can 
occur.  Undoubtedly families of various sorts would arise in the state 
of nature, but the particular families we have are emphatically a func- 
tion of law.  The law helps to create an independent familial sphere; it 
also  determines  who  may  be  entitled  to 
its  protections  and 
disabilities.160 

To some extent, the state also insulates the public sphere from civil 
society, through, for example, the rule of one person, one vote161 and 
limitations on  expenditures on  campaigns.162 Intermediate organiza- 
tions, like religious groups and labor unions, also receive various pro- 
tections,  insulations, and  disabilities by  laws  designed to  recognize 
independent social spheres.163 The creation of diverse social spheres, 
understood as a mechanism for allowing diverse kinds of valuation, is 
also an important social good, providing a form of liberty that is indis- 
pensable in modern society.164 

It would be foolish to idealize current practices. Institutional prac- 
tice  often  deviates from  institutional aspiration.  Politics  is  often  a 
realm for use; it has important marketlike features.  It is hardly a sim- 
ple process of exchanging reasons.  The family is not only a place for 
the  expression of  love.  Women  and  children have  often  been  used 
without their consent, sometimes like commodities.  People who  be- 
lieve in different kinds of valuation do not deny the gap between cur- 
rent practice and current aspiration. Much social criticism consists of 
an insistence on that gap, and of a claim for reform in the interest of 
producing conformity to the aspiration. 

158. See generally ROBERT ELLICKSON, ORDER WITHOUT LAW (1992) (arguing that large 

areas of social life arise spontaneously and are shaped independently of legal institutions). 

159.  But see id. at  123-264 for a discussion of the role of (nonlegal) social norms and social 

sanctions in sustaining ownership rights, bargains, and duties of care. 

160. See OKIN, supra note 33, at  129-31. 
161. See, e.g., Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S.  533, 579 (1964) (requiring state electoral districts 

that render all citizens' votes "approximately equal in weight"). 

162. See  Buckley  v.  Valeo,  424  U.S.  1  (1976)  (upholding  some  limitations but  rejecting 

others). 

163.  These include charitable deductions, refusal to  intervene in internal religious disputes, 
and insulation from civil rights laws.  For criticism, see Mary Becker, The Politics of  Women 's 
Wrongs and the Bill of "Rights": A Bicentennial Perspective, 59 U. CHI. L. REV. 453 (1992).  For 
example, labor unions are protected from the antitrust laws, which would otherwise be a serious 
obstacle to success.  See  15 U.S.C.  ?  17 (1988). 

164. This is part of the project of political liberalism, as discussed in RAWi.S, supra note 81, 

and Charles Larmore, Political Liberalism, 18 Pol.  THEORY 339, 343-46  (1990). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

827 

Moreover, it  is  possible to  conceive  of  prevailing institutions in 
quite different ways.  Some familiar social criticism consists of a claim 
that an existing sphere of social differentiation embodies an inadequate 
kind of valuation. Thus, for example, the family has often been a place 
for  hierarchy  and  deference,  and  it  is  sometimes  suggested  that 
processes of mutual respect and reason-giving should displace this un- 
just  kind  of  valuation.165 The  political process has  often  been con- 
ceived  as  appropriately a  realm of  reason-giving; the  characteristic 
American attack on hierarchy and privilege is an attempt to replace a 
system of  authority with  a  system of  reasons.166 Some people think 
that the attack has not gone far enough and that if reason-giving is to 
prevail, legal changes are needed to  ensure against (for example) the 
corrosive effects on democratic deliberation of disparities in wealth.167 
Others argue that bonds of affection and even love ought to replace or 
supplement the kinds of reason-giving that are characteristic of mod- 
ern  politics.168 

Often, of course, market thinking is  said to be at least a descrip- 
tively and perhaps a normatively superior alternative to current kinds 
of  valuation.  Thus  it  is  sometimes suggested that family life, sexual 
choice, and markets ought all to be conceived as systems of exchange 
and use.169 Some especially ambitious forms of social criticism involve 
an effort to claim that one kind of valuation -  use, respect, love, wor- 
ship -  ought to be the universal one.170 Most modestly, it is some- 
times suggested that things would be better if the family were made 
more marketlike, or if the market were made more familylike.'71 

These debates show that many claims for social reform are really 
arguments for revision of the kinds of valuation prevailing in different 
social institutions.  In some forms, these claims point to the constitu- 
tive role of law, urging that existing arrangements are hardly natural, 
that they could not exist without certain legal choices, and that revi- 

165. See  OKIN,  supra note  33,  at  17; cf  Jean Hampton, Feminist Contractarianism, in  A 
MIND OF ONE'S OWN 227 (Louise M. Anthony & Charlotte Witt eds.,  1993) (suggesting the use 
of contractualist analysis in the moral evaluation of private relationships). 
166.  This is,  I think, the principal theme of  WOOD, supra note 29. 
167. See, e.g., RAWLS, supra note 81, at 359-63; Joshua Cohen, Deliberation and Democratic 

Legitimacy, in THE GOOD POLITY 17,  18 (Alan  Hamlin & Philip Pettit eds.,  1989). 

168. See, e.g., NEL NODDINGS, CARING (1984); Joan Tronto, Beyond Gender Difference to a 
Theory of Care, in AN ETHIC OF CARE 240, 251-52 (Mary J. Larrabee ed., 1993); cf. MICHAtI  J. 
SANDEL, LIBERALISM AND THE LIMITS OF  JUSTICE  (1982)  (arguing  that  liberalism  ignores  con- 
tribution of communal bonds to  individual identity). 

169. See generally BECKER, supra note 3.  As noted, much may be gained by the assumption 

of  "as if commensurability," at least for predictive purposes. 

170.  Cf. NODDINGS, supra note 168 (arguing for "caring" as foundation of ethical behavior). 
171. See  ROBERTO M.  UNGER, THE CRITICAL LEGAL STUDIES MOVEMENT 62-66  (1986). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

828 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

sions in law would make sense from the standpoint of justice or some 
other value.  Of course a traditional liberal view is that widely diverse 
kinds of valuation are an important social good.'72 

B.  Religion, Civic Equality, and Political Liberalism 

Our system is one of liberal republicanism.173  As  such, it is com- 
mitted to a principle of political equality and to a certain view about 
the relationship between political life and religious conviction.  We can 
make some progress on these abstractions by observing that a liberal 
republic attempts to  exclude certain kinds of  valuation from public 
life.  Those kinds of  valuation may be too  sectarian, or they may be 
inconsistent with the premise of political equality.  A  liberal republic 
thus bans particular "inputs" into politics either because they express 
a kind of valuation that is suited only to private life, or because they 
deny political equality, a  commitment that entails certain evaluative 
attitudes toward fellow citizens.  What I want to emphasize is that we 
can get a distinctive purchase on  certain constitutional issues in this 
light. 

Under the Constitution, the Establishment Clause'74 is the key ex- 
ample of the ban on certain kinds of valuation.  The Constitution rules 
out  valuations that assume certain conceptions of  what is  sacred, at 
least  those  that  invoke religious commitments.  For  example, a  law 
making Easter a national holiday may not rest on the ground that it 
reflects the sanctity of Jesus Christ. 75 The Establishment Clause gen- 
erally rules sectarian justifications for statutes out of bounds, 76 even if 
other, neutral factors could support the same laws.'77 Political liber- 
alism is constituted in part through the idea that certain kinds of valu- 
ation are too contentious to be a legitimate part of public life, even if 
they are a fully legitimate part of private citizenship.'78 

A  liberal  republic  also  excludes  certain  kinds  of  valuation  of 
human beings as inconsistent with constitutionally prescribed norms 
of  political equality.  I  have referred to  the  prohibition on  "titles of 

172.  Cf  HERZOG, supra note  154. 
173.  See  1  BRUCE ACKERMAN, WE  THE  PEOPLE 30-32 

(1991);  see  also  SUNSTEIN, supra 

note  139, ch.  5. 

174.  U.S.  CONST. amend.  I,  cl.  1. 
175. See, e.g., Wallace v. Jaffree, 472 U.S.  38 (1985); Stone v. Graham, 449 U.S. 39 (1980). 
176.  This  is  a  controversial  claim.  See  STEPHEN L.  CARTER, THE  CUILTURI ot.  DISBLIIIR} : 
103-23 (1993).  A subtle discussion is John Rawls, The Idea of Public Reason: Further Consider- 
ations,  161 U.  CHI. L. REV. (forthcoming 1994). 

177.  See Stone, 449 U.S. at 41. 
178. See generally RAWLS, supra note 81. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

829 

nobility,"179 a key  to  the  American  tradition  in this  regard.  The  Equal 
Protection  Clause  is  now  understood  very  much  in  these  terms.  Thus, 
for  example,  a  law  cannot  be  premised  on  the  ground  that  blacks  are 
inferior  to  whites,  80 or  women  inferior  to  men.181  This  idea  may  help 
make  sense  of  the  controversial  claim  that  discriminatory  intent  is  a 
necessary  and  sufficient  condition  for  invalidating  legislation.'82  One 
would  have  to  say  much  more  to  justify  this  proposition.'83  But  we 
can  get  at  what  underlies  the  emphasis  on  discriminatory 
intent  by 
seeing  it  as  a  ban  on  certain  kinds  of  valuation  of  human  beings.  At 
the  very  least,  we  can  see  why  discriminatory  intent  is by  itself  enough 
to  doom  a  legislative  enactment. 

Similar  ideas  help  make  sense  of  the  apparent  anomaly  that  the 
same  law  may  be valid  if produced  by a neutral justification  but  invalid 
when  produced  by  a  discriminatory  justification.  For  example,  liter- 
acy  tests  for voting  are unconstitutional  if motivated  by  racial  animus, 
but  acceptable  if supported  on  racially  neutral  grounds.184  The  reason 
for  the  asymmetry  is  that,  by  hypothesis,  the  first  law  reflects  an  ap- 
propriate  kind  of  valuation,  whereas  the  second  does  not.  This  simple 
idea  underlies  the  prevailing  conception  of  equality  under  the  Four- 
teenth  Amendment,  which  bans  those  kinds  of  valuation  that  deny  the 
forms  of  respect  that  are  prerequisites  for  political  equality.185  In  the 
same  vein,  recall  Holmes's  aphorism:  "[e]ven  a  dog  knows  the  differ- 
ence  between  being  tripped  over  and  being  kicked."'86  The  difference 
has  everything  to  do  with  the  relevant  kind  of  valuation.  It  is  closely 
connected  with  the  expressive  function  of  law,  which,  in  this  context, 
calls  for  invalidation  of  any  measure  that  denies  the  principle  of  equal 
dignity  and  respect. 

C.  Broadcasting  and  Free  Speech,  with a  Note  on  Rights  Generally 
Many  of  the  sharpest  debates  in  the  theory  of  free  speech  raise  the 
question  whether  government  may  legitimately  regulate  the broadcast- 

179. See supra text accompanying notes 29-30. 
180. See, e.g.,  Brown v. Board of  Educ.,  347 U.S.  483,  494  (1954).  This idea underlies the 
Court's antidiscrimination holdings in subsequent cases, such as Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 
229 (1976). 

181.  Cf  Personnel Admr.  v.  Feeney, 442  U.S.  256,  273  (1979)  (noting that discriminatory 

purposes cannot legitimately account for legislation). 

182. See Feeney, 442  U.S.  at 274; Village of Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Hous.  Dev. 

Corp., 429 U.S.  252, 265 (1977);  Washington, 426  U.S.  at 240. 

183.  See discussion and citations in  GEOFFREY R.  STONE ET AL.,  CONSTITUTI ONA. LAW 

600-05  (2d ed.  1990). 

184. See  Lassiter v. Northampton County Bd. of  Elections, 360 U.S. 45,  51 (1959). 
185.  See also infra the discussion of sex equality in section V.G. 
186. See supra note  131. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

830 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

ing media in the interest of promoting democratic goals.187  In at least 
two ways, issues of appropriate kinds of valuation and of commensu- 
rability underlie these  debates.  The  first issue  is  whether  to  treat 
speech as  an ordinary commodity, valued in  the  same way  as  other 
commodities.  The second issue is whether free speech values are uni- 
tary or instead plural and diverse. 

Substantial government deregulation of  the  airwaves has spurred 
much of the recent debate concerning the first issue.188 Some people 
think  that,  in  terms  of  actual  programming, deregulation has  pro- 
moted a sort of accelerating race to the bottom, rather than furthering 
the  democratic goals  of  attention  to  public  issues  and  diversity of 
view.'89  The result has been a split between the democratic concep- 
tion of free speech and the belief in satisfying consumption choices.  If 
we satisfy consumer desires, we may fail to promote democratic goals 
of intelligent and informed political participation.'90 

In these circumstances, many of the  recent challenges to  deregu- 
lated  markets in  expression reject the  notion  that  speech should be 
valued in the same way or for the same purposes as ordinary consumer 
products.  This claim suggests that a system of free markets is not nec- 
essarily compatible with a well-functioning system of free expression. 
These are two very different things.  If a free speech market promotes 
democratic goals, it is not because it is a conceptual truth, but because 
the forces of supply and demand work out that way.191 It may well 
turn out  that  market forces disserve democratic ideals by  deterring 
substantive coverage of public issues and sufficient diversity of view.  If 
so,  democratic  correctives may  promote  the  purposes  of  the  free 
speech guarantee. 

Those who  think of  speech as  a  commodity, to  be  valued in  the 
same way as other things that people desire, are often unable to under- 
stand  the  complaints of  people  who  urge a  democratic conception. 
This  is because they have a distinctive conception of  what speech is 
for,  one that makes it hard to come to terms with the different concep- 
tion  of  the  democrats.  Thus  the  former chairman of  the  Federal 

187. See, e.g., L. SCOTT POWE, AMERICAN BROADCASTING AND THE FIRST AMENDMENT 

(1987); Owen Fiss, Free Speech and Social Structure, 71 IOWA L. REV. 1405 (1986).  See gener- 
ally  DEMOCRACY AND THE MASS MEDIA (Judith Lichtenberg ed.,  1990). 

188.  The developments are outlined in DWIGHT L. TEETER, JR. & DON R.  LE Duc,  LA.w' 

OF MASS COMMUNICATIONS 402-31  (7th ed.  1992). 

189.  See  CASS R.  SUNSTEIN,  DEMOCRACY AND THE PROBI.EM OF FREE SP1-tECH 17-51 

(1993) for such an argument and relevant citations. 

190. See  C.  Edwin Baker, Advertising and  a  Democratic Press, 140 U.  PA. L.  RI V.  2097 

(1992). 

191. See J.M. Balkin, Some Realism About Pluralism.  Legal Realist Approaches to tle  First 

Amendment, 1990 DUKE L.J. 376; Fiss, supra note  187, at  1411-13. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

831 

Communications Commission, Mark Fowler,  said that  "television is 
just another appliance.  It's a toaster with pictures."192 This is a con- 
spicuous statement of the market conception of free speech, and it is 
jarring because it reveals an unusually stark view of how to value the 
products of the broadcast media. 

The most basic objection to this claim is that it shows an improper 
kind (not necessarily level) of valuation of some forms of speech.  If we 
value speech either as an intrinsic good or because it is instrumental to 
a well-functioning deliberative process, we will value it in a quite dif- 
ferent way from toasters.  The assessment of legal policy will change 
accordingly.  Of  course it  remains possible that  we  would  conclude 
that, because of the dangers of content-based regulation of the speech 
market, deregulation is the right legal strategy, all things considered. 
But this complex institutional argument -  about the role of the First 
Amendment in a second-best world -  strikingly differs from that of- 
fered by Chairman Fowler. 

With  respect to  the  second  issue,  it  seems clear that  free speech 
values are plural and diverse rather than unitary.193  Much inventive 
and instructive work has attempted to identify a single value animat- 
ing the protection of free speech, like democracy, self-realization, au- 
tonomy, or consumer satisfaction.194 But it would be most surprising 
if free speech were connected with any single value.195  This is true for 
most constitutional rights, which serve a range of purposes.  The pro- 
tection  of  property rights, for  example, helps  to  promote economic 
prosperity by  creating appropriate incentives for productive activity. 
But 
important 
noneconomic  value -  and,  by  limiting  government discretion over 
personal holdings, it serves democratic goals as well.196 The problem 
with  unitary or monistic theories of  constitutional value is  that they 
are insufficiently differentiated. 

it  also  safeguards  individual  security  - 

an 

It would be especially obtuse to suggest that the free speech princi- 
ple  serves  only  political  values.  A  system  of  free  communication 

192.  Bernard Nossiter,  The FCC's Big  Giveaway Show, NATION, Oct. 26,  1985, at 402. 
193. See Joshua Cohen, Freedom of Expression, 22 PHIL. & PUB.  AFF. 207, 223-30  (1993). 
194. See Martin Redish, The Value of Free Speech, 130 U.  PA. L. REV. 591 (1982); see also 

infra notes  197-98. 

195. See generally Steven Shiffrin, The First Amendment and  Economic Regulation:  Away 

from  a  General Theory of the First Amendment, 78 Nw.  U.  L. REV. 1212 (1983). 

196. See JEREMY WALDRON, THE RIGHT TO PRIVATE PROPERTY 284-322  (1988).  Plural 
values are promoted by other constitutional rights as well.  Consider the hearing rights guaran- 
teed by the Due Process Clause, the protection against unreasonable searches and seizures under 
the  Fourth  Amendment,  and  the  barrier to  cruel  and  unusual punishment provided by  the 
Eighth Amendment. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

832 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

yields a wide variety of diverse social goods.197  Significant autonomy 
interests, quite independent of democracy, help justify the protection 
of free speech.198 There is also an important connection between free 
speech and individual self-development. The opportunity to create art 
or literature, like the opportunity to read the products of other minds, 
is  part  of  the  development  of  human  capacities.  A  vigorous  free 
speech  principle also  helps  secure  scientific progress.  Finally,  free 
communication is indispensable to economic development.199 A well- 
functioning system of free expression should be alert to the wide range 
of  values  at  stake,  and  to  the  qualitative distinctions  among  those 
values. 

An understanding of diverse values will not lead to a simple set of 
judgments about the meaning of the First Amendment.  But it should 
help  inform  the  constitutional inquiry.  Many  debates in  the  First 
Amendment area are about different kinds of valuation of speech and 
about the relationship of those kinds to constitutional inquiry.200 

The  point  applies to  most  constitutional rights.  As  simply  one 
other example, consider the debate over whether the Supreme Court 
should protect "fundamental rights" under the  Due  Process Clause. 
In  an  influential if  extreme formulation, Judge Bork  asks  how  the 
Court can protect the right to sexual privacy if it does not protect the 
right to  pollute.  On  Bork's view,  both  rights amount to  "gratifica- 
tions,"  and there is  no  essential difference between them.201 A  less 
extreme version of  this  view  is  the  concern whether the  Court can 
consistently protect sexual privacy without protecting property inter- 
ests; who is to say that the former is more important than the latter?202 
We  might  be  able to  handle this  question better if  we  insist  on 
qualitative rather than merely quantitative differences among rights. 
It is not necessarily true that someone will value sexual privacy more 
than continued employment for longer hours at better wages, but it is 
possible to have a distinct concern about government regulation of the 
former, and it may be because of the way that sexual privacy is valued 

197. See Cohen, supra note  193, at 223-30. 
198. See Thomas Scanlon, A  Theory of Free Expression, 1 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 204, 215-22 

(1972). 

199. See, e.g., Virginia State Bd. of  Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, 425 

U.S.  748, 765 (1975) (rejecting ban on advertising by pharmacies). 

200.  See, for example, SUNSTEIN, supra note  189, at  121-65 and citations therein. 
201.  See ROBERT BORK, THE TEMPTING OF AMERICA 257-59  (1990). 
202.  Cf  Richard A.  Epstein, Property, Speech, and the Politics of Distrust. in THE BILL OF 
RIGHTS IN THE MODERN STATE (Geoffrey R.  Stone et al. eds.,  1992) (arguing that the logical 
structure of  free speech analysis applies just  as  readily to  property rights under the  Takings 
Clause). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

833 

that constitutional protection is appropriate.203 Once claims for con- 
stitutional protection are not aligned along a single scale and assessed 
in  purely quantitative terms,  it  becomes  easier to  make progress in 
thinking about fundamental rights. 

This  general understanding may  cast  light  on  some  familiar and 
somewhat mysterious notions in legal and social theory.204 Consider, 
for example, Dworkin's account of rights as "trumps,"205 or Rawls's 
claim that, under the appropriate theory of justice, the principle call- 
ing  for  equal  basic  liberty  is  lexically  prior  to  better  economic 
arrangements.206 

Much might be  said about these complex ideas.  It  is possible to 
think that, when we treat rights as trumps, we mean simply that rights 
are very highly valued and that they may not be violated without ex- 
tremely strong justifications.207 Because of the high premium we place 
on free speech, or because of our distrust of ad hoc judgments, we ban 
case-by-case trade-offs. On this view, there is no issue of incommensu- 
rability.  Or we might think that when A  is lexically prior to B,  it  is 
simply because we place an especially high premium on A.  It would 
indeed seem  fanatical to  suggest that  any  right,  to  qualify as  such, 
must be respected regardless of the consequences. 

But  perhaps it  is  inadequate to  formulate these  issues in  purely 
quantitative terms.  If we treat rights as "trumps," we may be taken to 

203.  For such an argument, see Jed Rubenfeld, The Right to Privacy, 102 HARV. L.  REV. 

737,  802-06  (1989). 

204.  For a related view, compare ANDERSON, supra note  1, at 67, on  whom I draw here. 
205.  See  DWORKIN, supra note 4,  at xi-xii,  184-205. 
206.  JOHN RAWLS, A  THEORY OF JUSTICE 61 (1971) ("[A] departure from the institutions 
of equal liberty . .  . cannot be justified by, or compensated for, by greater social and economic 
advantages."). Note also Rawls's at least implicit recognition of incommensurability as I under- 
stand it here: 

If someone denies that liberty of conscience is a basic liberty and maintains that all human 
interests are commensurable, and that between any  two  there always exists some  rate of 
exchange in terms of which it is rational to balance the protection of one against the protec- 
tion of the other, then we have reached an impasse. 

RAWLS, supra note 81, at 312. 

207.  This appears to have been Mill's position.  Mill described the claim to (a right of) per- 
sonal security as having "that character of absoluteness, that apparent infinity and incommensu- 
rability with all other considerations which constitute the distinction between the feeling of right 
and  wrong and  that of  ordinary expediency and  inexpediency."  MILL,  supra note  59,  at  67. 
Compare Mill's analysis of  "justice": 

[J]ustice is a name for certain moral requirements which, regarded collectively, stand higher 
in the scale of social utility, and are therefore of more paramount obligation, than any others 

. .Justice 

remains the  appropriate name for certain social  utilities which  are vastly 
more important, and therefore more absolute and imperative, than any others are as a class 
. . . and which, therefore, ought to be, as well as naturally are, guarded by a sentiment not 
only different in degree, but also in kind .... 

Id.  at 78-79. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

834 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

be saying not that they are infinitely or even extraordinarily valuable 
when viewed solely in terms of aggregate levels, but that they are val- 
ued in  a  distinctive way -  a  way  quite different from, and qualita- 
tively higher than, the way we value the competing interests.  Because 
of  the  distinctive way  that  they  are valued, it  is  necessary that  the 
competing interests be  (a)  of  a  certain qualitative sort  and  (b)  ex- 
traordinary in  amount  or  level,  in  order  to  count  as  reasons  for 
abridgment.208 

Similarly, in  speaking of  the  lexical priority of  equal liberty,  we 
may mean that a just  society  values this  interest in  a  way  that pre- 
cludes its  violation for social and economic advantages.  The  lexical 
priority of  liberty thus  represents an effort to  restate Kantian ideals 
about the  priority of  equal dignity and respect.209 We  can  imagine 
cases in which this judgment could be fanatical.210 But it seems clear 
that, in some cases, a belief in lexical priority may well reflect claims 
about incommensurability. We might treat equal liberty as a reflection 
of the foundational commitment to equal dignity and respect, and be- 
lieve that we do violence to the way we value that commitment if we 
allow it to be compromised for the sake of greater social and economic 
advantages. On this view, the lexical priority of equal liberty is struc- 
turally akin to the refusal to allow a child to be traded for cash, or a 
promise to be breached as a result of mildly changed circumstances. It 
reflects a judgment that the prevalent kind of valuation forbids com- 
promising the good for certain reasons, even though those reasons are 
legitimate bases for action in other contexts. 

D.  Environmental Protection 

Most  positive  theories of  government regulation assess environ- 
mental issues211 by  reference to  people's "preferences" for  environ- 
mental quality viewed abstractly, through a  unitary scale, along the 
same metric - 
that of utility or of willingness to pay.212 But there are 
some apparent anomalies in  individual behavior here.  In  particular, 
ordinary people appear to  resist the  use  of  a  unitary scale  and  the 

208.  As  noted, this  is  John Rawls's understanding of  the  clear and present danger test in 
RAWLS, supra note  81; see also the  discussion of hierarchical incommensurability in  Pildes & 
Anderson, supra note 48,  at 2147-58. 

209.  See RAWLS, supra note 81, at 289-371  (discussing the priority of basic liberties). 
210.  Note that Rawls qualifies the priority of liberty to assume reasonably good background 
conditions.  See id. at 297.  The charge of fanaticism may provide a basis for challenging Rawls's 
understanding of  the clear and present danger test.  See supra notes  81-82 and accompanying 
text. 

211.  I draw in this section on the discussion in Sunstein, supra note 51, at 247-53. 
212.  See, e.g., B. Peter Pashigian, Environmental Regulation.  Whose Self-Interests .re  Being 
Protected?, in CHICAGO STUDIES IN POLITICAIl ECONOMY 489, 529 (George J. Stigler ed., 1989). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

835 

claim of commensurability. Perhaps the discussion thus far can help 
make sense of  some of  the most  puzzling phenomena relating to  the 
public's environmental judgments.  Through this route we may be able 
to understand some features of the apparent demand for environmen- 
tal regulation, even if we  ultimately conclude that the demand often 
involves irrationality. Consider a few examples. 

(a)  Some  people  feel  extremely insulted  when  asked how  much 
they would accept (WTA) for a specified level of environmental deteri- 
oration,  treating the  question  as  outrageous or  a  form  of  bribery, 
rather as if they had been asked to sell a child or a part of their body. 
Studies using WTA  questions consistently receive a  large number of 
protest answers, such  as  "I  refuse to  sell" or  "I  want  an  extremely 
large or infinite amount of  compensation for agreeing to  this"; such 
studies frequently experience protest rates of fifty percent or more.213 
(b) Some people say that environmental goods have infinite value 
or that the effort to achieve a clean environment should not be "traded 
off"  against other important values.  In  opinion polls,  people some- 
times say that we  should achieve a clean environment "regardless of 
cost."  In  1992, eighty percent of respondents agreed with this state- 
ment, up from sixty-nine percent the year before.214 

(c) Some apparently popular statutes reflect a sort of environmen- 
tal absolutism.  The Endangered Species Act215 forbids balancing ex- 
cept in the rarest of circumstances.216 To the same effect, the Delaney 
Clause217 forbids any entry of carcinogenic substances onto the mar- 
ket, banning trade-offs of any sort.218 

(d) There are extraordinary disparities in federal expenditures for 
each  life  saved.219 Some  environmental programs prevent risks  at 
enormous cost; the government is willing to  spend relatively little to 
stop other risks.  All current efforts to produce uniformity in expendi- 

213.  Daniel Kahneman et al.,  The Endowment Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias, 5 
J. ECON. PERSP. 193, 202-03  (1991) (citation omitted).  The authors comment:  "These extreme 
responses reflect the feelings of outrage often seen when communities are faced with the prospect 
of accepting a new risk such as a nuclear power plant or waste disposal facility."  Id.  at 203. 

214.  See Poll Shows Four of Five Americans Support Environment, Even Over Economy, 23 

Env. Rep. (BNA)  1155 (Aug.  7,  1992). 

215.  Endangered Species Act  of  1973, Pub.  L.  93-205,  87  Stat.  884  (codified as  amended 

principally at  16 U.S.C.  ??  1531-1544 (1988)). 
216.  16 U.S.C.  ?  1539(a)-(d) (1988). 
217.  Food Additive Amendments Act of  1953, Pub. L. No.  85-929,  ? 4, 72 Stat. 1784 (codi- 

fied as amended at 21 U.S.C.  ? 348(c)(3)(A)  (1988)). 

218.  21  U.S.C.  ? 348(c)(3)(A)  (1988). 
219.  See STEPHEN BREYER, BREAKING THE VICIOUS CIRCLE 24-27  (1993); CAss R.  SUN- 

STEIN, AFTER THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION 238-41  (1990).  Consider the following table: 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

836 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

tures -  understood, for example, as equivalent amounts of dollar ex- 
penditures for each statistical life saved -  have failed. 

Such phenomena may  in  the  end  reflect irrationality, confusion, 
poor  framing of  relevant questions,  interest-group power,  or  sheer 
chance.  But it would be useful to explore other possible explanations. 
When people are thinking in these various ways, exactly what are they 
doing? 

We  might  hypothesize  that  social  valuation  of  environmental 
goods comes partly from an insistence that diverse social goods should 
not  be assessed according to  the  same metric, and that  those  goods 
ought to be valued in different ways.  With this hypothesis, some ap- 
parent anomalies dissolve or become more readily explicable.  Some 
people, for example, insistently rebel against the idea that we should 
see  all  of  the  following,  environmentally related  consequences  as 
"costs":  unemployment, higher  prices,  greater poverty,  dirtier air, 
more cancer, respiratory problems, the  loss  of  species.  If  we  under- 
stand all these things as "costs," to be assessed via the same metric, we 
will disable ourselves from making important distinctions.  It might be 
hypothesized that when people refuse to trade off environmental qual- 
ity  and other goods, they  are making a  claim about the  diversity of 
goods  and  incommensurability.  They  are  claiming  that  one  set  of 
goods is superior to another not in the sense that it is infinitely valua- 
ble, but in the sense that it stands higher in a hierarchy of public val- 

Cost-Effectivencess of Selected Regulations 
Cost per premature death averted 
Regulation 
Unvented Space Heater Ban 
Underground Construction Standards 
Auto  Fuel-System Integrity Standard 
Standards for Servicing Auto Wheel Rims 
Side-Impact Standards for Autos (Dynamic) 
Low Altitude Windshear Equipment & Training 

Standards 

Hazard Communication Standard 
Standards for Radionuclides in Uranium Mines 
Benzene NESHAP  (Revised: Coke Byproducts) 
Electrical Equipment Standards (Coal Mines) 
Arsenic/Copper NESHAP 
Benzene NESHAP  (Revised:  Transfer Operations) 
Coke Ovens Occupational Exposure Limit 
Arsenic Occupational Exposure Limit 
Asbestos Ban 
1,2 Dichloropropane Drinking Water Standard 
Hazardous Waste Land Disposal Ban (1st  3rd) 
Formaldehyde Occupational Exposure Limit 
Atrazine/Alachlor  Drinking Water Standard 
Hazardous Waste Listing for Wood-Preserving 

Chemicals 

See  BREYER, supra. 

Agency 
CPSC 
OSHA-S 
NHTSA 
OSHA-S 
NHTSA 
FAA 

OSHA-S 
EPA 
EPA 
MSHA 
EPA 
EPA 
OSHA-H 
OSHA-H 
EPA 
EPA 
EPA 
OSHA-H 
EPA 
EPA 

($millions  1990) 
0.1 
0.1 
0.4 
0.4 
0.8 
1.3 

1.6 
3.4 
6.1 
9.2 
23.0 
32.9 
63.5 
106.9 
110.7 
653.0 
4,190.4 
86,201.8 
92,069.7 
5,700,000.0 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

837 

ues.220  The  refusal  to  accept  certain  sorts  of  trade-offs  reflects  and 
expresses  this judgment.  As  in  the  context  of  lexical  priority,  the  kind 
of  valuation  of  the  environment  forbids  compromises  on  the  basis  of 
reasons  that  are  fully  legitimate  in  other  settings. 

Or  consider  the  issue  of  environmental  risks  in  the  workplace. 
People  regularly  take  jobs  that  expose  them  to  certain  risks  to  health 
and  safety.  This  fact  makes  it tempting  to  say  that  people  value  a risk 
of  level  A  at  some  dollar  amount  X.221  Thus,  for  example  - 
in  a 
slightly  different  context  -  one  of  the  most  prominent  writers  on  risk 
regulation  refers approvingly  to  an  "ingenious  effort" to  infer  "a value 
of  life  from  data  on  individual  seat  belt  use."222  There  are many  stud- 
ies  to  this  general  effect,  especially  in  the  area  of  workplace  safety.223 
Indeed  we  might  well  find  out  a  good  deal  about  valuation  of  safety 
in  different 
and  health  by  exploring 
settings.224 

the  required  risk  premium 

In  a way  this  approach  makes  obvious  sense.  For  purposes  of  allo- 
cating  resources  to  reduce  risk,  it  is  a  promising  alternative.  But  sup- 
pose  that  even  after  their  behavior  is  explained  in  this  way,  people 
firmly  resist  (as  is  predictable)  the  conclusion  that,  to  them,  risk A,  or 
their  lives,  is really  worth X.  Suppose  they  claim  that  this  is not  in fact 
their  view.  To  the  evidence  of  their  behavior,  suppose  that  employees 
respond  that  they  did  indeed  "take  the job,"  but  they  adamantly  resist 
any  broader  or  acontextual 
inference  about  their  trade-offs  between 
risk  and  dollars.225  They  say  that  whatever  they  did,  it  is  unreasona- 
ble  to  say  that  they  value  their  lives  at  the  amount  represented  by  the 
discounted  value  of  their  life.  Is  it  so  clear  that  they  are  not  making 
sense? 

Even  if these  people  are indeed  not  making  sense,  we  might  be  able 
to  use  their  responses  to  understand  some  otherwise  peculiar  features 
of  the  social  demand  for  environmental  regulation.  It  is  even  possible 
that  they  are making  sense.226  If so,  it is because  their  valuation  is not 

220.  See the discussion of hierarchical incommensurability in Pildes & Anderson, supra note 

48,  at 2147-58. 

221.  See W. KIP VisCUSI, RISK BY CHOICE 37-39  (1983); Viscusi,  supra note 62, at 6. 
222.  W. Kip Viscusi, Strategic and Ethical Issues in the Valuation of Life, in STRATEGY AND 

CHOICE 359, 365 (Richard J. Zeckhauser ed.,  1991). 

223.  See  VIscusI,  supra note  62,  at  52-53  (summarizing 20  occupational risk value-of-life 

studies). 

224.  See the summary in id. at 51-74. 
225.  See  Sen, supra note  57, at  206 (denying that the choice  of X  over  Y reflects a  "state- 
ment" about the acontextual merits of X and  Y); see also RAZ, supra note  17, at 336-39  (to the 
same general effect). 

226.  See ANDERSON, supra note  1, at  195-203; Pildes & Anderson, supra note 48, at 2143- 

62; Sen, supra note 57, at 200. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

838 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

an acontextual one or a global judgment about valuation or optimiza- 
tion, but instead highly dependent on and geared only to the particular 
setting in which the choice is made.  When a worker accepts a risky 
job for cash, it may mischaracterize his choice to say that he "really" 
thinks that the risk is equivalent to that amount of cash - 
if the word 
"really" is intended to capture an abstract, acontextual judgment.  In- 
stead he  has  simply taken this job  in  preference to  others among a 
specific range of opportunities, and this decision, in its context, means 
nothing more general.227 

Through this route, we might help come to terms with phenomena 
(a)  through (d)  above.228 For example, the  risk charts might reflect 
qualitative distinctions among different sorts of hazards.  People might 
be interested not only in cost for each life saved, but also in whether 
the risk was assumed knowingly and voluntarily, whether the exposing 
entity knows the facts, whether the underlying activity produces valu- 
able goods, whether the hazard is  common, whether the exposure is 
essential, whether the risk is encountered occupationally or elsewhere, 
and whether the  people subjected to  risk were able to  participate in 
relevant decisions.229 They might also be interested in  the nature of 
the  risk, thinking, for  example, that  certain deaths  are worse  than 
others.  Through this route, we might well discover that people's valu- 
ations of different risks will vary a good deal with context.  Hence the 
varying valuations will reflect not only irrationality or interest-group 
pressure, but also diverse judgments about diverse risks. 

I do not claim that this approach fully justifies the current dispari- 
ties.  In view of their obvious irrationality, that conclusion would be 
extravagant.230 But it  may well  be rational to  allow  widely varying 

227.  This is the argument in Sen, supra note 57, at 205-07.  As  Raz puts it: 
Revealed  preferences are  a  very  incomplete and  misleading clue  to  people's  valuations. 
These can be accurately gauged only if one takes account of people's own reasons for differ- 
ent valuations (a delicate task which is in principle incapable of completion, as it is impossi- 
ble completely and exhaustively to describe a person's set of values at any given time). 

RAZ, supra note  17, at 325. 

228.  It would be possible to think here that we have an issue of lexicographic preferences- 
of preferences so strong for certain goods as to bar trade-offs with other goods.  Many puzzles are 
raised by this view.  Without attention to issues of incommensurability, the lexicographic prefer- 
ence seems best understood as a case of an especially intense preference for goods of  a certain 
sort, and in that case it is not obviously helpful to speak of lexicographic preferences at all.  It 
might well  be better to  speak of  highly valued goods.  For  present purposes, I  suggest that a 
lexicographic preference might really suggest an issue of hierarchical incommensurability - 
that 
is, of a good favored via a kind of valuation that prevents it from being compromised for goods 
valued in some other way, at least unless those goods are extraordinary in terms of sheer number. 
229.  For a discussion of some of these factors, see WILLIAM W. LOWRANCE, OF ACCEPTA- 

BLE RISK 86-94  (1976). 

230.  Various heuristics, many of  them productive of  bias, are operative too.  See  Vlscusl, 
supra note 62, at  111-37; Roger G.  Noll  & James E. Krier, Some Implications of Cognitive Psy- 
chology for  Risk Regulation, 19 J. LEGAL. STUD.  747 (1990); Sunstein, supra note 51, at 42. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

839 

expenditures  in  light  of  the  diverse  factors  outlined  above,  and  at least 
some  of  the  current  variations  might  have  some  such  foundation. 

Similarly,  the  protest  answers  to  certain  questions  might  reflect  not 
sentimentality  or  simple  confusion,  but  a judgment  that  people  value 
in  a  way  that  forecloses  acceptance  of  even  high 
the  environment 
amounts  of  money  in  return  for  degradation.  Such  judgments  are 
to  the  extreme  cases  of  incommensurability,  discussed 
analogous 
above,  in  which  people  value  a  certain  relationship  or  good  through  a 
kind  of  valuation  that  disqualifies  certain  conventional  reasons  for  ac- 
tion  -  especially  acceptance  of  money  as a basis  for  compromising  or 
eliminating  it.  For  example,  if  a  pet  owner  were  asked  how  much  he 
would  accept  to  allow  use  of his  pet  dog  for laboratory  experiments,  he 
would  be  insulted  and  probably  respond  very  much  like  the  people  in 
(a).23'  This  response  stems  from  the  fact  that  the  pet  owner's  ordinary 
attitude  toward  his  pet  is  incompatible  with  treating  the  pet  as  an  ob- 
ject  solely  for  human  consumption  or  use.  In  these  circumstances  the 
very  idea  of  sale  for the  purpose  of  experimentation  seems  illegitimate. 
This  is  so  even  though  economic  valuation  of  pets  - 
in  terms  of 
purchase  price,  sale  price,  and  medical  expenditures  - 
is  perfectly 
common.  It  is  not  contradictory  to  think  that  there  are  limits  to  the 
amount  that  one  will  pay  to  prolong  the  life  of  one's  pet  while  also 
thinking  that,  realistically,  no  price  is high  enough  to  allow  that  pet  to 
be  used  for  laboratory  experiments.  The  reason  for  the  difference  is 
that,  because  of  the  difference  in  context,  a  different  kind  of  valuation 
is  expressed  through  these  different  choices. 

Some  people  think  of  freedom  from  certain  environmental  risks, 
and  the  protection  of  pristine  areas,  in just  this  way.  They  value  the 
relevant  goods  not  for  their  use,  but  for  their  beauty  or  their  indepen- 
dence  from  human  artifice.  The  emphasis  in law  on  "use value"  inade- 
quately  captures  the  way  they  value  the  relevant  goods.  It  is  not  an 
adequate  response  to  note  that  there  is  an  asymmetry232 between  the 

231.  It is not responsive to say that some or many people might, under imaginable circum- 
stances, allow the experiments if the amount were extraordinary high.  See supra text accompa- 
nying notes 45-46. 

232.  Studies in the environmental area observing this asymmetry include JUDD HAMMACK & 
TOWARD  BIOI-CONOMIC  ANAI  YSIS 

GARDNER  M.  BROWN,  WATERFOWL  AND  WETLANDS: 
(1974); Elizabeth Hoffman & Matthew L. Spitzer, Willingness-to-Pay vs. Willingness-to-Accept: 
Legal  and  Economic Implications, 71  WASH.  U.  L.Q.  59  (1993);  Robert D.  Rowe  et  al.,  An 
Experiment on the Economic Value of  Visibility, 7 J. ENVTL. ECON. & MGMT. 1 (1980); Richard 
Thaler,  Toward a  Positive Theory of  Consumer Choice, 1 J. ECON. BEHAV. & ORG. 39 (1980). 
Other studies making this observation include Daniel Kahneman et al., Experimental Tests of the 
Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem, 98 J. Pot.  ECON. 1325, 1342-46 (1990); see also Jack 
L.  Knetsch,  The Endowment Effect and Evidence of Nonreversible Indifference Curves, 79 AM. 
ECON. REV. 1277,  1282-83 (1989); Jack L.  Knetsch  & J.A.  Sinden,  Willingness To Pay and 
Compensation Demanded:  Experimental Evidence of  an  Unexpected Disparity in  Measures of 
Value, 99 Q.J. ECON. 507, 507-09 (1984); William Samuelson & Richard Zeckhauser, Status Quo 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

840 

Michigan  Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

answer  to  the  two  questions:  "How  much  would  you  have  to  be  paid 
to allow  degradation?"  and  "How  much  would  you  pay  to avoid degra- 
dation?"  People  are  perfectly  willing  to  answer  the  second  question 
with  numbers  that  are  systematically 
lower  than  those  produced  by 
the  first.  In  the  environmental  area,  the  asymmetry  is especially  large, 
and  it  creates  a  considerable  puzzle  for  conventional  views  about  ra- 
tionality.  But  it  would  be  wrong  to  think  that  the  answers  to  the  sec- 
ond  question  are  in  some  deep  sense  more  revealing  of  "true" 
preferences,  while  the  responses  to  the  first  question  are  mistaken. 

The  asymmetry  may  have  a  good  deal  to  do  with  diverse  kinds  of 
valuation.  In particular,  people  may  believe  that  a species  or a pristine 
area  has  intrinsic  rather  than  instrumental  value.  When  this  is  so, 
they  do  not  want  to  assume  the  sort of responsibility  that  is entailed  by 
allowing  its  elimination  for  cash.233  The  asymmetry  reflects  a  belief 
that  an  answer  to  the  first question  above  entails  a different  sort  of  act 
from  an  answer  to  the  second.  This  may  not  be  irrational  at  all.  In 
the  first case,  the  reference  state  or  status  quo  is  nondegradation,  and 
the  respondent  is  asked  to  interfere  with  that  state  of  affairs.  In  the 
second  case,  the  reference  state  is degradation,  which  the  respondent  is 
asked  to  help  alleviate.  The  asymmetry  reflects  a judgment  that  these 
are  answers  to  two  very  different  questions. 

The  asymmetry  thus  suggests  that  people  think  that  the  loss, 
through  their  deliberate  action,  of  a  pristine  area  or  an  endangered 
species  is  incommensurably  bad,  and  that  this  thought  should  be  ex- 
pressed  through  regulatory  proscriptions.  To  say  the  least,  this  view 
It  is  by  no  means  clear  that  the  relevant 
raises  many  complexities. 
judgments  about  responsibility  can  be  defended.  I  mean  to  suggest 
only  that  the  idea  is  both  common  and  intelligible. 

E.  Cost-Benefit  Analysis234 

One  of  the  most  hotly  disputed  issues  in  law  and  policy  involves 
the  role  of  cost-benefit  analysis  (CBA).  In  the  most  dramatic  victory 
for  CBA,  the  Reagan  administration  adopted  two  important  executive 

Bias in Decision Making, 1 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 7 (1988); W. Kip Viscusi et al.. An Investi- 
gation of the Rationality of Consumer Valuations of Multiple Health Risks. 18 RAND  J. ECON. 
465 (1987). 

233.  See  Rebecca R.  Boyce  et  al.,  Ant Experimental Examination of  Intrinsic Values as  a 
Source of  the  WTA-WTP Disparity. 82  AM. ECON. REV. 1366,  1366-67  (1992).  See also  the 
discussion of responsibility and the action-omission distinction in Williams, supra note 88, at 93- 
100. 

234.  I draw in this section on Sunstein, supra note 69, at 25-26. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

841 

orders calling for the application of CBA to all regulatory decisions.235 
These orders were withdrawn by President Clinton and replaced by a 
new executive order, which also places a high premium on cost-benefit 
analysis.236 

There is of course much to be said in favor of CBA.  Federal regu- 
lation is  notoriously and pervasively chaotic and irrational.237 Who 
could object to the idea that we should systematize costs and benefits 
and  compare them?  The  question  seems  especially  powerful when 
combined with the plausible claim that some opponents of  CBA  are 
confused about their real objection.  In fact, it is sometimes said,238 the 
opponents' real complaint is that some of the relevant variables have 
been insufficiently valued.  Would it not be a sufficient response to say 
to  the critics of this form of analysis that perhaps we should place a 
higher premium on, for example, human health, or the environment, 
and then proceed with CBA? 

It  would  be  difficult to  challenge  the  view  that  law  and  policy 
should be assessed on the basis of an inquiry into the advantages and 
disadvantages of different courses of action, and CBA often appears to 
be a way of systematizing that sort of approach. But at least for some 
purposes, I  do  not  think this  response would be sufficient.  Nor  is  it 
entirely adequate to say, as critics of CBA typically do, that this sort 
of  approach fails to  address distributional issues or is biased against 
the  poor.239 

The real problem with any form of conventional CBA is that it is 
obtuse.  CBA is obtuse because it tries to measure diverse social goods 
along the same metric.240 Suppose, for example, that we are told that 
the "cost" of a certain occupational safety regulation is $1 million, and 
that the "benefit" is $1.2 million.  To  make a sensible evaluation, we 
need to know a great deal more.  To what do these numbers refer? Do 
they include greater unemployment, higher inflation, and the scaled- 
back production of  important goods?  Do  they  mean more poverty? 
At  least in principle, it would be much better to have a highly disag- 

235.  Exec. Order No.  12,498, 3 C.F.R.  323 (1986), reprinted in 5 U.S.C. ? 601 (1988); Exec. 

Order No.  12,291, 3 C.F.R.  127 (1982), reprinted in  5 U.S.C.  ? 601 (1988). 

236.  Exec. Order No.  12,866, 58 Fed. Reg. 51,735 (1993). 
237.  See, e.g., BREYER, supra note 219. 
238.  See  PETER ASCH,  CONSUMER SAFETY REGULATION 1-13,  64-69 
239.  There is  something to  these  objections.  Willingness to  pay.  the  typical criterion for 
calculating costs and benefits, depends on ability to pay, and in this sense there is a bias against 
the poor.  Note  that President Clinton's new order requires attention to "equity" and "distribu- 
tive impacts." 

(1988). 

240.  I  am  assuming here that diverse kinds of  valuation are an  affirmative good,  a  claim 

defended in Part III. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

842 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol.  92:779 

gregated system for assessing the qualitatively different effects of regu- 
latory  impositions.  People  should  be  allowed  to  see  those  diverse 
effects for themselves and to make judgments based on an understand- 
ing  of  the  qualitative differences.  If  all  of  the  relevant goods  are 
aligned along  a  single  metric,  they  become  less  visible,  or  perhaps 
invisible. 

Through considerations of  this  sort,  we  might  be  able to  make 
some progress toward assessment of the Reagan and Clinton adminis- 
trations' executive orders on regulation.  Instead of conventional cost- 
benefit analysis, what is  necessary is a full accounting of  the various 
social consequences of regulation.  Those consequences should be de- 
scribed in  a  way  that  allows  a  detailed view  of  what the  costs  and 
benefits specifically are.  Once greater specificity is added, we will not 
be  thinking in  terms of  simple  costs  and  benefits at  all.  President 
Clinton's order241 makes some modest steps in this direction, but the 
steps are erratic and unconnected with any clear theory of how to as- 
sess regulation.242 

The best response to  this claim is pragmatic and institutional.  It 
would be that at least for law and public policy, it makes sense to act 
as if diverse goods were commensurable, because this way of proceed- 
ing makes decisions tractable where they would otherwise be ad hoc, 
and because ad hoc decisions lead to a systematic misallocation of re- 
sources and a perverse system of priorities. CBA may offer a less than 
full description of  what is  really at stake, but perhaps it counteracts 
the forms of inconsistency and ultimate irrationality that result in the 
public sector if we proceed without quantitative help. 

This is a plausible defense of CBA in the real world.  Whether it is 
right depends on pragmatic judgments that cannot be resolved in the 

241.  See supra note 236 and accompanying text. 
242.  The Clinton order is cautious and even ambiguous about cost-benefit analysis as a tool 
of  decision.  It  says  "qualitative" costs  and  benefits will  be  included as  part of  the  analysis: 
"Costs and  benefits shall be  understood to  include both  quantifiable measures (to  the  fullest 
extent that these can be usefully estimated) and qualitative measures of costs and benefits that are 
difficult to  quantify, but nevertheless essential to  consider."  Exec. Order No.  12,866, 58 Fed. 
Reg. 51,735, at 51,735 (1993).  The order further states:  "Each agency shall assess both the costs 
and  the  benefits of  the  intended regulation and,  recognizing that some  costs  and benefits are 
difficult to quantify, propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that the 
benefits of  the intended regulation justify  its costs."  Id.  at 51,736.  The  order also  contains a 
vague reference to the relevance of  "equity" and "distributive impacts."  Id. 

But these are odd and in some ways not entirely coherent formulations.  If quantification is 
impossible or  misleading, we  are not  weighing costs  and benefits at  all,  but  instead assessing 
advantages and disadvantages. "Qualitative" costs and benefits are not easy to conceive.  In any 
case, some of the advantages and disadvantages of regulatory action are not adequately described 
as costs and benefits at all.  The Clinton order should be seen as a halfway house between CBA 
and a more differentiated analysis that draws close attention to  the diverse goods at stake.  Of 
course it remains possible that this halfway house is the best way of combining good theory with 
administrative concerns and sensible priority setting, but the current theory seems confused. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

843 

abstract.  My point is that if goods are diverse and valued in different 
ways, there will be considerable crudeness in this approach to regula- 
tion.  Much will be lost even if much is also gained.  We should there- 
fore  have  a  presumption in  favor  of  a  much  more  disaggregated 
accounting of the effects of regulation, one that exposes to public view 
the full set of effects. 

F.  Specific Performance, Damages, Private Law Remedies: Another 
View of the Cathedral 

The  legal system usually insists on  an  award of  damages for the 
infliction of harm; a damages award appears to reflect a judgment in 
favor of  commensurability.  But  sometimes damages are insufficient. 
We can approach a large subject - 
the relationship between compen- 
sation and commensurability243 -  by examining a pervasive issue in 
the law of contract: whether to award a damages remedy or instead to 
require specific performance.244 From an exploration of this issue, we 
may be able to offer a few tentative generalizations. 

It is typically said that specific performance will be awarded when 
damages are "inadequate." But what could this possibly mean?  Sup- 
pose that Jones has contracted to  buy a painting, and that the seller 
defaults on  the  agreement.  It  is  far from clear why  a  court should 
order the seller to hand over the painting, rather than to pay damages 
to Jones.  If the damages seem inadequate, we might think that they 
have been set too low, and that the right solution is simply to require 
the seller to pay more.  Surely there is some level at which the court 
will  set the proper amount.  Why,  then, is  specific performance ever 
available? 

A  conventional answer is  that  damages remedies are inadequate 
when the good at issue is unique.245 But the notion of uniqueness is 
itself  a  puzzle.  At  least for economists, the  term points  at  most  to 
"questions of degree."246 All goods have substitutes of some sort; this 
is  part of  the  usual understanding of  choice  amidst scarcity.  In  ex- 
plaining the  notion  of  uniqueness, some  people have stressed that  a 
damages remedy might well be inaccurate for certain goods.  Subjec- 
tive value is peculiarly hard to ascertain in some cases, and the goods 
may  involve  high  search costs  that judges  cannot  easily  determine. 

243.  See generally Margaret J. Radin, Compensation and  Commensurability. 43  DUKF L.J. 

56 (1993). 

244.  For a good modern treatment of  this issue, see generally Anthony  Kronman, Specific 

Performance, 45  U.  CHI. L. REV. 351 (1978). 

245.  See, e.g., id. at 355-58. 
246.  Id.  at  359. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

844 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

The subjective value of Jones's painting is nearly impossible to  know 
and may well substantially exceed the market value, if a market exists. 
The particular costs incurred by Jones in finding that particular paint- 
ing  are hard to  establish.  In  these circumstances, the  existence of  a 
specific performance remedy can be seen as a natural response to infor- 
mation costs faced by the legal system in ascertaining the appropriate 
damages remedy. 

We might conclude that, when it is especially expensive to  deter- 
mine damages, courts will  order specific performance.  In a brief but 
notable description of  the  doctrine, Judge Posner says that  the  doc- 
trine represents an exception to the usual damages decree for cases in 
which  "damages are difficult to  compute  because of  a  lack  of  good 
market substitutes for  the  performance of  the  contract  breaker."247 
This is  a notable description because it suggests that behind the spe- 
cific  performance  remedy  lies  the  simple  problem  of  cost  of 
computation. 

There is undoubtedly a good deal of truth to this; but another fac- 
tor may be at work.  The specific performance remedy can be under- 
stood  to  stem  from  a  resistance  to  commensurability.  Specific 
performance must  be  awarded because  the  good  in  question  is  not 
commensurable with cash.  This is not to say that it is more valuable 
than cash.  Indeed, it is less valuable, often, than a great deal of cash. 
The claim is instead that the good is valued in a way that is inconsis- 
tent  with  cash valuation.  What the  plaintiff wants, and  what  she  is 
entitled to get, is a good that she values in the way that she values the 
object  for  which  she  has  contracted.  A  good  that  she  values 
"equally," in market terms, is not  a perfect substitute.248 Hence one 
would  expect  the  specific performance remedy to  reflect a  stand  in 
favor of diverse kinds of valuation. 

There is no simple way to test this hypothesis against its economic 
competitor.  The  two  would  suggest  parallel results.  But  both  the 
rhetoric and the  outcomes of  some  of  the  cases suggest that specific 
performance is awarded at least in part because cash does not  reflect 
the way in which the promisee values the good in question.249 

247.  POSNER, supra note  130, at  130. 
248.  See supra note 94 on why the quotation marks are necessary. 
249.  See, e.g., Nemer Jeep-Eagle, Inc. v. Jeep-Eagle Sales Corp., 992 F.2d 430, 436 (2d Cir. 
1993)  (granting  specific  performance  when  franchisee's  very  existence  as  business  was 
threatened); Semmes Motors, Inc. v. Ford Motor Co., 429 F.2d  1197, 1205 (2d Cir. 1970) (grant- 
ing  temporary injunction when  plaintiff sought  right  to  continue  20-year-old  business); City 
Stores Co. v. Ammerman, 266 F.  Supp. 766, 776 (D.D.C.  1967) (granting specific performance 
when there was a disputed lease critical to future expansion of business); Forman v. Benson. 446 
N.E.2d  535,  541 (111. App.  Ct.  1983) (granting specific performance for breach of  contract for 
sale of  land); Kitchen v.  Herring, 42  N.C.  137,  138 (1851)  (same); see also  David  Cohen,  The 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

845 

This point suggests the need to  supplement Guido  Calabresi and 
Douglas  Melamed's well-known discussion of the choice between lia- 
bility and property rules.250 In their terminology, a right is protected 
by a liability rule if it can be taken upon a payment of compensation. 
A  right is protected by a property rule if it can be taken only through 
voluntary exchange, and if market compensation is therefore an inade- 
quate justification for the taking.  Calabresi and Melamed's important 
discussion rightly emphasizes the  relevance of  transactions costs,  in- 
cluding information costs, to  the choice between the two methods of 
legal protection.251  But this account provides only part of the picture. 
As  the discussion above suggests, property rules are also appropriate 
when  the  relevant right  or  good  is  valued  in  a  different way  from 
money.  In  such cases, courts hesitate to  use liability rules, not only 
because courts doubt their ability to  calculate a  proper cost  for  the 
forgone good, but also because a dollar amount will reflect the wrong 
kind of valuation of  the good at issue.  The litigant is entitled to  the 
good and its existing kind of valuation, rather than to a substitute val- 
ued in a different way, even if in some aggregative sense "equally."252 
The point bears on damage remedies generally, most obviously for 
emotional distress or pain and suffering.253 As  Margaret Jane Radin 

Relationship of Contractual Remedies to Political and Social Status: A Preliminary Inquiry, 32 U. 
TORONTO L.J. 31 (1982). 

250.  Guido Calabresi & A. Douglas Melamed, Property Rules, Liability Rules, and Inaliena- 

bility:  One View of the Cathedral, 85 HARV. L. REV. 1089 (1972). 

251.  Id.  at  1093-98. 
252.  The point may help justify the requirement that a "public use" be shown before govern- 
ment may undertake even a compensated taking of private property. See U.S. CONST. amend. V 
("nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation"). 
253.  Thus RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS ? 903 cmt.  a (1977)  states: 
[C]ompensatory damages [for pecuniary loss] are designed to place [the damaged party] in a 
position substantially equivalent in a pecuniary way to that which he would have occupied 
had no tort been committed.  When[,] however, the tort causes bodily harm or emotional 
distress, the law cannot restore the injured person to his previous position.  The sensations 
caused by harm to  the body or by  pain or humiliation are not  in any way analogous to  a 
pecuniary loss, and a sum of money is not the equivalent of peace of mind  ....  There is no 
scale by which the detriment caused by suffering can be measured and hence there can only 
be a very rough correspondence between the amount awarded as damages and the extent of 
the suffering. 

See generally Radin, supra note 243, at 269-83. 

Consider in  this  regard the  debate on  whether people's failure to  insure for  nonpecuniary 
harms reflects a social judgment against mandating insurance through the tort system.  See supra 
note  20  and accompanying text.  It  is  possible to  think that the  failure to  insure has  no  such 
implications.  Perhaps there is  a  norm against purchasing insurance for certain risks.  Perhaps 
commodifying - 
those risks would reflect a strange kind (not 
amount) of  valuation of  the underlying good.  People do  not ordinarily insure against death of 
their children, or their own  physical pain, in  part because their attitudes make the decision to 
insure seem peculiar, as if one viewed one's children or freedom from pain as a sort of asset or 
commodity.  On this view, the failure to  insure reflects a quite particular judgment, and it does 
not mean that these events are not harms deserving compensation when they occur.  Hence the 
inference drawn in Priest, supra note 20, at  1546-47,  1553, and Shavell, supra note 20. at 228- 35. 

in the form of insuring against - 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

846 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

has argued, we might think of financial compensation not as commen- 
surable with many injuries at issue in tort law, and thus not as a means 
of truly restoring the status quo ante, but less ambitiously as an effort 
to  establish and recognize that a  wrong has been done and to  deter 
wrongdoing while ensuring that some redress has been paid.  Even if a 
legal system can do  no better, that redress does not  fully rectify the 
wrong, because monetary sums are not commensurable with the rele- 
vant injury.254 

The  same  ideas  underlie an  important debate in  environmental 
law, having to do with the appropriate measure of damages for injury 
to natural resources.  The "restoration cost" for, say, a portion of the 
Alaska seashore may diverge from its "use value," understood as ag- 
gregated  private  willingness  to  purchase  the  area  in  question. 
Through an important regulation, the Department of the Interior indi- 
cated  its  preference for  use  value  if  it  was  lower  than  restoration 
cost.255 The  Court of  Appeals for the  District  of  Columbia Circuit 
invalidated the regulation on the theory that Congress had expressed a 
preference for restoration.256 The decision of the court reflects an un- 
derstanding that those who injure natural resources should be required 
to  restore the  status quo  ante, not  because it  is  more  valuable, but 
because the public is entitled to have a good that it values in the way 
that  it  values  natural  resources,  rather  than  the  so-called  cash 
equivalent.257 

may be unwarranted. See Croley & Hanson, supra note 20, at  59-67.  The unwarranted infer- 
ence  is a  version of  that committed in  Viscusi, supra note 222,  at  362-65  - 
seeing particular 
choices as reflecting global or acontextual judgments.  See also  Sen, supra note  57, at  206  (re- 
jecting such an inference).  Alan Schwartz illuminates this puzzle by describing financial reme- 
involving  "substitutes  rather  than  replacements": 
dies 
"Nonpecuniary harms are not replaceable by insurance payments or damage judgments; rather. 
these transfers are used to  purchase substitutes that make up for or assuage the  pain of  acci- 
dents."  Alan  Schwartz, Proposals for  Products Liability Reform:  A  Theoretical Synthesis. 97 
YALE  L.J. 353, 408 (1988). 

for  nonpecuniary  losses  as 

254.  See  Radin, supra note 243, at 60-61. 
255.  43 C.F.R.  ?  11.35(b)(2) (1987). 
256.  Ohio v. U.S.  Dept. of  Interior, 880 F.2d 432, 441 (D.C.  Cir.  1989). 
257.  The court stated: 

The fatal flaw of [the Department of the] Interior's approach. however, is that it assumes 
[But] Congress was 
that  natural resources are fungible goods, just  like any  other  .... 
skeptical of the ability of human beings to measure the true "value" of a natural resource. 
Indeed, even the common law recognizes that restoration is the proper remedy for injury to 
property where measurement of damages by some other method will fail to compensate fully 
for the injury ....  [N]atural resources have value that is not readily measured by traditional 
means. 

880 F.2d at 456-57  (footnotes omitted). There are complex relations among restoration cost. use 
value, option value (the amount people would pay to have an option to see a natural asset). and 
existence value (the amount that people would pay to ensure continued existence of a good).  The 
latter two  measures help respond to  people's concerns about the need to  replicate the original 
kind of valuation. The Department of the Interior is now wrestling with these issues.  For exam- 
ple, see the proposal in 56 Fed. Reg.  19,756 (1991), using the term compensable value to include 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

847 

G.  Feminism in Law 

An  understanding of  issues  of  commensurability, and  of  diverse 
kinds of  valuation, should  help  explain a  number of  claims  by  and 
debates  among  feminists,  both  inside  law  and  elsewhere.  Some  of 
these  claims  and  debates have  been  inadequately understood in  the 
legal culture, in part because of the importance of kinds of valuation258 
and because of the infrequency with which such kinds are understood 
to be part of legal theory and practice. 

To  offer a brief summary:  In a statement that has now been fre- 
quently quoted (by,  among others, MacKinnon  herself259), Richard 
Rorty takes Catharine MacKinnon to have claimed that "being a wo- 
man  is  not  yet  a  way  of  being a  human being."260 What does  this 
mean?  It may well mean that women are often not valued in the way 
that  a  human being  is  entitled  to  be  valued.  More  concretely,  we 
might understand some feminist thought to be insisting that, as human 
beings, women are entitled to  be treated with dignity and respect,26' 
and that frequently they are not so treated.  Instead women are treated 
with affection or love, or, much worse, as objects for the use and con- 
trol of others. 

Consider in this regard a frequent response -  offered famously by 
former heavyweight champion Mike Tyson, but also by an astonishing 
number of other people - 
to claims of sex discrimination or even sex- 
ual  assault:  "I love  women."262 It  is  interesting to  think about the 
nature of  this  response and  the  reason that  it  is  inadequate.  It  is 
tempting, but not sufficient, to say that such responses are insincere or 
false.  Instead the response connotes a high level of valuation or a sort 
of intense and real appreciation. But the response is obtuse when the 

"all of the public economic values associated with an injured resource, including use values and 
nonuse values such as option, existence, and bequest values."  56 Fed. Reg. at  19,760.  A leading 
textbook, interestingly, comments that:  "the concept of 'compensable value' recognizes that re- 
sources are valued for many different reasons, not all of which are reflected accurately in market 
prices."  ROBERT V. PERCIVAL ET AL., ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION: LAW, SCIENCE, AND 
POLICY 362 (1992).  For subsequent public commentary and updating of  the proposed regula- 
tion, see 58 Fed. Reg.  39,328 (1993). 

258.  See, e.g., Hampton, supra note  165, at 236-38;  see also ANDERSON, supra note  1, at 8- 

259.  See, e.g., Catharine MacKinnon, Reflections on Sex Equality Under Law, 100 YALE L.J. 

11,  117-40. 

1281, 1299 & n.85 (1991). 

260.  Richard Rorty, Feminism and Pragmatism, 30 MICH. Q.  REV. 231 (1989). 
261.  Of  course some  feminists have  questioned Kantian understandings.  See  NOI)INGS, 

supra note  168; Tronto, supra note  168. 

262.  Tyson Pleads Not Guilty to Rape Charge, N.Y.  TIMES, Sept. 12, 1991, at B18.  A  recent 
LEXIS search discovered 124 entries containing the phrase "I love women," many of which were 
responsive to  charges of  sexism,  sexual  discrimination, or  sexual  assault.  Search of  LEXIS, 
Nexis  library, Major Papers file (Dec.  27,  1993). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

848 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

claim  is  that  women  have  not  been  treated  with  basic  dignity  and  re- 
spect.  The  invocation  of  love  or  affection,  even  if  sincerely  and  in- 
tensely  felt,  is unresponsive  to  the  relevant  concern,  which  is about  the 
appropriate  kind  and  not  the  appropriate  level  of  valuation. 
In  fact  many  claims  about  issues  related  to  sex  equality  - 

includ- 
ing  the  distribution  of labor within  marriage,  pornography,  sexual  har- 
assment,  and  abortion  -  might  be  taken  to  be  claims  that  law  and 
social  norms  should  treat  women  in  a  certain  way,  one  that  involves 
dignity  and  respect,  or a principle  of  civic  equality.  On  this  account,  a 
distinctive  norm  underlies  the  objection  to  certain  forms  of  sex  ine- 
quality,  and  the  norm  is  connected  with  a claim  about  proper  kinds  of 
valuation.263  Hence  the  objection  to  sexual  harassment  is  that  this 
practice  treats  women  as  objects  for  the  enjoyment  and  use  of  men. 
Hence  the  objection  to  legal  proscriptions  on  abortion  is  that  the  law 
ought  not  to  use  women's  reproductive  capacities  against  women's  will 
and  for  the  protection  of  third  parties,  at  least  when  it  does  not  simi- 
larly  use  men's  capacities.  Similarly,  the  objection  to  pornography  has 
a  good  deal  to  do  with  the  way  in  which  certain  forms  of  sexually 
explicit  material  treat  women's  sexual  capacities  as  objects  for  the  use 
of  others,  especially  through  sexual  violence.264  Thus  pornography  is 
challenged  not  as  offensive,  but  as  embodying  an  improper  means  of 
valuing  human  beings.265  Similar  issues  are raised by the sale  of sexual 
and  reproductive  capacities  through  markets,  as  in  the  practices  of 
prostitution  and  surrogacy.266 

A  good  deal  would  have  to  be  said  in  order  to  support  the  view 
that  these  claims  entail  any  particular  legal  reform.  All  I mean  to  say 
is  that  an  important  strand  in  recent  writing  about  sex  discrimination 

263.  Compare Locke's assertion, as a governing principle in the State of Nature, that "there 
cannot be supposed any such Subordination among  us,  that may Authorize  us  to  destroy one 
another, as if we were made for one another's uses."  JOHN LOCKE, Two  TREATISES OF GOV- 
ERNMENT 271 (Peter Laslett ed., student ed.  1988) (3d ed.  1698).  This is an essentially liberal 
idea.  It shows the deep continuity between certain strands of feminism and the liberal tradition, 
notwithstanding the  purported antiliberalism of  some feminist thought.  See,  e.g.,  CATHARINE 
MACKINNON, FEMINISM UNMODIFIED (1987); cf  OKIN, supra note 33, at 61 ("[A] number of 
the basic tenets of liberalism  . .  have been basic tenets in the development of feminism, too."); 
Susan M. Okin, Reason and Feeling in  Thinking About Justice, 99  ETHICS 229 (1989) (drawing 
connections between Rawls's work and feminist thought). 

264.  For one such unified treatment of abortion and pornography, see SUNSTEIN, supra note 

139, ch.  9. 

265.  See MACKINNON, supra note 263, at  154 ("To define the pornographic as the 'patently 
[P]ornography, in a feminist view, furthers the idea 

offensive' further misconstrues its harm.... 
of  the sexual inferiority of  women .  . 
."). 

266.  See  Elizabeth Anderson, Is  Women's Labor a  Commodity?. 19 PHIL. & Pun.  AFF. 71 
(1990) (arguing that commercial surrogacy improperly commodifies reproductive capacity).  But 
see  Debra Satz, Markets in  Women's Reproductive Labor. 21  PHIL. &  PUB. AFF.  107 (1992) 
(questioning the view that reproductive labor is not a commodity). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

849 

should be taken to argue that an improper kind of valuation has per- 
vaded  norms and  law  relating to  women,  and  that  changes are  re- 
quired that would embody a different kind. 

H.  Blocked Exchanges 

An  understanding of diverse kinds of valuation helps explain why 
liberal  regimes  generally  respect  voluntary  agreements.  If  people 
value  things  in  different ways,  the  state  should  allow  them  to  sort 
things out as they choose.  If values were commensurable, perhaps we 
could  seek to  block  certain voluntary exchanges simply because we 
had better information about relevant costs and benefits than the par- 
ties themselves.  But, in the face of diverse kinds of valuation, it is best 
to  permit people to value as they like.267 

But even a system that generally respects freedom of contract may 
block exchanges on several grounds.  Typically such grounds involve 
some form of market failure: a party may lack relevant information, a 
collective action problem may exist,  third parties may be affected, a 
party may be  myopic.  But  an additional and distinct reason is  that 
some exchanges involve and encourage improper kinds of valuation. 
I think that more common arguments stressing distributive consid- 
erations or  unequal bargaining power often depend, upon reflection, 
on an unarticulated claim about inappropriate valuation.  The claim is 
that to allow purchase and sale of a good will mean that the good will 
be wrongly valued in a qualitative sense.268 Consider, for example, the 
right to  vote.  Vote trading is  objectionable in part because it  would 
allow inappropriate concentration of political power in the hands of a 
few.  The  prohibition therefore overcomes a  collective  action  prob- 
lem.269 But perhaps the ban on vote trading also stems from a concern 
about kinds of valuation.  If votes were freely tradable, we would have 
a different conception of what voting is for  -  about the values that it 
embodies -  and this changed conception would have corrosive effects 
on politics. 

267.  This is a large part of the argument in FRIEDRICH A. HAYEK, THE ROAD TO SERFI)OM 

57-59 (1944): 

The welfare and the happiness of millions cannot be measured on a single scale of less and 
more.  The  welfare of  people  .  .  .  cannot  be  adequately expressed as  a  single  end  .... 
[N]othing but partial scales of value exist -  scales which are inevitably different and often 
inconsistent with  each  other.  From  this  the  individualist concludes  that  the  individuals 
should be allowed, within defined limits, to follow their own values and preferences rather 
than somebody else's. 
268.  These claims are made explicit in Radin, supra note 23, at 1863-70, and KEI MAN. supra 

269.  See  Richard A.  Epstein,  Why Restrain Alienation?. 85 Coi  UM. L.  REV. 970.  984-88 

note 23, at 77-84. 

(1985). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

850 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

Some reactions to Judge Posner's argument on behalf of a form of 
"baby selling" stem from a similar concern.270 Judge Posner contends 
that a market for babies would serve most of the relevant policies bet- 
ter than does the current system.  In some ways his argument is per- 
suasive.  Certainly the desire of infertile couples for children would be 
better satisfied through a market system.  But part of the objection to 
free markets in babies is not quite engaged by Judge Posner.  Instead 
the objection is that a system of purchase and sale would value chil- 
dren in  the  wrong way.  This  system  would  treat human beings as 
commodities, a view that is itself wrong, and a practice with possible 
harmful consequences for social valuation in general. This is at most a 
summary of a complex argument, based partly on uncertain empirical 
judgments, and it  is  hardly by  itself decisive.  But we  cannot get an 
adequate grasp on the problem without seeing this concern. 

Or  consider a  possible application of  the  widely  held  view  that 
market incentives are preferable to command-and-control regulation. 
Might it not be preferable, for example, to allocate tradable racial dis- 
crimination rights, so that discriminators, or people who refuse to act 
affirmatively, can purchase rights from people who  do  not  discrimi- 
nate  or  who  engage  in  affirmative action?271 Suppose it  could  be 
shown that an approach of this sort would be more efficient than the 
approach in the current civil rights laws, and also that it would pro- 
duce equal or better outcomes in terms of aggregate hiring of minority 
group members.  Even if this were so,  it might be thought unaccept- 
able to  permit employers to  discriminate for a  fee,  because the  way 
that  we  do  or  should  value  nondiscrimination is  inconsistent  with 
granting that permission.  This argument might be educative:  if dis- 
criminators could buy the  right to  discriminate, perhaps discrimina- 
tion  would  not  be stigmatized in  the  way  we  want.  Or it  might be 
expressive:  perhaps society  would  like  to  condemn  discrimination 
quite apart from consequential arguments.272 

In coming to terms with the issue of blocked exchanges, some fur- 
ther points are important.  As  noted, the recognition of diverse kinds 
of valuation might well be made part of a conception of law that places 
a high premium on individual liberty and choice.  At least as a general 
rule, the  state should not  say that one  kind of  valuation will  be  re- 
quired.  Within broad outlines, people ought to be permitted to value 

270.  See supra notes 25-26  and accompanying text. 
271.  See  Robert Cooter, Market Affirmative Action, 31  SAN DIEGO L.  REV. (forthcoming 
1994).  The idea is proposed as satire in DERRICK BELI., FACES AT THE BOTTOM OF THE WELI. 
ch.  5. (1993). 

272.  Notations to this effect are made in Cooter, supra note 271. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

851 

as they wish, though we should recognize that any kind of valuation 
will inevitably be affected by social norms and by law. 

Moreover, there is an important difference between urging changes 
in social norms and urging changes in law.  There may be a justified 
norm against asking a neighbor to  mow one's lawn without a law to 
that effect.  Similarly, one might speak on behalf of a powerful norm 
against certain attitudes toward animals without also recommending 
laws that, for example, forbid people to eat meat.  It is possible to urge 
people to value animals in a certain way without thinking that the law 
should require that kind of valuation. 

We might understand the distinction between norms and laws in 
two different ways.  First, the distinction might be largely pragmatic. 
A  law  imposed on  people who  do  not  share the  relevant norm may 
breed frustration and resentment.  It may be counterproductive or fu- 
tile.  Second, the difference might be rooted in a principle of  liberty, 
one  that calls for a strong presumption in favor of  governmental re- 
spect for diverse kinds of valuation.  A  legal mandate may be simply 
too  sectarian or intrusive for a heterogeneous society.  Both pragma- 
tism  and principle seem to  argue in  favor of  a  sharp distinction be- 
tween norms and law. 

There is a final point.  Markets are filled with agreements to trans- 
fer goods that are not valued simply for use.  People purchase music, 
even if  they  regard the  performances as  deserving awe  and wonder. 
They buy human care for their children.273 They trade the right to see 
beautiful areas.  They  purchase pets for whom  they feel affection or 
even love, and whom they hardly regard as solely for human exploita- 
tion and use.  The objection to the use of markets in certain areas must 
depend on the view that markets will have adverse effects on existing 
kinds of valuation, and it is not a simple matter to show when and why 
this will be the case.  For all these reasons, opposition to commensura- 
bility, and insistence on  diverse kinds of  valuation, do  not  by  them- 
selves amount to opposition to market exchange, which is pervaded by 
choice among goods that participants value in diverse ways. 

I.  Legal  Reasoning 

A belief in diverse kinds of valuation has consequences for current 
debates about the actual and appropriate nature of legal reasoning.  If 
it can be shown that a well-functioning system of law is alert to these 

273.  It is interesting, however, that these exchanges are also regulated by a complex system 
of norms.  It would be odd to tell a babysitter that she will get a premium for being loving, or a 
reduced rate for being merely affectionate.  Implicit deals on this front undoubtedly occur, but 
the fact that they are only implicit is itself important. Sec supra text accompanying notes 130-31. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

852 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

diverse  kinds  of  valuation,  theories  of  legislation,  administration,  and 
adjudication  may  be  affected. 

Consider,  for  example,  economic  analysis  of  law.  It  is  clear  that 
this  form  of  analysis  has  produced  enormous  gains  in  the  positive  and 
normative  study  of law.  Nonetheless,  the  approach  has been  criticized 
on  many  grounds,  most  familiarly  that  it  is  insufficiently  attuned  to 
distributive  arguments.274  But  perhaps  the  resistance  to  economic 
analysis  stems  from  something  quite  different  and  less  noticed.  In  its 
normative  form,  economic  analysis  depends  on  too  thin,  flat,  and  sec- 
tarian  a  conception  of  value,  captured  in  the  notion  that  legal  rules 
should  be  designed  so  as  to  maximize  wealth.  The  problem  with  this 
idea  is  that  the  word  wealth  elides  qualitative  distinctions  among  the 
different  goods  typically  at  stake  in  legal  disputes.  Instead  of  maxi- 
mizing  wealth,  it  is  desirable  to  have  a highly  disaggregated  picture  of 
the  consequences  of  legal  rules,  a  picture  that  enables  the judge  to  see 
the  various  goods  at  stake.  This  is  true  not  only  of  the  law  of  free 
speech  and  religious  liberty,  but  also  of  the  law  of  contract  and  tort. 
At  least  under  ideal  circumstances, 
it  would  be  good  to  have  a  full 
sense  of  the  qualitatively  distinct  interests  at  stake  before  reaching  a 
decision. 

We  still  lack  an  account  of  practical  reason  in  law.  But  what  I 
have  said  here  offers some  considerations  in  support  of  analogical  rea- 
soning,  the  conventional  method  of  Anglo-American 
law.  Analogical 
reasoning,  unlike  economic  analysis,  need  not  insist  on assessing  plural 
and  diverse  social  goods  according  to  a  single  metric.  The  analogical 
thinker  is  alert  to  the  manifold  dimensions  of  social  situations  and  to 
the  many  relevant  similarities  and  differences.  In  picking  out  relevant 
similarities,  the  analogizer  does  not  engage  in  an act  of  deduction.  In- 
stead  she  identifies  common  features  in  a  way  that  helps  constitute 
both  legal  and  cultural  categories,  rather  than  being  constrained  by 
some  particular  theory  of value  given  in advance.  Unequipped  with  or 
unburdened  by  a  unitary  theory  of  the  good  or  the  right,  she  is  in  a 
position  to  see  clearly  and  for herself  the  diverse  and  plural  goods  that 
are involved  and  to  make  choices  among  them  without  reducing  them 
to  a single  metric.275  This  is one  description  of  the  characteristic  style 

274.  See,  e.g.,  Morton Horwitz, Law and  Economics.  Science or Politics?, 8  HOFSTIRA L. 

REV. 905 (1980). 

275.  See  ANDERSON, supra note  1, at 91-116; Cass R.  Sunstein, On Analogical Reasoninlg. 
106 HARV. L. REV. 741 (1993).  The distinction between incommensurability and incomparabil- 
ity, see supra text accompanying notes 64- 65, may well suggest that the absence of commensura- 
bility (as I understand it here) does not endanger the claim that there are right answers in law.  I 
cannot, however, discuss that complex issue here. See John Mackie, The Third Theory of Law, in 
RONALD  DWORKIN  AND  CONTEMPORARY JURISPRUDENCE 161,  165  (Marshall  Cohen  ed.. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

853 

of  Anglo-American 

law  in  its  idealized  form. 

A  distinctive  feature  of  analogical  thinking  is  that  it  is  a  "bottom- 
up"  approach,  building  principles  of  a  low  or  intermediate  level  of 
generality  from  engagement  with  particular  cases.  In  this  respect,  it is 
quite  different  from  "top-down"  theories,  which  test  particular  judg- 
ments  by  reference  to  general  theory.276  Because  analogy  works  from 
particular judgments,  it is  likely  to  reflect  the  plural  and  diverse  goods 
that  people  really  value.  Of course  there  are nonanalogical  approaches 
that  insist  on  the  plurality  of  goods,277 and  those  approaches  also  have 
a  "top-down"  character. 

Of  course  this  approach  has  disadvantages  as  well.  The  use  of  a 
single  metric  makes  things  simple  and  orderly  where  they  would 
otherwise  be  chaotic.  In  certain  areas  of  the  law,  this  may  be  a  deci- 
sive  advantage,  all  things  considered.  Certainly  it has  been  taken  as an 
important  advantage  in many  areas  of  contemporary  law,  in which  the 
displacement  of  common  law  courts  by  legislation  has  been  designed 
to  promote  rule-of-law  virtues  inaccessible  to  ordinary  adjudication.278 

VI.  CHOICES 

I  have  not  yet  dealt  with  two  major  questions.  The  first  involves 
the  choice  among  different  kinds  of  valuation  and,  more  particularly, 
the  decision  whether  or  not  to  make  things  commensurable.  The  sec- 
ond  involves  the  issue  of  how  to  make  choices  among  incommensura- 
ble  goods.  The  two  questions  are  obviously  related.  They  are  also 
large  and  complex;  to  answer  them,  we  would  need  to  answer  many  of 
the  major  questions  in  ethical  and  political  theory.  As  I  have  empha- 
sized,  most  answers  must  be  developed  in  the  context  of  particular 
problems.  I  offer  only  a  few  notations  here. 

1984) (questioning Dworkin's right-answer thesis on the grounds that strengths are not always 
commensurable on a linear scale). 

276.  See Smart, supra note 68, at 56: 
In science general principles must be tested by reference to particular facts of observation. 
In ethics we may well take the opposite attitude, and test our particular moral attitudes by 
reference to more general ones.  The utilitarian can contend that since his principle[] rests 
on something so simple and natural as generalized benevolence it is more securely founded 
than our particular feelings, which may be subtly distorted by analogies with similar looking 
(but in  reality totally different) types of  case[s], and by all  sorts of  hangovers from tradi- 
tional and uncritical ethical thinking. 

For discussion of  related issues, see Sunstein, supra note 275, at  767-90. 

277.  An  example is Sen's "capability approach." See  AMARTYA SEN, INEQUALITY REEX- 
AMINED 39-55,  73-87  (1992); see also  Sen, supra note  57,  at  207-10.  Rawls's list  of  primary 
goods has similar characteristics. See  RAWLS, supra note 81, at  181. 

278.  Cf  Bruce Ackerman, The Common Law Constitutionalism of John Marshall Harlan. 36 

N.Y.  L. SCH. L. REV. 5 (1991). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

854 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

A.  Which Kinds of  Valuation? 

To come to terms with the question of appropriate kinds of valua- 
tion, we should begin by asking whether diversity in kinds is desirable 
at all.  Perhaps we should adopt a unitary kind of valuation, or seek to 
obtain  some  sort  of  commensurability.  In  many  ways  this  project 
unites such diverse thinkers as Plato, Bentham, and, in law, Richard 
Posner.279 It seems clear that this approach would have many advan- 
tages.  It  would  simplify and order decisions by  placing the  various 
goods along a single metric.  According to one familiar conception of 
rationality, this  step  would  increase rationality.  Would  it  not  be  a 
large improvement if commensurability could be obtained? 

Let us put law to one side for the moment and think about claims 
for  unitariness and  commensurability in  human  life  generally.  It 
seems obvious that  an  answer to  this  question should  turn on  what 
leads to a better conception of the human good.  There is no transcen- 
dental or  external standpoint from which  to  offer this  answer.  Our 
evaluation will  inevitably be a  reflection of  what we  think.  But this 
should hardly be thought disabling.280 We might make some progress 
by considering what the world would be like if kinds of valuation re- 
ally were unitary or if commensurability really did obtain.  In such a 
world, for example, a loss of friendship or the death of a parent would 
really  be  like  a  loss  of  money,  though  undoubtedly  a  lot  of  it.281  An 
achievement in  something  that  one  prizes - 
would be valued in the same way as an increase in net worth, or the 
birth of a new child, or falling in love, or the relief of human suffering, 
or the victory of a favorite sports team.  Offers of cash exchange would 
really be evaluated solely on the basis of their amount.  The distinction 
between instrumental and intrinsic goods would collapse, in the sense 
that  many  intrinsic  goods  would  become  both  fungible  and 
instrumental. 

like  art  or  music- 

A great deal would be lost in such a world.282 A life with genuine 
commensurability would be flat and dehumanized.  It would eliminate 

279.  See supra notes 2-3  and accompanying text. 
280.  Note the fallacy of thinking that, without transcendental or external grounds, our evalu- 
ations have no  basis at  all; they  are ultimately grounded in  human experience, and  none the 
worse for that.  See generally HILARY PUTNAM,  RENEWING PHILOSOPHY (1992). 

281.  This is related to Putnam's attack on  utilitarianism, captured in the tale of the super- 
Benthamites, whose understanding of experience would not be readily accessible to us.  See supra 
note 65. 

282.  In this vein Williams criticizes utilitarianism for "its great simple-mindedness. ... 
[It 
has] too few thoughts and feelings to match the world as it really is."  Williams, supra note 88, at 
149; cf  RAZ, supra note 17, at 344 ("There is no need, nor any way, to justify pervasive features 
of human thought.  But there is a need for an explanation which make them intelligible."). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

855 

delight, bewilderment, and surprise.  It would be inconsistent with an 
appropriately diversified approach to  a  good  human  life.  It  would 
eliminate desirable relationships and  attitudes.  In  fact  it  would  be 
barely recognizable.283 

On the other hand, nothing in this brief account is fatal to the view 
that law and public policy sometimes ought to rest on unitary kinds of 
valuation or  on  assumptions of  commensurability.  It  is  possible to 
think that under ideal conditions, the best system of  valuation is  di- 
verse and plural, but that in light of the weaknesses of human institu- 
tions  and  the  constant  prospect  of  bias  and  arbitrariness, public 
choices should assume a single kind or a unitary metric as the best way 
of promoting all of the relevant goods.284 This question cannot be an- 
swered  a  priori or  in  the  abstract.  But  those  who  favor  legal  ap- 
proaches based on  unitary kinds of  valuation and commensurability 
should understand that their approach is best defended as a means of 
overcoming certain institutional obstacles, and not as reflecting a fully 
adequate understanding of the relevant problems.  I have suggested as 
well that even if, say, government officials align the diverse effects of 
regulation along a single metric, they should also provide a disaggre- 
gated picture, so  that citizens can be aware of  qualitative differences 
and of the various goods at stake. 

All this leaves much uncertainty.  But it does suggest that, institu- 
tional issues aside, we should approve of a large degree of diversity in 
kinds of  valuation.  From this  it  does not  follow  that any particular 
kind of valuation is appropriate for any particular sphere.  To evaluate 
kinds of valuation, we also have to  think very concretely about what 
kinds in what places are parts of a good life or a good political system. 
To  come to  terms with this question, it  would be necessary to  say a 
great deal.  For  present purposes, a  few  observations may  suffice to 
give a sense of the sorts of things that might emerge. 

Some families exist in which people are valued solely for their use, 
and this is a pervasive source of deprivation and injustice.285 A family 

283.  Thus Wittgenstein: 
Some philosophers (or whatever you like to call them) suffer from what may be called "loss 
of problems." Then everything seems quite simple to them, no deep problems seem to exist 
any more, the world becomes broad and flat and loses all depth, and what they write be- 
comes immeasurably shallow and trivial. 

LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN, ZETTEL para. 456  (G.E.M.  Anscombe & G.H.  von  Wright eds.  & 
G.E.M.  Anscombe trans., 1967).  For Mill's related critique of  Bentham, see supra note 59. 

284.  "[Risk analysis] allows many environmental problems to be measured and compared in 
common terms, and it  allows different risk reduction options to  be evaluated from a  common 
basis."  RELATIVE RISK REDUCTION STRATEGIC COMMITTEE, SCIENCE ADVISORY BD., 
REDUCING RISK:  SETTING PRIORITIES AND STRATEGIES FOR ENVIRONMENAI.  PROTECTION 
2 (1990). 

285.  See  Okin,  supra  note  33. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

856 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

in which reason-giving is the sole or pervasive kind of valuation would 
have different problems; but it seems clear that it would have problems 
as well.  The bonds that unite people in  a  family are not  adequately 
captured by the exchange of reasons.  But this is not to say that injus- 
tice within families cannot be exposed through that exchange.  A mea- 
sure  of  respect  is  a  condition  for  a  well-functioning  relationship 
between spouses.286 

So, too, a political system dominated not by reasons but instead by 
self-interested bargaining may well produce inferior law, and precisely 
because the  absence of  reason-giving will  fail  to  uncover difficulties 
with  some  of  the  various proposals.287 Such  a  political system  will 
also violate principles of political equality to the extent that it allows 
the  translation of  economic  disparities into  law.  A  political system 
that depended on bonds of affection or love would probably prove un- 
workable, certainly in a large, heterogeneous society. 

These various observations are no more than assertions.  They are 
meant simply to point toward the sorts of concrete inquiries that are 
required for an evaluation of what kinds of valuation are appropriate 
in what contexts. 

B.  Choices Among Incommensurable Goods 

How are choices made among incommensurable goods?  How can 
those choices be assessed? The first point is that there is no algorithm 
or formula by which to answer this question.  If we are looking for a 
certain sort of answer - 
the sort characteristic of  some believers in 
commensurability -  we will be unable to find it.  Relatively little can 
be said in the abstract.  Instead we need to offer detailed descriptions 
of how such choices are made, and how to tell whether such choices 
turn out  well.  Here there are many possible criteria for public and 
private action, and a mere reference to the existence of incommensura- 
bilities will be unhelpful standing by itself. 

The  search for criteria may well  emphasize the  need to  secure a 
form of narrative continuity within a  life or within a  society.  When 
someone chooses one option over another, it may be because the cho- 
sen option makes for coherence over the course of time, whereas the 
disregarded option, even if attractive, would ensure that things make 
little  or  no  sense.  There is  also  a  connection between different self- 
understandings and  the  choice  between incommensurable options A 

286.  See Hampton, supra note  165, at 251. 
287.  See  Robert  Goodin,  Laundering  Preferences,  in THE FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL CHOICE 

THEORY 75 (Jon Elster & Aanund Hylland eds.,  1986). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

857 

and B.  The selected option may conform to the agent's preferred self- 
understanding.  To  achieve  that  self-understanding, we  need  to  be 
clear about what we value most deeply and to make choices that prop- 
erly express the deepest valuations.288 Thus,  for example, it  may be 
irrational to  value a certain amount of cash over spending time with 
one's family, because this  would lead to  a  self-understanding that is 
either inconsistent with what has gone before or otherwise indefensible 
for those asking what a good life contains.  Individual and social ideals 
play a large role in this assessment.289 These are inadequate and ab- 
stract  remarks, but  they  may  help  explain  how  choices  are  made 
among incommensurables, and how choices tend to go right or wrong. 
Some of the same things can be said of law and the public sphere. 
Suppose that a society is deciding whether to sacrifice a number of jobs 
in return for protecting an endangered species.  No  unitary metric can 
be helpful here.  But perhaps the people entrusted with the power of 
decision will ask, as part of the inquiry, about the society's prevailing 
ideals,  about ways  minimally to  damage relevant goods,  and  about 
what decision best fits with the community's self-understanding as this 
has been established over time.  This  is  not  merely a  descriptive in- 
quiry.  It involves asking what choice puts that self-understanding in 
its best or most attractive light.  On this view, choice among incom- 
mensurables is an act of interpretation, one that involves a dimension 
of fidelity to the past, but that is also constructive.290 
In law and politics, a diverse set of standards - 

liberty, equality, 
prosperity, excellence, all of these umbrella terms -  will be brought to 
bear on  hard cases.  A  particular goal  is  to  find solutions that  will 
minimally damage the relevant goods.  Perhaps an approach that pro- 
motes a recognizable form of liberty will only modestly compromise a 
recognizable conception of equality.  Here too there is no escape from 
close examination of particular cases. 

Consider, for example, the issue of surrogacy.  It would be plausi- 
ble to  conclude that the legal system ought not to  criminalize surro- 
gacy  but  also  ought  not  to  require surrogate mothers to  hand over 
their children to the purchasing parents, at least during a brief period 

288.  For  the  view  that  choice  reflects the  articulation of  value commitments, see  Charles 
Taylor, Responsibility for Self  in FREE WILL 111 (Gary Watson ed.,  1982).  I am suggesting that 
this point applies to legal and political choice as well.  See also the discussion of commitment in 
Amartya  Sen,  Rational  Fools,  reprinted in  BEYOND SFI.F-INTIEREST 25,  31-43  (Jane  J. 
Mansbridge ed.,  1991). 

289.  See supra section I.B. 
290.  Cf.  DWORKIN, supra note  74,  at  45-113  (describing legal  interpretation in  similar 

terms). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

858 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

after  birth.291 Criminalization  would  entail  difficult  enforcement 
problems and might also discourage arrangements that do much good 
and  little  harm.  We  can  understand why  surrogacy arrangements 
might be thought to be connected with sex inequality, but the contri- 
bution to discrimination is probably too attenuated to justify criminal- 
ization.  On the other hand, it may be damaging to the birth mother to 
force  her  to  hand  over  a  child  against her  will,  especially because 
before the fact it may be quite difficult for her to  know exactly what 
this  action entails.  The  failure of  the  legal  system to  order specific 
performance is unlikely to have serious adverse consequences on pro- 
spective participants in such arrangements. This is of course an inade- 
quate treatment of a complex problem. All  I mean to do is to suggest 
some of the lines along which the inquiry might occur.  (Compare an 
approach that would insist on  commensurability. Such an approach 
would be laughably inadequate; it would prevent us from seeing what 
is really at stake.) 

Much  of  the  relevant work here is  done  in  two  ways:  through 
analogies and through understanding consequences, mediated as these 
are through expressive norms.  When incommensurable goods are at 
stake, it is typically asked: What was the resolution of a previous case 
with  similar features? Through this process, people seek to  produce 
vertical and  horizontal consistency among  their various judgments. 
This system of testing is designed not to line goods up along a single 
metric, but to produce the sort of consistency and rigor that character- 
izes the successful operation of practical reason.  The inquiry into con- 
sequences avoids monism while still examining the real-world effects 
of different courses of action.  How, for example, will a particular re- 
sult compromise or promote the relevant goods? This is a characteris- 
tic part of practical reasoning in law. 

In the context of emissions trading in environmental law, for ex- 
ample, it seems hard to support the empirical claim that the shift from 
command-and-control government to financial incentives will have se- 
rious  adverse  effects  on  people's  thinking  about  pollution.  Many 
claims about the educative function of law are actually claims about 
real-world consequences, understood through  expressive norms  on 
which there is no dispute.  It is possible to think well about those con- 
sequences, and sometimes we  can see that the feared effects will  not 
materialize. In this way it is possible to explore whether there will be 
damage to some of the goods that are allegedly threatened by certain 

291.  See  JONATHAN GLOVER, ETHICS OF NEW  REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOIOGIES: THE 

GIlOVER REPORT TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION 77-78,  151 (1989). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

859 

initiatives.  Of course it is true that, on some issues, we will lack rele- 
vant data. 

C.  A Note on  Tragedy 
There is a final point.  A recognition of incommensurability is nec- 
essary to keep alive the sense of tragedy, and in certain ways this is an 
individual and collective good, perhaps especially in law.292 Recogni- 
tion that all outcomes "impose costs" is not quite the same thing as a 
sense of  tragedy.  Though  I  can  hardly discuss this  complex  matter 
here, the very notion of tragedy seems to embody a commitment to an 
understanding of the uniqueness of certain goods, or the irreversibility 
and irreplaceability of certain losses.293 If tragedy were understood to 
mean  instead high  costs,  or  the  existence of  losses  that  accompany 
benefits (Kaldor-Hicks rather than  Pareto improvements, for exam- 
ple), the sense of tragedy would be dramatically changed.  Here too we 
would not have a simple redescription of the problem. 

A  sense of  tragedy is  an individual good because it  accompanies 
certain relationships and attitudes that are an important part of a good 
life.  It is a collective good for this reason and also because it focuses 
attention on the fact that, even when the law is doing the right thing, 
all things considered, much may be lost  as well.  This is valuable in, 
for example, current thinking about the environment and occupational 
safety.  In the presence of tragedy, there is a large incentive to create 
social arrangements so that people do not face that prospect. 

This is so with respect to pervasive conflicts among valuable things 
-  employment versus environment, diminishing poverty versus na- 
tional security, attention to family versus attention to work.  Such con- 
flicts themselves may be an artifact of legal and social arrangements. 
On monistic theories of value, it is easy to believe that nothing is really 
lost -  or at least nothing that is unique, intrinsically valuable, or irre- 
trievable.  This understanding diminishes the incentive to find a solu- 
tion that will not create tragic choices.  When tragedy is understood to 
be present, there is a constant and conspicuous social interest in seek- 
ing solutions that simultaneously promote all of the relevant goods. 
At  its  best, the  Anglo-American legal system is  alert to  the  fact 
that diverse goods are at stake in  many disputes.  Judges know that 
not  all of  these goods can simultaneously be preserved.  This aware- 
ness is itself desirable because of the pressure that it tends to exert on 

292.  Cf  GUIDO CALABRESI & PHILIP BOBBITT, TRAGIC CHOICES 57-64  (1978). 
293.  For discussions of the defining characteristics of tragedy, see id.  See also MAiR I H 
\  C. 
NUSSBAUM, THE FRAGILITY OF GOODNESS 23-84  (1986) (discussing the role of conflict amolng 
ethical claims in Greek tragedy). 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

860 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol. 92:779 

judges and legislators as well.  A redescription of tragedy in terms that 
assume a monistic theory of value would not create the same sort of 
pressure. 

CONCLUSION 

Human beings  value  goods,  events,  and  relationships in  diverse 
and plural ways.  Sometimes we face serious problems of commensura- 
bility.  This problem does not entail paralysis, indeterminacy, or arbi- 
trariness.  Decisions  are made all  the  time  among incommensurable 
goods, at the personal, social, and legal levels, and these decisions may 
well be rational or irrational. It might even be possible to convert our 
kinds of  valuation for  use  on  a  unitary metric, or  to  make  goods, 
events, and relationships commensurable. But if what I have said here 
is correct, this would be a sort of tragedy, not least because it would 
make the very fact of tragedy puzzling or even incomprehensible. 

The fact of diverse kinds of valuation, and the existence of incom- 
mensurable goods,  have not  yet played a  major role in  legal theory. 
But these issues underlie a surprisingly wide range of  legal disputes. 
No  unitary "top-down" theory can  account  for  the  complexities of 
most controversies in law.  Perhaps most dramatically, the liberal in- 
sistence on social differentiation -  markets, families, religious groups, 
politics, and more - 
is best justified as an attempt to make a space for 
distinct kinds of  valuation and to  give each of  them its  appropriate 
place in human life.  The Establishment and Equal Protection Clauses 
are centrally concerned with  regulating kinds of  valuation.  In envi- 
ronmental law, the major issue of contestation is frequently the appro- 
priate  kind  of  valuation  of  environmental  amenities;  if  beaches, 
species, and mountains were valued solely for their use, we would not 
be able to understand them in the way that we now do. 

The same issue arises in the law of contract, especially in the award 
of specific performance remedies. It also plays a role in thinking about 
the point of damage remedies in tort.  In both settings, it is wrong to 
ignore the highly contextual nature of choice and to act as if a particu- 
lar decision -  not to take out insurance for a certain danger, to accept 
a job at a certain risk premium -  reflects some global judgment sim- 
ply adaptable for policy use.  No global judgment need underlie partic- 
ular  choices.  Many  blocked  exchanges,  moreover, attest  to  social 
resistance to commensurability. I have also suggested that attention to 
these issues shows that cost-benefit analysis is obtuse, because it aligns 
qualitatively distinct goods along a single metric.  Instead of cost-bene- 
fit analysis -  which might of course be helpful in our at most second- 
best world -  what is desirable is a disaggregated picture of the effects 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

February 1994] 

Incommensurability 

861 

of different courses of action, so that officials and citizens can see those 
effects for themselves. 

In  disputes over free speech, large questions are whether speech 
ought to be valued in the same way as commodities traded on markets, 
and whether free speech values are unitary or plural.  I have suggested 
that we ought not to treat free speech as an ordinary commodity and 
that we should recognize the diverse ends it embodies.  In contempo- 
rary feminism, an important and basic claim is that women have not 
been valued in the right way - 
that is, they have been valued through 
love and affection, and for use, but too  infrequently treated with dig- 
nity and respect.  This claim helps explain current disputes over por- 
nography, surrogacy, prostitution, and the division of labor within the 
family.  Various arguments for revision of existing understandings 
market thinking for families and politics, extension of the metaphor of 
the  family,  the  view  that  reason-giving ought  to  occupy  all  social 
spheres -  might be seen as attempts to renovate current forms of val- 
uation in favor of a new or even unitary kind. 

An  especially large task  for  legal  theory is  to  offer an  adequate 
description of how,  in legal contexts, choices should be made among 
incommensurable goods and among different possible kinds of valua- 
tion.  I  have at  best  started to  undertake that  task here.  There are 
limits to  how  much can be said in the abstract; a close inspection of 
particular contexts will be indispensable to this endeavor.  But I con- 
clude with two large suggestions.  An insistence on incommensurabil- 
ity  and  on  diverse kinds of  valuation is  one  of  the  most  important 
conclusions emerging from the study of  Anglo-American legal prac- 
tice, and an appreciation of those diverse kinds will yield major gains 
to those seeking to understand and to evaluate both public and private 
law. 

This content downloaded  on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

