The Anticaste Principle
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein
Source: Michigan Law Review, Vol. 92, No. 8, Symposium: Visions of Equality: The Future of
Title VII (Aug., 1994), pp. 2410-2455
Published by: The Michigan Law Review Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1289999 .
Accessed: 21/06/2014 19:14

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

The Michigan Law Review Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Michigan Law Review.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

THE  ANTICASTE  PRINCIPLE 

Cass R. Sunstein* 

It  is  sometimes  suggested  that  there  is  a  sharp opposition  be- 
tween  "liberty" and "equality."'  If the  law forbids racial discrimi- 
nation  in employment,  it may promote  equality, but perhaps it will 
simultaneously  interfere  with  liberty.  If  the  law  requires  wealthy 
people  to transfer some  of their income to poor people,  it may pro- 
mote  equality,  but  it may  also  undermine  liberty.  If a  health  care 
program  ensures  universal  access  to  health  care,  it  may  promote 
equality,  but it could  also  raise serious doubts from the  standpoint 
of  liberty.  The  tension  between  liberty and equality  often  appears 
deep,  and  it  plays  a  large  role  in  American  political  and  legal 
thought. 

But before  accepting the alleged opposition  between  liberty and 
equality,  we  should  observe  that  there  are  many  possible  under- 
standings of  liberty and equality.  These  understandings reveal  not 
disputes  about  dictionary definitions  but  diverse  substantive judg- 
ments  that  need  to  be  identified  and  assessed.  Different  concep- 
tions  of  the  two  values  will  lead  to  different  views  about  their 
relationship.  For example, the term equality could refer to freedom 
from desperate  conditions, in the form of minimum welfare guaran- 
tees; to  a ban on discrimination on certain specified grounds; to the 
idea  that  every  citizen  should  have  the  same  power  over  political 
outcomes,  as  in  the  one-person,  one-vote  rule; to  similar starting 
points or basic opportunities for every citizen; to similar incomes  or 
wealth; to  similar incomes  unless disparities can be justified as ben- 
eficial for  all; or  to  much more. 

The same  is true for liberty.  That capacious term could refer to 
the  basic political  rights of  free  speech  and free  elections.  It could 
include  the  guarantees of  a fair system of  criminal justice,  in which 
rules are laid down in advance and a defendant  has a right to  a fair 

*  Karl N.  Llewellyn  Professor of Jurisprudence, University  of  Chicago. -  Ed.  This es- 
say develops  some  ideas contained  elsewhere.  See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, THE PARTIAL CONSTI- 
TUTION 338-46  (1993).  The essay  greatly benefited  from comments  by Akhil  Amar,  Martha 
Minow,  and others  at a conference  on  equal  citizenship held  at Brown  University  in March 
1994.  I am also grateful for very helpful suggestions from Richard Epstein, Jane Mansbridge, 
and  Susan Moller  Okin. 

1.  See  the  helpful  discussion in AMARTYA  SEN,  INEQUALITY REEXAMINED 12-30 (1992), 

upon  which  I draw here. 

2410 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August  1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2411 

trial before  an independent  judge.  It could entail social respect  for 
the  outcomes  of  processes  in  which  citizens  pursue  their  various 
conceptions  of the good,  given market forces, existing common  law 
rules, existing preferences,  and existing distributions of wealth.  The 
term  liberty could  refer  to  a  system  that  ensures  autonomy  in  the 
formation  of  preferences  and beliefs  by providing a  decent  educa- 
tion  for  all  and by  counteracting  unjust background conditions.  It 
could  refer  to  much more. 

indeed  identical to  - 

We  can readily see  that some  conceptions  of  equality  are quite 
compatible  with - 
some  conceptions  of  lib- 
erty.  For example,  libertarians, who  may  appear to  oppose  equal- 
ity, insist on equality of an important kind; they want to ensure that 
all  citizens  have  an equal  right to  pursue their own  ends.2  An  un- 
derstanding  of  equality  lies  at  the  heart  of  the  libertarian  creed. 
Freedom  from desperate  conditions,  often  treated  as an egalitarian 
idea,  is  an understanding of  liberty as well.  Those  who  emphasize 
autonomy  in  the  formation  of  preferences  are  speaking  of  both 
equality  and  liberty; they  want  to  ensure  that  unjustified inequali- 
ties  - 
do  not  limit the  free  development  of  individual personality. 

inequalities  based upon wealth, race, or sex, for example 

In these  circumstances, it is important to be quite careful before 
seeing  any  tension  between  equality  and  liberty.  Tension  exists 
only  when  we  specify conceptions  of these  broad terms that cannot 
peacefully  coexist.  Perhaps such  incompatible  conceptions  cannot 
be  defended.  Perhaps the  best  conceptions  of  equality  are entirely 
compatible  with  the  best  understandings of  liberty. 

In  this  essay,  I  seek  to  defend  a  particular understanding  of 
equality,  one  that is an understanding of  liberty as well.  I call this 
conception  "the anticaste principle."3 Put too  briefly, the  anticaste 
principle  forbids  social  and  legal  practices  from  translating highly 
visible  and morally irrelevant differences into systemic social disad- 
vantage,  unless there is a very good  reason for society  to do so.  On 
this view,  a special problem of inequality arises when members of  a 
group  suffer  from  a  range  of  disadvantages  because  of  a  group- 
based  characteristic that is both visible  for all to  see  and irrelevant 

2.  See id. at 22 (arguing that libertarians "insist[ ] on equal immunity from interference  by 

others"). 

3.  Related  ideas  can  be  found  in  LAURENCE H.  TRIBE,  AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONAL 

LAW ? 16-21  (2d  ed.  1988),  and  Owen  M.  Fiss,  Groups and  the Equal  Protection  Clause, 5 
PHIL. &  PUB. AFF. 107.  147-70 (1976).  There  are, however,  important differences  between 
these  approaches and what I defend  here, partly because  of my understanding of the equality 
principle, and partly because  I suggest that the principle is for legislative  rather than judicial 
enforcement.  Many such differences  will emerge  in the  course  of  the  discussion. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2412 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

from a moral point of view.  This form of inequality is likely to be 
unusually persistent and to extend into multiple social spheres, in- 
deed into the interstices of everyday life. 

I do not claim that this is the only valid understanding of equal- 
ity.  On the  contrary, there are many such understandings. Our 
Constitution's equality principle is plural rather than singular. It 
has  numerous manifestations;4 a  unitary conception of  equality 
would not exhaust the term as it operates in American legal and 
political discussion. Consider political equality and principles disal- 
lowing discrimination on the basis of religious conviction or preju- 
dice. These conceptions of equality warrant support, and they have 
considerable grounding in our constitutional traditions.5 

I emphasize the anticaste principle, not because it exhausts the 
concept of equality, but because it captures an understanding that 
has strong roots in American legal traditions, has considerable in- 
dependent appeal, is violated in many important parts of American 
life, and fits well with the best understandings of liberty. In other 
words, the anticaste principle is an important and perhaps insuffi- 
ciently  appreciated part of  the  lawyer's conception of  equality 
under the American Constitution.6 

In describing the anticaste principle, I also offer some informa- 
tion about racial and gender disparities in the United States.  I do 
so because it is hard to have a sense of the world of discrimination 
without having a good sense of the data.  Legal discussions about 
equality are too often and too exclusively conceptual, attempting to 
offer perspicuous descriptions of discrimination or inequality with- 
out a sufficient discussion of the facts that underlie either the prob- 
lem or the solutions.7 I will not offer much detail about solutions 
here, but I do hope that my presentation of information about ex- 
isting inequalities will help to illuminate the problem. 

I emphasize as well that enforcement of the anticaste principle is 
mostly for legislative and executive officers and only secondarily for 
courts. Sometime in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centu- 
ries, there was a large-scale transformation in the substance of the 
constitutional equality principle. This is a long and as-yet-untold 

4.  In this way it is similar to most constitutional rights, which serve a number of functions. 
5.  Some  are discussed  in  SUNSTEIN, supra note  *, at  123-61. 
6.  Although  this  is  a  lawyer's conception,  it is  mostly  for nonjudicial enforcement.  See 

infra section  II.B.2. 

7.  See  Stephen  J. Schulhofer, The  Feminist  Challenge  in  Criminal Law,  (Feb.  28,  1994) 
(unpublished  manuscript, on  file  with  author)  (discussing  the  need  for  data  and  midlevel 
solutions  in  feminist  reform of  criminal law). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2413 

story.  A  set of amendments originally designed at least in part to 
eliminate social caste eventually became a requirement that legisla- 
tion be reasonably related to legitimate state interests -  a require- 
ment  whose  original home  was  the  Due  Process Clause.8 The 
transformation makes some sense if we think about the limited ca- 
pacities of  the judiciary. Taken seriously, a  full-blown anticaste 
principle is  beyond judicial competence.  But if  the  Constitution 
speaks to nonjudicial actors as well, the broad commitments of the 
Fourteenth Amendment have  a  different meaning outside  the 
courtroom. It is possible, in short, to insist on the continuing im- 
portance of one of the great unused provisions of the Constitution, 
Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment: "The Congress shall have 
power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this 
article."9 

I.  FALSE STARTS 

In this Part, I discuss three understandings of the equality prin- 
ciple.  All three have played a major role in public and sometimes 
legal debate. The first stresses the advantages of free markets. The 
second relies on  respect for existing preferences. The third and 
most important sees the equality principle as a ban on unreasonable 
distinctions between social groups. As we will see, the difficulties 
with each of these understandings help lay the foundation for the 
anticaste principle. 

A.  Markets? 

In light of the extraordinary recent outburst of international en- 
thusiasm for free markets, it should not be surprising to find a re- 
surgence of the view that all invidious discrimination on the basis of 
race and sex will be eliminated by laissez faire.10 On this view, the 
appropriate approach for law would be to eliminate constraints on 
market ordering and to rely solely on property rights, voluntary ar- 
rangements, and freedom of contract to produce equality. 

8.  U.S.  CONST. amends.  V,  XIV;  see,  e.g.,  Allgeyer  v.  Louisiana,  165  U.S.  578,  589-90 
(1897)  (striking down  a Louisiana law limiting the  right of  out-of-state  insurance companies 
to do business in Louisiana as an infringement on liberty of contract not justified by the law's 
purpose). 

9.  U.S.  CONST. amend.  XIV,  ? 5. 
10.  See, e.g., RICHARD A.  EPSTEIN, FORBIDDEN GROUNDS 59-78  (1992).  But see id. at 76 
(conceding  that discrimination of  some  sort will persist in markets because  such discrimina- 
tion  is "rational").  I focus on  race and gender equality, with occasional  reference  to  disabil- 
ity.  Other  forms  of  inequality  raise additional  issues  that  I cannot  take  up  here.  See  infra 
section  II.B.4. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2414 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

In many ways, free  markets are indeed  connected  with equality 
on  the  basis  of  race  and  sex.  Legal  barriers to  female  and  black 
employment  are a form of  government  intervention  in the  market, 
and  they  have  often  been  an  effective  and  severe  hindrance  to 
equality.  Antifemale  and antiblack cartels, especially when govern- 
ment-sponsored,  can  drive  down  both  wages  and  employment  for 
women  and blacks.  In a free market, by contrast, all people  should 
succeed  to the  extent  that they are able to perform their respective 
functions  -  as employers,  employees,  co-workers,  and customers. 
It is unnecessary  to  stress that women  and blacks often  perform as 
well  as  or  better  than  men  and  whites.  Once  discriminatory laws 
are eliminated,  free markets may therefore  accomplish a great deal 
in breaking down a system of inequality.  In South Africa, for exam- 
ple, it is most doubtful that the system of apartheid could have  sur- 
vived  under free  markets.  Too many employers  would  have  found 
it desirable to hire blacks; too  many companies would have found it 
in  their  economic  interest  to  serve  people  on  a  nondiscriminatory 
basis. 

The point can be made through a simple example.  Suppose that 
an  employer  prefers  to  hire  only  men;  suppose  he  believes  that 
women  belong  in the  home.  This employer  should  face  severe  ob- 
stacles  to  continued  profitability  and,  in  the  end,  might  even  be 
driven out of the market.  An  employer who restricts himself to one 
social group will be placed at a serious disadvantage; it would be  as 
if he refuses to hire people  whose  last names begin with a particular 
letter.  If the  employer  is sexist or racist, his "taste" for discrimina- 
tion operates  as an implicit tax on the operation of his business.  To 
say the least, self-imposed  implicit taxes are self-defeating  in a com- 
petitive  market. 

Much the  same  can be  said for a company that prefers to  serve 
only whites or men.  Such a company will artificially restrict its busi- 
ness  to  one  social  group, and it will  thus impair its  own  economic 
interests by reducing its market and the  corresponding demand for 
its  product.  An  employer  who  hires and serves  women  as well  as 
men  should  do  much better  in market competition. 

As  a  complete  solution,  however,  free  markets  will  be  inade- 
quate if used to remedy sex and race discrimination.  There are sev- 
eral  reasons.11  First,  a  market  system  allows  discriminatorily 
motivated  third  parties  to  impose  costs  on  people  who  agree  to 

11.  A  more  detailed  discussion,  with  citations,  can  be  found  in  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Why 

Markets Don't  Stop Discrimination, 8 Soc.  PHIL. &  POLY. 22, 23-34  (1991). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August  1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2415 

treat men and women, or blacks and whites, equally.12 Customers, 
co-workers, and others sometimes withdraw patronage and services 
from nondiscriminatory employers. For example, a law firm that 
hires female lawyers might find itself punished in the marketplace. 
A grocery store that hires blacks might find it harder to attract cus- 
tomers. Under these circumstances, market pressures do not check 
discrimination but instead increase the likelihood that it will con- 
tinue. Ironically, the failure to discriminate operates as a tax on the 
employer's business, rather than vice versa.  A  nondiscriminator 
could face  the  equivalent of  a  self-imposed tax by virtue of  co- 
worker or customer reactions. 

The phenomenon is hardly unusual. Consider, for example, a 
shopkeeper whose customers do  not  like  dealing with blacks or 
women; a commercial airline whose patrons react unfavorably to 
female pilots; a university whose students and alumni prefer a pri- 
marily white faculty; a hospital whose patients are uncomfortable 
with female doctors or black nurses. The persistence of private seg- 
regation in major league baseball is a familiar example. The latter 
finds a modern analogue in studies of the prices of baseball cards, 
which show a  race-based premium for white players.13 We may 
speculate that in some athletic competitions customers prefer white 
athletes, and these preferences play a role in some market deci- 
sions. In cases of this kind, market pressures create rather than pre- 
vent  discrimination.14 

Of course, third parties do not have uniform preferences. Many 
and perhaps most whites and men are not discriminators. In any 
case third-party preferences are sharply divided, and for this reason 
we should expect a wide range of diverse views and practices, each 
gaining and losing influence in  different times and places.15 My 
point is  only that in  some  important sectors, and for important 
lengths of time, the existence of third-party discrimination can en- 

12.  See  GEORGE A.  AKERLOF, The economics  of  the caste and  of  the rat race and  other 

woeful  tales, in  AN  ECONOMIST'S BOOK OF TALES 23, 31-43  (1984). 

13.  See  Clark Nardinelli  &  Curtis Simon,  Customer Racial Discrimination in  the Market 

for  Memorabilia:  The Case of  Baseball,  105 Q.J. ECON. 575  (1990). 

14.  On  this account  it remains necessary to  explain  why third parties are not  themselves 
hurt  by  their  taste.  Sometimes  they  will  be;  an  employee  who  prefers  not  to  work  with 
women  may  find himself  with  a  worse job.  But  sometimes  the  third parties  will  not  suffer 
competitive  injuries in markets because  they are not  competing  in markets -  consider peo- 
ple  who  prefer not  to  fly in airplanes piloted  by blacks -  and sometimes  the  harm inflicted 
by  a discriminatory taste  will operate  like  any other  harm inflicted by  a  taste,  for example, 
the  taste  for  color  television  or  high-quality ice  cream.  Prices  will  go  up,  but  the  relevant 
goods  will not  be  driven  from the  market. 

15.  The  point  is emphasized  in EPSTEIN, supra note  10, at 30-31,  44-46. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2416 

Michigan  Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

sure that inequality persists even  in free markets.  The extent  of the 
effect  is of  course  an empirical question. 

Thus far, then,  we  have  seen  that co-worker  and customer  dis- 
crimination may lead markets to perpetuate  discrimination.  A  sec- 
ond  problem  with  relying  on  markets  to  produce  equality  is  that 
race and sex discrimination can be a successful and indeed  ordinary 
market  response  to  generalizations  or  stereotypes  that,  although 
overbroad and perhaps in one sense even invidious, provide an eco- 
nomically  rational basis  for  market  decisions.16  If  stereotypes  are 
economically  rational,  the  market  will  not  operate  against  them. 
Stereotypes  and generalizations are of course a common  ingredient 
in market decisions.  There are information costs in making distinc- 
tions  within  categories,  and  people  sometimes  make  the  category 
do  the  work of  a more  individualized and perhaps more  costly  ex- 
amination  into  the  merits of  the  particular employee. 

Many categorical judgments  are not  only  pervasive  but also  le- 
gitimate.  We all rely on them every day.  Employers rely on proxies 
of various kinds, even though the proxies are overbroad generaliza- 
tions and far from entirely accurate.  Test scores, level  of education, 
and prestige of college  attended are all part of rational employment 
decisions.  Despite  their  imprecision,  such  categorical  judgments 
might  well  be  efficient  as  a  cost-saving  device  and  thus  persist  in 
free  markets; but they  might also  disserve the  cause  of  equality  on 
the  basis of  race  and gender. 

This is so  especially  in light of the fact that race and gender  are 
so  highly  visible  and  thus  so  cheaply  used  as  a  proxy  for  other 
things.17  Different  characteristics - 
for  example,  educational  at- 
tainment  -  might be  more  accurate as proxies but less  efficient  to 
use  because  the  cost  of  gaining accurate information is higher. 

We  might  compare  statistical  generalizations  of  the  sort  I  am 
describing  with  the  category  of prejudice.  Perhaps we  can  under- 
stand that controversial term to include a continuum of unnecessary 
or inefficient categorical judgments, including, for example, (i) a be- 
lief  that  members  of  a  group  have  certain characteristics when  in 
fact they do not, (ii) a belief  that many or most members of a group 
have certain characteristics when in fact only some  or a few do, and 
(iii)  a reliance  on fairly accurate group-based generalizations when 

16.  See  Edmund  S.  Phelps,  The Statistical Theory of  Racism and  Sexism, 62  AM. ECON. 

REV. 659  (1972). 

17.  The point is, of course, related to the discussion of why a morally irrelevant character- 
istic should be  highly visible in order to be part of  a caste system.  See infra text accompany- 
ing  notes  70-75. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August  1994] 

The  Anticaste  Principle 

2417 

more accurate and reasonably cheap classifying devices are avail- 
able, or, in other words, when there is a more efficient classifying 
device.  Statistical discrimination is quite different. It occurs when 
the generalization, though inaccurate, is less costly to use than any 
subclassifying device, even though subclassifications would be more 
accurate in particular cases. Under plausible assumptions about the 
cost of  acquiring information, statistical discrimination might well 
be efficient. 

Reliance on race- or sex-based generalizations may be a product 
of prejudice, but this need not be the case.  Generalizations about 
race and gender may well be overbroad, but no more so than gener- 
alizations that are typically and unproblematically used in  many 
areas of decision. Note that "college attended" might well be used 
in the employment market, despite its considerable imprecision as a 
classifying device.  Moreover, in the area of sex discrimination, an 
employer might discriminate against women, not because he hates 
or devalues them, but because he has found from experience that 
women devote more time to child care than do men, or that women 
are more likely to take leave for domestic duties. For this reason 
sex discrimination might be based on genuine facts, not irrational 
prejudice -  although those facts may themselves be a product of 
discrimination elsewhere, particularly within the  family.18 This 
form of statistical discrimination -  judgments based on statistically 
reasonable stereotyping -  need not be a form of prejudice. 

My point here is not to celebrate or to condemn statistical dis- 
crimination but instead to say that economically rational decisions 
can ensure that inequality will persist for women or blacks, even or 
perhaps especially in free markets. In various ways, blacks differ 
from whites and women differ from men.  In light of these differ- 
ences, it is fully possible that in certain settings, race- or sex-based 
generalizations are sufficiently accurate as proxies for certain char- 
acteristics. The conclusion is that free markets will not drive out 
discrimination to the extent that discrimination is an efficient use of 
generalizations that, while inaccurate in some ways, have sufficient 
accuracy to persist as classificatory devices. 

This point suggests that there is no sharp discontinuity between 
laws calling for affirmative action and laws embodying the antidis- 
crimination principle, at least if  the outlawed discrimination is  a 
form of statistical discrimination. The ban on statistical discrimina- 

18.  See SUSAN M. OKIN, JUSTICE, GENDER, AND THE FAMILY 110-33 (1989)  (arguing that 
the  family  as currently constituted  "raises psychological  as well  as practical barriers against 
women  in all other  spheres"). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2418 

Michigan  Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

tion  shows  that  the  law  does  not  just  forbid  irrational bigotry  or 
prejudice.  Instead,  the  most  elementary  antidiscrimination princi- 
ple  singles  out  one  kind of  economically  rational stereotyping  and 
condemns  it, on  the  theory  that such stereotyping  has the  harmful 
long-term  consequence  of  perpetuating  group-based  inequalities. 
Along  this  dimension,  the  distinction  between  affirmative  action 
and  antidiscrimination is  thin in principle.19 It  is  thin because  the 
law does  not  only  ban discrimination rooted  in prejudice or hostil- 
ity; it also  bans discrimination in the  form of  statistical generaliza- 
tions  of  the  sort  that  employers,  customers,  and others  rely  on  all 
the  time.  The ban on statistical discrimination is based on many of 
the  reasons  that  support affirmative action.  I do  not  contend  that 
the  two  are the  same  thing. 

Thus far, then, we  have  seen  that markets are unlikely  to  bring 
about equality on the basis of race and sex when third parties are in 
a position  to impose costs on nondiscriminators and when statistical 
discrimination is rational.  The third problem with relying on laissez 
faire to eliminate discrimination is that in free markets, people  who 
are subject to  discrimination may fail to  attempt to  overcome  their 
unequal status because they will fail to invest in "human capital" 
the time and effort, in terms of education and experience, needed  to 
produce economically valued characteristics. They may fail to do so 
simply because  of  current social practices and a discriminatory sta- 
tus quo.  Suppose, for example, that there is current sex discrimina- 
tion  in  a  certain  field  for  any  number  of  reasons  - 
employers 
themselves  prefer to  hire male  employees,  or  third parties impose 
pressures in  discriminatory directions, or employers  engage  in  sta- 
tistical discrimination.  These  discriminatory phenomena  will affect 
the  decisions  of  women  with regard to  education  or training in the 
relevant field and indeed may affect their aspirations in general.  As 
market  participants,  women  might  well  invest  less  than  men  in 
training to  be,  for example,  doctors  or technicians, if these  profes- 
sions discriminate against women and thus reward their investments 
less  than those  of  men.  The  decision  to  invest  less  would  be  fully 
rational  as a response  to  the  practices of  employers.20 

19.  See  David  A.  Strauss, The Myth of  Colorblindness, 1986 SUP. CT. REV. 99  (arguing 
that insistence on nondiscrimination in fact amounts to affirmative action when racial classifi- 
cations  are accurate). 

20.  Notably,  this  is  a  form of  market  failure, unlike  the  first two  problems.  The  lower 
investments  in  human capital will produce  externalities.  See  Shelly J. Lundberg &  Richard 
Startz, Private Discrimination and Social Intervention in Competitive Labor Markets, 73 AM. 
ECON. REV. 340 (1983)  (producing a model  in which workers with similar initial capabilities 
end up with different amounts of human capital according to how much employers are willing 
to  pay different  groups of  workers). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August  1994] 

The Anticaste Principle 

2419 

Of  course  the  same  would  be  true in the  racial context.  If law 
firms  are  less  likely  to  hire  blacks  than  whites,  blacks  will,  other 
things being  equal, be  less inclined than whites  to go to  law school. 
If shops  are less likely to hire blacks than whites, blacks will be less 
likely  than whites  to  acquire the  skills necessary  to  work in  shops. 
In  every  sector  of  the  market that contains  discrimination, the  be- 
havior of prospective  black employees  will be affected,  in the sense 
that blacks will scale  back their investments  in acquiring the  requi- 
site  training and skills. 

The result of these various factors can be a vicious circle or even 
a  spiral.  Because  of  existing  discrimination, members  of  the  rele- 
vant groups will invest less in human capital.  Because  of this lower 
investment,  the  discrimination  may  persist  or  even  increase,  be- 
cause  its statistical rationality increases.  Because  of  this effect,  the 
discriminatory  tastes  of  employers  and  customers  may  well  in- 
crease.  Because  of this effect, investments in human capital will de- 
crease  still further, and so  on. 

These  considerations  suggest  that  although  free  markets  can 
often  help  further the  cause  of  race  and gender  equality,  they  are 
not  a panacea.  Discrimination  can persist because  of  the  effects  of 
third-party discriminators, because  of statistical discrimination, and 
because  of  adverse effects  on investment  in human capital.21 If dis- 
crimination is to be reduced,22 markets are not enough; supplemen- 
tal  legal  controls  will  be  necessary.  Empirical  questions  are  very 
important here, and we cannot get a full handle on the subject with- 
out  knowing  a  great  deal  about  the  facts.  For  example,  in  some 
imaginable  contexts,  third-party prejudice will be  too  weak  to  pro- 
mote  much discrimination, and in some  imaginable contexts,  preju- 
dice  will be  a spur to further investments  in human capital.  What I 
am suggesting here, based on highly plausible assumptions and sup- 
ported by recognizable phenomena  in the United  States, is that free 
markets  can  fail to  undermine  race and sex  inequality. 

B.  Preferences? 

I  turn  now  to  an  influential  claim  about  the  relationship  be- 
tween  discrimination  and  law.  The  claim  is  that  the  legal  system 
should  take  preferences  as  a  given  rather  than  attempt  to  alter 

21.  Of  course  women  and blacks have  sometimes  invested  a  large amount  to  overcome 
discrimination, and of  course  I am describing possibilities,  not certainties.  To see  the effects 
of  free  markets  on  race and sex  equality,  a good  deal  of  empirical data is  necessary. 

22.  The question  whether discrimination should be reduced requires a theory of equality, 

which  reliance  on  free  markets does  not  itself  provide. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2420 

Michigan  Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

them.  This  claim seems  especially important for  sex  equality, 
though it bears on race equality as well.  In many different nations, 
and in some places in the United States, women frequently say that 
they are content with the sexual status quo.  Legal efforts might 
therefore be thought to represent an unacceptable form of pater- 
nalism.  If women themselves are content, on what basis can the 
legal system intervene? Is not legal intervention an illegitimate in- 
terference with the right to liberty or autonomy? Thus some people 
suggest, for example, that abortion cannot possibly raise problems 
of sex equality because many women are opposed to abortion.23 
These questions raise some complex issues; I  deal with them 
only briefly here.24 The basic response is that a social or legal sys- 
tem that has produced preferences, and has done so by limiting op- 
portunities unjustly, can hardly justify itself by reference to existing 
preferences. The satisfaction of private preferences, whatever their 
content and origins, does not respond to a persuasive conception of 
liberty, welfare, or autonomy. The notion of autonomy should refer 
instead to decisions reached with a full and vivid awareness of avail- 
able opportunities, with relevant information, and without illegiti- 
mate  or  excessive  constraints on  the  process  of  preference 
formation. When there is inadequate information or opportunity, 
decisions and even preferences should be  described as unfree or 
nonautonomous. 

Private preferences often  do  adjust to  limitations in  current 
practices and opportunities. Consider here the story of the fox and 
the sour grapes.25 The fox does not want the grapes because he 
considers them to be sour, but his belief that the grapes are sour is 
based on the fact that they are unavailable. One cannot therefore 
justify the cessation of the fox's efforts to get the grapes by refer- 
ence to the fox's preferences. Mary Wollstonecraft's A  Vindication 
of  the Rights of  Women26 applies this basic idea  to  the  area of  dis- 
crimination on the basis of sex.  Wollstonecraft writes, "I will ven- 
ture to affirm, that a girl, whose spirits have not been damped by 
inactivity, or innocence tainted by false shame, will always be  a 
romp, and the doll will never excite attention unless confinement 

23.  See,  e.g.,  Michael  W.  McConnell,  How  Not  To Promote  Serious  Deliberation About 

Abortion,  58  U.  CHI. L. REV. 1181, 1190 & nn.17-18 (1991)  (book  review). 

24.  For further discussion, see  ELIZABETH ANDERSON, VALUE IN ETHICS AND ECONOM- 

ICS (1993); JON ELSTER, SOUR GRAPES (1983); SEN, supra note  1, at 53-55. 

25.  See ELSTER, supra note 24, at 109-40 (including an extended  argument on  the point). 
26.  MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT, A  VINDICATION OF THE RIGHTS OF WOMEN (Carol  H. 

Poston  ed.,  Norton  &  Co.  1975)  (2d  ed.  1792). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2421 

allows her no  alternative."27 Mill makes the  same points in  his 
work on sex equality.28 

Amartya Sen offers an especially vivid real-world example from 
India. In 1944, the All-India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health 
surveyed widows and widowers about their health. About 48.5% of 
the widowers said that they were "ill" or in "indifferent" health, 
while only 2.5% of widows gave the same response.29 In these cir- 
cumstances it would seem odd to base health policy on subjectively 
held views about health conditions. Such an approach would en- 
sure that existing discrimination would be severely aggravated. 

One goal of a legal system is, in short, to ensure autonomy not 
merely in the satisfaction of preferences but also and more funda- 
mentally in the processes of preference formation. The view that 
freedom requires an opportunity to choose among alternatives finds 
a natural supplement in the view that people should not face unjus- 
tifiable constraints on  the  free development of  their preferences 
and beliefs. 

This discussion does not at all mean that government should feel 
free to reject existing views of the citizenry, or that such views are 
irrelevant to  antidiscrimination policy.  For purely prudential rea- 
sons, it is important for government to be cautious about intruding 
on  widespread current views even if it seems clear that they are 
wrong.  A  system of governmental reforms that does not connect 
with public convictions is likely to be futile or self-defeating. More- 
over, government is itself vulnerable to the same distortions that 
affect private preferences.30 There is no reason to  think that the 
judgments that underlie government action are systematically less 
susceptible to  distortion than the judgments that underlie private 
action. In addition, there is certainly some relation between private 
desires and individual and social welfare, and for this reason private 
desires should generally count in deciding on appropriate policy. 

For all these reasons government should be modest in its will- 
ingness to revisit private desires and beliefs; certainly it should be 
cautious before proceeding against apparently widespread public 
judgments. All I suggest here is that private preferences are an un- 

27.  Id.  at 43. 
28.  See JOHN STUART MILL, THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN 15-16 (MIT Press 1970) (1869) 

(writing against the  claim that the  existing  desires  of  women  are a product of  consent). 

29.  AMARTYA SEN,  COMMODITIES AND CAPABILITIES 82  (1985);  see  generally  JOSEPH 

RAZ,  ETHICS IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN  169-72  (1994). 

30.  See  W.  KIP VISCUSI, FATAL TRADEOFFS 21-23  (1992)  (illustrating this point  for risk 

perceptions). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2422 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

promising  foundation  for  antidiscrimination  policy  to  the  extent 
that such preferences  can be shown to be  a product of unjust back- 
ground conditions. 

C.  Irrational or  Unreasonable Distinctions? 

Much of equality law has proceeded  by asking whether similarly 
situated people  have been  treated differently.  On this view,  blacks 
can be  treated differently from whites only when they  are different 
from  whites;  the  same  is  true  of  differential  treatment  between 
women  and men.  At  least  implicitly, legal  doctrines  in the  area of 
discrimination  allow  differences  in  treatment  when  people  really 
are  different  and ban  differences  in  treatment  when  people  really 
are the  same.31 

It will  readily appear that the  notion  that the  similarly situated 
must  be  treated  similarly is  purely  formal.  To  become  workable, 
that  notion  requires  a  substantive  theory  explaining  what  sorts  of 
similarities and differences  are relevant.  Blacks and whites, for ex- 
ample,  are  differently  situated  along  many dimensions;  so  too  are 
women  and men.  The  government  could  not justify  a racially dis- 
criminatory law  enforcement  policy  on  the  ground that blacks  are 
disproportionately  involved  in crime, even  if such a policy could be 
justified  by  reference  to  actual  racial  differences  with  respect  to 
participation  in  crime.  What  is  necessary  is  a  theory  to  explain 
when differences will be treated as relevant.  By itself the "similarly 
situated"  test  cannot  supply that theory.  From this we  might con- 
clude that the problem with the theory is that it is empty, not that it 
is wrong.32 

As  a reaction to the "similarly situated" test in the abstract, this 
conclusion  seems  right.  But  from  Supreme  Court  jurisprudence 
over the last few decades, we can construct a general understanding 

31.  See, e.g., Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 57, 78 (1981) (upholding men-only draft regis- 
tration  on  the  grounds  that  "[m]en  and  women,  because  of  the  combat  restrictions  on 
women,  are  simply  not  similarly situated  for purposes  of  a  draft"); Michael  M.  v.  Superior 
Court, 450 U.S.  464, 476 (1981)  (plurality opinion)  (upholding  a statutory rape law applying 
only to underage females because  "the statute ...  reasonably reflects the fact that the conse- 
quences  of sexual intercourse and pregnancy fall more heavily on the female than the male"); 
Califano  v. Webster, 430  U.S.  313, 317-18 (1977)  (upholding  a statute  that treated  men  and 
women  differently with respect to social security benefits because  Congress acted to compen- 
sate  women  for past employment  discrimination); Califano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S.  199, 216-17 
(1977)  (plurality opinion)  (striking down  a statute  that treated  men  and women  differently 
with respect to social security benefits in part because  Congress did not enact the scheme  "to 
remedy  the  arguably greater needs  of  women"). 

32.  See Peter  Westen,  The Empty Idea of  Equality, 95 HARV. L. REV. 537, 543-48 (1982) 
(arguing that equality is meaningless without a separate standard for judging whether people 
are  the  same  or different). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2423 

of what the test means, and this understanding is not merely formal. 
On  that  understanding, blacks must be  treated  the  same  as whites 
to  the  extent  that  they  are  the  same  as  whites;  women  must  be 
treated  the  same  as  men  to  the  extent  that  they  are  the  same  as 
men.  But  these  ideas  also  seem  unhelpful.  To  what  extent  are 
blacks the  same  as whites,  and to what extent  are women  the  same 
as men?  The  law has answered this question  largely by saying that 
blacks  and  whites  should  almost  always  be  taken  to  be  the  same, 
and that women  should be taken to be the same as men unless there 
is  (i)  a physical difference  associated  with reproduction,33 (ii)  a le- 
gally  constructed  difference  not  itself  in  dispute,34 or  (iii)  a  differ- 
ence  closely  associated with past discrimination for which the law in 
dispute operates  as a remedy or compensation.35  In all other cases, 
distinctions  based  on  race and gender should be  struck down  as ir- 
rational, as stereotypical, or as based on hostility and prejudice.36 It 
follows  that  the  law  operates  as a  ban  on  formal inequality  of  the 
sort  that  prohibits  most  explicit  distinctions  between  men  and 
women  or blacks  and whites. 

There is much to be said on behalf of invalidating formal distinc- 
tions  on  the basis of  race and gender.  Wholesale  disparagement of 
the  pursuit of  formal equality makes little  sense.  In the  racial con- 
text,  formal inequality is often  associated with second-class  citizen- 
ship  for  blacks.  Sometimes  the  same  has  been  true  for  gender  as 
well,  as in the exclusion  of women  from the jury and from the prac- 
tice  of  law.  Many formal distinctions do help produce inequality in 
the  form  of  second-class  status,  and  many  of  them  are  based  on 
prejudice.  Even  if  some  formal  distinctions  between  blacks  and 
whites  or  men  and  women  can  be  justified,  a  strong  presumption 
against  such  distinctions  might be  defended  as being  well  adapted 
to  the  limited  capacities  of  courts.  Individualized  inquiry into  the 
legitimacy  of  formal distinctions might produce too  many errors in 
particular cases.  Perhaps  a  flat  ban  on  race  and  sex  distinctions 
could  be justified  as a way of  producing results that make  sense  in 
the  aggregate  and that allow errors that are few enough  in number 
to  be  acceptable  in  light  of  the  risks  that  would  be  produced  by 
more  individualized  inquiry.  In  addition,  formal  inequalities  tend 

33.  Michael M., 450  U.S.  at 471-73. 
34.  Rostker, 453  U.S.  at 78. 
35.  Webster, 430  U.S.  at 318. 
36.  See, e.g., Craig v. Boren,  429 U.S.  190 (1976)  (striking down  a statute  that permitted 
women  but  not  men  between  the  ages  of  18 and 20  to  purchase 3.2%  beer);  see  also  cases 
cited  supra note  31. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2424 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

to  encourage  people  to  think  in  terms  of  race  and  gender,  and  a 
broad prohibition on laws containing such inequalities therefore has 
a desirable  educative  or expressive  effect. 

Similar ideas could help justify a judicial refusal to test carefully 
laws  that  discriminate in  fact  but  that  do  not  embody  formal  ine- 
quality.37 Careful scrutiny of  laws that discriminate in fact but not 
on  their face  might lead  courts to  face  issues that are beyond  their 
competence  and best assessed legislatively.  Consider the extraordi- 
nary difficulties that would be raised by asking whether  a veteran's 
preference  law  would  be  adopted  in  a  world  of  sex  equality,  or 
whether it could be adequately justified in light of its discriminatory 
effects.38 

These  considerations  might form the  basis for  a justification of 
the  Supreme  Court's  current  equality  jurisprudence,  casting  it  as 
reasonable  in principle and sensibly  adapted to  the  courts' modest 
role.  But there is a problem with this project.  It is not at all simple 
to  come  up with a sensible  theory of equality that would map onto, 
or adequately  account for, the existing approach.  On what possible 
theory  would  the  Constitution ban all explicit race and sex  distinc- 
tions  and  allow  all  other  laws  to  stand?  There  are  two  problems 
here. 

First, some  deviations  from formal equality might well  promote 
equality  as that term is often  or best understood.  Consider, for ex- 
ample,  a  decision  of  a  local  police  department  to  furnish  special 
police  protection  for women  who  are traveling alone  at night,  and 
suppose  that the decision  was based on a recent outbreak of sexual 
violence  in the area.  It is at least unclear that this decision is incon- 
sistent  with  equality  as it is best  understood.  Perhaps it  promotes 
equality  by  counteracting  social  conditions  that  subject women  to 
disproportionate  risks.39  From  this  example  it  may  follow  that 
some  laws  that  treat  women  differently  from  men  are  acceptable 
and  indeed  promote  the  goal  of  equality,  rightly  understood. 
Califano  v.  Webster,40 upholding  formal  sex  discrimination  in  the 
benefit  formula under social security law, is an explicit and unusual 
reflection of this point.  Perhaps a maternal deference  rule could be 

37.  See  Washington v.  Davis,  426  U.S.  229, 246-48  (1976). 
38.  See David  A.  Strauss, Discriminatory Intent and the Taming of  Brown, 56 U.  CHI. L. 

REV. 935,  1000-03  (1989). 

39.  Cf  Michael M. v. Superior Court, 450 U.S.  464 (1981)  (plurality opinion)  (upholding 
a sex discriminatory statutory rape law on the ground that nature already deters women  from 
engaging  in  sexual  intercourse  by  imposing  the  penalty  of  pregnancy, something  to  which 
men  are not  subject). 

40.  430  U.S.  313  (1977). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2425 

justified during child custody proceedings; perhaps alimony deter- 
minations should be required to consider domestic work, which is 
closely correlated with gender.41 

Alternatively, some laws raise equality concerns even if they do 
not violate formal equality. Consider a law that forbids pregnant 
women from appearing in public. Perhaps no man can be similarly 
situated to  a pregnant woman, and perhaps there is no problem, 
from the standpoint of formal equality, in these circumstances. But 
from the  standpoint of  sex  equality, does  this make any sense? 
Surely problems of inequality are raised by a law that penalizes a 
physical capacity limited to one gender.42 Or suppose that the law 
forbids women from having an  abortion, or  excludes pregnancy 
from a disability program. Under current constitutional law, there 
is apparently no issue of sex discrimination.43 Men cannot get preg- 
nant; women and men are to that extent not similarly situated. A 
law that restricts abortion or excludes pregnancy therefore raises no 
equality problem. But this is an odd way to think about equality. If 
the law takes a characteristic limited to one group of citizens and 
turns that characteristic into a source of social disadvantage, it may 
well violate the equality principle, best conceived.44 

Let us push this argument further. Sometimes equality requires 
the similarly situated to be treated similarly. But sometimes people 
who are differently situated ought to  be  treated differently, pre- 
cisely in the interest of  equality.45 In the area of  disabilities, for 
example, the use of stairs denies equality to people who are bound 
to wheelchairs, and the use of oral communication creates a prob- 
lem for people who cannot hear.  Legislative changes have often 
been based on an understanding that people who are different must 

41.  The  point  is  made  nicely  in  Mary E.  Becker,  Maternal Feelings:  Myth,  Taboo, and 
Child Custody, 1 S. CAL. REV. L. & WOMEN'S STUD. 133,203-23  (1993), and Mary E. Becker, 
Prince  Charming:  Abstract Equality, 1987 Sup. CT. REV. 201, 219-22. 

42. But cf. Bray v. Alexandria Women's Health Clinic, 113 S. Ct. 753, 760-62 (1993) 
(holding that "the disfavoring of abortion ...  is not ipso facto sex discrimination"); Geduldig 
v. Aiello, 417 U.S. 484, 494-96 & n.20 (1974) (holding that excluding pregnancy coverage 
from a state disability program does not violate the Equal Protection Clause absent an intent 
to discriminate, even though "it is true that only women can become pregnant"). 

43. See Bray, 113 S. Ct. at 760-62; Geduldig, 417 U.S. at 494-98 & n.20. But note too the 
striking appearance of  arguments involving sex discrimination in Planned Parenthood v. 
Casey, 112 S. Ct. 2791, 2807, 2809, 2830-31 (1992) (joint opinion of O'Connor, Kennedy, & 
Souter, JJ.); 112 S. Ct. at 2842 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part); 112 S. 
Ct. at 2846-47 (Blackmun, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). 

44.  See  the  discussion  of  differences  in CATHARINE MACKINNON, Difference and Domi- 

nance:  On  Sex  Discrimination,  in FEMINISM UNMODIFIED 32  (1987). 

45. See SEN, supra note 1, at 16-19 (arguing that achieving equality in one area may ne- 

cessitate inequality in another area). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2426 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

be treated differently if they are to be treated equally.46 Of course, 
the  expense  of  the  adaptation  is  relevant  to  the  question  of  what, 
exactly,  ought  to  be  done.  But  constitutional  doctrine  has  rarely 
recognized  that  differences  in  people's  situations  might  justify  a 
claim for differential  treatment  in the  interest  of  equality. 

We  can  connect  this  issue  to  the  broader  failure  of  American 
law to do as much as it might have about existing inequalities on the 
basis  of  both  sex  and  race.  In  many  areas  there  has  been  much 
progress; women  cannot  be  excluded  from  professions,  and  most 
laws  that  build  on  or  ratify sex-based  stereotypes  are forbidden.47 
But if we look  at the basic indicators of social welfare, it is not clear 
how  much  difference  the  law  has  made.48  The  relative  labor- 
market status of women  has not changed much in the  aftermath of 
judicial decisions.49 The difference between  the earnings of women 
and of men was greater in 1980 than it was in 1955, even  though the 
key Supreme Court decisions were in the 1970s.50 Women continue 
to  face  occupational  segregation  in the workforce, and the  result is 
that  women  disproportionately  occupy  low-paying  positions  tradi- 
tionally identified as female.51 Thus Gerald Rosenberg's  influential 
study concludes  that "[c]ourt action contributed little to eliminating 
discrimination against women.  Cases were argued and won but, liti- 
gants  aside,  little  was  accomplished."52 

This conclusion  is probably too  blunt.  It is hard to measure the 
real-world effects  of  Supreme  Court decisions,  and the  ban on  un- 
equal  treatment  by government  may well  have  made  an important 
difference  for many women,  even  if it is hard for social scientists to 
tie  real-world  changes  to  judicial  decisions.  A  degree  of  agnosti- 
cism makes  good  sense  here.  But it is highly revealing that the  re- 
quirement of formal equality cannot be easily associated with large- 
scale  changes  in the  social  welfare  of  women. 

46.  The  most  important example  is the  Americans  with Disabilities  Act  of  1990, Pub. L. 
No.  101-336,  104  Stat.  328  (codified  as  amended  at  42  U.S.C.  ?? 12101-12213)  (Supp.  IV 
1992). 

47.  See  cases  cited  supra note  31. 
48.  See  infra  text  accompanying  notes  122-27; see  also  GERALD N.  ROSENBERG, THE 
HOLLOW HOPE  207-12 (1991) (concluding that "[l]itigation has failed to end [sex] discrimina- 
tion"); Mary E.  Becker,  Politics, Differences, and  Economic  Rights, 1989 U.  Cmii. LEGAL F. 
169, 172-74 (arguing that while  antidiscrimination laws have produced  progress for women, 
they  have  not  made  women  economically  equal  to  men). 

49.  ROSENBERG, supra note  48, at 207. 
50.  Id.  at 207, 209 tbl. 7.1. 
51.  Id.  at 209-10. 
52.  Id.  at 212. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August  1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2427 

Ironically, some existing inequalities may be partly a product of 
contemporary equality law. After divorce, women's economic wel- 
fare goes  sharply down, whereas men's goes sharply up.53 Legal 
rules, not nature, assure this result by generally refusing to take ac- 
count of domestic contributions and by refusing to regard the hus- 
band's success in  the  employment market as  a joint asset.  The 
relevant rules might well be subject to legal attack. 

Certainly some existing inequalities stem from laws that do not 
violate formal equality.  Consider veterans' preference laws, sex- 
based in effect if not in intent. Such laws are immune from attack 
under the formal equality standard, but they can have enormous 
effects on state employment.54 Perhaps more important is the exist- 
ence of a social security system that was designed for and that bene- 
fits male breadwinners, while helping women much less because 
women do not follow conventional male career paths.55 The failure 
to  provide adequate protection against rape, sexual harassment, 
and other forms of sexual assault and abuse might also raise equal- 
ity issues; these failures raise no problems under the formal equality 
approach. 

Now we  are in a position to make some general observations 
about the question of race and sex differences. The question for 
decision is not whether there is a difference -  often there certainly 
is -  but whether the legal and social treatment of that difference 
can be adequately justified. Differences need not imply inequality, 
and only some differences have that implication. When differences 
do have that implication, the implication is a result of legal and so- 
cial practices, not the result of differences alone.  Because they are 
legal and social, these practices might be altered even if the differ- 
ences remain.56 Existing law recognizes this point insofar as formal 
discrimination on  the basis of  race and sex is prohibited even if 
based on differences that are "real" in the sense that as a matter of 
simple fact, blacks are not similarly situated to whites and women 

53.  See  OKIN, supra  note  18,  at  160-67,  337;  LENORE J.  WEITZMAN, THE DIVORCE 

REVOLUTION 337-40  (1985). 

54.  See  Personnel  Admr.  v. Feeney,  442  U.S.  256, 259  (1979)  (holding  that a  Massachu- 
setts  law giving absolute  lifetime  preferences  to  veterans  for civil service  positions  does  not 
violate  the  Equal  Protection  Clause  even  though  the  law  "operates  overwhelmingly  to  the 
advantage  of  males"). 

55.  See  Becker,  supra  note  48,  at  176-78  (citing  statistics  to  show  the  adverse  conse- 

quences  of  structural discrimination in the  social  security system). 

56.  See  MACKINNON, supra note  44,  at 32-45  (arguing for an equality principle focusing 
on  gender  dominance,  not gender difference); see also JOHN RAWLS, A  THEORY OF JUSTICE 
107-08 (1971)  (stressing how the social structure affects the naturally unequal distribution of 
talents  and privileges). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2428 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

are not similarly situated to men.57 But existing law stops short in- 
sofar as it does not allow attacks on discriminatory but facially neu- 
tral practices based on an unequal status quo.58 

An  analogy may be helpful here.  The problems faced by dis- 
abled people are not a function of disability "alone" (an almost im- 
penetrable idea -  what would current disabilities even mean in a 
different world?) but are instead the result of the interaction be- 
tween physical and mental capacities on the one hand and a set of 
human obstacles made by and for the able-bodied on the other.  It 
is those human obstacles, rather than the capacities taken as brute 
facts, that create a large part of what it means to be disabled. One 
could not defend, for example, the construction of a building with 
stairs and without means of access for those on wheelchairs on the 
ground that those who need wheelchairs are different. The ques- 
tion is whether it is acceptable, or just, to construct a building that 
excludes people who need an unusual means of entry. That ques- 
tion may not be a simple one, but it cannot be answered simply by 
pointing to a difference. 

We might conclude that there are two fundamental problems 
with the "similarly situated" idea.  The first is that the idea cannot 
be made operational without a theory of some kind. The second is 
that the implicit theory behind the current approach seems hard to 
justify or even to describe. The best defense would suggest that the 
approach is adapted to a reasonable understanding of equality, or 
several reasonable understandings, while at the same time being 
uniquely well suited to judicial administration. This defense is far 
from implausible, but it suggests that a full justification of the con- 
stitutional equality principle remains to be offered. 

II.  THE ANTICASTE PRINCIPLE 

A.  Definition 

I  suggest that in  American constitutional law, an  important 
equality principle stems from opposition to  caste.  This principle 
grows out of the original rejection of the monarchical legacy59 and 

57.  See,  e.g.,  Califano  v.  Goldfarb,  430  U.S.  199  (1977)  (plurality opinion)  (forbidding 
discrimination  in  social  security  even  though  men  are  less  frequently  dependent  on  their 
spouses  than are women); see also J.E.B.  v. Alabama  ex rel. T.B.,  114 S. Ct. 1419, 1427 n.l1 
(1994)  (stating that peremptory challenges  are forbidden even  if women's  perceptions  really 
are different from men's); 114 S. Ct. at 1432 (O'Connor, J., concurring) (emphasizing that law 
does  not  always take  real differences  into  account). 

58.  See, e.g., Feeney, 442  U.S.  at 260. 
59.  See  GORDON S.  WOOD, THE RADICALISM OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 95-109 

(1992)  (discussing consequences  of  the  attack on  monarchical heritage). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2429 

the  explicit  constitutional  ban on  titles  of  nobility.60 The  principle 
was fueled  by the  Civil War Amendments  and the  New  Deal.  The 
opposition  should be understood  as an effort to eliminate,  in places 
large and small, the caste system rooted  in race and gender.  A  law 
is therefore  objectionable  on grounds of equality if it contributes to 
such a caste  system.  The controlling principle is that no group may 
be  made  into  second-class  citizens.  Instead  of  asking  "Are  blacks 
or women  similarly situated  to  whites  or men,  and if so  have  they 
been  treated  differently?" we  should ask "Does  the  law or practice 
in  question  contribute  to  the  maintenance  of  second-class  citizen- 
ship,  or  lower-caste  status, for blacks or women?" 

I  do  not  suggest  that  the  caste  features  of  current  American 
practices are at all the same, in nature or extent, as those features of 
genuine  caste  societies.  I do  not  suggest that dictionary definitions 
of  caste, or  caste  systems  as  understood  in,  say,  India,  lead  to  the 
simple conclusion  that there are major caste characteristics to mod- 
ern  American  society.  Certainly it  is  true  that  blacks  and  women 
have  risen to  most  of  the  highest reaches of  American  society; cer- 
tainly it is true that the most conspicuous  legal barriers have fallen; 
and these  phenomena,  along with many others,  suggest  that we  do 
not  have  anything like  a genuine  caste  system.  But  the  similarities 
between  true  caste  systems  and existing  American  inequalities  are 
what  make  our current practices a reason  for collective  concern. 

The motivating idea behind an anticaste principle is that without 
good  reason, social  and  legal structures should  not  turn differences 
that are  both  highly  visible and  irrelevant from  the moral point  of 
view  into  systematic social  disadvantages.  A  systematic  disadvan- 
tage  is  one  that  operates  along  standard and  predictable  lines  in 
multiple  and  important  spheres  of  life  and  that  applies  in  realms 
that relate to basic participation as a citizen in a democracy.  There 
is no  algorithm by which to identify those  realms.  As  a provisional 
working list, we might include education, freedom  from private and 
public  violence,  income  and  wealth,  political  representation,  lon- 
gevity,  health,  and political  influence.  The  anticaste  principle sug- 
to  basic  human  capabilities  and 
gests 
functionings,61 one  group, defined  in  terms of  a morally irrelevant 
characteristic, ought not to be systematically below  another.  As  we 
will soon  see,  the  Civil War Amendments  can be  understood  as an 
effort  to  counteract  this form of  disadvantage.62 

that  with  respect 

60.  U.S.  CONST. art. I,  ? 9, cl. 8; U.S.  CONST. art. I, ? 10, cl.  1. 
61.  See  SEN, supra note  1, at 39-42  (discussing capabilities  and functionings). 
62.  See  infra text  accompanying  notes  81-89. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2430 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

In  the  areas  of  race and sex  discrimination, a  large part of  the 
problem is this sort of systemic disadvantage.  A  social or biological 
difference has the effect of systematically subordinating members of 
the  relevant  group -  not  because  of  nature, but because  of  social 
and  legal  practices.  This  phenomenon  occurs  in  multiple  spheres 
and  along  multiple  indices  of  social  welfare:  poverty,  education, 
political  power,  employment,  susceptibility  to  violence  and  crime, 
distribution of  labor within the  family, and so  forth.  My emphasis 
on  these  variables  should  make  clear  that  I  am  not  stressing  eco- 
nomic  factors  alone,  though  these  are indeed  important.  I  am  in- 
stead  suggesting  reference  to  a  broad  and  eclectic  set  of  social 
indicators. 

Consider  in  this  regard the  Human  Development  Index  in  the 
United  Nations'  1993  Human  Development  Report.63 The  index, 
based  on  longevity,  educational  attainment, and per capita income, 
is itself extremely crude.64 But i  is highly revealing that the United 
States  as a whole  ranks sixth; that white  Americans  by themselves 
would  rank  first; and  that  black  Americans  by  themselves  would 
rank  thirty-first, next  to  Trinidad and Tobago.65  Consider  as  well 
the fact that every nation in the survey provides better lives for men 
than for women.66 

Systematic  differences  of  this kind help  produce  frequent  inju- 
ries  to  self-respect  - 
the  time-honored  constitutional  notion  of 
"stigma."  A  particular concern is that self-respect  and its social ba- 
ses ought not to be distributed along the lines of race and gender.67 
When  someone  is  a  member  of  a  group  that  is  systematically 
subordinate  to  others,  and when  the  group  characteristic is  highly 
visible,  insults  to  self-respect  are likely  to  occur  nearly  every  day. 
An  important aspect of a system of caste is that social practices pro- 
duce a range of obstacles to the development  of self-respect, largely 
because  of  the  presence  of  the highly visible but morally irrelevant 
characteristic that gives rise to lower-caste status.  Of course the law 
cannot provide self-respect, at least not in any simple or direct way. 
But group membership tends to fuel the cycle of discrimination dis- 

63.  UNITED  NATIONS  DEV.  PROGRAMME,  HUMAN  DEVELOPMENT  REPORT  1993 

(1993) 

[hereinafter  HUMAN  DEVELOPMENT  REPORT]. 

64.  See Richard A.  Epstein,  Caste and the Civil Rights Laws: From Jim Crow to Same-Sex 
Marriages, 92 MICH. L. REV.  2456, 2463-68 (1994)  (this issue); Cass R. Sunstein,  Well-Being 
and  the State, 107 HARV. L. REV.  1303, 1322 (1994). 

65.  HUMAN  DEVELOPMENT  REPORT, supra  note  63,  at  18  &  figs.  1.12-.13. 
66.  Id.  at  18 & tbl.  1.3. 
67.  Self-respect 

is  emphasized 

in  RAWLS,  supra  note  56,  at  440-46,  and  JOHN  RAWLS, 

POLITICAL  LIBERALISM  82,  106,  180-81  (1993). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2431 

cussed  in  Part I, in  which  employers  rely  on  statistical  discrimina- 
tion,  group  members  adjust  their  aspirations  to  this  reliance, 
statistical discrimination becomes  all the more rational, and so on.68 
That  is  the  caste  system  to  which  the  legal  system  must  respond. 
The  system  can operate  largely because  of  the high visibility of  the 
group  characteristic. 

Ideas  of  this kind raise some  obvious  questions:  Should we  not 
speak  of  individuals  instead  of  groups?  Is  it  not  equally  bad  to 
have, say, ten percent of the population in desperate or unfortunate 
conditions,  as  compared  with  having  a  high  percentage  of  black 
Americans  in such conditions?  And  exactly  why must the  morally 
irrelevant characteristic be highly visible?  It is true that an old  and 
independent  liberal principle protects freedom  from desperate  con- 
ditions,69 and  that  principle  is  offended  whenever  people  do  not 
have basic subsistence.  Freedom from desperate conditions  is a lib- 
eral  principle  connected  with  both  equality  and liberty,  and  it  can 
be  violated  even  in  the  absence  of  group-based  disadvantages. 
What I am suggesting is that a separate problem  of  inequality,  one 
with  constitutional  dimensions,  arises when  a group of  people,  de- 
fined in terms of a characteristic that is both highly visible and mor- 
ally  irrelevant,  faces  second-class  status.  The  anticaste  principle 
may  be  offended  by  second-class  status  even  if  most  or  all  of  the 
caste's  members  are  living  at  or  above  a  decent  floor.  A  special 
problem  with use  of  a highly visible  but morally irrelevant charac- 
teristic  is  that  each  group  member  - 
every  black  American  and 

68.  See supra text  accompanying notes  20-21. 
69.  Thus Thomas Jefferson wrote: 
I am conscious  that an equal division of property is impracticable.  But the consequences 
of  this enormous  inequality  producing so  much misery to  the  bulk of  mankind, legisla- 
tors  cannot  invent  too  many  devices  for  subdividing  property,  only  taking  care  to  let 
their  subdivisions  go  hand in  hand  with the  natural affections  of  the  human mind.... 
Another  means  of  silently  lessening  the  inequality  of  property  is  to  exempt  all  from 
taxation  below  a certain point, and to  tax the higher portions of property in geometrical 
progression  as they  rise.  Whenever  there  is in any country, uncultivated lands and  un- 
employed  poor,  it  is  clear  that  the  laws  of  property  have  been  so  far extended  as  to 
violate  the  natural right.  The  earth is given  as a common  stock  for man to  labour and 
live  on. 

Letter  from  Thomas  Jefferson  to  James  Madison  (Oct.  28,  1785),  in  8  THE PAPERS OF 
THOMAS JEFFERSON 681, 682  (Julian P.  Boyd  et  al. eds.,  1953). 

Similarly, James Madison  wrote: 
The  great  object  should  be  to  combat  the  evil:  1.  By  establishing  a  political  equality 
among  all.  2. By withholding unnecessary opportunities  from a few, to increase the  ine- 
quality  of  property,  by  an  immoderate  and  especially  an  unmerited,  accumulation  of 
riches.  3. By the silent operation of laws, which, without violating the rights of property, 
reduce  extreme  wealth  towards  a  state  of  mediocrity,  and  raise  extreme  indigence  to- 
wards a state  of  comfort. 

James Madison, Parties, NATL. GAZETTE, Jan. 23, 1792, reprinted in 14 THE PAPERS OF JAMES 
MADISON  197, 197 (Robert  A.  Rutland  et  al. eds.,  1983). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2432 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

every woman -  may well be subject, some  of the time, to a distinc- 
tive  stigma by virtue  of  group membership.  That stigma is part of 
what it means  to  be  a member  of  a lower  caste. 

Because  the  stigmatizing  characteristic is  highly  visible,  it  will 
probably trigger reactions from others in a wide variety of spheres, 
even  in the interstices of everyday life.70 Highly visible characteris- 
tics  are  especially  likely  to  be  a basis  for  statistical discrimination 
and to  fuel  prejudice from third parties.  For some  purposes,  how- 
ever,  it  might  make  sense  to  speak  as  well  of  characteristics that, 
while  not  highly visible,  are easily verified.  And  often  characteris- 
tics  become  visible,  or  are thought  to  be  visible,  precisely  because 
they are a basis for social disadvantage.  Consider stereotypes  about 
the  physical characteristics of  members of  religious minorities,  and 
compare  this description of  attitudes in prerevolutionary America: 
So distinctive and so separated was the aristocracy from ordinary 
folk that many still thought the two groups represented two orders of 
being....  Ordinary people were thought to be different physically, 
and because of varying diets and living conditions, no doubt in many 
cases they were different. People often assumed that a  handsome 
child, though apparently a commoner, had to be some gentleman's 
bastard offspring.71 
In  the  area  of  race  and  gender,  daily  denials  of  basic  respect, 
usually based  on  prejudice of  some  sort, are a large part of  what it 
means  to  have  a caste system.  With blacks, for example,  dark skin 
color  is associated  with a range of  stereotypes  that can have  harm- 
ful  effects  during encounters  with  shopkeepers,  employers,  police 
officers, businesses,  co-workers, and much more.  With women,  the 
problem  is  not  so  much hostility  as  a range of  expectations  about 
social role  that are closely  associated with inequality or condescen- 
sion,  often  in the  nominally personal and even  familial sphere.72 It 
is for this reason  that the  argument I am making works best  when 
the  morally  irrelevant  characteristic is  highly  visible.73  When  the 
characteristic is not highly visible, we cannot have a caste system as 
I understand it here,  though the  translation into  disadvantage of  a 

70.  See Jane Mansbridge, Equal Citizenship in Everyday Life, Presentation to the Confer- 
ence  on Equal Protection and its Critics at Brown University (Mar. 11-12,1994)  (unpublished 
manuscript, on  file with author)  (discussing daily effects  of  inequality). 

71.  WOOD, supra note  59, at 27. 
72.  See  OKIN, supra note  18, at  134-69. 
73.  Compare  Justice  Marshall's reference  to  a  black  railroad porter  who  reported  that 
"he had been  in every city in this country ...  and he had never been in any city in the United 
States  where  he  had  to  put  his  hand  up  in  front  of  his  face  to  find out  he  was  a  Negro." 
Henry J. Reske,  Marshall Retires for  Health Reasons:  First Black Justice Fought Discrimina- 
tion As  Litigator, Supreme Court Dissenter, A.B.A.  J., Aug.  1991, at  14, 15 (quoting  Justice 
Thurgood  Marshall). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2433 

morally  irrelevant but  invisible  characteristic74 can raise important 
equality  concerns  as well.75 

Under  the  principle I am describing, a history of  discrimination 
is  not  a  necessary  condition  for  status  as  a  lower  caste,  though  in 
practice such a history is highly probable.  No  group is likely to  be- 
come  second  class in the  sense  used  here unless it has been  subject 
to  past  discrimination.  The  discrimination  may  take  the  form  of 
legal  and  social  practices that  are not  discriminatory on  their  face 
but that translate certain characteristics into a systemic basis for dis- 
advantage.76 If social and legal practices have that consequence,  we 
have  a system with castelike  features and a legal response  is appro- 
priate  - 
even  though  the  absence  of  intentional  discrimination 
may  make  the  call for response  less  insistent. 

B.  Markets, History, Institutions 
1.  Markets and  Moral Irrelevance 

The anticaste principle leaves many ambiguities.  What is the set 
of  morally  irrelevant  differences?  What  does  it  mean  to  say  that 
such  differences  may  be  turned into  disadvantages  if  the  state  has 
good  reasons  for  doing  so?  And  who  will  be  doing  the  remedial 
work? 

The  initial  point  is  that  whether  it  is  permissible  to  invoke  a 
morally  irrelevant difference  is determined  by  the  context.77  As  a 
general rule skin color should be taken to be morally irrelevant, but 
for  some  people  it may  be  made  relevant  to  private  life,  as  in  the 
selection  of  intimate  friends; gender  may play a large role  in many 

74. This may well be true of homosexuality. Under my definition, homosexuals do not 
constitute a lower caste, though discrimination against them may be illegitimate and though 
the caste system based on gender may lie behind discrimination based on sexual orientation. 
See Andrew  Koppelman, Why Discrimination Against Lesbians and Gay Men Is Sex Discrim- 
ination, 69 N.Y.U. L. REV. (forthcoming May 1994) (arguing that discrimination based on 
sexual orientation is a form of sex discrimination). 

75. I return to the issue of moral irrelevance below. See infra notes 92-94 and accompa- 

nying text. 

76. Of course there is no state-of-nature argument here.  Any second-class status is a 
product of law, even if some inequalities would arise in the state of nature, a possibility with 
no  moral weight.  See John Stuart Mill, Nature, in  10 COLLECTED WORKS OF JOHN STUART 
MILL 373, 381-401 (J.M. Robson ed., 1969). 

77. I am bracketing for the moment questions of justice within spheres that are not nor- 
mally described as political. See OKIN, supra note 18.  Susan Okin persuasively shows that 
injustice occurs within families and that this source of injustice is associated with many injus- 
tices elsewhere.  Susan M. Okin, Political Liberalism, Justice, and Gender, 105 ETHICS (forth- 
coming  Oct.  1994).  The  anticaste principle picks  up  on  this  idea.  See  supra  text 
accompanying notes 63-66, 70-72. For some, gender may be morally relevant to some per- 
sonal things, as in choice of partner, without being morally relevant to all personal things, as 
in allocation of labor within the household. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2434 

Michigan  Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

private  choices,  as  in  the  selection  of  dancing  partners.  When  I 
speak  of  the  impermissibility of  turning morally  irrelevant  factors 
into  a  systematic  source  of  social  disadvantage,  I  do  not  mean  to 
deny  that  in  many  settings  morally  irrelevant factors  may  well  be 
used.  But  even  this point  leaves  numerous open  questions.  We do 
not have anything like a full account of what sorts of differences  are 
relevant  to  legitimate  official judgments.  Can such  an  account  be 
provided  here? 

For lawyers, at least, many of  the political  and moral complexi- 
ties  can  be  bracketed.  Perhaps those  involved  in  the  legal  system 
can  build  on  the  general  understanding  that  race  and  gender  are 
irrelevant  from  the  moral  point  of  view  without  making  complex 
and perhaps sectarian claims about moral relevance  in general.  In- 
deed,  one happy feature of legal thinking is that participants in legal 
disputes can often bracket large-scale claims about the right and the 
good  and  build  incompletely theorized agreements about particular 
issues.78 There is general public or judicial agreement that race and 
sex are morally irrelevant in the sense  that the distribution of social 
benefits  and burdens ought not  to  depend  on  skin color  or gender. 
This agreement  is founded  on  good  reasons, because  both  of  these 
are  accidents  of  birth, because  accidents  of  birth should  not  pro- 
duce  second-class  citizenship,  and because  it is hard to  imagine  an 
account that would justify lesser benefits or greater burdens by ref- 
erence  to  these  particular accidents.79 To say this is not  to  say that 
social  roles  must  have  nothing  to  do  with  gender;  many  people 
think  that roles  and gender  cannot  be  entirely  separated.  But  it is 
to  say  that  social  disadvantage  cannot  be  justified  by  reference  to 
race or sex  alone,  and that point is sufficient for my purposes here. 
Nor,  for lawyers, is the  notion  of  moral irrelevance  a new  one. 
The  anticaste  principle has  distinctive  historical roots.  Recall  that 
the Constitution forbids titles of nobility and that an important part 
of the founding creed involved the rejection of the monarchical her- 
itage,  largely on  the  ground that monarchy made  caste  distinctions 

78.  This  idea  is  discussed  in  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Rules  and  Analogies,  17 THE TANNER 
LECTURES  ON HUMAN  VALUES  (forthcoming  1995); it  has  an  obvious  resemblance  to  the 
idea  of  "overlapping consensus"  as found in RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM, supra note  67, 
at  133-72. 

79.  Compare  on  this  score  such  accidents  of  birth  as  great  strength  or  intelligence  or 
ability to  produce products that the market rewards.  These  accidents may be entangled  with 
nonaccidental  factors; promoting  them  brings about  desirable  incentives  and  also  is  associ- 
ated with a range of valuable social goals, like increased productivity.  Of course it would be 
possible  to  say that when  people  do  not  like  people  of  certain races, there  is a productivity 
loss from forbidding them to indulge their "taste" -  sometimes  this may even  be true -  but 
this productivity loss  seems  inadequate  to  overcome  the  basic case  offered  in the  text. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2435 

among  fundamentally equal  human  beings.80 The  Civil  War 
Amendments were rooted in a judgment about the moral irrele- 
vance of race, formerly taken to be relevant because of nature. In 
the aftermath of the American Civil War a high U.S. official stated, 
"God himself has set His seal of distinctive difference between the 
two races, and no  human legislation can overrule the Divine de- 
cree."81 In the same period, antidiscrimination law was challenged 
squarely on the ground that it put the two races in "unnatural rela- 
tion" to each other.82 

The Civil War Amendments were based on a wholesale rejec- 
tion of the supposed naturalness of racial hierarchy. The hierarchy 
was thought to be a function not of natural difference but of law, 
most notably the law of slavery and the various measures that grew 
up in the aftermath of abolition. An important purpose of the Civil 
War Amendments was the attack on racial caste.83 Thus Senator 
Howard explained that the purpose of the Fourteenth Amendment 
was to  "abolish[] all class legislation in the States and [do] away 
with the injustice of subjecting one caste of persons to a code not 
applicable to  another."84 The defining case of  the Black Codes, 
placing special disabilities on the freedmen's legal capacities, exem- 
plified the  concern with caste legislation.85 Thus Justice Harlan, 
dissenting in  Plessy  v.  Perguson,86 wrote  one  of  the  greatest 
sentences in American law: "There is no caste here."87 Contempo- 
rary understandings of sex inequality build on this basic idea.88 

I  do  not  contend that the  anticaste principle, as I  describe it 
here, can be understood as a mechanical reflection of pre- and post- 
Civil War aspirations. The ratifiers did believe that caste or class 
legislation was forbidden; but they did not fully unpack the cate- 
gory.  They understood that legislation always made distinctions 

80.  See  WOOD, supra note  59,  at  254-61  (arguing that  although  the  Federalists  and  the 
anti-Federalists  disagreed  as  to  how  privileged  the  government  leaders  needed  to  be,  both 
opposed  monarchical hierarchy based  on  heredity  alone). 

81.  2  CONG. REC. app. at 3  (1874)  (speech  of  Rep.  Southard). 
82.  3  CONG. REC. 983  (1875)  (statement  of  Rep.  Eldredge). 
83.  See Charles Fairman, Does  the Fourteenth Amendment Incorporate the Bill of Rights?, 
2  STAN. L. REV. 5  (1949)  (arguing that the  framers of  the  Fourteenth Amendment  intended 
to  forbid  discrimination against blacks at the  state  level). 
84.  CONG. GLOBE, 39th  Cong.,  1st Sess.  2766  (1866). 
85.  See John Harrison, Reconstructing the Privileges or Immunities Clause, 101 YALE L.J. 
1385, 1413 (1992)  (explaining  how Black Codes  were used to prevent blacks from enjoying  a 
wide variety of social and legal privileges available to whites, including testifying in court and 
owning  property). 

86.  163 U.S.  537  (1896). 
87.  163 U.S.  at 559. 
88.  See  Okin, supra note  77. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2436 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

among persons, and they thought the category of caste or class leg- 
islation was  a  small subset of  legislation, involving illegitimate 
grounds for differential treatment. In seeing what counted as ille- 
gitimate grounds, they looked not to theory but to slavery and the 
Black Codes as defining illustrations. So far there is considerable 
overlap between an important strand in the Civil War period and 
what I  am  urging here.  But  the  Civil War Amendments were 
targeted at caste legislation, that is, at specific laws that embodied 
discrimination and in this way helped to create caste. This is what 
Justice Harlan had in mind in Plessy. There was no general under- 
standing that these amendments imposed on government a general 
duty to remove caste status or banned nondiscriminatory laws that 
contributed to caste status -  even if it was understood that Con- 
gress would have the power to counteract the legacy of slavery with 
affirmative legislation.89 

The anticaste principle as I  understand it here is more ambi- 
tious.  It is not directed merely at caste legislation but more gener- 
ally  at  a  social  status quo  that, through historical and  current 
practices, creates second-class status. We can understand this prin- 
ciple as emphasizing legislative rather than judicial duties and as 
reading the Civil War Amendments through the lens of  the New 
Deal,  which reflected an  understanding that social practices are 
often a creation of law, at least in part, and that government is legit- 
imately made responsible for practices that produce social evils, in- 
cluding  pervasive  deprivation.90  Reading  the  Civil  War 
Amendments through the lens of the New Deal,91 we might see a 
constitutional problem not only with particular caste legislation but 
with lower-caste status in general. 

Thus far I have emphasized social consensus and history. Per- 
haps lawyers can build on these sources, but an adequate account of 
the subject of  caste and moral irrelevance could not rest content 
with social agreement and with the past. I cannot offer that account 
here, but a few observations may be helpful. If the notion of moral 

89.  See  generally  Eric  Schnapper, Affirmative Action  and  the  Legislative  History  of  the 

Fourteenth Amendment, 71 VA. L. REV. 753, 796-97  (1985). 

90.  See BRUCE ACKERMAN, WE THE PEOPLE: FOUNDATIONS 100-04  (1991)  (seeing  both 
the  Lochner  Court  and  the  New  Deal  as  attempts  to  synthesize  a  coherent  framework  of 
rights  out  of  existing  sources  of  legal  doctrine,  including  the  Civil  War  Amendments); 
SUNSTEIN, supra note  *, at 40-67  (arguing that New Deal jurisprudence recognized that social 
practices  determining  ownership  rights, labor rights, and civil  rights were  themselves  prod- 
ucts of  the  legal  regime). 

91.  See  the  discussion  of  "synthesis" in  ACKERMAN, supra  note  90,  at  140-50  (arguing 
that  Brown  v.  Board  of  Education,  347  U.S.  483  (1954),  reinterpreted Fourteenth  Amend- 
ment  equal  protection  requirements  in light of  post-Plessy  social  developments). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2437 

irrelevance  involves  a  lack  of  connection  to  either  entitlement  or 
desert,  we  might think that a wide range of differences  among peo- 
ple  are indeed  morally arbitrary, in the  sense  that such differences 
do not by themselves justify more resources or greater welfare.  In a 
market economy,  those  morally irrelevant differences  are quite fre- 
quently  translated into  social  disadvantages.  Consider  educational 
background, intelligence,  physical strength, and existing supply and 
demand  curves for various products and services.  Certainly some- 
one  does  not  deserve  more  goods  and services merely  by virtue  of 
the  fact  that  many  people  want  what  he  is  able  to  provide.  Con- 
sider  an  especially  fast  run from  one  side  of  a  tennis  court  to  an- 
other,  or  a  book  about  a  murder that  is  especially  entertaining  to 
read.  For good  instrumental  reasons,  including  the  production  of 
desired  commodities,  we  may well  want to  reward people  who  can 
provide  widely  valued goods; but the relationship between  that tal- 
ent  and  desert  or entitlement  is obscure. 

In  a  market  economy,  many  factors  - 

strength,  intelligence, 
and  educational  background  -  affect  resources  and  welfare,  and 
most  of these  factors are arbitrary from the moral point of view.  Is 
someone  really entitled  to more money  because  he was born into  a 
family that stressed education,  or because  of his intelligence,  or be- 
cause he happened  to produce a commodity that many people  like? 
Markets do  reward qualities that are irrelevant from a moral point 
of  view.  But  it would  be  difficult indeed  to justify a principle that 
would  attempt, through law, to counteract all or most of the factors 
that markets make  relevant.  The reason is that in general,  the  rec- 
ognition  of such factors is inseparable from the operation  of  a mar- 
ket  economy,  and  by  and  large,  a  market  economy  is  a  source  of 
many  important  human  goods,  including  individual  freedom,  eco- 
nomic  growth and prosperity, and respect for different conceptions 
of  the  good.  Any  legal  solutions  that  call  for  major intrusions  on 
markets must be evaluated in light of the effects on various possible 
human goods  that those  alleged  solutions  will compromise.  If legal 
remedies  produce more unemployment, greater poverty, and higher 
prices for food  and other basic necessities,  they are, to that extent,  a 
bad  idea. 

The implementation  and reach of any anticaste principle should 
depend  on considerations  of this kind.  The point is not that human 
equality  should  be  "traded off"  against  the  seemingly  sterile  and 
abstract notion  of  market efficiency.  I do  not  claim that otherwise 
unjustified  inequality  can  be  supported  by  some  intrinsic  good 
called  "efficiency."  Efficiency  is  an  instrumental good,  though  no 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2438 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

less important for that.  I argue only that intrusions on markets may 
defeat  valuable  human goals  and that this  is  important to  keep  in 
mind. 

To be  more  precise:  The  use  of  the  factors that  ordinarily un- 
derlie markets is at least sometimes, though of course not always, in 
the  interest  of  the  most  disadvantaged, certainly in  the  sense  that 
lower  prices and higher employment  are especially  valuable  to  the 
poor.  When this is so, any government initiative that would bar use 
of those  factors - 
intelligence,  production of socially valued goods, 
and so forth -  seems perverse.92 Moreover, a principle that would 
override  all morally irrelevant factors would  impose  extraordinary 
costs  on  society,  both  in its implementation  and administrative ex- 
pense  and in its infliction of  losses  on  a wide  range of  people.  The 
anticaste  principle  seems  to  have  greatest  appeal  in  discrete  con- 
texts  in  which  gains from current practice to  the  least  well-off  are 
hard to  imagine; in  which  second-class  citizenship  is  systemic  and 
occurs in multiple spheres and along easily identifiable and sharply 
defined lines; in which the morally irrelevant characteristic is highly 
visible; in which there will be no major threat to a market economy; 
and  in  which  the  costs  of  implementation  are most  unlikely  to  be 
terribly high. 

Ideas  of  this  sort  do  not  justify  a  judgment  that  poor  people 
constitute  a  lower  caste.  For  one  thing,  poor  people  represent  a 
broad, amorphous, not easily identified, and to some degree shifting 
group.  When  people  are poor,  we  cannot  say that social  and legal 
practices turn a highly visible  and morally irrelevant characteristic 
into  a  systemic  source  of  social  disadvantage.  Of  course  human 
deprivation creates  a significant problem of justice,  and a recogniz- 
able  constitutional  understanding tries  to  provide  all  people  with 
freedom  from desperate conditions.93 I mean here to identify a sep- 
arate  understanding  -  one  that  supports  a  legal  assault  on  the 
castelike  features  of  the  status  quo  with  respect  to  race,  sex,  and 
disability.  It is relevant here that the benefits of  antidiscrimination 

92.  Rawls's difference  principle, see  RAWLS, supra note  56, at 60, would almost certainly 
fail to justify many of  the  inequalities  that markets introduce, since many of  those  inequali- 
ties do not benefit the least well-off.  But a less rigid set of understandings, allowing inequali- 
ties  that benefit  most people,  including many of the disadvantaged, would justify reliance on 
markets, especially in light of the government's ability to use greater aggregate wealth to help 
disadvantaged  people  and  to  provide  a  basic  floor.  See  the  intriguing finding in  NORMAN 
FROHLICH & JOE A.  OPPENHEIMER,  CHOOSING JUSTICE 58-60  (1992),  suggesting that in ex- 
perimental  studies  most  people  choose  average  utility with  a welfare  floor, rather than  the 
difference  principle. 

93.  See supra note  69. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste Principle 

2439 

law do seem substantial, and the negative effects on the economy 
appear minor.94 

2.  Judges and  Legislators 

Originally the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution was 
understood as an effort to eliminate racial caste -  emphatically not 
as a ban on distinctions on the basis of race.95 A  prohibition on 
racial caste is of course different from a prohibition on racial dis- 
tinctions. A ban on racial distinctions would excise all use of race in 
decisionmaking. By contrast, a ban on caste might well draw some 
measures having discriminatory effects into question, and it would 
certainly allow affirmative action programs.96 

Originally, Congress, not the courts, was to be the principal in- 
stitution for implementing the Fourteenth Amendment. The basic 
idea was that Congress would transform the status of  the newly 
freed slaves by engaging in a wide range of remedial measures.97 It 
was not at all anticipated that federal judges -  responsible for the 
then-recent and highly visible Dred  Scott v.  Sanford98 decision, 
which established slavery as a constitutional right -  would be en- 
forcing the Amendment. Indeed, the notion that judges would play 
a major role in helping to bring about equality under law was en- 
tirely  foreign  to  the  drafters and  ratifiers of  the  Civil  War 
Amendments. 

At  some stage in the twentieth century, there was a dramatic 
change in the legal culture's understanding of the notion of equality 
under the  Constitution. The anticaste principle was transformed 

94.  See John J. Donohue  III, Employment Discrimination Law in Perspective: Three Con- 
cepts  of  Equality,  92  MICH. L.  REV. 2583,  2600-01  (1994)  (this  issue)  (describing  antidis- 
crimination  laws as  correcting market imperfections  to  some  extent);  James J. Heckman  & 
Brook  S. Payner, Determining the Impact of Antidiscrimination Policy on  the Economic  Sta- 
tus of  Blacks:  A  Study of  South  Carolina,  79  AM. ECON. REV. 138 (1989)  (concluding  that 
federal  antidiscrimination  law  may  account  for  increased  wages  and  employment  among 
blacks  in the  South  Carolina textile  manufacturing industry). 

95.  This idea  is supported  by Justice Harlan's statement  "There is no  caste  here," which 
appears in his dissenting  opinion  in Plessy v. Ferguson,  163 U.S.  537, 559 (1896),  in the  sen- 
tence  immediately  preceding  his  famous  assertion  that  "[o]ur Constitution  is  color-blind." 
163 U.S.  at 559.  See  the  excellent  discussion in T. Alexander  Aleinikoff,  Re-Reading Justice 
Harlan's Dissent in Plessy v. Ferguson:  Freedom, Antiracism, and Citizenship, 1992 U.  ILL. L. 
REV. 961  (maintaining  that Justice  Harlan's  dissent  in  Plessy  can  be  read  to  support  race- 
conscious  programs that combat  subordination). 

96.  See  Schnapper, supra  note  89,  at  789-98  (arguing that  history  does  not  support  the 

attack  on  affirmative action). 

97.  See id. at 784-88 (arguing that Congress intended  the Fourteenth Amendment  to pro- 
vide  a constitutional  basis for An  Act  To Establish a Bureau for the Relief  of Freedmen  and 
Refugees,  ch.  90,  13 Stat. 507  (1865)  [hereinafter Freedmen's  Bureau  Act]). 

98.  60 U.S.  393  (1857). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2440 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

into  an antidifferentiation principle.99 No  longer  was the  issue  the 
elimination  of second-class citizenship.  The focus shifted instead to 
the  entirely  different  question  whether  people  who  were  similarly 
situated  had been  treated similarly -  a fundamental change.  This 
shift  in  focus  remains one  of  the  great untold  stories  of  American 
constitutional  history. 

So  long  as  the  courts were  to  be  the  institution  entrusted  with 
enforcing  the  Equal  Protection  Clause, the  shift was fully intelligi- 
ble,  notwithstanding  its  problematic  relationship  with  the  original 
understanding of the Fourteenth Amendment  and with the best un- 
derstanding of  what race and sex  inequality really are.  The judici- 
ary  simply  lacks  the  necessary  tools  to  implement  the  anticaste 
principle.  The transformation in the conception  of equality is there- 
fore  understandable  in  light  of  what  came  to  be,  under  the  Four- 
teenth  Amendment,  the  astonishing  institutional  importance  of 
courts  and  the  equally  astonishing  institutional  insignificance  of 
Congress.  But  the  transformation of  an  anticaste  principle  into  a 
prohibition  on  racial  differentiation  has  inadequately  served  the 
constitutional  commitment to equal protection of the laws.100 It has 
meant  that too  little will be done  about the second-class citizenship 
of  blacks, women,  and the  disabled. 

If the  legal culture is to  return to the roots of the constitutional 
commitment  and to  a better  understanding of  equality,  the  legisla- 
tive  branch should  take  the  lead.  The  anticaste  principle, if taken 
seriously,  calls  for  significant restructuring of  social  practices.  For 
this reason legislative and administrative bodies, with their superior 
democratic  pedigree  and  fact-finding capacities,  can  better  imple- 
ment  the  principle than can the  courts.101 

Of  course  there  are difficult issues  of  strategy, timing,  and  im- 
plementation.  Some  legal  interventions  may  not  be  fruitful; they 
may  even  be  counterproductive.  Some  may  breed  confusion  and 
resentment.  Others may be  unintelligible.  Still others may disrupt 
a  society's  basic  organizing  frameworks  in  a  way  that  does  great 
harm and  little  good.  Outsiders  -  and insiders too  -  will  often 
know  too  little,  and  both  must  be  careful  about  introducing  legal 

99.  The high-water mark of the anticaste understanding was probably Loving v. Virginia, 
388 U.S.  1 (1967),  with its reference  to  "White Supremacy."  388 U.S.  at  11.  The triumph of 
the  antidifferentiation  idea  can be  found  in  Washington v.  Davis,  426  U.S.  229  (1976),  and 
City of  Richmond  v. J.A.  Croson  Co., 488  U.S.  469  (1989). 

100.  For present  purposes  I do  not  discuss the  possibility that the  Privileges or Immuni- 
ties Clause would be a better source of the equality principle of the Fourteenth Amendment. 
101.  See ROSENBERG, supra note  48, at 336-43  (arguing that courts alone  can do  little  in 

the  way of  social  reform). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2441 

principles that do  not  cohere with cultural norms.  Context will 
therefore matter a great deal. But these issues concern quite differ- 
ent matters from the issue of principle that I am now discussing. 

3.  Suspect Classes 
What is the relationship between the anticaste principle and the 
familiar idea that some classifications are "suspect," in the sense 
that  the  courts will  be  hostile  to  discrimination against certain 
groups?  We can start by observing that the Supreme Court has 
granted heightened scrutiny to laws that discriminate against cer- 
tain identifiable groups thought likely to be at particular risk in the 
ordinary political process.102 When the  Court grants heightened 
scrutiny, it is highly skeptical of legislation, and the burden of every 
doubt operates on behalf of groups challenging the relevant laws.103 
The difference between the two ideas can be described in the 
following way: The notion of suspect classifications is based on a 
fear that illegitimate considerations are likely to lie behind legisla- 
tion, whereas the anticaste principle is designed to ensure against 
second-class status for certain social groups. The two ideas overlap, 
because lower castes may well be subject to legislation grounded on 
illegitimate considerations. But the two ideas are nonetheless dis- 
tinct, because illegitimate considerations may lie behind legislation 
discriminating against groups that do not count as lower castes, and 
because the anticaste principle imposes duties on government that 
go well beyond a ban on illegitimately motivated legislation. 

In deciding whether to grant heightened scrutiny, the Court has 
not been altogether clear about its underlying rationale. The Court 
appears to  have examined a set of factors -  above all, the rele- 
vance of the group characteristic to legitimate governmental ends, 
the likelihood that the group in question will be subject to preju- 
dice, the immutability of the characteristic, the existence of past and 

102. See Croson, 488 U.S. at 470-72 (applying strict scrutiny to legislation using racial 
distinctions); Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Ctr., 473 U.S. 432, 440-42 (1985) (refusing to apply 
strict scrutiny to legislation distinguishing the mentally retarded because of the lack of a legal 
tradition disadvantaging this group); Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 204 (1976) (applying 
heightened scrutiny to legislation using gender distinctions). 

103. I am putting to one side the distinction between "strict scrutiny," used in the racial 
context, and "intermediate scrutiny," used in the context of sex discrimination. An interest- 
ing development is the Court's recent suggestion that it has failed to determine whether 
gender classifications are inherently suspect and thus whether intermediate scrutiny or strict 
scrutiny should apply in gender cases, see J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B., 114 S. Ct. 1419, 1425 
n.6 (1994) (deciding a gender discrimination case without mentioning the difference between 
intermediate and strict scrutiny), though it is not clear that there is much difference between 
the two standards. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2442 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

present  discrimination,  and  the  group's  lack  of  political  power.104 
In this way, it has moved  well beyond  the defining case of discrimi- 
nation  against blacks to include discrimination against women,  ille- 
gitimate  children, and sometimes  aliens.105 

Most  of  these  factors have  yet  to  be  fully  analyzed.  They  pur- 
port to  involve  a quasi-factual investigation into real data, but they 
actually  depend  on  controversial  and  usually  unidentified  norma- 
tive judgments.  For example, we cannot know whether a character- 
istic  is  "relevant" just  by  looking  at facts.  Often  race  and  sex  are 
relevant  to  employment  decisions,  in the  sense  that profits depend 
on  them.  We  cannot  know  whether  a  group  has  historically been 
subject  to  "discrimination" without  knowing  whether  the  unequal 
treatment  was  justified;  discrimination  is  of  course  a  value-laden 
category. 

Similarly,  a  major  problem  with  the  key  issue  of  political 
powerlessness  is  that  relevant judgments  are based  not  simply  on 
facts  about  political  influence.  They  also  depend  on  some  contro- 
versial  and  usually  unarticulated claims  about  how  much  political 
power is appropriate for the group in question  and about the legiti- 
macy of the bases for legislative judgments on matters affecting the 
group.  The  claim  that  a  group  is  politically  weak  in  the  constitu- 
tional  test  is  thus  a product of  controversial  and rarely articulated 
claims. 

For  example,  blacks  may  have  a  good  deal  of  political  power; 
they  can  influence  elections,  even  elections  of  the  President.  The 
same  is  true  of  women,  who  of  course  can  affect  elections  a great 
deal.  The  potentially  large electoral  influence of  both  groups does 
not exclude  them from the category of groups entitled  to particular 
protection  against  discrimination.  The  reason  is  that  even  if  they 
can  wield  political  influence,  prejudice in the  constitutionally  rele- 
vant sense  is likely to operate against both blacks and women  in the 
political  process.  Blacks  may be  subject to  hatred or  devaluation; 
women  may be  subject to  stereotypes  about  their appropriate role 
that affect their political power and even their own aspirations.  The 
conclusion  is that the category of  political powerlessness  looks  like 
an inquiry into political science, but it really depends on some judg- 
ments  about  the  legitimacy  of  the  usual  grounds  for  government 
action classifying on  the basis of race and sex.  The real question  is 
whether  legislation  disadvantaging the  relevant  group is peculiarly 

104.  See J.E.B.,  114 S. Ct. at  1424-26. 
105.  See, e.g., Craig v. Boren,  429 U.S.  190 (1978)  (women);  Graham v. Richardson, 403 

U.S.  365  (1971)  (illegitimate  children); Trimble v.  Gordon,  430 U.S.  762  (1977)  (aliens). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August  1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2443 

likely to rest on illegitimate grounds. Heightened scrutiny is a way 
of testing whether it does. 

This  discussion should  show  that  the  basic  features of  the 
Court's analysis - 
the history of  discrimination, the category of 
prejudice, the inquiry into whether the relevant characteristic is im- 
mutable -  can be  analyzed in  the  same way.  These ideas  are 
designed to  help determine if illegitimate considerations typically 
underlie legislation classified on  the  relevant basis.  As  noted, a 
judgment that there has been a history of discrimination depends 
on a theory of appropriate distribution, at least of a general sort. 
We rarely say that criminals have suffered a history of discrimina- 
tion, and if we do say so, it is not because they are punished for 
criminal conduct. To say that there has been prejudice is to say that 
the  usual  grounds for  discrimination are  impermissible, even 
though those grounds may represent good-faith moral convictions. 
Consider, for example, the widely held view that women and men 
should occupy different social roles -  a view that, despite its popu- 
larity, may not be used to support legislation. Moreover, immuta- 
bility is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for suspect 
class status. Blind people are not entitled to the heightened scru- 
tiny accorded legislation targeting suspect classes, even though the 
condition of being blind is usually immutable. And if new drugs or 
technology allowed blacks to  become whites, or  vice versa, and 
made sex-change operations feasible and cheap, would courts aban- 
don their careful scrutiny of race and sex discrimination? Surely 
not. 

My major point here is that the anticaste principle is quite dif- 
ferent from the  antidiscrimination principle. We might therefore 
think that under current doctrine, discrimination against, for exam- 
ple, Asian Americans and Jews should be presumed invalid, with- 
out also thinking that Asian Americans and Jews count as lower 
castes. The inquiry into suspect classification is therefore quite dif- 
ferent from the inquiry into caste, though the two ideas do overlap. 

4.  Discrimination  Without Caste?  Caste Without Discrimination? 
The above discussion illustrates that many groups that are fre- 
quently subject to discrimination do not qualify as lower castes in 
the way I have understood that term. It seems reasonable to think 
that Asian Americans suffer from discrimination and prejudice, but 
it is doubtful that they qualify as a lower caste, because they do not 
appear to be systematically below other groups in terms of the basic 
indicators of  social well-being. The same is  true for many other 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2444 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

groups subject to discrimination, including, for example, homosexu- 
als and Jews. Homosexuals are not a lower caste in the sense that 
they are not worse off than heterosexuals in terms of many of the 
usual indicators of  social welfare; they cannot show second-class 
citizenship in this sense.  But they are also subject to pervasive dis- 
crimination and prejudice, with possibly corrosive effects on self- 
respect, and in that sense they are subject to social practices con- 
nected to the issues of caste that I have been discussing. 

Nothing I have said here is meant to legitimate discrimination 
against groups that have suffered and continue to suffer from pri- 
vate and public prejudice. For example, there is indeed an equality 
norm that is  offended by discrimination on  the basis of  religion. 
Though I cannot support the point here, I think the same is true for 
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. But the anticaste 
principle does not cover groups simply by virtue of  the fact that 
they are often subject to illegitimate discrimination. The anticaste 
principle has special meanings and uses.  It does not exhaust the 
several constitutional principles of equality. 

C.  Some  Data 

As  I have understood the matter, the inquiry into caste has a 
large empirical dimension. The principle focuses on whether one 
group is systematically below others along important dimensions of 
social welfare. I offer some relevant information here. Needless to 
say, the account is far from complete. Throughout this discussion it 
will be useful to recall that about twelve percent of Americans are 
black. 

It is not surprising to find dramatic disparities between whites 
and blacks along nearly all dimensions of social well-being. Begin 
with economic measures. The per capita income of whites is nearly 
double that of blacks. The median income of white households is 
$37,783, as compared to  $21,548 for black households.106 Nearly 
one-third of  black Americans live below the poverty level, com- 
pared to  about one-tenth of  white Americans.107 Ten percent of 
whites over sixty-five live below the poverty line, as compared to 
about a third of blacks.108 Perhaps worst of all, 45% of black chil- 
dren live below the poverty line, as compared to 16% of white chil- 

106.  BUREAU  OF  THE  CENSUS,  U.S.  DEPT.  OF  COMMERCE,  STATISTICAL  ABSTRACT  OF 
THE  UNITED  STATES  1993,  at  467  tbl.  732,  462  tbl.  721  (113th  ed.  1993)  [hereinafter  STATISTI- 
CAL ABSTRACT]. 

107.  Id.  at 471 tbl. 740. 
108.  Id.  at 470 tbl. 739. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste Principle 

2445 

dren.109 About  a  quarter of  black  households earn  less  than 
$10,000  per  year,  compared  to  fewer  than  10%  of  white 
households.110 

There are also striking disparities with respect to unemployment 
levels.  In 1992, 6.5% of whites were unemployed, as compared to 
14.1% of blacks.1l  Disparities of this sort persist over time.  Con- 
sider the chart on the following pages: 

109. Id. at 469 tbl. 736. 
110. Id. at 464 tbl. 725. 
111. Id. at 413 tbl. 652. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

CIVILIAN  UNEMPLOYMENT  RATE  BY  DEMOGRAPHIC  CHARACTERISTIC, 

1950-92112 

[Percent; monthly  data seasonally  adjusted] 

Total 

Males 

Total 

Males 

Females 

White 

Black  and other  or Black 

Year or  All  civilian 
month 

workers 

Total 

16-19 
years 

20 years  Total 
and over 

Total 

16-19 
years 

20  years  Total 

and over 

16-19 

years 

20 years 

and over 

Females 
16-19 
years 

20 years 
and over 

1950 
1951 
1952 
1953 
1954 
1955 
1956 
1957 
1958 
1959 
1960 
1961 
1962 
1963 
1964 
1965 
1966 
1967 
1968 
1969 
1970 
1971 

5.3 
3.3 
3.0 
2.9 
5.5 
4.4 
4.1 
4.3 
6.8 
5.5 
5.5 
6.7 
5.5 
5.7 
5.2 
4.5 
3.8 
3.8 
3.6 
3.5 
4.9 
5.9 

4.9 
3.1 
2.8 
2.7 
5.0 
3.9 
3.6 
3.8 
6.1 
4.8 
5.0 
6.0 
4.9 
5.0 
4.6 
4.1 
3.4 
3.4 
3.2 
3.1 
4.5 
5.4 

4.7 
2.6 
2.5 
2.5 
4.8 
3.7 
3.4 
3.6 
15.7 
4.6 
4.8 
5.7 
4.6 
4.7 
4.1 
3.6 
2.8 
2.7 
2.6 
2.5 
4.0 
4.9 

13.4 
11.3 
10.5 
11.5 
5.5 
14.0 
14.0 
15.7 
13.7 
15.9 
14.7 
12.9 
10.5 
10.7 
10.1 
10.0 
13.7 
15.1 

5.3 
4.2 
3.3 
3.1 
5.5 
4.3 
4.2 
4.3 
12.7 
5.3 
5.3 
6.5 
5.5 
5.8 
5.5 
5.0 
4.3 
4.6 
4.3 
4.2 
5.4 
6.3 

10.4 
9.1 
9.7 
9.5 
5.6 
12.0 
12.7 
14.8 
12.8 
15.1 
14.9 
14.0 
12.1 
11.5 
12.1 
11.5 
13.4 
15.1 

4.4 
3.3 
3.0 
3.2 
6.2 
4.1 
4.2 
5.1 
4.0 
3.9 
3.4 
2.9 
1.1 
2.1 
2.0 
1.9 
3.2 
4.0 

9.0 
5.3 
5.4 
4.5 
9.9 
8.7 
8.3 
7.9 
12.6 
10.7 
10.2 
12.4 
10.9 
10.8 
9.6 
8.1 
7.3 
7.4 
6.7 
6.4 
8.2 
9.9 

9.4 
4.9 
5.2 
4.8 
10.3 
8.8 
7.9 
8.3 
13.7 
11.5 
10.7 
12.8 
10.9 
10.5 
8.9 
7.4 
6.3 
6.0 
5.6 
5.3 
7.3 
9.1 

14.4 
13.4 
15.0 
18.4 
26.8 
25.2 
24.0 
26.8 
22.0 
27.3 
24.3 
23.3 
21.3 
23.9 
22.1 
21.4 
25.0 
28.8 

8.4 

6.1 

5.7 

4.1 

9.9 

8.4 

7.4 

7.6 

12.7 

10.5 

9.6 

11.7 

10.0 

9.2 

7.7 

6.0 

4.9 

4.3 

3.9 

3.7 

5.6 

7.3 

5.1 
3.9 
3.7 
3.8 

4.7 
4.6 
5.7 
4.7 
4.8 
4.6 
4.0 
3.3 
3.8 
3.4 
3.4 
4.4 
5.3 

9.2 

8.5 

8.9 

7.3 

10.8 

9.4 

9.4 

11.9 

11.0 

11.2 

10.7 

9.2 

8.7 

9.1 

8.3 

7.8 

9.3 

10.9 

20.6 

19.2 

22.8 

20.2 

28.4 

27.7 

24.8 

29.2 

30.2 

34.7 

31.6 

31.7 

31.3 

29.6 

28.7 

27.6 

34.5 

35.4 

112.  ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT 315 tbl.  B-41  (1994)  (footnote  omitted). 

' 

10.6 

8.4 

7.7 

7.8 

6.4 

9.5 

8.3 

8.3 

9.6 

9.4 

9.0 

7.5 

6.6 

7.1 

6.3 

5.8 

6.9 

8.7 

., 

? 

. 

z 

u 

'. 

E 

< 

O 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

CIVILIAN  UNEMPLOYMENT  RATE  BY  DEMOGRAPHIC  CHARACTERISTIC, 

1950-92 

-  CONTINUED 

[Percent; monthly data seasonally  adjusted] 

Total 

Males 

Females 

Total 

Males 

Females 

Year or  All  civilian 
month 

workers 

Total 

16-19 
years 

20 years  Total 
and over 

16-19 
years 

20 years 
and over 

Total 

16-19 
years 

20  years  Total 

and over 

16-19 

years 

20  years 

and  over 

White 

Black  and  other or  Black 

1972 
1972 
1973 
1974 
1975 
1976 
1977 
1978 
1979 
1980 
1981 
1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989 
1990 
1991 
1992 

5.1 

4.5 

14.2 

5.9 

14.2 

5.6 

4.9 
5.6 
8.5 
7.7 
7.1 
6.1 
5.8 
7.1 
7.6 
9.7 
9.6 
7.5 
7.2 
7.0 
6.2 
5.5 
5.3 
5.5 
6.7 
7.4 

4.3 
5.0 
7.8 
7.0 
6.2 
5.2 
5.1 
6.3 
6.7 
8.6 
8.4 
6.5 
6.2 
6.0 
5.3 
4.7 
4.5 
4.7 
6.0 
6.5 

3.8 
4.4 
7.2 
6.4 
5.5 
4.6 
4.5 
6.1 
6.5 
8.8 
8.8 
6.4 
6.1 
6.0 
5.4 
4.7 
4.5 
4.8 
6.4 
6.9 

12.3 
13.5 
18.3 
17.3 
15.0 
13.5 
13.9 
16.2 
17.9 
21.7 
20.2 
16.8 
16.5 
16.3 
15.5 
13.9 
13.7 
14.2 
17.5 
18.4 

3.6 

3.0 
3.5 
6.2 
5.4 
4.7 
3.7 
3.6 
5.3 
5.6 
7.8 
7.9 
5.7 
5.4 
5.3 
4.8 
4.1 
3.9 
4.3 
5.7 
6.3 

5.3 
6.1 
8.6 
7.9 
7.3 
6.2 
5.9 
6.5 
6.9 
8.3 
7.9 
6.5 
6.4 
6.1 
5.2 
4.7 
4.5 
4.6 
5.5 
6.0 

13.0 
14.5 
17.4 
16.4 
15.9 
14.4 
14.0 
14.8 
16.6 
19.0 
18.3 
15.2 
14.8 
14.9 
13.4 
12.3 
11.5 
12.6 
15.2 
15.7 

4.9 

4.3 
5.1 
7.5 
6.8 
6.2 
5.2 
5.0 
5.6 
5.9 
7.3 
6.9 
5.8 
5.7 
5.4 
4.6 
4.1 
4.0 
4.1 
4.9 
5.4 

10.0 
10.4 
9.4 
10.5 
14.8 
14.0 
14.0 
12.8 
12.3 
14.3 
15.6 
18.9 
19.5 
15.9 
15.1 
14.5 
13.0 
11.7 
11.4 
11.3 
12.4 
41.1 

8.9 
9.3 
8.0 
9.8 
14.8 
13.7 
13.3 
11.8 
11.4 
14.5 
15.7 
20.1 
20.3 
16.4 
15.3 
14.8 
12.7 
11.7 
11.5 
11.8 
12.9 
15.2 

29.7 
31.7 
27.8 
33.1 
38.1 
37.5 
39.2 
36.7 
34.2 
37.5 
40.7 
48.9 
48.8 
42.7 
41.0 
39.3 
34.4 
32.7 
31.9 
32.1 
36.5 
42.0 

6.9 

7.0 

6.0 

7.4 

12.5 

11.4 

10.7 

9.3 

9.3 

12.4 

13.5 

17.8 

18.1 

14.3 

13.2 

12.9 

11.1 

10.1 

10.0 

10.4 

11.5 

13.4 

11.4 

11.8 

11.1 

11.3 

14.8 

14.3 

14.9 

13.8 

13.3 

14.0 

15.6 

17.6 

18.6 

15.4 

14.9 

14.2 

13.2 

11.7 

11.4 

10.8 

11.9 

13.0 

38.4 

40.5 

36.1 

37.4 

41.0 

41.6 

43.4 

40.8 

39.1 

39.8 

42.2 

47.1 

48.2 

42.6 

39.2 

39.2 

34.9 

32.0 

33.0 

30.0 

36.1 

37.2 

8.8 

9.0 

8.6 

8.8 

12.2 

11.7 

12.3 

11.2 

10.9 

11.9 

13.4 

15.4 

16.5 

13.5 

13.1 

12.4 

11.6 

10.4 

9.8 

9.6 

10.5 

11.7 

g 

CA 

uo 

t 

S 

c* 

- 

It 

; 

i- 

' 

P. 

^41- 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2448 

Michigan  Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

We might turn to education, longevity,  and crime.  Over 80% of 
whites have completed  high school, while about two-thirds of blacks 
have  their  high  school  diplomas.113 About  23%  of  whites  have 
completed  a college  degree, as compared to about 13% of blacks.114 
The  life  expectancy  of  a white  American  is four years  longer  than 
the  life  expectancy  of  a  black  American.115 From  1970  to  1990, 
about  ten  people  per 100,000 were  murdered each year.116 During 
this  same  period,  the  annual  murder  rate  for  white  men  ranged 
from seven  to ten per 100,000, compared to a range of fifty to eighty 
for black men.117 Similarly, the  murder rate for white  women  was 
between  two  and three  per  100,000, compared to  ten  to  fifteen  for 
black women.118 In 1991, thirty whites out of a thousand were sub- 
ject  to  a crime against their person,  down from thirty-two in  1973, 
but  forty-four  blacks  out  of  a  thousand  were  subject  to  such  a 
crime,  up  from  forty-two  in  1973.119 

Consider  political  representation.  Of  the  435  members  of  the 
House  of  Representatives,  only forty are black.  In the  Senate,  the 
numbers are even  more striking: of the one  hundred senators, only 
one  is black.120 There are also inequalities in political participation. 
About  70% of white people  were registered to vote,  as compared to 
64% of  blacks, in the  1992 elections.  There are slightly higher dis- 
parities for voting itself, showing about a 10% differential in the last 
presidential  election.121 

With respect to  sex inequality, most of  the numbers are far less 
dramatic.  Women's  life  expectancy  is  higher  than  that  of  men.122 
The  educational  attainment of  men  and women  is about the  same, 
especially  in light of  changes over  the past twenty years - 
though 
white men are significantly more likely to be college  graduates than 
white  women.123 Most  of  the  disparities between  men  and women 
involve  income,  wealth,  and political  representation. 

113.  STATISTICAL ABSTRACT, supra note  106, at  153 tbl. 232. 
114.  Id. 
115.  Id. at 85  tbl.  115. 
116.  Id. at 94  tbl.  129. 

117.  Id. 
118.  Id. 
119.  Id.  at  197 tbl. 309. 
120.  Telephone  Conversation with the Office of the Congressional Black Caucus (Sept.  1, 

1994). 

121.  STATISTICAL ABSTRACT, supra note  106, at 283 tbl. 454. 
122.  Id.  at 85  tbl.  116. 
123.  Id.  at  153 tbl. 231. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2449 

The basic economic indicators show large differences. About 
69.3% of women are in the labor force, as compared to 88.9% of 
men.  The median yearly earnings of women is $24,000, compared 
to $35,850 for men.  At every stage of educational attainment, men 
out-earn women by a substantial margin. The average annual in- 
come of a woman high school graduate is about $19,000; for a man, 
the average is about $28,000. For a woman with some college edu- 
cation, the  annual figure is  over  $22,000, as  compared to  over 
$33,000 for a man.  For a woman who has at least a bachelor's de- 
gree,  the  annual figure is  about $33,000, as  compared to  over 
$50,000 for a man.124 

The  poverty  rate  for single-mother  families  is  59%.125  Note  in 
this regard that 15,396 children under eighteen live only with their 
mother, compared to  the 2182 who live with their father only.126 
And after divorce, the average standard of living of men increases 
by  42%,  whereas  that  of  women  decreases  by  73%.127  There  are 
388  male  representatives in  the  House  of  Representatives and 
forty-eight women.128 Of  one  hundred senators, only seven  are 
women.129 

This is merely a brief collection of information showing group- 
based disparities that bear on the question of second-class citizen- 
ship.  As we will soon see, the information suggests a need to shift 
from judicial to  legislative forums -  and also, ironically, to  use 
race- and gender-neutral remedies. 

III.  THE FUTURE 

A.  From Antidiscrimination to Anticaste 

Equality law has had two principal stages.  The first was con- 
cerned with preventing explicit discrimination, public or private, 
against blacks and women.  This included the attack on American 
apartheid, led by Thurgood Marshall and culminating in Brown v. 
Board  of Education,130 and also the attack on explicit sex discrimi- 
nation, led by Ruth Bader Ginsburg.131 The legal assault on public 

124. Id. at 394 tbl. 624, 467 tbl. 731. 
125.  Id.  at 470  tbl. 737. 
126. Id. at 63 tbl. 79. 
127.  OKIN, supra  note  18,  at  161.  These  are  contested  figures,  though  the  claim  of  a 

general  disparity is  uncontroversial. 

128.  1994 CONGRESSIONAL STAFF DIRECTORY at xix-xxvi (Ann  L. Brownson  ed.,  1994). 
129.  Id.  at xvii-xviii. 
130. 347 U.S. 483 (1954). 
131. See, e.g., Califano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199 (1977). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2450 

Michigan  Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

discrimination  was  eventually  matched  by  the  statutory  attack  on 
private discrimination.132 The second  stage  consisted  of  challenges 
to public and private practices that did not involve explicit discrimi- 
nation but that stemmed from prejudice or that otherwise had large 
and  not  adequately  justified  discriminatory effects.133 This second 
stage  built  on  the  first.  Neither  has entirely  run its course. 

Both  of  these  movements  for  reform  had  substantial  success, 
certainly in eliminating the most conspicuously unsupportable pub- 
lic and private practices.  Both were connected  with anticaste goals, 
and to the extent  that they operated within the judiciary, they were 
also well adapted to the limited institutional capacities of the judici- 
ary.134 On  the  other  hand,  the  successes,  important  as  they  have 
been,  have  had  ambiguous  effects  on  the  inequalities  discussed 
above.  From what has been  said thus far, it should be  clear that if 
the  elimination  of  second-class  citizenship  is  an  important  social 
goal,  it would be valuable to start in new directions, some  of which 
have  not  typically been  associated  with civil rights at all. 

If  opposition  to  caste  is  a  basic  goal,  civil  rights policy  should 
concern  itself  first and foremost  with such problems  as lack of  op- 
portunities  for  education,  training,  and  employment;  inadequate 
housing,  food,  and health  care; vulnerability to  crime, both  public 
and private; incentives to participate in crime; disproportionate sub- 
jection  to  environmental  hazards;  and  teenage  pregnancy  and 
single-parent families.  Policies of  this kind suggest  a major shift in 
direction  from  the  more  narrowly focused  antidiscrimination poli- 
cies  of  the  past. 

This is hardly the place for a full program for legislative  reform. 
But  in resolving current problems, most of the traditional claims of 
civil rights law provide incomplete  help.  The problem is not rooted 
in explicitly race- or sex-based classification, nor does  it lie in preju- 
dice,  at  least  not  in  any simple  sense.135 It  lies  instead  in  policies 
and  programs  that  contribute  to  second-class  status,  often  in  ex- 

132.  See, e.g.,  Civil Rights Act  of  1964, Pub. L. No.  88-352,  tit. VII,  78 Stat. 241, 253-66 
(codified  as amended  principally at 42 U.S.C.  ?? 2000e to 2000e-17 (1988 & Supp. III 1991)). 
133.  See, e.g., Voting  Rights  Act  Amendments  of  1982, Pub. L. No.  97-205, 96 Stat.  131 
(codified  at 42 U.S.C.  ? 1973b (1988)); Civil Rights Act  of  1964, Pub. L. No.  88-352, tit. VII, 
78 Stat. 241, 253-66 (codified as amended principally at 42 U.S.C.  ?? 2000e to 2000e-17  (1988 
&  Supp. III  1991)). 

134.  But see ROSENBERG, supra note  48, at 169, 226-27  (arguing that the  Court has been 
unable  to  improve  the  lot  of  women  or blacks and that any progress achieved  by these  two 
groups usually resulted  from extrajudicial forces). 

135.  The problem may well lie in a form of selective  racial empathy and indifference,  but 
this notion  is hard to  administer, for reasons well discussed in Strauss, supra note  38, at 939, 
988-90. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August  1994] 

The Anticaste Principle 

2451 

tremely complex  ways involving interactions between  past practices 
and  a wide  array of  current policies.136 

In proposing reforms, we might look  quite eclectically at a range 
of  protections  against the  sorts of  disparities discussed  above.  For 
example,  policies  promoting  economic  growth  are  an  important 
part  of  equality  law  insofar  as  growth  is  associated  with  employ- 
ment  and the  reduction  of  poverty.  But  because  the  association  is 
imperfect,137 many  other  steps  are necessary.  I  simply  note  a  few 
possibilities  here; of  course  a range of  details would  be  required in 
order  to  assess  any of  them. 

Targeted educational policies,  including efforts to promote  liter- 
acy  and  Head  Start  programs,  provide  promising  models.138  At 
least  partial successes  have  resulted  from parental leave  and  "flex- 
time"  policies.139  Certainly,  employment-related  policies  are  im- 
portant  insofar  as job  increases  are closely  connected  with  the  re- 
duction of poverty.  In the area of voting rights law, the race-neutral 
remedy of cumulative voting might be preferable to racially explicit 
approaches.140 Consider  as  well  recent  initiatives  designed  to  re- 
duce  violence  generally  and  violence  against  women  in  particular 
- 
through  education,  additional  government  resources  for  crime 
prevention  and punishment,  and new  legal  remedies  for victims of 
sex-related  violence.141  We  might  compare  these  with  President 
Clinton's recent executive  order on environmental justice, designed 
to prevent disproportionate health and safety effects from the exist- 
ence  of  environmental  hazards.142 

136.  A  model  discussion  is  CHRISTOPHER JENCKS, THE HOMELESS (1994)  (tracing  the 
causes of increased homelessness  to a variety of indifferent or well-intentioned  governmental 
and social  actions, such as the destruction of  skid row housing and the  deinstitutionalization 
of  the  mentally  ill). 

137.  See  Sunstein, supra note  64, at  1307-08 (arguing that the  productivity gains leading 

to  economic  growth can  actually fail to  help  the  poor). 

138.  See  Laura A.  Miller,  Head  Start: A  Moving  Target, 5  YALE L.  &  POLY. REV. 322 

(1987)  (portraying Head  Start as one  of  the  clear success  stories  of  the  Great  Society). 

139.  See Ruth  Bader  Ginsburg & Barbara Flagg, Some  Reflections on  the Feminist Legal 

Thought in  the 1970's,  1989 U.  CHI. LEGAL F. 9. 

140.  See LANI GUINIER, THE TYRANNY OF THE MAJORITY 149 (1994); Richard H.  Pildes, 

Gimme  Five, NEW REPUBLIC, Mar. 1, 1993, at  16. 

141.  See,  e.g.,  Violence  Against  Women  Act,  S.  11,  103d  Cong.,  1st Sess.  (1993);  H.R. 

1133,  103d Cong.,  1st Sess.  (1993). 

142.  Exec.  Order No.  12,898, 59 Fed.  Reg.  7629  (1994). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2452 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

Of course there are limits to how much legal reform can do to 
redress these problems, at least in the short run. But there is much 
that law can do to help.143 

B.  Against  Race  Consciousness 

On the account I have offered, there is no constitutional objec- 
tion to genuinely remedial race- and sex-conscious policies, at least 
as a general rule.144 If a basic goal is opposition to caste, affirma- 
tive  action policies are ordinarily permissible. Partly this lesson 
stems from the history of the Civil War Amendments; if history is 
relevant, it is hard to support the view that affirmative action pro- 
grams are invalid.145 But partly it is a lesson of logic. We have seen 
that in an important way the antidiscrimination principle is continu- 
ous with the affirmative action principle. Insofar as statistical dis- 
crimination is outlawed, the government has singled out one form 
of rational categorization and subjected it to special disability. At 
least along this dimension, the antidiscrimination principle partakes 
of an affirmative action principle. 

To be sure, it may be possible to generalize from the Civil War 
Amendments a general opposition to the use of skin color as a basis 
for  the  distribution of  social benefits and burdens. Perhaps we 
should say that government ought never or rarely to consider skin 
color in its official decisions, because use of skin color has bad edu- 
cational and expressive effects, and because it legitimates the view 
that people should see each other, and themselves, in racial terms. 
But this view is historically adventurous,146 and it would also in- 
volve a highly intrusive role for the courts.  Race-conscious pro- 
grams occupy an exceptionally wide range. They can be found in 

143.  See,  e.g.,  CASS N.  SUNSTEIN,  AFTER THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION 77-81  (1990); 
Donohue,  supra note  94 (arguing that employment  discrimination laws successfully reduced 
discrimination); Miller, supra note  138 (describing the successes of the Head  Start program). 
144.  A  qualification is  necessary  here.  Many race- and sex-conscious  programs may be 
only  pretextually  remedial,  especially  in the  gender  context,  in which purportedly remedial 
measures  may  in  fact  be  discriminatory.  See, e.g.,  Weinberger v.  Wiesenfeld,  420  U.S.  636 
(1975)  (striking down  a social security law giving benefits to women  but not to  men  because 
the provision actually reflected irrational gender stereotypes).  Also,  some  approaches might 
be  too  crudely connected  with remedial goals, see,  e.g., Metro  Broadcasting, Inc. v. Federal 
Communications Commn., 497 U.S. 547 (1991) (upholding a race-conscious approach despite 
its crudeness),  or perhaps with rigid quotas, see, e.g., City of  Richmond  v. J.A.  Croson  Co., 
488  U.S.  469  (1989). 

145.  See Schnapper, supra note 89, at 789-98  (arguing that history does not support oppo- 

sition  to  affirmative action  programs). 

146.  See  id.  at  797-98  (arguing that courts categorically condemning  "benign racial dis- 
tinctions"  such  as  affirmative action  programs ignore  the  130-year-old  intentions  expressed 
by  Congress  in the  Freedmen's  Bureau  Act). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste  Principle 

2453 

education, employment, licensing, and  elsewhere.147 They  have 
been accepted at local, state, and federal levels and by courts, ad- 
ministrators, presidents, and legislatures;148 they have come from 
people  whose views sharply diverge, including conservatives and 
liberals alike -  both Democrats and Republicans have supported 
them.149 In these circumstances, judges should be extremely reluc- 
tant to say that there is anything like a flat ban on race-conscious 
programs. 

It might be concluded that race- and sex-conscious remedial pol- 
icies are not merely unobjectionable but even mandatory under an 
anticaste principle. Perhaps such policies are necessary in order to 
counteract second-class status; certainly many  people  have  so 
thought. But such policies have a mixed record, and in some places 
and ways, they have been a conspicuous failure. Some platitudes 
are  worth repeating: In  some  places, race-conscious judgments 
have stigmatized their purported beneficiaries, by making people 
think that blacks are present only because of their skin color.  In 
some  places, such judgments have fueled hostility and increased 
feelings of second-class citizenship. Some people who would do ex- 
tremely  well  in  some  good  institutions  - 
schools  or jobs  -  are 
placed by affirmative action in programs or positions in which they 
perform far less  well, with harmful consequences for  their self- 
respect.  Ironically, affirmative action  programs can  aggravate 
problems of caste by increasing the social perception that a highly 
visible  feature  like  skin  color  is  associated with  undesirable 
characteristics. 

In part the failures have stemmed from resistance to any reme- 
dies at all for the legacy of discrimination, and it would be wrong to 
discount the extent to  which opposition to  affirmative action can 
stem from opposition to any change in the status quo.  But in part 
the failure has stemmed from a general conviction that skin color 
and gender should not matter to social outcomes. In view of both 
history and principle, that conviction should not be discounted or 

147.  See,  e.g.,  Freeman  v.  Pitts,  112 S.  Ct.  1430  (1992)  (busing  to  desegregate  Georgia 
schools);  Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. Federal Communications Commn., 497 U.S.  547 (1990) 
(minority  preferences  for broadcast licenses);  Wygant v. Jackson Bd.  of  Educ., 476  U.S.  267 
(1986)  (layoffs  allocated  partly by race). 

148.  See, e.g., City of  Richmond  v. J.A.  Croson  Co.  488 U.S.  469  (1989)  (local  construc- 
tion  set-aside  program); Fullilove  v. Klutznick, 448 U.S.  448  (1980)  (congressional  set-aside 
program in construction  grants); Regents  of  the  Univ.  of  Cal. v. Bakke,  438 U.S.  265  (1978) 
(state-level  university admission  program). 

149.  See  448  U.S.  at 461-62  & n.38  (citing  123 CONG. REC. 12,941-43, 13,242-57 (1977)) 
(discussing  the  overwhelming  passage  of  the  minority business  enterprises  program at issue 
in  Fullilove  by both  the  Senate  and the  House). 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2454 

Michigan Law  Review 

[Vol. 92:2410 

trivialized.  It is relevant in this regard that many defenses  of affirm- 
ative  action programs are hard to offer in public.  Often  the nature 
of  affirmative action  programs is not  discussed  publicly because  to 
do so would be humiliating to the supposed beneficiaries or intoler- 
able  to  the  public at large. 

Perhaps  this  is  partly a  product  of  the  unfortunate  rhetoric  of 
affirmative action.150 But partly it is a result of a deep-seated  resist- 
ance  to  "racialism" as producing frequent  unfairness in  individual 
cases  and as inconsistent with widespread convictions  about the re- 
lationship  between 
individual  achievement  and  social  reward. 
Elaborate  arguments might be  and have been  offered  to  try to  un- 
dermine  this  resistance  and  these  convictions.151 But  it  is  at  least 
revealing  that  sometimes  these  arguments  seem  too  elaborate  to 
carry much weight before  the very people  to whom they are aimed. 
I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  all  or  most  affirmative action  pro- 
grams should  be  abolished.  There is too  much variety to  allow  for 
sensible  global judgments.  But we know enough  to know that such 
programs  have  often  failed  and  that  race-neutral  alternatives  are 
often  better. 

These  considerations  suggest  both  a  presumption  in  favor  of 
race- and gender-neutral policies  and the  need  to  develop  legal  re- 
forms that are not gender- or race-conscious - 
that do not give rise 
to  widespread  fears that government  is playing favorites  or is sub- 
ject to the lobbying pressure of well-organized private groups.  And 
it would be possible to administer an anticaste principle in race- and 
gender-neutral  terms.  We  can  think  of  many  examples,  including 
broad-based  anticrime and  antidrug measures; literacy and  educa- 
tional  programs; policies  designed  to  protect  children  from  poor 
health and from poverty, including neonatal care and childhood im- 
munizations;152 and  programs  designed  to  discourage  teen  preg- 
nancy  and single-parent  families.  Policies  of  this  kind could  easily 
be  designed  in race- and sex-neutral terms, and such policies  would 
be  directed  against many of  the  important problems faced  by both 
blacks  and women. 

150.  See  Margaret J. Radin, Affirmative Action  Rhetoric, in  REASSESSING CIVIL RIGHTS 
130, 136-38 (Ellen  Paul et  al. eds.,  1991); see also  Thomas Hill,  The Message of  Affirmative 
Action,  in  REASSESSING CIVIL RIGHTS, supra, at  108. 

151.  See, e.g., Strauss, supra note  19 (arguing that antidiscrimination and affirmative ac- 

tion  are indistinguishable  in principle). 

152.  Note  the enormous disparity between  infant mortality rates for blacks and the corre- 
sponding  rates for whites.  See  Gaps in Infant Mortality Rate Still Widening Between Blacks, 
Whites, CHI.  TRIB., Apr.  30,  1994, at  19. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

August 1994] 

The Anticaste Principle 

2455 

These  are  some  of  the  directions  in  which  equality  law  might 
move  in  the  future.  It  is  ironic but  true  that  a  third stage  of  civil 
rights policy, directed most self-consciously  against race and gender 
caste,  might also be self-consciously  designed  - 
for reasons of pol- 
icy  and principle  - 

so  as to  avoid  race- and gender-specificity. 

CONCLUSION 

In  this  essay  I  have  criticized three  approaches  to  the  problem 
of  race  and sex  equality  in law.  Free markets can accomplish  con- 
siderable  good  in the  area of  equality  as everywhere  else,  but they 
are  only  a  mixed  blessing  for  race  and  sex  equality.  Reliance  on 
existing preferences  has related problems, at least to the extent  that 
those  preferences  are  an  artifact of  an  unjust status quo.  The  no- 
tion  that the  law forbids unreasonable  distinctions is purely formal. 
As  often  interpreted, the idea has substance behind it, and perhaps 
it  is well  suited  to  the  institutional  limits of  the judiciary.  But  the 
substance  is  not  simple  to  defend.  It  sometimes  requires identical 
treatment  in  cases  in  which  distinctions  make  sense,  and  ignores 
inequality  when  inequality  is  present.  Sometimes  the  cause  of 
equality  requires people  who  are differently  situated  to  be  treated 
differently,  and this is a major gap in constitutional  doctrine. 

I have  suggested  that one  of  the prevailing constitutional  norms 
ought  to  be  an anticaste principle, one  that forbids social  and legal 
practices  from  turning highly  visible  but  morally  irrelevant  differ- 
ences  into  a basis for second-class citizenship.  I have also sought to 
show  realms  in  which  a  system  with  castelike  features  persists  in 
modern  American  society;  this is  an  area in  which  a  good  deal  of 
information  is  indispensable.  Partly for  this  reason,  the  anticaste 
principle  is mostly  for  legislative  rather than judicial enforcement. 
Courts  lack  the  requisite  fact-finding capacity  and  electoral  legiti- 
macy.  But  this  does  not  mean  that  others,  prominently  including 
Congress,  are  relieved  of  an  important  and  even  constitutional 
duty,  violated  by  widespread  current  practices,  to  eliminate  the 
castelike  features  of  American  society. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

