Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 27 (2D SERIES) Rules and Rulelessness 
Cass R. Sunstein 
THE LAW SCHOOL THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
Cass R. Sunstein* [T]he establishment of broadly applicable general principles is an essential component of the judicial process. 
—Justice Antonin Scalia, The Rule of Law is A Law of Rules [T]he highest ethical life of the mind consists at all times in the breaking of rules which have grown too narrow for the actual case —William James, Principles of Psychology 
There are two stylized conceptions of legal judgment. The first, associated with Jeremy Bentham and more recently with Justices Hugo Black and Antonin Scalia, places a high premium on the creation and application of general rules. On this view, public authorities should avoid “balancing tests” or close attention to individual circumstances. They should attempt instead to give guidance to lower courts, future legislators, and citizens through clear, abstract rules laid down in advance of actual applications. The second conception, associated with Blackstone and more recently with Justices Felix Frankfurter and John Marshall Harlan, places a high premium on law-making at the point of application through case-by-case decisions, narrowly tailored to the particulars of individual circumstances. On this view, public authorities should stay close to the details of the controversy before them, and avoid broader principles altogether. The problem with broad principles is that they tend to overreach; they may be erroneous or unreasonable as applied to cases not before the court. 
*Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This text consists of a very preliminary version of the second of the 1994 Tanner Lectures in Human Values, to be delivered at Harvard University in November 1994. All rights reserved. It would not be easy to overstate the importance of the controversy between the two views. Such issues arise in every area of law; they often involve fundamental liberties. Of course familiar understandings of the rule of law prize, as a safeguard of freedom, broad rules laid down in advance; but the American legal system also values close attention to the details of each case. In every area of regulation—the environment, occupational safety and health, energy policy, communications, control of monopoly power—it is necessary to choose between general rules and case-by-case decisions. 
In its purest form, enthusiasm for genuinely case-specific decisions is incoherent. Few if any judgments about a particular case are entirely particular. Almost any judgment about a particular case depends on the use of principles, or reasons. Any principles or reasons are, by their very nature, broader than the case for which they are designed. Case-by-case particularism is not a promising foundation for law. 
In many circumstances, however, enthusiasm for rules seems senseless. Sometimes public authorities cannot design general rules, because they lack relevant information. Sometimes general rules will fail, because the legal system seeks subtle judgments about a range of particulars. Often general rules will be poorly suited to the new circumstances that will be turned up by unanticipated developments. Often rulemakers cannot foresee the circumstances to which their rules will be applied. Often rules will be too crude, since they run up against intransigent beliefs about how particular cases should be resolved. In short, the costs of making rules, and of adhering to rules, are often extremely high. 
One of my principal goals in this essay is to respond to a pervasive social phenomenon: extravagant enthusiasm for rules and the rule of law. Case-by-case decisions are an important part of legal justice. At the same time, we should keep in mind the characteristic vices of rulelessness, which include bias, unequal treatment, and high costs. Particularism is even worse than a mixed blessing for law; it is an invitation to error and abuse. 
As a way of reducing the risks of both rules and case-by-case judgments, I suggest two principal alternatives. The first is pragmatic. It involves a highly contextualized inquiry into the levels and kinds of error and injustice via rules or via rulelessness. Surprising progress can be made through such inquiries. Rules cannot be favored or disfavored in the abstract; everything depends on whether, in context, rules are superior to the alternatives. The second involves a presumption in favor of what I will call privately adaptable rules—rules that allocate initial entitlements but do not specify endstates, and that harness private forces to determine outcomes. Privately adaptable rules are typically invoked in support of economic markets. I argue here that they also deserve an honored place in a legal system committed to a wide range of corrections to the operation of economic markets. 
Law has a toolbox, containing many devices. Lawyers have customarily opposed rules (“do not go over 60 miles per hour”) to standards (“do not drive unreasonably fast”), with rules seeming hard and fast, and standards seeming open-ended. There is indeed a difference between rules and standards. But the rules-standards debate captures only a part of what is at stake, and it is important to have a fuller sense of the repertoire of available devices. In this section I outline a number of them; my goal is only to clarify some terms that will come up throughout. 
First, however, a cautionary note. It will be apparent that whether a legal provision is a rule, a presumption, a principle, a standard, a set of factors—or something else—cannot be decided in the abstract. Everything depends on the understandings and practices of the people who interpret the provision. The American Constitution, for example, says that “Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech.” This provision might operate as a rule if people take it as a flat ban on certain sorts of regulations. It could operate as a presumption if people see it as saying that Congress can regulate speech only if it makes a demonstration of harm of certain kinds and degrees. Or it could be a set of factors; once we parse notions like “abridging” and “the freedom of speech,” perhaps we will decide cases on the basis of an inquiry into two, three, or more relevant considerations. The content and nature of a legal provision cannot be read off the provision. It is necessary to see what people take it to be. 
For this reason we should distinguish among three kinds of actors. The first is the person or institution that issues the relevant legal provision. The second is the person or institution that is subject to the provision. The third is the person or institution charged with the power to interpret the provision. If we take a rule to be a provision that minimizes law-making power in particular cases (see below), a lawmaker may intend to issue a rule, but the interpretive practices of the interpreting institution may turn the provision into something very different. Whether a provision is a rule or not is a function of interpretive practices, and the lawmaker has limited power over those practices. 
By “untrammeled discretion,” I mean the capacity to exercise official power as one chooses, by reference to such considerations as one wants to consider, weighted as one wants to weight them. A legal system cannot avoid some degree of discretion, in the form of power to choose according to one’s moral or political lights. As we will see, the interpretation of seemingly rigid rules itself allows for discretion. But a legal system can certainly make choices about how much discretion it wants various people to have. 
A system of untrammeled discretion exists when there are no limits on what officials may consider in reaching a decision and on how much weight various considerations deserve; hence there are no limits on the officials’ power to decide what to do. Both inputs and outputs are unconstrained. In the real world, untrammeled discretion is quite rare. But perhaps some police officers come very close to this sort of authority, in light of the practical unavailability of review. 
As we will soon see, it is too simple to oppose rules to discretion. The basic problem with this opposition is that interpretation of rules involves discretion, and that so-called discretion is rarely untrammeled in the legal context. 
Often a system of rules is thought to be the polar opposite of a system of untrammeled discretion. In fact there is no such polar opposition. Rules do not eliminate discretion. There is a continuum from rules to untrammeled discretion, with factors and standards (see below) falling in between. 
The key characteristic of rules is that they specify outcomes before particular cases arise. Rules are defined by the ex ante character of law. By a system of rules, I therefore mean to refer to something very simple: approaches to law that make most or nearly all legal judgments under the governing legal provision in advance of actual cases.1 We have rules, or (better) rule-ness, to the extent that the content of the law has been set down in advance of applications of the law. In the extreme case, all of the content of the law is given before cases arise. This is an ambitious goal—impossibly ambitious. As we will see, no approach to law is likely to avoid allowing at least some legal judgments to be made in the context of deciding actual cases. Rules do not and indeed cannot contain all of the necessary instructions for their own interpretation. Nonetheless, it is possible to ensure that a wide range of judgments about particular cases will occur in advance. 
On this view, a system of rules exists to the extent that most or all of the real work of deciding cases and giving content to the law has been done before the actual applications. We have a rule, or ruleness, to the extent that decisions about cases have been made ex ante rather than ex post. If a key function of law is to assign entitlements, a rule can thus be defined as the full or nearly full ex ante assignment of legal entitlements, or the complete or nearly complete ex ante specification of legal outcomes. 
When a rule is in play, the decision of cases does not depend on ex post assignments—as it does when, for example, a judge decides whether someone is liable for nuisance by seeing whether his conduct was “unreasonable” (assuming this term has not been given precise content in advance) or when a judge decides whether a restriction on abortion imposes an “undue burden” (making the same assumption). In the purest case, the responsibility of the decisionmaker is to find only the facts; the law need not be found. When rules are operating, an assessment of facts, combined with an ordinary understanding of grammar, semantics, and diction—and with more substantive understandings on which there is no dispute—is usually sufficient to decide the case. 
that no one under eighteen may drive. It could be somewhat more complex, saying that people under eighteen may not drive unless 1This understanding is close to that in Louis Kaplow, Rules and Standards: An Economic Analysis, 42 Duke LJ 469 ( they pass certain special tests. Or it could be quite complex, creating a formula for deciding who may drive. It might look, for example, to age; performance on a written examination; and performance on a driving test. Each of these three variables might be given a specified numerical weight. 
Rules can also be specific or abstract. Specific rules apply to a narrow class of cases; abstract rules apply to a broad class of cases. An abstract rule might say, for example, that no one may drive over 60 miles per hour, or that all cars must be equipped with catalytic converters. A specific rule might say that President Nixon’s papers are public property; that the first amendment allows government to ban advertisements for casino gambling when gambling has been unlawful in the recent past; or that sixth-grade students may be suspended without a hearing for a period of less than two weeks, if there has been a serious allegation of criminal activity. All rules are defined in terms of classes, but sometimes the rule is narrowly tailored so as to pick up only a few cases, or perhaps only one. 
It is familiar to find rules that have explicit or implicit exceptions for cases of necessity or emergency. It is unfamiliar, indeed nearly impossible, to find rules without any such exceptions. For example, a person may be banned from taking the life of another; this is a rule; but self-defense is a valid excuse. Many constitutions allow abridgements of individual rights in case of emergency. The American Constitution allows the President to suspend the writ of habeas corpus in time of war. Other constitutions say that certain rights can be abridged under unusual circumstances. We might go so far as to say that almost all rules have at least some implicit exceptions. 
The consequences of making exceptions depend on the details. An exception could be narrow but vague, as in the idea that reasonable limits on free speech can be made under conditions of war. The conditions are rare and the exception therefore narrow; but the meaning of the exception is vague (what are “reasonable limits?”). Or the exception could be narrow and specific, as in the idea that under conditions of war, members of the Communist party may not work for the government in any capacity. An exception might be broad and vague or broad and specific. A specific exception might well convert the rule with exceptions into a complex rule, or a formula. 
A legal system may contain presumptions or presumptive rules. The law may presume, for example, that when the government regulates speech on the basis of its content, the regulation is unconstitutional. But the presumption might be rebutted by claims of a certain kind and strength, as when government can show a clear and present danger. The law might presume that an employer may not discriminate on the basis of race; but the presumption might be rebutted by a showing that, for example, a black actor is necessary to play the part of Othello. 
The legal system is pervaded by rules that operate as presumptions and that can be countered by showings of a particular kind and a particular degree. The line between presumptions and rules with emergency exceptions is thin. A rule with necessity or emergency exceptions might be described, somewhat imprecisely, as a strong presumption. With presumptions, it is necessary to know what counts as a rebuttal, and whether the presumption and the rebuttal are specific or vague, broad or narrow. 
We might contrast both untrammeled discretion and rulebound ways of proceeding with approaches that allow particular judgments to emerge through the decisionmaker’s assessment and weighing of a number of relevant factors, whose precise content has not been specified in advance. The key point is that several factors are pertinent to the decision, but there is no rule, simple or complex, to apply. There is no rule because the factors are not described exhaustively and precisely in advance, and because their weight has not been fully specified. Hence the decisionmaker cannot rely simply on “finding the facts” and “applying the law.” The content of the law is not given; part of it must be found. There is a degree of ex post allocation of legal entitlements. 
On this score, the difference between rules and factors is one of degree rather than kind. As we will see, those who interpret rules must determine at least some of their content. In a system of factors, moreover, the decisionmaker cannot do whatever she wants. But the content of the law is created in large part by those who must apply it to particular cases, and not by people who laid it down in advance. To a considerable extent, we do not know what the law is until the assessment of particular cases. 
which regulated pricing and allocation of petroleum products from 1973 to 1981. The statute required the agency to “provide for” nine factors, “to the maximum extent practicable.” These factors were “protection of public health, safety, and welfare; ( all public services; ( preservation of an economically sound and competitive petroleum industry; ( distribution of crude oil and petroleum products; (7) maintenance of exploration and production of fuels; (8) economic efficiency; and (9) minimization of interference with market mechanisms.”2 Congress added that each of the nine factors is equally important. There is much to be said about this quite bizarre list. What is important here is that an explicit enumeration of factors may be possible. 
In most contexts, however, any given list of relevant factors is not exhaustive. Life may turn up other relevant factors that are hard or impossible to identify in advance. In most areas of law governed by factors rather than rules, it is understood that the identified factors, if described at a level of specificity, are not complete—or that if they are intended to be complete, they are stated in a sufficiently general way, so as to allow unanticipated, additional considerations to apply. 
Rules are often compared with standards.3 A ban on “excessive” speeds on the highway is familiarly thought to involve a standard; so too with a requirement that pilots be “competent,” or that behavior in the classroom be “reasonable.” As standards, these might be compared with a 55 miles per hour speed limit, or a ban on pilots who are over the age of 70, or a requirement that students sit in particular, assigned seats. 
The contrast between rules and standards is very useful. It identifies the fact that with some legal provisions, interpreters have to do a great deal of work in order to generate the necessary content. With a standard, it is not possible to know what we have in advance. The meaning of a standard depends on what happens with its applications. The important feature of standards is that they share with factors a refusal to specify outcomes in advance. Standards depart from factors in refusing to specify the sorts of considerations that are relevant in particular applications. It would not be right, however, to say that standards offer more discretion than factors. The amount of discretion depends on the context. 
Here too, moreover, the nature of the provision cannot be read off its text, and everything will depend on interpretive practices. Once we define the term “excessive,” we may well end up with a rule. Perhaps officials will decide that a speed is excessive whenever it is over 60 miles per hour. If a standard is transparent, in the sense that there is a clear ex ante understanding of its meaning, it is a rule. Or we may instead end up with a set of factors or a presumption. Perhaps anyone who goes over 60 miles per hour will be presumed to have gone excessively fast, unless special circumstances can be shown. Or perhaps the judgment about excessive speed will be based on need, weather conditions, traffic, time of day, and so forth. The principal distinction between rules and standards turns on the fact that we do not know what a standard is, or means, until it is applied.4 Something of the same kind can be said of rules (see below), but it cannot be said nearly so bluntly. 
In law, principles are often said to be both deeper and more general than rules. We might say that rules are justified by principles. The justification of the rule could be used to interpret its meaning; hence courts will resort to the principle in trying to understood the rule. For example, there is a principle to the effect that it is wrong to take human life without sufficient cause; the law implements this principle with a range of rules governing homicide. There is a prin 
ciple to the effect that it is wrong not to keep your promises; hence the law contains a range of rules for enforcement of contractual obligations. A common use of the term “principle” in law involves the justifications behind rules. 
There is another and quite different understanding of the notion of principle in law. Any legal system contains explicitly formulated principles as well as rules; these principles do not lie behind rules but instead bear on the resolution of cases. Thus it is said that no person may profit from his own wrong; that he who seeks equity must do equity; that ambiguous statutes should be construed so as not to apply outside the territorial boundaries of the United States. The status of legal principles is somewhat mysterious; they differ in weight, ranging from strong presumptions to tie-breakers when cases are otherwise in equipoise. Usually they operate as factors. But principles are not rules. We might say that principles are more flexible than rules, in the sense that principles bear on cases without disposing of them. The distinction should not be overstated. Since any given rule X is unlikely to resolve all cases that fall under the literal language of rule X, the difference between rules and principles is one of degree rather than of kind. 
What is the relationship between a principle and a standard? If we see a principle as the justification for a rule, the difference seems obvious: a standard is not a justification for an (already specified) rule, but instead a legal provision that needs a good deal of specification to be used to resolve individual cases. If we understand a principle as a relevant consideration in the decision of cases, the distinction between principles and standards is more complex. As I understand it here, a legal principle is different from a legal standard in the sense that the latter “covers” individual cases without specifying the content of the analysis in particular cases, whereas a principle is a background notion that does not by itself cover an individual case, but is instead brought to bear on it. This is a lamentably vague formulation. But the distinction makes intuitive sense. Compare a standard banning unreasonable risks with a principle to the effect that statutes should be construed so as to avoid constitutional doubts. 
One final complication. It is sometimes said that a decision in a case turns on a “principle,” as in the idea that speech may not be restricted unless there is a clear and present danger, or that discrimination on the basis of race is presumed invalid, or that no contract is valid without consideration. In this usage, a principle is not distinguishable from a standard, and at some points below, I will use the terms interchangeably. 
The last category is not a simple alternative to the others. Sometimes a legal system proceeds by comparing the case at hand to a case (or to cases) that have come before. The prior case is inspected to see whether it “controls,” or should be extended to, the case at hand. The prior case will be accompanied by an opinion, which may contain a rule, a standard, a set of factors, or something else. The court deciding the present case will inspect relevant similarities and differences. That court, not bound by the previous opinion, may produce a rule, a standard, a set of factors, or something else. With analogy, we do not have a decision by rule, because the rule is not specified in advance of the process of analogical thinking. The rule emerges from comparison of cases, and it is applied only after it has been specified. Analogical thinking is rule-based (or standard-based) only in the sense that it depends on a rule (or a standard); but analogical thinking does not involve simple rule-application (or standard-application) because the rule (or the standard) is not given in advance. Analogical reasoning is thus not a form of rule-application. 
When courts proceed with analogies, then, the nature of the legal provision—its content and even its character as a rule, a standard, a set of factors—is not known before the analogical process takes place. The nature of the provision is specified in the case at hand by grappling with the precedent; we do not know what we have before the grappling occurs. It is unusual, however, for analogical thinking to yield rules. Most of the time, an analogy will produce a standard, one that makes sense of the outcomes in the case at hand and the case that came before. 
A system of rules is often thought to be the signal virtue of a system of law. Indeed, the rule of law seems to require a system of rules.5 The idea has a constitutional source. The due process clause of the American Constitution is sometimes interpreted so as to require rules, or rule-like provisions, and to forbid a system based on analogies, standards, or factors. This is particularly important in the area of criminal justice and freedom of speech, where the “void for vagueness” doctrine requires clear rules before the state may regulate private conduct. 
It is not an overstatement to say that the void for vagueness doctrine is among the most important guarantees of liberty under law. Consider Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville,6 which is exemplary on the point. 
In the early 1970s, it was a crime to engage in “vagrancy” in the City of Jacksonville. The category of “vagrancy” covered “Rogues and vagabonds, or dissolute persons who go about begging, common gamblers, persons who use juggling or unlawful games or plays, common drunkards, common night walkers . . . persons wandering or strolling around from place to place without any lawful purpose or object, habitual loafers, disorderly persons . . . persons able to work but habitually living upon the earnings of their wives or minor children . . . .” A number of people were arrested under this law. Among them were two white women, Papachristou and Calloway, who had been traveling in a car with two black men, Melton and Johnson. 
The Supreme Court reversed the convictions on the theory that the Jacksonville ordinance was inconsistent with the due process clause. It was “void for vagueness,” because it failed to provide fair notice that contemplated conduct is unlawful, and because “it encourages arbitrary and erratic arrests and convictions.” The Court emphasized several points: “The poor among us, the minorities, the average householder are not in business and not alerted to the regulatory schemes of vagrancy laws; and we assume that they would have no understanding of their meaning and impact if they read them.” Moreover, the “ordinance makes criminal activities that by modern standards are normally innocent.” Thus “[p]ersons ‘wandering or strolling’ from place to place have been extolled by Walt Whitman and Vachel Lindsay. . . . The difficulty is that these activities are historically part of the amenities of life as we have known them.” 
The ordinance was also unlawful because it put “unfettered discretion . . . in the hands of the Jacksonville police.” To say this is not to deny that the ordinance could serve important law enforcement purposes. The Court said: “Of course, vagrancy statutes are useful to the police. Of course, they are nets making easy the roundup of so-called undesirables. But the rule of law implies equality and justice in its application.” 
Notably, the Court quoted a law review article to the effect that “‘Algeria is rejecting the flexibility introduced in the Soviet criminal code by the ‘analogy’ principle, as have the East-Central European and black African states.” Many systems of criminal justice have made it an offense to engage in conduct that is “analogous” to what is specifically prohibited. The analogical principle has played a large role in Chinese criminal law.7 Apparently the Supreme Court believed that this analogical approach to the criminal law8 raises severe questions under the due process clause. 
We can take Papachristou to exemplify a failure of the rule of law. But what specifically does this concept entail? We can identify several characteristics.9 a. Clear, general, publicly accessible rules laid down in advance. 
It is plain that the rule of law requires rules that are clear, in the sense that people need not guess about their meaning, and that are general, in the sense that they apply to classes rather than particular people or groups. Laws should be publicly accessible as well. It follows that there is a ban on “secret law.” Legal proscriptions must be available to the public. Of course vague laws—banning, for example, excessive or unreasonable behavior—are unacceptable, at least in the criminal context; they are akin to “secret law” in the sense that people cannot know what, specifically, they entail. The idea that law 7See Jon Elster, Solomonic Judgments 217 (1989), citing an unpublished paper by Hungdad Chiu. 
8England too had analogical crimes. This tradition was of course rejected in the United States. 
9I claim little originality here, drawing on Fuller, The Morality of Law, supra note 5, and Raz, in The Authority of Law, supra note 5. should be laid down in advance is associated with the notion that rules, to qualify as such, must specify outcomes before the point of application. When rules are operating, people who interpret or apply the law do not give content to the law in the encounter with particular problems. 
In the real world of law, many complexities arise on these counts. It is a fiction to say that would-be criminals actually consult the law in advance of the crime. In fact we do not know the extent to which criminal statutes are understood by the general public. Undoubtedly the answer varies from area to area, and in many cases people could not describe the law with much accuracy. It is also the case that many laws, including criminal statutes, have a high degree of ambiguity. No legal system is without a large degree of discretion to give content to law at points of application, and this means that ruleness will be limited even in legal systems highly committed to the rule of law. Perhaps this is a failure of the rule of law, but it also seems to be a product of the limitations of human language and foresight. 
b. Prospectivity; no retroactivity. 
In a system of rules, retroactive lawmaking is disfavored, and it is banned altogether in the context of criminal prohibitions. In general, laws must operate prospectively only. The ban on ex post facto laws is the clearest prohibition on retroactivity. More modestly, American law includes an interpretive principle to the effect that civil laws will ordinarily apply prospectively. If the legislature wants to apply a law retroactively, it must do so unambiguously, and if it does so unambiguously, there is at least a question to be raised under the due process clause. 
c. Conformity between law on the books and law in the world. 
If the law does not operate in the books as it does in the world, the rule of law is compromised. If there is little or no resemblance between enacted law and real law, the rule of law cannot exist. If the real law is different from the enacted law, generality, clarity, predictability, fair notice, and public accessibility are all sacrificed. People must be permitted to monitor official conduct by testing it against enacted law. 
In many legal systems, of course, there is an occasional split between what the law says and what the law is, and often the split is severe. But the frequency of the phenomenon should not deflect attention from the fact that this is a failure of the rule of law. d. Hearing rights and availability of review by independent adjudicative officials. 
The rule of law requires a right to a hearing in which people can contest the government’s claim that the relevant conduct meets legal requirements for either the imposition of harm or the denial of benefits. Someone who is alleged to have committed a crime, or to have forfeited rights to social security benefits or a driver’s license, is entitled to some forum in which he can claim that the legal standards have not in fact been violated. Ordinarily the purpose of the hearing is to ensure that the facts have been accurately found. There should also be some form of review by independent officials, usually judges entitled to a degree of independence from political pressures. e. Separation between law-making and law-implementation. 
Legal systems committed to the rule of law separate the task of making the law from the task of implementing the law. For example, the nondelegation principle requires that the legislature lay down rules in advance; it therefore prohibits rules from being created by the people who execute them. The nondelegation principle is now honored much more in the breach than in the observance, in part because there are no clear criteria by which to distinguish lawmaking from law-implementation. The distinction is one of degree rather than kind. But in some areas of law, people engaged in enforcement activity are constitutionally constrained from giving content to the law. The area of criminal justice is an important example. f. No rapid changes in the content of law; no contradictions or inconsistency in the law. 
If the law changes too quickly, the rule of law cannot exist. People will not be able to adapt their conduct to what is required. So too if the law contains inconsistency or contradiction, which can make it hard or impossible to know what the rules are. Needless to say, people should not be placed under mutually incompatible obligations. The problem of rapidly changing law was a prime impetus behind the adoption of the American Constitution. Hence Madison wrote: “The mutability of the laws of the States is found to be a serious evil. The injustice of them has been so frequent and so flagrant as to alarm the most steadfast friends of Republicanism. I am persuaded that I do not err in saying that the evils issuing from these sources contributed more to the uneasiness which produced the Convention, and prepared the public mind for a general reform, than those which accrued to our national character and interest from the inadequacy of the Confederation to its immediate objects.”10 
Both of these phenomena—unstable law and inconsistent law—are part of the fabric of the modern regulatory state. Sometimes regulatory law changes very quickly, thus making it difficult for people to plan. Sometimes regulatory law imposes conflicting obligations, so that it is hard for people to know what they are supposed to do. These are important pathologies of modern law, and they produce high levels of inefficiency and injustice. g. Likelihood of agreement on meaning of rules from people who disagree on first principles. 
A particular advantage of a system of rules is that people who disagree on much else may nonetheless agree about the meaning of a rule. A law that forbids people from going over 55 miles per hour has the same meaning to Republicans and Democrats, libertarians and socialists, anarchists and members of the Ku Klux Klan. When the rule of law is in place, people can know what the rules are without adverting to first principles. Indeed, adverting to first principles is generally illegitimate, short of civil disobedience. By their very nature, rules ban people from basing their decisions on considerations that are perfectly legitimate in other settings. 
This is an oversimplification, as we will see. Disagreements about first principles may break out in disputes over the meaning of rules. But the oversimplification has fundamental truth. And in this oversimplification also lies some of the enduring truth of legal positivism, the law-politics distinction, and the view that ours is a government of law, not human beings. 
10Letter to Thomas Jefferson, October 24, 1787. 
A great virtue of rules is that they circumscribe permissible grounds for both action and argument; in doing so, they reduce costs of many diverse kinds. I have said that in a heterogeneous society, containing people of limited time and capacities, this is an enormous advantage. It saves a great deal of effort, time, and expense. But by truncating the sorts of value-disputes that can arise in law, it also ensures that disagreements will occur along a narrowly restricted range. 
I now discuss some of the characteristic virtues of decisions according to rules. First, however, it is important to note that rules fall in several different categories. Here is a nonexhaustive account, tied to my special concerns here. 
on the grounds that they are a good summary, and that they are desirable as rules, rather than mere advice or rules of thumb, so as to save the costs of making individualized decisions. Of course a rule that counts as a summary of wise decisions may operate, for good pragmatic reasons, as a genuine rule—one that cannot be revisited during particular applications. If people over the age of sixty are banned from being commercial pilots, it is because this is a pretty accurate summary of good individual decisions, and less costly to administer than any alternative. (Consider the expenditures that would be required to assess competence in every case.) If we say that people with sat scores below 500 will not be admitted to a certain college, it is for a similar reason. 
coordinate their behavior so as to overcome collective action problems. This is true, for example, with respect to rules of the road. The rule that people must drive on the left-hand side of the road is valuable because it tells people where to drive, not because it is any better than its opposite. We do not think that people must drive on the left because it is a wise decision, in the individual case unaccompanied by rules, to drive on the left. So too, rules may solve prisoner’s dilemmas, in which individually rational decisions can lead to social irrationality or even disaster. The rules governing emission of pollutants are an example. And if each polluter felt free to revisit the justification for the rule, the prisoner’s dilemma might not be solved. The best solution is probably to fix a rule and to require everyone to adhere to it. 
who may marry whom, for example, say something about the institution of marriage and about social convictions of who is entitled to public recognition of a relational commitment. Three people cannot be married, nor can people of the same sex. These rules do not summarize individually wise decisions, but instead express a social judgment about relations and valuations. We might say that the expressive function of law includes the effects of law on social attitudes about relationships, events, and prospects, and also the “statement” that law makes independently of such effects. 
Suppose that in order to succeed in your plans, you need to engage in consistent behavior over time. Perhaps an exercise program requires you to work out for one hour, and just one hour, every day; or perhaps a good diet requires you to eat the same things, more or less, at the same time for a period. In these circumstances, a rule that is enforceable through some mechanism—perhaps social sanctions—may be the best way to proceed. 
Societies can face similar problems. Perhaps good monetary policy for a certain period requires the Federal Reserve Board to do the same thing each month; suppose too that without a rule, and with particularized consideration of what to do each month, the Board would do inconsistent things. Adoption of a rule may ensure the requisite consistency. In this way, a rule may be a precommitment strategy that overcomes predictable problems with ruleless decisions. 
ments among people who disagree on questions of theory or on fundamental values. Rules might do this in three different ways. First, people can agree that a rule is binding, or authoritative, without agreeing on a theory of why it is binding, and without agreeing that the rule is good. Theories of legitimate authority are highly pluralistic, and acceptance of rules can proceed from diverse foundations. 
Usually the factors at work in the decisions I have in mind are valued in qualitatively different ways. Moreover, those factors cannot be placed on a single metric; they are not commensurable. To understand these claims, something must be said about diverse kinds of valuation and about the difficult problem of incommensurability. 
a. The factors involved in legal decisions are often qualitatively different from one another. It does seem clear that human beings value goods, things, relationships, and states of affairs in diverse ways; all goodness is goodness-of-a-kind.38 There is of course a distinction between instrumental and intrinsic goods. We value some things purely or principally for use; other things, like knowledge or friendship, have intrinsic value. But the distinction between intrinsic and instrumental goods captures only a part of the picture. Intrinsically valued things produce a range of diverse responses. Some bring about wonder and awe; consider a mountain or certain artistic works. Toward some people, we feel respect; toward others, affection; toward others, love. People worship their deity. Negative valuations are similarly diverse. To lose money is to lose an instrumental good (though one that might be used for intrinsic goods, like the preservation of human life). To lose a friend is a different matter. So too, our responses to intrinsic bads are diverse. Many of the relevant distinctions play a role in law, as when beaches must be compared with dollars, or protection of racial equality measured against associational freedom. It is to be sure possible that the use of a single metric, treating goods as relevantly the same, may have some pragmatic advantages; cost-benefit analysis is based on this judgment. But decisions based on factors tend to involve goods that are understood to be valued in qualitatively diverse ways. 
not be commensurable. Return, for example, to the idea that the Constitution requires such hearings as are justified by an assessment of three factors: the individual interest at stake; the likelihood of error and the probable value of additional safeguards; and the government’s interest, pecuniary and nonpecuniary, in avoiding complex 38See Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics ( Amartya Sen, Plural Utility, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 83 (198283). procedures. It would be odd to say that this assessment can be made through lining up the relevant variables along any single metric. There is no scale by which it makes sense to weigh these matters. If we devise a scale, we will have to recharacterize the relevant goods in a way that changes their character and effaces qualitative differences. Perhaps this is justified for pragmatic reasons, but something will be lost as well as gained. 
when the relevant goods cannot be aligned along a single metric without doing violence to our considered judgments about how these goods are best characterized. By our considered judgments, I mean our reflective assessments of how certain relationships and events should be understood, evaluated, and experienced. The notion of a single metric should be understood quite literally. By this I mean a standard of valuation that (1) operates at a workable level of specificity, ( comparison along the same dimension. In deciding cases according to factors, there is often no such metric. Decisions nonetheless are made, and they can be justified or criticized on the basis of reasons. But those reasons do not amount to a single scale of value. Of course rules are often developed on the basis of an assessment of incommensurable goods. 
These are brisk and inadequate remarks about a complex subject.39 For the moment my claim is simple: The factors that are typically at stake in law are valued in different ways, and these factors are not commensurable along any scale. 
All this leaves two questions. Under what circumstances is it appropriate to rely on factors rather than rules? And under what circumstances might a legal system be expected to do one rather than the other? 
It is unlikely that we will be able to generate a reliable and general positive theory on this topic. Legislation is a complex product of legislative self-interest, private influence, and public-spirited motiva39More detailed discussion can be found in Cass R. Sunstein, Incommensurability and Valuation in Law, 92 Mich L Rev 779 (1994). tions on the part of both legislators and those who influence them. Judicial choices between rules and factors are at least equally difficult to attribute to a single behavioral influence, or a set of behavioral influences. It is hard to imagine a simple testable hypothesis that would not be falsified by many results in the world. 
We are likely to do far better by identifying mechanisms by which certain choices might be made, rather than law-like generalizations by which choices are usually made.40 Moreover, the occasional role of public spirit in legislative deliberations—from legislators themselves or from people who influence them—means that the normative and the positive cannot be so sharply separated. Normative views about what makes best sense will undoubtedly affect outcomes. The same is true of others faced with the choice between rules and rulelessness, including judges and bureaucrats. 
Most broadly, we can suggest that rules will be avoided (1) when the lawmaker lacks information and expertise, so that the information costs are too high to produce rules, ( on rules because of political dissensus within the relevant institution, so that the political costs of rules are too high to justify them, ( when people in position to decide whether to have rules do not fear the bias, interest, or corruption of those who decide cases, (4) when those who make the law do not disagree much with those who will interpret the law, and hence when the law-makers do not need rules to discipline administrators, judges, or others, and ( applications of the legal provision are few in number or relevantly different from one another. Rules might thus be chosen when the error rate with the particular rules is relatively low, when the error rate for rulelessness is high, and when the number of cases is large. 
Of course there can be a considerable ex ante investment in rulemaking, at least in the nonobvious cases, and at least if we seek rules that have some degree of accuracy. On the other hand, the absence of rules may produce significant costs at the stage when particular decisions are made. One question is who bears these costs, and how much power they have to minimize them. High investments in choosing the content of the law must be made by people 40See Jon Elster, Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences (1989), making this claim much more generally. deciding on the particular applications; they must not only find the facts but also find the law. Consider, for example, the problems of deciding whether airline pilots over the age of 60 are still able to do their jobs competently. Such decisions will be time-consuming, may produce unequal treatment, and may create a lot of error under the pressure of the moment (mistaken stereotypes about people over 60, or misplaced sympathy for discharged employees). Such decisions may also impair predictability and thus create high costs for people trying to order their affairs under law. 
Where those who make the law are not the same as those who interpret and enforce it, there will be complex pressures. On the one hand, the lawmakers may distrust the interpreters and enforcers, and may therefore seek to impose rules. If everyone is aligned in interest, the costs of rulelessness will be diminished, since the lawmakers need not fear that interpreters and enforcers will have agendas of their own. On the other hand, a split between lawmaking on the one hand and law-interpreting/law-enforcement on the other can create some pressure to avoid rules. Here is the key point: When law-making is split from law-interpretation and law-enforcement, many of the costs of producing clarity ex ante will be faced by lawmakers themselves, whereas many of the costs of producing clarity ex post will be faced by others. A law-making body that does not enforce law can “export” the costs of rulelessness to those who must enforce whatever provisions have been enacted. There may be political and other advantages in doing this—though as we have seen, there are countervailing pressures too. 
The odd and perhaps counterintuitive result is that a system of separated powers imposes at least some pressure toward avoiding rules. A system of unified powers does not impose similar pressure, since in such a system people who refuse to make rules ex ante will face the costs of rulelessness ex post. The rise of administrative agencies combining traditionally separated powers helps counteract the difficulty. 
As I have said, the benefits for law-makers of refusing to make rules may, in a system of separated powers, be countered by other factors. The failure to make rules may be punished by the interests that fear the outcomes within another branch of government; or it may fit poorly with the representatives’ own political commitment or electoral self-interest. Similar considerations apply to a decentralized, hierarchical judiciary. In such a system, there will be some incentive for the Supreme Court to avoid making rules and to export the costs of rulelessness to others. But the incentive can be overcome by other considerations. I return to these points below. 
Some of these speculations are borne out by comparing the legal system in England with that in the United States.41 English law is far more rule-bound than American law. The Parliament is less likely to delegate discretionary authority to judges. For their part, English judges treat statutes as rules, interpreting them literally and generally refusing to investigate whether the particular application of the rule makes sense as a matter of policy or principle. In England, law-making and law-interpretation are far more rule-bound than in the United States, where law-making often takes place in the process of confrontation with particular cases. 
How might this be explained? It is notable that laws in England are drafted by an Office of Parliamentary Counsel, a highly professional body that consists of skilled authors of laws. The Parliamentary Counsel brings about a uniform style of drafting. It is also closely attuned to the methods of English judges, and the Counsel drafts legislation with close knowledge of literalism and of the prevailing canons of construction. The judges’ practice is itself uniform and relatively simple. In a parliamentary system, the government and the legislature are allied, and the high degree of party control means that there is a level of homogeneity in England at the law-making stage. Moreover, and critically, Parliament revisits statutes with some frequency, and it fixes mistakes that are shown as such when particular cases arise. 
The situation in the United States is very different. There is no centralized drafting body, and hence no uniformity in terminology, and little professionalization. In America, the drafters of legislation are multiple and uncoordinated. The party system has largely disintegrated, and the executive and legislature are hardly aligned. Congress appears only intermittently aware of the judges’ interpre41I draw in this section on the extremely illuminating discussion i n Patrick Atiyah and Robert Summers, Form and Substance in Anglo-American Law (1987). tive practices, which are themselves not easy to describe in light of the sheer size of the federal judiciary and the existence of sharp splits, on just this point, in the Supreme Court. Congress does overrule statutory decisions to which it objects. But it is not in the business of responding rapidly and regularly to particular cases in which literal interpretations misfire. Hence both law-making and law-interpreting practice are very different from what they are in England. 
This brief description connects well with the contextual suggestions offered above. There tends to be more dissensus in America than in England at the law-making stage. The quality of drafting ex ante is lower, as is the possibility of legislative correction ex post. None of this suggests that England or America has the optimal level of rules in light of its own institutional characteristics. But it does suggest that the two legal systems are highly responsive to distinctive contextual features. 
How can a legal system minimize the problems posed by unreasonable generality on the one hand and those of potentially abusive discretion on the other? The best approaches involve (a) highly contextualized inquiries into the likelihood of error and abuse with either rules or rulelessness, and hence an “on balance” judgment about risk; and (b) a presumption in favor of a particular kind of rule, that is, the privately adaptable rule that allocates initial entitlements and does not specify outcomes. But there are other possibilities as well. 
Jeremy Bentham favored clear rules, laid down in advance and broadly communicated. In at least some of his writings, he also favored adjudicative flexibility, allowing judges to adapt the rules to the complexities of individual cases. Bentham was aware that rules could misfire as they encountered particular controversies, especially if we understand the notion of misfiring in utilitarian terms. In courts of law, he concluded, the rules would not be fully binding. This suggests a paradox: How could someone advocate clear rules without asking judges to follow them? Bentham’s ingenious answer involved the different audiences for law. The public would hear general rules; the judges would hear individual cases.42 This is the important idea of an “acoustic separation” for legal terms, justified on utilitarian grounds. There is such a separation in many areas of law, including tax law and the law relating to excuses for criminality. 
Following this idea, we might suggest that legislatures should lay down rules, but that interpreters should feel free to ignore them in contexts where they produce absurdity. In some ways this is the American legal practice. Of course it is equally important to develop subsidiary principles to discipline the general idea of “absurdity” and to give it concrete application in the modern regulatory state. Modern agencies, more than courts, might be entrusted with the job of adapting general rules to particular circumstances. 
There are, however, two large difficulties with the Benthamite strategy. The first involves the right to democratic publicity—more particularly, the right to know what the law is. The Benthamite strategy appears to compromise that right. The rule of law and democratic values might well be jeopardized if the law is not what the statute books say that it is. Benthamite approaches might therefore be unacceptable to the extent that utilitarian judgments about acoustic separation run into liberal principles of publicity. 
The second problem with the Benthamite strategy is that the strategy fails to take account of the fact that general rules can be unacceptable precisely because general rules can create bad private incentives as compared with more fine-grained approaches. The secrecy of the Benthamite approach—the distinction between the law as it is known and the law as it operates in courts of law—will do nothing at all about the problem of poor incentives from crude rules. Indeed, publicizing the exceptions, and telling everyone about the possibility of close judicial attention to the particulars of your case, may well be a good idea if we seek optimal incentives. At least this is so if people would not react to the presence of exceptions by believing that they can do whatever they want and that the rule does not exist at all. 
We might conclude that too often, the Benthamite strategy is neither democratic nor efficient. But there is still a place for a version of it. A legal system might sometimes provide that in exceptional cases, interpreters should be permitted to change rules, 42See Gerald Postema, Bentham and the Common Law Tradition (1986). by exploring whether their justifications create absurdity or injustice, if the particulars of the case so suggest. We might even see a judicial (or administrative) power of this kind as part of the interpretation of rules, not as an authority to change rules. This power should be publicly known—a fully disclosed aspect of interpretation. In some contexts, of course, the possibility of changing rules, or of interpreting them with close reference to whether they make sense in particular circumstances, might be too damaging to the project of having rules. But this contextual judgment cannot be made in the abstract. 
Often a legal system should make the choice between rules and rulelessness on the basis of a contextual inquiry into the aggregate level of likely errors and abuses. I have suggested that when judges or other interpreters are perceived to be ignorant, corrupt, or biased, or in any case when they diverge in their judgments from the people who make rules, a legal system will proceed with rules. Even a poor fit, in the form of over- and under-inclusive rules, can be tolerated when individual decisions will be inaccurate as well. Thus we might find factors when there is no special reason to distrust those who will assess them. So too, individualized decisions are likely to be dispensed with when it is possible to come up with rules that fit well. 
The choice between rules and rulelessness might be seen as presenting a principal-agent problem. The legislature, as the principal, seeks to control the decisions of its agents. A problem with rules is that the agents might be able to track the principal’s wishes better or best if they are given the freedom to take account of individual circumstances. Any rule might inadequately capture the legislature’s considered judgments about particular cases. The costs of rulelessness might be acceptable if the legislature does not believe that the court or other interpreter is likely to be untrustworthy, perhaps because there is a basically shared view of relevant problems. 
On the other hand, without rules the agent might become uncontrollable. This is so especially in light of the fact that a system of factors allows the agent to weigh each factor as he chooses. The result is that a system of rules might be adopted as the best way, overall, to control the agent’s discretion, at least if there is a measure of distrust of some or all agents. It is also true that rules tend to make sense and to be adopted in the face of social consensus within the lawmaking body; decisions by factors are more probable when there is dissensus. It is not hard to obtain a ban on racial discrimination when people agree that this form of discrimination is illegitimate; it is much harder to obtain a similar ban on discrimination against the handicapped, where balancing tests are pervasive. Consider the fact that Congress often delegates discretionary power to an agency when it is unable to agree on the appropriate rule, because of social dissensus, and therefore it tells the agency to act “reasonably.” Examples include the areas of broadcasting regulation and occupational safety and health. This route is followed partly because factors, more conspicuously and regularly than rules, drive discretion underground. The costs of laying down rules are increased in the face of dissensus on their content, and this consideration increases the likelihood that we will see factors instead. 
Sometimes it is impossible to come up with rules in a multimember body. Often participants in a dispute begin discussion by attempting agreement on “principles” rather than concrete rules, as in controversies over the Middle East. So too people are able to agree on a set of relevant factors, or perhaps on some particular outcomes, without being able to agree on a rule, or on the general reasons that account for particular outcomes. Sometimes people agree on general principles but disagree on particular cases. Sometimes the opposite is true. When rules do not emerge from legislatures, it may well be because it is impossible to get agreement from a heterogeneous body. Return here to the fact that legislatures that delegate broad discretion can internalize two large benefits of rulelessness: economizing on information costs and on the political costs of specificity. They can simultaneously externalize the costs of rulelessness, which are faced by administrators. It is administrators who must compile relevant information and face the political heat of making hard and specific choices. 
It follows that we tend to find rules where one group of interests is well-organized or otherwise powerful, and when its adversaries are not. In circumstances of this sort, the well-organized interests can press the governmental body in the direction of rules. A wellorganized group is unlikely to allow itself to become at risk through factors when it need not do so (unless, perhaps, it believes that it is even more likely to be successful with bureaucrats or judges). Consider laws governing the regulation of agriculture, which are often highly specific, in part because the farmers’ lobby is wellorganized, and because the opponents of such laws are not. 
Factors are more likely to be the basis for decision when opposing interests have roughly equivalent power in the lawmaking body, and when they are willing to take their chances with a bureaucracy or a judge. This may be so because they are both highly organized, or because they are both weak and diffuse. A possible example is the Occupational Safety and Health Act, which is quite vague, in part because its opponents and adversaries are both powerful. On the other hand, two well-organized groups might produce rules when compromise is possible and when there are, to both groups, special risks from relying on an agency or a court. 
This may be the case when, for example, the regulated class needs to know what the rule is, so that it can plan its affairs. Perhaps it is better to have fairly bad rules than no rules at all. When such planning is made possible by clear rules, members of the regulated class may have it within their power to avoid (some of) the costs of inaccurate rules. Perhaps they can alter their conduct so as to avoid triggering the rule in cases in which the rule is over-inclusive. On the other hand, this avoidance may itself be an undesirable social cost. Return to the problem of site-level unreasonableness, where application of an overbroad rule forces employers to make workplace changes that produce possibly little gain, and at possibly high cost. 
Rules are also more likely to be unacceptable when the costs of error in particular cases are very high. The enormous danger of error can make the over- and under-inclusiveness of rules intolerable. It is one thing to have a flat rule that people under the age of 16 cannot drive; the costs of the rule—mistaken denials of a license—are relatively low. It is quite another thing to have a flat rule that people falling in a certain class will be put to death. It is for this reason that rule-bound decisions are unacceptable in inflicting capital punishment, and to some extent in criminal sentencing generally. (But here we must believe not only that rules make for error, but also that case-by-case decisions will make for less error.) 
The point also helps explain the dramatic difference between criminal liability, which is generally rule-bound, and criminal sentencing, which is generally based on factors. Part of the story is that specificity is needed at the liability stage, so that people can plan accordingly, and so that the discretion of the police is sharply cabined. Both interests are far weaker at the sentencing stage. Planning is not so insistently at stake. The discretion of the sentencing judge or jury is less prone to abuse than the discretion of the police officer. 
I have noted that rules are less acceptable in the face of sharp limits in information and experience. When information is lacking, or can be obtained only at high cost, officials will avoid them. At the same time, rules—once they are in place—economize on information costs at the point of application. For example, there was a dramatic shift from adjudication to rulemaking in American administrative agencies in the 1960s and 1970s, partly on the theory that rules could resolve many cases at once, and limit the informational costs, biases, and errors of case-by-case judgments. But because of the informational demands faced by people who make rules in the first instance, rules are now exceptionally difficult to promulgate, and there has been a shift in the other direction, toward decision without rules. In the Environmental Protection Agency, for example, it takes over a year and a half to prepare a rule internally; half a year more to receive the legally-required public comments; and sixteen more months to analyze the comments and issue the rules.43 It is not at all surprising that the result is to shift agencies away from rulemaking and toward less costly options. 
Rules are also less acceptable when circumstances are changing rapidly. When circumstances are changing, rules are likely to be inaccurate. Consider, for example, a congressional decision to issue a statutory standard for permissible emissions levels for coal-fired power plants. Surely any such standard will be out of date in a short time because of technological change. In these circumstances rules will become obsolete very quickly, and it may be best to delegate decisions to institutions capable of changing them rapidly, or perhaps to allow case-by-case judgments based on relevant factors. 
When numerous decisions of the same general class must be made, the inaccuracy of rules becomes far more tolerable. Consider, for example, the requirement that all drivers must be over the age of 16, or the use of the social security grid to decide disability claims. 
43See Stephen Breyer & Richard Stewart, Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 107 (3d ed. 1993). Frustrating bureaucratic insistence on “the technicalities” may result simply because so many decisions must be made, and because individualized inquiry into whether technicalities make sense in particular cases is too time-consuming. Similarly, rules can be avoided when few decisions need to be made, or when each case effectively stands on its own. 
There is a general conclusion. The choice between rules and rulelessness cannot itself be made on the basis of rules. That choice is itself a function of factors. It would be obtuse to say that one or another usually makes sense, or is justified in most settings. To decide between them, we need to know a great deal about the context—the likelihood of bias, the location and nature of social dissensus, the stakes, the risk of over-inclusiveness, the quality of those who apply the law, the alignment or nonalignment of views between lawmakers and others, the sheer number of cases. It follows that a well-functioning legal system should be suspicious of two trends in recent writing—extravagant enthusiasm for rules and excessive focus on the possibility of achieving accurate outcomes through fine-grained encounters with particulars. 
A more ambitious strategy might emerge from distinguishing between two sorts of rules.44 Some rules allocate initial entitlements—they unquestionably count as rules—but at the same time they maximize flexibility and minimize the informational burden on government, by allowing private adaptation to determine ultimate outcomes. Consider the rules of the road; taxes imposed on dangerous workplaces; rules allocating property rights and thus creating private property; or rules governing entry into agreements. These might be described as privately adaptable rules. By contrast, some laws do not merely allocate entitlements, but also minimize private flexibility by mandating particular end-states or outcomes. Consider price controls, or specified technology for new cars, or flat bans on the presence of carcinogens in the workplace. Rules that specify 44Related discussion can be found in Friedrich Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty (1960), distinguishing between “laws” and “commands.” This is a highly illuminating but also confused discussion; I have drawn on some of Hayek’s ideas but tried to reduce the level of confusion. end-states are common in modern regulation, in the form of “command and control” regulation that says exactly what people must do and how they must do it. 
The line between these sorts of laws is one of degree rather than one of kind. What I am describing is a characteristic of some rules, not a crisp category of rules. Notably, all rules allocate entitlements, and the allocation may well have an effect on both preferences and distributions, and hence on end-states as well.45 It is insufficiently appreciated that government cannot avoid the task of allocating entitlements and of doing so through rules. Laissez-faire is a chimera; what is familiarly described as laissez-faire is actually a particular set of legal rules. Our rights, as we live them, do not come from nature. They depend on law.46 
We own property only because the legal system has allocated property rights to us. In this sense, property rights are anything but natural. Freedom of contract, as we understand and enjoy it, is not part of nature. It is a function of legal rules creating and constituting that form of freedom.47 The rules of private property and freedom of contract are rules, and they are legal in character. What I want to emphasize here is that these rules are distinctive in the sense that they allocate initial entitlements, allow private adaptation, and do not specify end-states. 
function of the legal system, which says, often, that people can do as they wish without public or private interference, and with public or private protection. If all this is right, there can be no system of laissez-faire (short of anarchy); legal rules are pervasive and inevitable, indeed coercive in their own way, even in the most 45Hence the Coase theorem will sometimes be wrong insofar as it predicts the initial allocation of the entitlement will not affect outcomes. See Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law, 22 J Legal Stud 217 ( 
competition in Jules Coleman, Risks and Wrongs 60-62 ( theme in the New Deal era. For general discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, The Partial Constitution ch. 2 ( 
( market-oriented of free market systems.48 (People in Eastern Europe, now undertaking the difficult task of creating markets, have seen this all too well.) Government can hardly avoid the task of creating rules allocating rights. 
The claim on behalf of privately adaptable rules is not that laissez-faire is a possibility for law. It is instead that law can choose rules with certain characteristics—rules that will reduce the risks of rules, by allowing private adaptation and by harnessing market and private forces in such a way as to minimize the informational and political burden imposed on government. The ultimate project, then, is to favor rules that specify and allocate initial entitlements, and to disfavor rules that specify outcomes. Hence the rules that constitute markets are entirely acceptable insofar as their rule-ness usually does not produce the risks that tend to accompany rules. 
A key feature of privately adaptable rules is their association with free alienability of rights. Ownership rights are of course freely alienable,49 and in this way they attend to the fact that owners (and purchasers) know how valuable the relevant rights are to them. The informational burden on government is therefore minimized. The surrounding rules do not operate as personal orders. They allow large room for individual maneuver. They are coercive, to be sure. The law of property is itself coercive insofar as it prevents non-owners from claiming what they would otherwise claim and doing what they would otherwise do.50 The virtue of privately adaptable rules is not that they are not coercive and not that they are “natural”; it is that 48See Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom 38-39 (1944): “The functioning of a competition . . . depends, above all, on the existence of an appropriate legal system. . . . In no system that could be rationally defended would the state just do nothing. An effective competitive system needs an intelligently designed and continuously adjusted legal framework as much as any other.” See also Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines 165-66 (1983): “Finally, the focus on entitlement has the effect of emphasizing legal rights. Other relevant factors, for example market forces, can be seen as operating through a system of legal relations (ownership rights, contractual obligations, legal exchanges, etc.). The law stands between food availability and food entitlement. Starvation deaths can reflect legality with a vengeance.” 
49To be sure, restrictions on free alienability might be justified for many reasons, including collective action problems, externalities, difficulties with commodification, and so forth. I cannot discuss these issues here. 
50Cf. Sen, supra note 48. they reduce the costs of rule-making and harness private information and preferences51 in the service of outcomes that are themselves not identified ex ante. 
People who favor privately adaptable rules, and who distrust rules that specify end-states, are often known as critics of the modern regulatory state.52 The distinction between the two sorts of rules might easily be harnessed in the service of an argument for private property, freedom of contract, simple rules of tort law, and relatively little else. The same insights might, however, be used on behalf of reform strategies that take the modern state as an important social good. Many current regulatory rules are dysfunctional not because they promote the goals of the modern regulatory state, but because they unnecessarily specify end-states. In so doing, they produce both injustice and inefficiency, in the form of over-inclusiveness and under-inclusiveness, replicating all of the problems typically associated with a refusal to make inquiries at the point of application. 
A prominent example is command and control regulation, pervasive in the law of environmental protection; this form of regulation has been largely unsuccessful because of the pathologies of rules. It makes no sense to say that all industries must adopt the same control technology, regardless of the costs and benefits of adoption in the particular case. Command-and-control should be replaced by more flexible, incentive-based strategies, which could use privately adaptable rules. Instead of saying, for example, what technologies companies must use, the law might impose pollution taxes or fees, and then allow private judgments about the best means of achieving desirable social goals. Government might also allow companies to buy and sell pollution licenses, a system that would create good incentives for pollution reduction without imposing on government the significant informational burden of specifying means of pollution reduction. The familiar economic argument for incentives is a key part of the argument for privately adaptable rules. 
Or consider the area of telecommunications, an area that has for too long been burdened by unduly rigid rules. For much of its history, the Federal Communications Commission has been faced with 51Subject to the qualification in supra note 45. 
52See Hayek, supra note 44; Richard Epstein, Simple Rules for a Complex World (forthcoming 1995). the task of deciding to whom to allocate licenses. In making this decision, it has alternated between rules and factors. In using factors, the fcc has referred to local ownership, minority ownership, participation by owners in public affairs, broadcast experience, the adequacy of technical facilities, the background and qualifications of staff, the character of owners, and more. The problems with both rules and factors are entirely predictable—inaccuracy through excessive rigidity on the one hand, and discretionary, ad hoc, costly, potentially abusive judgments on the other. It is no wonder that both approaches have largely failed. 
What alternatives are possible? In a famous early article, Ronald Coase argued that the government should allocate broadcasting licenses through what I am calling privately adaptable rules53— based on property rights and market transfers, as we do (for example) for ownership of newspapers and automobiles. In the last year the fcc has experimented with auctions, and the experiments have produced surprisingly good results. Now there is an obvious objection to Coase’s proposal. Perhaps broadcasting licenses should not be regarded as ordinary property; perhaps the criterion of private willingness to pay is an inadequate basis for awarding licenses. The objection contains a real point.54 Broadcasting protects a range of “nonmarket” values, captured in the aspiration to promote attention to public affairs, diversity of view, and high-quality programming. But the objection is not a justification for departing from privately adaptable rules in favor of command and control regulation via rules or factors. Instead the rules for license auctions might be designed so as to ensure auction credits for those applicants who promise to promote nonmarket values. Th e example shows that privately adaptable rules might well be used not to oppose regulatory goals, but instead to harness market forces in the interest of those very goals. 
53See Ronald Coase, The Federal Communications Commission, 2 J. Law & Econ. 1 (1959). 
Problem of Free Speech ( 
Sometimes both rules and factors are intolerable; sometimes market forces cannot or should not be harnessed. Having eliminated both rules and factors, the law might use a lottery instead. (Of course the decision to hold a lottery is supported by a rule.) This is a characteristic approach to the military draft, where rule-bound judgments seem too crude, and where judgments based on factors are too obviously subject to discrimination and caprice. Lotteries are used in many other areas as well. Of course lotteries have an arbitrariness of their own, and for this reason, they may be an inferior approach. 
Alternatively, the legal system, having found both rules and factors inadequate, might abolish the relevant institution itself. (The abolition must of course be accomplished by rule.) Hence the best argument for abolition of the death penalty takes the following form. Rules are unacceptable because they eliminate the possibility of adaptation to individual circumstances. Rule-bound death sentences are excessively impersonal. But factors are unacceptable too, because they allow excessive discretion, and create a risk that irrelevant or illegitimate considerations will enter the decision to impose capital punishment. When judgments are to be made about who is to live and who is to die, a high degree of accuracy is necessary, and errors based on confusion, variable judgments, bias, or venality are intolerable. The problem is that human institutions cannot devise a system for making capital decisions in a way that sufficiently diminishes the risk of error. Rule-bound system create errors; so too with systems based on factors. 
The strongest argument against the death penalty is not that the penalty of death is too brutal, but that it cannot be administered in a sufficiently accurate way. Suppose it could be shown that through individualized consideration in the form of factors, the rate of error is high, at least in the sense that irrelevant or invidious factors play a large role in the ultimate decision of life or death. Suppose that rules are the only way to eliminate the role of such factors, but that rules are objectionable in their own way, because they do not allow consideration of possible mitigating factors. Perhaps evidence to this effect would not be sufficient to convince most people that the death penalty is unacceptable. But if it is possible to persuade a range of people of this conclusion, the sources of the argument lie, I think, in evidence of this sort. 
A system committed to the rule of law is committed to limiting official discretion; but it is not committed to making every decision according to judgments that have been fully specified in advance. Nonetheless, rules are an admirable device for obtaining agreement on the content of law, and also for reducing discretion at the point of application. Often people can agree on rules when they disagree about general theory; they can agree that the rules are binding, that the rules are good, and that the rules have a certain identifiable meaning. Frequently a lawmaker adopts rules because rules narrow or even eliminate the range of disagreement and uncertainty faced by people attempting to follow or to interpret the law. This step has enormous virtues in terms of promoting predictability and planning and of reducing both costs and risks of official abuse. 
Rules are sometimes thought to be associated with merely formal equality; but the association is misconceived. Hayekian understandings of the rule of law, identifying rules with free markets, introduce into that notion further ideas that should be distinguished and that require an independent defense. 
Rule-skeptics say that rules are not what they appear to be. I n their view, full ex ante specification of outcomes is a chimera. The need for interpretation, during encounters with concrete cases, means that ex post assessments of some sort are an inescapable part of law. There is some truth in this claim. Almost any judgment about meaning will partake of substantive ideas of a sort. It is almost inevitable that some case can eventually arise that will confound the attempt to use rules to specify all outcomes in advance. These claims are chastening. But they do not defeat the project of those who are enthusiastic about rules. Usually the question of meaning is easy; often ex ante specification is possible for most cases. A form of rulefollowing is therefore feasible. 
Rules have many goals, but as they operate in law, they are often simple summaries of good decisions in individual cases. In carrying out this task, they reduce costs, ease choice, limit the errors encountered in particular decisions, produce coordination, and make it unnecessary to debate issues of value and fact every time someone does something having social consequences. Because of their ex ante character, rules will usually be over-inclusive and under-inclusive by reference to the arguments that justify them. They will often be outrun by changing circumstances. Usually the crudeness of rules is tolerable, and most of the resulting inefficiency and injustice can be controlled through means short of abandoning rules. But, sometimes the crudeness of rules counts decisively against them. 
Some of the most difficult issues in law involve the choice between rules and factors in cases in which both seem unacceptable—rules, because of their crudeness and their insensitivity to particulars that confound them; factors, because of the likelihood of arbitrariness and discrimination in application. The Benthamite strategy calls for ex ante rules for the public and ex post, case-by-case particularism for judges. I have questioned this strategy on both economic and democratic grounds; but sometimes flexible, contextual interpretation of rules, adapting the general to the particular, can bring about something like the best of both worlds. 
More generally, the choice between rules and rulelessness might well be based on a highly pragmatic, contextualized inquiry into the costs of the two approaches in the particular area at hand. Moreover, privately adaptable rules are a promising effort to minimize the problems of excessive generality, by opting for rules that harness private ordering and thus reduce the informational costs imposed on government. Some people who favor such rules intend their arguments to be a critique of regulation and a basis for approval of unrestricted (though rule-governed) free markets. But privately adaptable rules may enjoy an important rebirth in the context of government regulation—in the creation of rules that are designed to accomplish regulatory goals, but that do so by specifying initial entitlements rather than final outcomes, and that harness market forces in the interest of socially chosen ends. This Working Paper is a preliminary version of an article that will be published in 1996, The Tanner Lectures in Human Values. Readers with comments should address them to: 
Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence The Law School The University of Chicago 1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, Illinois 60637 Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics (Second Series) 
