 REFERENCES Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1341845?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references. http://about.jstor.org/terms JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Cass R. Sunstein* Some people think that there is a deep opposition between "government intervention" and "free markets." But the opposition is too simple. No one is really opposed to "government intervention." Markets depend for their existence on law, which is necessary to establish property rights and to set out the rules governing contracts and tort. Short of anarchy, a system of legal entitlements, set by the state, is inevitable.1 If we are asking whether the state is an important part of the solution to current social problems, there can be only one answer: it had better be. But what is the relationship between the state and social well-being? This question assumes special significance in light of the original aspiration of the American founders - to create a deliberative democracy.2 Public officials would be accountable to the citizenry at large, but they were also supposed to engage in deliberative tasks, and to profit from and to encourage deliberation among the people as a whole. Both the structure of the national government and the system of individual rights were intended to encourage public deliberation. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. B.A. I975, Harvard College; J.D. I978, Harvard Law School. just do nothing. An effective competitive system needs an intelligently designed and continuously adjusted legal framework as much as any other." FRIEDRICH A. HAYEK, THE ROAD TO SERFDOM 38-39 (I944). ISSUES I27-43 (I99I) (describing the distorting effects of television news coverage); cf. STEPHEN BREYER, BREAKING THE VICIOUS CIRCLE 2I, 34 (I993) (showing that public assessment of the riskiness of many activities diverges widely from expert assessments). or scandals about public officials' private lives. In these circumstances, we are likely to end up with misdirected policies or worse a form of government by faction, the evil most feared by the American founders.5 A high priority for those thinking about the role of the state should be to develop methods for focusing attention on things that matter to people's lives. (discussing the nature, cause, and effects of faction). provisions by exploring their relationship to the various components of individual and social well-being. A quality of life report would help in initiating this project. One of the simplest measures of social and economic well-being, used internationally and by many nations, is gross domestic product (GDP). The term refers to the total quantity of goods and services produced, weighted by their respective prices.7 Goods and services that are not paid for are not included. appeared in I6,055 major news stories in the last two years - and that the words "gross domestic product" appeared in 39,007 stories.9 It would be an absurd exaggeration to say that ordinary people frequently talk about GDP or GNP.10 But the numbers for GDP affect legislative deliberations, presidential judgments, media reports on the 6 In the law of free speech, for example, it is crucial to know whether an "actual malice" regime for libel law in fact alters press behavior as compared with a negligence regime - and whether the alterations lead to more or less information about public issues. In administrative law, it is important to know whether stringent judicial review actually improves agency perfor mance. by the inhabitants of the country. It adds to GDP all interest, profits, dividends, and rents coming into a country from abroad, and then subtracts all interest, profits, dividends, and rents ed., I992). In November, I99I, the Department of Commerce's Bureau of Economic Analysis shifted emphasis from GNP to GDP. See id. weekly hours, housing starts, and the money supply. These too are only crudely connected with social and economic welfare, for reasons that will emerge in the course of the discussion. state of the economy, professional recommendations, and much more. A different measure would focus attention on different things. Certainly GDP is a useful figure, for it bears a relationship to important social goals. If we think of income as an all-purpose means - as something that people want regardless of what else they want - we might well attend to GDP. There are, however, a number of problems with relying on GDP as a measure of well-being. Some of these problems suggest that GDP is imperfect as a measure of purely economic goals. Some of them suggest that important social, rather than purely economic, variables are not reflected in GDP, though of course it is artificial to distinguish the economic and the social.1" i. GDP and Economic Well-Being. - GDP's ability to measure economic well-being is doubtful for a number of reasons. (b) Excluded Goods and Services. - GDP does not include goods and services that are free, including some that are plausibly connected with economic well-being. For example, unpaid domestic labor is not a part of GDP.15 Many environmental amenities, such as clean air and water, are not reflected in GDP. The GDP figure thus fails adequately to measure either the benefits of a healthy environment or 11 See A.C. PIGOU, THE ECONOMICS OF WELFARE I2 (4th ed. I962) ("[T]here is no guarantee that the effects produced on the part of welfare that can be brought into relation with the measuring-rod of money may not be cancelled by effects of a contrary kind brought about in other parts, or aspects, of welfare; and, if this happens, the practical usefulness of our conclusions is wholly destroyed. . The real objection then is, not that economic welfare is a bad index of total welfare, but that an economic cause may affect non-economic welfare in ways that cancel its effect on economic welfare."). the costs of its degradation.16 There are other gaps in what GDP measures. It does not, for example, reflect changes in leisure time; but it is clear that any increase in leisure is a gain. 17 Most generally, a serious problem with GDP is that the figure excludes all social costs and benefits that do not have prices.18 (c) Unclear Correlations with Other Important Economic Indicators. - GDP sometimes seems to be a general placeholder for a number of indicators of economic well-being. But in fact, it may not be closely correlated with some important indicators. Consider two major social goals: reduction of poverty and of unemployment. Of course GDP growth can be an important factor in counteracting both unemployment and poverty, and nothing I say here is inconsistent with this judgment. But it is also possible for GDP increases to be accompanied by increases in unemployment and hence poverty (which is closely correlated with unemployment); indeed, this phenomenon has often happened. ployment growth, where productivity is understood as GDP divided by total employment. 19 Increases in productivity can contribute to an increase in GDP, possibly without increasing employment levels at all. For example, converting a plant to use industrial robots may 16 GNP needs to be modified to account for: any depreciation of natural capital stocks, in the same way that net national income is equal to gross national income less estimated depreciation on man-made capital. . [and] any damage losses accruing to human wellbeing from the extraction, processing and disposal of materials and energy to the receiving environments. cussion of adjusted national product - GNP adjusted for depreciation of physical capital - in Earth in the Balance Sheet: Incorporating Natural Resources in National Income Accounts, ysis to develop a new measure of GDP, one that incorporates the cost of pollution and the value Kuznets, Long-Term Changes in the National Income of the United States of America Since (Simon Kuznets ed., I952). Note also that a i968 study showed a spectacular gain in leisure over the last century. See A.W. Sametz, Production of Goods and Services: The Measurement one point in the unemployment rate means perhaps a I.8 percent increase in total labor input measured in manhours. Then, to get the 3.2 percent increment in output, manhour productivity raise production levels while eliminating the jobs of hundreds of assembly workers. Increases in GDP may therefore fail to produce increases in employment levels. Because poverty is well correlated with unemployment, it follows too that when GDP goes up, poverty may not go down.. Year GDP Growth Unemployment Poverty 2. GDP and Social Well-Being. - Even if GDP has some virtues as an indicator of economic welfare, it fails to capture important aspects of social well-being. it is at best indirectly reflected in GDP. Consider also the fact that there is no inevitable connection between GDP and life expectancy. improving criminal law enforcement, life expectancy, and public health. But what has been said thus far should show that the con nection between GDP and these other goods is unclear. on Sri Lanka, Jamaica, and Costa Rica). The level of childhood immunizations puts the United States 2ISt in the world, tied with Pakistan and below India, Bulgaria, North Korea, Indonesia, discussed in the text are connected to a broader debate. Emphasizing some of the problems with accounts inspired by utilitarianism, John Rawls proposes that judgments about well-being might be made by reference to "primary goods." In his latest formulation, Rawls points to "a. a background of diverse opportunities; c. powers and prerogatives of offices and positions of responsibility in the political and economic institutions of the basic structure; d. income and i8i (I993). This approach is in many respects a considerable improvement over utilitarian accounts and those that rely on an aggregated figure representing the private willingness to pay. INED 79-84 (I993). The term "capabilities" refers to a person's capacity or opportunity to choose among valuable activities or functionings. We might ask, for example, whether someone is able to get access to food, medical care, shelter, education, political participation, and so forth, or whether that person is able to avoid public and private violence, physical pain, and other forms of suffering. Like the list of primary goods, the list of capabilities and functionings is hetero geneous. Its chief advantage is that it enables us to focus on the question why such things as wealth and income are valuable, that is, what they enable people to have and to be. legal practices determining what money can be used to buy. If certain exchanges are blocked - if money cannot be used to purchase valuable things - per capita GDP becomes less important. Wealth is less valuable when money cannot be used to buy votes or political power, or education, or marriage, or self-respect. Similarly, the value of money is reduced to the extent that it is unnecessary for someone to have money to obtain important goods. If education, health care, political power, and clean air are free, money is less valuable.23 In short, the value of money is largely a function of the legal regime. To understand the relationship between GDP and valuable things, it is necessary to understand the set of legal entitlements through which people are enabled to get, or are disabled from getting, things of importance to their lives. It might then be possible to "map" legal provisions onto the various ingredients of well-being.24 (c) Commensurability. - GDP is of course an aggregative measure, and it is aggregative in a distinctive sense.25 GDP is not simply an index of different values, created to allow ease of understanding and comparison. Instead, it measures diverse items through the same basic dimension of "value," defined by willingness to pay. as if diverse goods can be assessed according to the same metric. This form of valuation seems wrong because it ignores qualitative differences among diverse social goods.26 Some things (like education and health) have intrinsic as well as instrumental value; other things (like cash) are simply for use. Intrinsically valuable things are themselves valued in different ways. 23 Of course there may be harmful social effects from prohibiting the use of money as a basis for exchange, or from providing goods for free. Both of these decisions may mean that there is less wealth upon which to draw. But these are different matters. attempt to generate a "measure of economic welfare" (MEW). See William D. Nordhaus & make a sensible evaluation, we need to know a great deal more. To what does this number refer? Does it include greater unemployment, higher inflation, and the scaled-back production of important goods? Does it mean more poverty? At least in principle, it would be much better to have a highly disaggregated system for assessing the qualitatively different goods at stake. People should be informed about the diverse potential effects and make judgments on the basis of an understanding of the qualitative differences. If all the relevant goods are aligned along a single metric, they become less visible, or perhaps A. Current American Approaches GDP is hardly the only indicator of social welfare. In the United States, over fifty indicators are now in use.28 The United Nations offers many more.29 A major problem with the current American approach is that the measures - offered in an endless and barely intelligible succession - lack organization and clarity.30 In this sec tion, I describe some of the most important indicators. 27 The use of GNP creates other difficulties, but because these seem less fundamental and in some ways more complex, I simply identify them here. goods. One could do much worse than to make assessments on the basis of existing preferences; people's well-being is certainly connected with satisfaction of consumption choices. Existing preferences are not, however, an adequate guide to social well-being, because they may depend capita GNP is an inadequate comparative guide if there are large differences in conditions and hence in needs. If distinctive needs are a product of local circumstances, GNP per capita will be an inadequate proxy for well-being. that are valuable because only a few people have them. Status symbols of various sorts, including luxury automobiles, are examples. See Richard H. McAdams, Relative Preferences, of positional goods, it is not clear that welfare is growing as well. helpful, but it has many failings as well. Above all, it is so detailed that readers cannot easily get a general picture; the latest edition includes I433 tables. seeking work because they do not believe that jobs are available for them. (Percent; monthly data seasonally adjusted) Year Workers Total Total Years and Over Total Years and Over (Percent; monthly data seasonally adjusted) Black and Other or Black Males Females Year Total Total Years and Over Total Years and Over The poverty level emerged from the I96I plan of the Department of Agriculture.35 Like judgments about unemployment, the judgment about who is poor is far from a simple matter of fact.36 The I96I estimate measured how much money was necessary to meet nutritional requirements, and this amount was multiplied by three to determine the total income necessary to meet all living expenses.37 Poverty thresholds have been updated every year by taking into account the consumer price index. Hence, the annual threshold for a family of The official measure of poverty does not include noncash income; it therefore excludes "food stamps, Medicare and Medicaid, school lunches, and subsidized rental housing."39 crude. It was based on a I955 study showing that food consumes one-third of the average household budget. See id. Families Below Poverty Level Persons Below Poverty Level Year (millions) Population (millions) Population Number Percent of Number Percent of Of course, there are large disparities in terms of race and sex in the percentage of persons and families living in poverty.41 The consumer price index, the most important indicator of the rate of inflation, is designed to reflect price changes for a set of goods, including housing, clothing, food and drink, medical care, entertainment, education, and tobacco products.42 Annual percentage changes show striking disparities over time: 40 See ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT I993, supra note 20, at 380, tbl. B-28. 41 See id. (showing that the percentage of blacks living in poverty is nearly triple that of whites, and that the percentage of black female householders in poverty is nearly double that of white female householders). (annual percentage change) Year All Items Excluding Energy Food and Energy All Items All Items All Items Excluding The average weekly earnings of workers in private nonagricultural industries, calculated monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, are provided in current dollars and in constant I982 dollars.44 43 The information in this table was compiled from several sources. The CPI-U figures for CPI-W figures, from Economic Indicators Handbook, cited above in note 8, at 227; CPI excluding food and energy, are from Economic Report of the President I993, cited above in I980, the CPI-U represented 8o% of the noninstitutional population, and the CPI-W, 32%. See Level Preceding Year Percent Change from Year Current Dollars 1982 Dollars Current Dollars 1982 Dollars Income distribution is measured in terms of quintiles. Income taxes have little effect on income distribution. The following table shows changes over time with respect to income, before and after tax, in the United States: (percent) No official government statistics reveal the costs and benefits of government regulation. Private estimates suggest that economic reg ulation costs the economy about $46 billion annually, and that social regulation (principally environmental controls) costs between $78 billion and $IO7 billion.47 The benefits of economic regulation appear low, but the benefits of social regulation range between $42 billion and $i8i billion.48 No one has fully explored the effects of regulation on GDP. A I990 study suggested that between I973 and I985, the GDP growth rate fell by o.I9 percentage points as a result of environmental controls.49 This study does not, however, include the health benefits of such controls, which probably lead to productivity gains. There are significant disparities in regulatory policy, especially with respect to expenditures per life saved: 46 The I986-I99I figures are derived from the Statistical Abstract of the United States, which uses a slightly different definition of "after-tax" income than Norman Frumkin's Guide senting the figures for income before and after taxes in I990); U.S. DEP'T OF COMMERCE, income before and after taxes for I986). (Cost per premature death averted) Regulation Agency ($millions 1990) Underground Construction Standards OSHA-S 0.1 Auto Fuel-System Integrity Standard NHTSA 0.4 Side-Impact Standards for Autos (Dynamic) NHTSA 0.8 Low-Altitude Windshear Equip. & Training Stds. FAA 1.3 Standards for Radionuclides in Uranium Mines EPA 3.4 Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Coke Byproducts) EPA 6.1 Electrical Equipment Standards (Coal Mines) MSHA 9.2 Arsenic Occupational Exposure Limit OSHA-H 106.9 Formaldehyde Occupational Exposure Limit OSHA-H 86,201.8 Atrazine/Alachlor Drinking Water Standard EPA 92,069.7 Hazardous Waste Listing for Wood-Preserving EPA 5,700,000.0 Chemicals The Federal Bureau of Investigation compiles statistics showing subjection to violent crime.51 The following table reflects changes over time: Murder and Violent Non-Negligent Forcible Aggravated Year Crime Homicide Rape Assault Here, then, are some of the most important indicators of social and economic well-being. It should be clear that the system for reporting and disseminating this information is quite ad hoc. There has been no democratic judgment about the ingredients of such key measures as GDP, poverty, and unemployment. There is no effort to put some or many of the indicators into a composite figure, to provide an indication of general changes over time. Nor does the government furnish reports offering a clearly accessible survey of social and eco nomic indicators. The United Nations makes what is probably the most influential international effort to measure well-being, though there have been illuminating efforts elsewhere. I summarize several methods here. A key point is that alternative accounts often place a premium on health and education as well as per capita income. (a) Description. - The report ranks I73 countries and contains comparative information on access to health services and safe water; numbers of radios, telephones, and televisions; levels of child immunization and malnutrition; public expenditures on education; malefemale wage gaps; levels of homicide, rape, and drug crimes; population per doctor; numbers of new AIDS cases; population growth; energy consumption; pollution levels; and much more. The HDI compiles much valuable information and presents it in a revealing way. For instance, the United States ranks first in both per capita GDP and adjusted real GDP; it also ranks first in mean years of schooling and in overall educational attainment. But it ranks sixth overall. The reason is that life expectancy at birth stands at 75.9 years, for a ranking along that dimension of sixteenth. An intriguing question concerns the precise relationship among the HDI's three variables of longevity, knowledge, and income. Some countries with relatively high income ranks (including Algeria, Namibia, and South Africa) have relatively low HDI ranks.61 Other countries have HDI ranks that are well above their income ranks (including China, Colombia, and Uruguay).62 A key issue is whether significant variations exist among groups within each country. In the United States, for example, whites, standing alone, rank above Japan in HDI; if American whites lived alone in their own country, it would rank first in the world.63 By contrast, African-Americans rank 3ist, and Hispanics 35th.64 In addition, no nation's HDI improves after being adjusted for sex inequalities, which indicates that no nation provides as good lives for women as it does Many other questions involve comparative data not directly reflected in the HDI's three principal variables. Between I980 and i986, for example, there were only 3I drug crimes per ioo,ooo people per year in Japan, 25 in Israel, and 38 in the Netherlands, compared with 225 in Canada, 234 in the United States, and 403 in Australia.67 The reported rape rate in the United States is by far the highest - i i 8 per ioo,ooo women between I5 and 59.68 In Japan, the rate is only 5 per ioo,ooo, and in many countries it is somewhere between i8 and capita GNP. See id. at 20I, tbl. 39. Notwithstanding its considerably lower per capita GNP, Japan's unemployment rate was 2. I%. See id. Switzerland's unemployment rate of I.3% is the lowest among industrialized nations, but its per capita GNP is slightly below that of the United States, which has a 6.6% unemployment rate. See id. 35.69 The United States also has the highest homicide rate, at 8 per IOO,OOO, compared with I.5 for Japan and Sweden and somewhere between 2 and 3 for Canada, Switzerland, Australia, Finland, Austria, and New Zealand.70 It should not be surprising that the United States has the highest rate of prisoners, 426 per ioo,ooo, compared with 94 in Canada, 54 in Switzerland, and 77 in the United Kingdom and in Germany.7 1 (b) Difficulties. - The HDI approach has important limitations. Any "index" will be controversial, and the equal weighting of the three variables seems somewhat arbitrary. In any case, the three variables are interrelated. Income can "buy" good educational attainment and also longevity; people who are poor tend to live shorter lives. So too, people who are in good health and who are well-educated have a better chance to make money. The use of the three variables is controversial partly because of these complex interrelations.72 The HDI is also insensitive to ethnic, racial, sex and regional differences. If, for example, there are important differences between men and women, people should know about this fact.73 It is also possible for a country with a high HDI score to have a number of people concentrated toward the bottom of the economic ladder and facing desperate conditions. make sense to include poverty level, access to food, employment figures, and more. Moreover, educational attainment is not adequately measured by mean years of schooling. Literacy is a form of educational attainment, but it sets a low floor, and in any case it is far from clear that, in assessing educational attainment, we should count literacy for two and mean years for one in some aggregate figure. Perhaps a composite figure could be developed on the basis of a more precise inquiry into relevant factors. Cf. PARTHA DASGUPTA, AN INQUIRY INTO WELL-BEING AND DESTITUTION 77-78 (I993) (noting the absence of attention to civil and political liberties in conventional measures of well-being, such as the HDI). here is that people may adjust their expectations in light of a status quo characterized by deprivation and injustice, and for this reason it is important to see what people can have or become, not merely what they think about their situation. All this has implications for law and policy. A high priority for both domestic and international agencies should be to compile accurate information about quality of life, to allow comparisons across time subject to distortions. See Ian Miles, Social Indicators for Real-Life Economics, in REAL-LIFE inadequate a measure of well-being based on happiness or desire-fulfillment). cited above in note 72, at io8-I6. Two efforts at tabulating human rights records in numerical and space, and to ensure that the relevant reports are widely dissem inated. of such a report. But it seems clear that the report should include, among other things, per capita income, poverty, housing, unemployment, average weekly earnings, inflation, child mortality, longevity, subjection to violent crime, literacy, and educational attainment. The report should also specify minimum standards for such things as income, education, health, and housing. The report should allow for comparison across regions, between men and women, and among different racial and ethnic groups. than whites, the public can see this fact and perhaps take corrective action. public and, in particular, to the news media. Strong evidence indicates that the media can play a large role in counteracting social problems by focusing public and private attention and by giving government the incentives to respond.83 Instead of attending to anecdotes and sensational scandals - or offering statements about sup posed trends - the news media should focus on the quality of life report and thus allow debate to be based on actual evidence. The report may well have an especially important role during elections, but it could affect deliberation and policymaking more broadly as well. two distinct benefits. First, the report may well have desirable social consequences by facilitating priority-setting, imposing appropriate in centives on governmental officials, and fueling public interest in re dressing serious problems. Accurate and widely disseminated information can be an important check on governmental failure to redress such problems.84 Consider the striking fact that in modern times, no the important role of news media in combatting famines). ment's willingness to address human suffering). country with an active, free, and democratic press appears to have suffered from famine.85 Second, the very process of compiling a quality of life report would have advantages. We have seen that any conception of what matters is a product of judgments that may be controversial. Human needs have a great deal to do with the facts - do people have jobs? do they have food or housing? - but they are not simply facts. Any conception of needs is a product of human judgments about what matters. Consider, for example, the very definitions of poverty and unemployment, or the decision whether to include comparative data about groups defined in racial, ethnic, and religious terms. The public understanding of social problems should itself be a product, at least in part, of a good process of social deliberation about how needs are best characterized.86 By using GDP as the central indicator of social welfare while publishing a wide array of unorganized and somewhat random indicators, the current system offers no such educational ben efits. or that it would not create risks. But most of the information is now compiled and available somewhere; its systematic presentation and dissemination should not be costly. There is of course a risk of error and bias, especially in view of the fact that the fortunes of an incumbent administration may depend on what emerges. Government manipulation of official statistics is hardly foreign to American experi ence. At the same time, many government agencies have established a reputation for objectivity, and there is no reason to believe that (for example) the statistics relating to literacy, infant mortality, and poverty levels reflect substantial bias. Political rights can have a major role in providing incentives and information toward the solution of economic privation. But the connections between rights and needs are not merely instrumental; they are also constitutive. For our conceptualization of economic needs depends on open public debates and discussions, and the guaranteeing of those debates and those discussions requires an insistence on political rights. Some of this effect might be counteracted by a report that catalogues a range of events, that allows comparisons, and that shows changes over time. The very need to compile the data would also give desirable incentives to government officials.88 I have suggested that both personal and social well-being are in important respects a product of law; that is, they are a function of the things to which the law gives people access. The law can give such access in many ways. It may provide guarantees of certain goods (such as housing, food, medical care); it may allow people to sell their labor; it may permit people to own certain things that they produce or inherit; and it may say that people can freely exchange some, but not all, of what they own. People's entitlements are a function of law, and it is their entitlements that enable them to obtain much of what provides for their well-being. We lack a systematic account of the relationship between legal entitlements and the components of well-being. 88 A similar report should be compiled in other nations and be made available for interna tional comparison and review. See Cass R. Sunstein, Information, Please, 2 E. EUR. CONST. Finally, the focus on entitlement has the effect of emphasizing legal rights. Other relevant factors, for example market forces, can be seen as operating through a system of legal relations (ownership rights, contractual obligations, legal exchanges, etc.). The law stands between food availability and food entitlement. Starvation deaths can reflect legality with a vengeance. and public officials are unlikely to know what to do unless they have good information about existing problems and trends. These points have general and complex consequences for the study of law, but I end with a simple claim: Democratic governments could take few more important steps than to initiate a process by which the components of well-being would become a substantial part of political de bate. Huber, Informational Regulation of Consumer Health Risks: an Empirical Evaluation of Hazard warning labels affect consumer behavior).