University of Chicago Law School ersity
Cass R. Sunstein Lawrence Lessig
Lawrence Lessig* and Cass R Sunstein** Introduction ....................................................
I. An Old (But Quite Lively) Debate .........................
II. The Original Executive ....................................
A. Original Understandings and Unitarian Puzzles: The
Executive and Prosecution .............................
B. Original Understandings and Unitarian Puzzles:
Departm ents ..........................................
C. Original Understandings and Unitarian Puzzles: The
Opinions Clause ......................................
D. Original Understandings: Rethinking Executive Versus
Administrative ........................................
1. The Nineteenth Century View ......................
2. Linking the Nineteenth Century View to the
Constitutional Text ................................
3. Linking the Nineteenth Century View to the Court's
Early Executive Cases: Marbury and Kendall .........
4. The Take Care Clause .............................
E. The Original Executive Power: Puzzles Revisited .......
1. Puzzle 1: Prosecution ..............................
2. Puzzle 2: Departments .............................
3. Puzzle 3: The Opinions Clause ....................
F. The Language of the Original Executive ...............
G. The Tale of the Bank ................................. III. The Problem of Changed Circumstances: Structure and
Unitariness ...............................................
A. M ethod ...............................................
B. The Method Applied ..................................
C. New Circumstances, Old Commitments ................ IV. Current Issues ............................................
A. Constitutionality of Independent Agencies .............
B. Immunizing Specific Functions from the President .....
G. Precisely Which Officers May Be Protected with a Good Cause Standard? ...................................... Conclusion ..................................................... Appendix: "The Great Departments" ..........................
19941 not advanced by the original design, we seemingly face an unpleasant dilemma-either we adhere to that design and sacrifice important institutional values, or we advance these institutional values and sacrifice fidelity to the original design. History apparently leads us to choose between the original design and a design many now view as indispensable.
At least this is so unless there is a compelling nonhistorical3 argument supporting a strong unitary design. We believe that there is indeed a plausible structural argument on behalf of the hierarchical conception of the unitary executive. This is an argument that emphasizes changed circumstances since the eighteenth century, and that accommodates the framers' design within this changed constitutional context-an argument, that is, that translates the framers' original design from the language and context of the eighteenth century into the world today.
After outlining the debate over the origins of a unitary executive in Part I, this Article goes on to make two basic points. The first, set out in Part II, is historical. Conventional wisdom insists (1) that the framers believed in a hierarchical executive branch, with the President in charge of all administration of the laws,5 and (2) that we must also ensure a hierarchical executive branch, at least if we are to be faithful to the framers' constitutional design.6 We think that the conventional wisdom is wrong on both counts. There is no historically sound reading of the Constitution that compels anything like the first claim. Any faithful reader of history must conclude that the unitary executive, conceived in the foregoing way, is just myth.
But we also think that this conclusion does not mean that a strongly unitary conception of the constitutional design is wrong. Part III of this Article offers a justification of that conception, relying not on false history, but on the best reading of the framers' structure translated into the certain crucial aspects of the unitary executive view make most sense of the framers' design, even if the application of that design differs dramatically from the application in the framers' own context.
In Part III, we therefore discuss the basic commitments of the original constitutional system-the avoidance of factionalism, political accountability, a degree of centralization in government, and expedition in law enforcement-and show that in the face of post-New Deal developments, those founding commitments would be compromised by limiting presidential power over the administration of the laws. However ironic it may be, the claims on behalf of the strongly unitary executive, while implausible as a matter of simple history, may nonetheless be right as a matter of constitutional interpretation.
In Part IV, we apply these general propositions to a wide range of current disputes about the relationship between the President and the administration. We discuss Congress' power to create independent prosecutors and independent agencies. We also attempt to sort out a set of issues that have become prominent in the wake of the Supreme Court's surprising reentry into this area in the period from 1976 to the present.
I. QuITE Whether the founders framed a strongly unitary executive, or whether we should continue to recognize what they framed, is not a new debate. Throughout our history the question has been the subject of intense controversy. Fueled more recently by the work of Presidents, judges, and academic observers,8 the question has regained center stage. Before the late 1970s, the question seemed well settled, even if the answers were to some observers quite-jarring. It was clear that "executive" functions must be performed by officers subject to the unlimited removal and broad supervisory power of the President.9 But it was equally clear that Congress had the constitutional power to remove from the President's authority officers having "quasi-legislative" and "quasijudicial" functions.1
In these two sentences could be found the basic wisdom about the relationship between the President and administrative agencies. Some unsettled questions remained. But it appeared that those questions would be answered through accommodations, formal and informal, between Congress and the President, and not as a matter of constitutional law.
All this changed in the 1980s. Spurred by President Reagan's efforts to assert hierarchical control over the bureaucracy,' the entire field ex-
perienced a minor revolution. Sharp new battle lines were drawn. In several cases, the Supreme Court limited congressional efforts to insulate administration of the laws from presidential control. These cases seemed to suggest that the whole idea of independent administration could no longer be sustained-a change in understanding that, if accepted, would dramatically alter the framework of American government.
This shift in the Court-toward greater solicitude for presidential control over implementation-inspired an even greater shift in the academy. Scholars began to assert more forcefully that the conventional view of the executive power-in particular, the idea that Congress could create independent agencies-was constitutionally unfounded.'8 Perhaps the Court could eventually be persuaded to conclude that the Constitution prohibited Congress from creating "independent agencies." But in several more recent cases the Supreme Court unambiguously committed itself to the idea that Congress may, at least sometimes and at least to some extent, make administration independent of the President. Indeed, the Court has allowed Congress to go beyond independent "quasilegislators" and "quasijudges" and create independent prosecutors1 5-an innovation from the previous cases that appears to expand congressional authority.
The recent cases leave many questions unanswered, involving the precise relationships among the President, the so-called executive agencies, and the so-called independent agencies. These questions assumed special importance in connection with efforts by President Bush to assert
close control over government regulation they have new urgency as a result of likely new efforts by President Clinton to claim authority over a government staffed largely by Republican Presidents. Heated struggles arose between President Bush and Congress over a range of unresolved issues.18 Similar issues are likely to rematerialize during the Clinton Administration, and these debates will undoubtedly raise new issues about exactly how unitary the executive branch can claim to be.
It is time again to ask whether the executive is "unitary" in the sense that the President must have plenary power to control administration and execution of the laws. It seems clear that the belief in a unitary executive has captured the high ground of principle, so that arguments for an "evolving Constitution," for flexibility in interpretation, or for judicial deference to political compromise, have become moves of compromise or mere politics. But is this really a debate between principle and politics? Or more precisely, is this a debate where principle favors the unitary view?
We begin with some basics? No one denies that in some sense the framers created a unitary executive the question is in what sense.20 Let us distinguish between a strong and a weak version. The strong versionheld by those whom we will call the modem unitarians-contends that the President has plenary or unlimited power over the execution of administrative functions, understood broadly to mean all tasks of lawimplementation. All officers with such functions must either be removable at the President's discretion or be subject to presidential countermand in the context of policy disagreements. The Constitution creates "a hierarchical unified executive department under the direct control of the President," with consequences we develop in detail below. In the
modem unitarian's view, the Constitution constitutionalizes a single organizational value-unitariness-at the expense of other possible governmental values-such as disinterestedness or independence. The conclusion is that any organizational structure that violates unitariness violates the Constitution.
The weak version offers a more unruly picture. It contends that there are functions over which the President has plenary powers that these functions are the "executive" functions in the constitutional sense but that in the founding vision, "executive" functions-which must of course be specified in detail23 -are not coextensive with all the functions now (or then) exercised by the President.24 As for these nonexecutive functions exercised by the executive, the original unitarian-as we will refer to those who believe in the weak version-contends that Congress has a wide degree of authority to structure government as it sees fit. Under this view, unitariness is a significant constitutional value, but it is not a trumping constitutional value. Other values may at times override unitariness, and it is Congress that is to choose among these competing values.
In outline form, the belief in a strongly unitary executive is grounded in the Vesting Clause of Article II: "The executive Power shall
be vested in a President."25 This clause creates "a" President, not several it is powerful, and to some decisive, textual evidence in favor of the view that the Constitution creates a hierarchy with the President at the top.26 Moreover, the President is given all executive power. The framers did not split up that power among different national entities. The Take Care Clause is said to reenforce this view. This clause explicitly gives the It may be true that the Take Care Clause is a duty at least as much as it is a
understood at the founding so as to be implied by the document itself. A nonoriginalist who is nonetheless insistent on maintaining fidelity with founding commitments would ask either (1) whether such limitations should be understood to follow from the best understanding of the framers' design,3 or (2) whether such limitations follow from the original understanding translated into the current (and quite different) context.3 We now proceed to explore, on originalist grounds, which version of unitariness is embodied in the Constitution. 19941
nation?42
(allowing Congress to vest the appointment of some officers somewhere else) all for us read plainly, but for the most part insignificantly were they also unnecessary scribbles for the founders?
It is our suspicion that much of the conventional reading of Article II's text is informed by very modern ideas, and this leads us to adopt a distinctive interpretive strategy. Rather than beginning with text or structure alone, we begin with history. Our aim is to dislodge modem preconceptions about the nature of the President and executive power by
ing, an original practice widely inconsistent with a proposed original understanding should draw that understanding into doubt. As we suggest, in every case the original practice conflicts sharply with the practice predicted by the modem unitarian's theory. Together, we suggest, the three puzzles force us to ask whether there is a different model of the original executive that better captures the original design. We conclude that there is. A. Original Understandings and Unitarian Puzzles: The Executive and
Prosecution
We begin with the narrow but revealing question of criminal prosecution, as presented in the contest over the independent counsel and resolved in Morrison v. The Ethics in Government Act of 1978, enacted in the wake of Watergate, established the office of the independent counsel to investigate and prosecute offenses against certain officers of the administration. Without exploring the details of the Act, suffice it to say that under certain circumstances, the statute vested in the special counsel full prosecutorial authority for some limited period of time, uncontrolled by the President except to the extent that the Attorney General could discharge the special counsel for "good cause."5 The claim of Theodore Olson (the prosecuted) was that the power of Alexia Morrison (the prosecutor) was power from "the executive power," and hence "vested" in the President alone. For Justice Scalia, writing in dissent,52
of their original understanding, then they did not understand prosecution to be within the notion of "executive Power" exclusively, and therefore did not understand it to be within the exclusive domain of the
President. While the argument for this conclusion has been discussed before in depth,5 we can quickly summarize the important points here.
Consider first the original structure of federal prosecution. If the modern unitary model were the framers' model, one might think that the framers would have established a hierarchical department of legal affairs, responsible for all federal prosecution, with officers answerable to the President or the President's agent (for example, the Attorney General).58 In fact, the record is not at all so neat. The first Congress established no hierarchical department of legal affairs-as we discuss below, the Department of Justice was not even born until 1870.- Nor did the framers establish a general or centralized body for federal prosecution. Most importantly, they established no absolute rule that prosecution must be conducted solely by those answerable to the President. In each of these three design elements, the unitary model mispredicts the original practice. We consider these in turn.
First: For the first eighty years of the Republic, there was no centralized and hierarchical department of legal affairs in the executive branch. While the Judiciary Act of 1789 did create the office of Attorney General, it did not create a "department" under him. By statute, the Attorney General had just two duties: to represent the United States in the Supreme Court (only), and to answer legal questions submitted to him by the President or heads of departments on matters relating to the operation of those departments -though from the start, the Attorney General also served as the President's legal advisor.6 The same act created district attorneys who prosecuted suits on behalf of the United States in the district courts. Until 1861, however, these district attorneys did not report to the Attorney General, and were not in any clear way answerable to him. Before 1861, the district attorneys reported either directly to no one (1789 to 1820) or to the Secretary of the Treasury (1820 through
1861.6) Throughout this period, they operated without any clear organizational structure or hierarchy.
Second: The first centralized federal prosecution was outside the direct control of the President. Within the Department of the Treasury, Congress established the office of the Comptroller, and in 1797 charged him with the power "to institute suit for the recovery of" a "sum or balance reported to be due to the United States, upon the adjustment of any [revenue officer's account]."66 This power was expanded in 1817, giving the Comptroller the power "to direct suits and legal proceedings, and to take such measures as may be authorized by the laws to enforce prompt payments of all debts to the United States."67 But the Comptroller himself was not directly within the President's control, and most commentators understood the Comptroller to be "relatively independent." So special was the Comptroller's position that it led Madison, who ordinarily supported an absolute removal power by the President over executive officers, to comment that "there may be strong reasons why an officer of this kind should not hold his office at the pleasure of the Executive branch of the Government."6 At one point in the debate, Madison argued that the Comptroller should hold his office for a fixed tenure.
Congress did not entirely follow Madison's suggestion, but nonetheless the Comptroller's decisions to prosecute were independent, as were his final determinations of disputes referred by statute to him.72 More importantly, whether Madison's initial thoughts prevailed or not, what is clear is that all thought the matter open for Congress' determinationthat is, that Congress had significant flexibility in structuring the duties of this "executive" officer.
Thus, the organizational structure of the original executive, at least with respect to prosecution, was not hierarchical. But perhaps the essence of unitarianism is not organizational structure. Perhaps instead the essence is mere control, through whatever structure. If the President retained either directory authority over the district attorneys, or removal authority over all exercising prosecutorial power,73 the unitary position may seem unimpaired, at least so far. While acknowledging that there was no clear organizational hierarchy, the unitarian could still claim that the essential requirement of presidential control was preserved : Even if the story just told shows that the Attorney General could not direct or remove district attorneys, nothing yet shows the President could not.75
Third: But so far this story ignores a crucial fact about federal prosecution at the founding-federal officers were not the only ones who conducted federal prosecutions. State officials also conducted federal prosecutions, and these officers were clearly not subject to control by the
President. Perhaps it would be possible to say that state officers enforcing federal law were not exercising "the Executive power of the United States" but it seems quite reasonable to think that insofar as enforcement of federal law is at stake, this was indeed their responsibility. As Harold Krent writes,
Congress vested jurisdiction in state courts over actions seeking
penalties and forfeitures, granted concurrent jurisdiction to
state courts over some criminal actions, and assigned state officials auxiliary law enforcement tasks. Thus, Congress assigned
law enforcement responsibility to state officials who were far removed from control of the executive Even when actions were criminal, "[t]he decisions whether to sue and what punishments to seek remained in the discretion of individuals outside the Executive's control."77 The original practice thus violated the unitarian's plan, even in its most minimal form.78 Here at least, some federal prosecution was exercised that was clearly beyond the President's control.
But not here only. For not only was federal prosecution vested in at least some federal officers not subject to direct presidential control, and in some state officers far removed from executive control,8 but federal
prosecutorial authority was also granted to private individuals wholly outside the executive's control. Both through citizen access to federal grand juries, and through civil qui tam actions (treated for at least some purposes as criminal actions),8 citizens retained the power to decide whether and in what manner to prosecute for violations of federal law. Here too the decision whom to prosecute and what crime to charge was placed in a person not subject to presidential direction or removal.8
Together, these bits of history are devastating to the modem unitarian's originalist claims about prosecution.8 Contrary to the unitary model, not all federal prosecution was vested in officers answerable (whether directly or not) to the President. Although Justice Scalia is technically correct that "always and everywhere-if conducted by government at all-[the prosecutorial authority has] been conducted never by the legislature, never by the courts, and always by the executive,"8 this
does not mean it has always and everywhere been the domain of the President. Sometimes government did not prosecute (private citizens did), and sometimes the federal executive did not prosecute (state executives did 6). And if we put standing issues to one side,87 nothing in principle would have stopped the framers from assigning the decision to prosecute someone to a federal official not subject to presidential removal (as Madison argued the Comptroller should have been8 8), or to state officials clearly outside federal control, or indeed to private citizens prosecuting qui tam actions (as every Congress since the founding has allowed ). In short, the decision "who should prosecute whom" was a decision the early Congresses at least thought far more subtle and complex than do the believers in a strongly unitary executive.
Perhaps it remains for the modern unitarian to insist on the implied control over prosecution reserved to the President through the pardon power. As the President has the power to pardon either before or after conviction,9 ' he retains throughout prosecution a practical control over the effects of prosecution. Thus one could say that, in effect, the President does retain ultimate control over the executive function of prosecution, even if prosecutorial power is vested elsewhere. Notably, this argument would mean that Morrison was rightly decided and indeed that Congress could place prosecutorial power wherever it chooses, so long as the President retains the authority to pardon.
No doubt the pardon power is an important grant to the President of control over prosecution. But, it is a limited grant as well. There is an important difference between the power not to prosecute and the power to pardon-for the latter is much more likely than the former to incur significant political costs. It would be fully consistent with a conception of separated powers that the President retain the power to pardon, but that he suffer political consequences to limit the exercise of this power. The power to control prosecution is conceptually and politically distinct from the power to grant pardons, and therefore the modern unitarian's
conception of prosecutorial control cannot derive from the power to Thus far, then, we have seen that the original practice does not suggest a presidential monopoly over the power of prosecution. In a number of settings, enforcement of the criminal law was placed beyond the control of the President. B. Original Understandings and Unitarian Puzzles: Departments
Prosecution constitutes the first puzzle with the unitary model. But it is left to the modem unitarian to respond that perhaps the framers did not understand prosecution to be a "core" executive function. Perhaps prosecution was an anomaly perhaps the framers thought that this function was a distinctive one entitled to a unique exemption from the general principle of presidential control over administration of the laws.
We suggest that, on the contrary, the story of prosecution suggests a need for a much more fundamental rethinking of the framers' understanding of what the executive was. The second puzzle presented by the original practice confirms the need for reevaluation.
If the Constitution entrenches presidential control over all departform organizational structure-departments to be arranged hierarchically, all subordinate to the President and all answerable to him in the exercise of all discretionary functions. Congress may impose duties on departmental officers, but it may not "structure the executive
department in ways that would deprive the President of his constitutional power to control that
We can test that theory against the framers' actual practice by examining the structure of the original executive departments. According to the modem unitarian, that structure should make manifest the President's exclusive power to control and direct department heads in the exercise of their discretionary functions. But, in fact, the authors of the original practice embraced no such single structure. Interestingly, they created a variety of structures, not a single one. More important, they did not give the President plenary control over all of the institutions that they created.
The first great Supreme Court opinion on this general subject, Myers v. United States,98 relies primarily on the great debate about the President's removal powers that occurred when the first Congress created the first departments in the new government-a debate known as the Decision of 1789. The Decision of 1789 is in turn a universal source of historical support for the belief in a strongly unitary executive.10 In Myers, ChiefJustice (and former President) Taft relied on that debate to establish three important propositions: the framers conceived of a President who was vested constitutionally with control over the executive departments Congress could not limit his control, through removal, over the members of those departments and therefore Congress could not condition his ability to fire a member of a department, in this case the postmaster.10 However strong a statement of the unitarian's vision, Taft's claims show some relative modesty. The Myers Court offered three important qualifications to the modem unitarian's view. First, it said that the Civil Service Act, immunizing inferior officers from plenary presidential control, did not offend Article II and the unitariness of the executive branch. Second, the Court agreed that officers with adjudicative duties could be immunized from presidential influence, even if those officers operated within the executive branch: "[T here may be duties of a quasijudicial character imposed on executive officers and members of executive tribunals whose decisions after hearing affect the interests of individ-. uals, the discharge of which the President can not in a particular case properly influence or control."1 Third, it said that Congress might be
able to prevent the President from "overruling" administrators in certain instances, even if he disagrees with them: "[T] here may be duties so peculiarly and specifically committed to the discretion of a particular officer as to raise a question whether the President may overrule or revise the officer's interpretation of his statutory duty in a particular instance."1 All the Constitution required, Taft asserted, was that the President have the power to discharge the employee for making a decision contrary to the President's wishes but Congress need not give him control to direct the decision itself.1 This conception of presidential oversight-that the President may not dictate outcomes, although he may discharge people with whom he disagrees-has considerable importance, and we will return to it below.1 But it is sufficient here simply to recognize that Myers does not stand for unlimited executive authority that some take it to require.'
The commentary on the Myers opinion, and on its terse partial rejection merely eleven years later in Humphrey's Executor v. United States,'0 is of course vast." What we want to emphasize here is the Myers Court's failure to present the complete story of the Decision of 1789. We can move quickly through what is essential for our purposes. Everyone agrees that this debate is crucial for understanding the framers' conception of the executive but unlike some who have relied upon Taft's opinion,"'
we think that the debate defeats rather than supports the claim on behalf of a strongly unitary executive.
Beginning in May of 1789, Congress considered the original organization of the new government. Representative Boudinot proposed that the House resolve itself into a committee of the whole, and Representative Benson proposed the establishment of three departments: Foreign Affairs (which was changed to the Department of State in September 1789112), War, and the Treasury. The committee of the whole took up deliberations initially on the Department of Foreign Affairs. Those deliberations show that distinctive organizations were thought to warrant distinctive treatment.
In supporting the strong version of the unitary executive, the modern unitarians focus on the debate over the President's power to remove the Secretary of Foreign Affairs. As originally proposed, the Secretary of Foreign Affairs was to be removable by the President, but this proposal gave rise to confusion. Some thought that removal of necessity followed appointment, and that since the President and Senate were involved in appointment, only the President and the Senate could remove. On this view, a shared role in removal was a matter of constitutional necessity. (This indeed was the apparent position of the executive's strongest booster, Alexander Hamilton, writing in The Federalist Papers. ) From
this point, some concluded that by assigning removal to the President alone, the proposal deprived the Senate of its constitutional role. Others thought that removal followed appointment, and that since the President appointed (Senate consent notwithstanding), only the President could remove. But these members were concerned that by stating in the statute what the Constitution compelled, later interpreters would believe the power was not constitutionally required. Still others thought the matter wholly within Congress' power to regulate. The President was ultimately though implicitly given plenary removal power, if by a revealingly narrow vote." Importantly, however, asJustice Brandeis pointed out in Myers,117 the final vote did not express the conviction that the power to remove even this purely executive officer was constitutionally vested in the President. Indeed, the vote reveals, as David Currie argues, that there "was no consensus as to whether [the President] got [the authority to remove] from Congress or from the Constitution
The details of this complex debate are not essential here. For what has been too quickly overlooked is a more fundamental fact of the debate, and one that is not subject to any similar ambiguity. Whatever dispute there may be about the removal power of the President over the Secretary of Foreign Affairs and similar officers, there is no ambiguity
about a central point: the first Congress conceived of the proper organizational structure for different executive departments differently. This conception, we believe, argues against the belief in a strongly unitary executive.
The relevant difference is manifest in two important ways. First, Congress treated the departments differently in their formation. Congress established the Departments of Foreign Affairs and War as "executive departments," ' with little detail, and with secretaries who were obligated to "perform and execute such duties as shall from time to time be enjoined on or intrusted to [them] by the President of the United States." But the treatment of the Department of the Treasury wholly different. Unlike with Foreign Affairs and War, the enacting Congress (1) did not denominate Treasury an "executive (2) did specify in detail the offices and functions of Treasury, (3) did impose on the Treasurer specific duties, and (4) did shield the Comptroller (an office within Treasury) from presidential direction.'
As Professor White describes, "Congress at first believed the Treasury Department should be closely associated with it .... occupying a status different from that of State and War."125
These differences in structure reveal one sense in which the first Congress considered the organizational form of the government to be mixed rather than unitary. And this, we suggest, has enormous implications. Some thought that entities whose duties bear a strong affinity to the judiciary need not be subject to presidential supervision alone. Madison, for example, stated and believed that Congress had considerable authority over entities that have 'judicial qualities."128 Many agencies, both executive and independent, are now engaged in adjudicative tasks. It appears to have been Madison's conviction that Congress has the authority to immunize such agencies from presidential control and indeed that Congress should exercise that
Madison's view was not shared by all. But at a minimum, we can say that the framers were not of one mind about the proper organizational structure and responsibility for these different departments. More likely, they had different conceptions about the proper structures, depending on the nature of the department at issue. Where from the nature of the office it was "proper" for an office holder to be subject to the control of Congress, or insulated from the influence of the President, the Constitution empowered Congress so to provide. But where it was not proper in this sense, it did not. Again, Madison's writings suggest this understanding:
Whatever... may be my opinion with respect to the tenure
by which an executive officer may hold his office according to
the meaning of the constitution, I am very well satisfied, that a
modification by the legislature may take place in such as partake
of the judicial qualities, and that the Legislative power is sufficient to establish this office on such a footing as to answer the purposes for which it is prescribed.' The presence of this understanding of permissible insulation from the President is significant enough when we are dealing with the Department of the Treasury. The problem for the unitary model only grows as we consider the next two great departments created by Congress: the Department of the Navy and the Post Office. The debate surrounding the formation of the Navy department (in 1796) was the first on a "new" department since 1789. Its organizational form followed that of State and War, while the organizational form of the Post Office tracked more closely Treasury's.
, Consider Navy first. Like the Department of War, Congress formed the Department of the Navy primarily to help the President to execute his commander in chief powers, powers constitutionally committed to him in Article II. And, like War, Congress' specification of the internal structure of this department was sparse. It was enough to establish a secretary who was to obey the President, for it was the President's power that he would be executing. Moreover, the Act creating the Department of the Navy, like those creating the Departments of War and State, was brief and simple: The Act established an "executive department" with a Secretary as its chief officer, whose duty was "to execute such orders as he shall receive from the President of the United States" concerning the "procurement of naval stores..., the construction ... equipment and employment of vessels of war and naval matters."
But the Post Office followed the opposite pattern. The statute creating the Post Office in 1789 did make the Postmaster General "subject to the direction of the President of the United States in performing the duties of his office."' But Congress did not denominate the Post Office an "executive department" as it did the Departments of State, War, and the Navy.' Moreover, the original act was clearly provisional, explicitly contemplating its replacement within the year,'3 and when Congress reorganized the office in 1792, Congress gave the Postmaster the authority to enter contracts and make appointments, and permitted the Post Office to operate from postal revenues.' When this change occurred, Congress removed the language making the Postmaster General subject to the direction of the President. The purpose of this change was to avoid the
charge that the scheme would combine "purse and sword" by giving the President power over the revenues directly.' The office, functioning to carry into effect the post power of Congress, was separated from presidential review and control.'3
The framing Congress thus followed two basic tracks when establishing the departments we now consider departments of the executive. For some departments (Foreign Affairs, War, and Navy), Congress granted the President plenary power over the affairs of agents within those departments-they were truly his agents. For the remaining departments (Treasury and Post Office), Congress granted the President no clearly stated or implied authority over the affairs of the relevant officers, and did not hesitate to articulate the full range of departmental structures and officers, complete with a full specification of the duties such officers had. Some departments the framing Congress treated as purely executive, and others not where the departments were not purely executive, Congress did not hesitate to create a degree of independence from presidential will.
One final feature of the original departmental structures should also be remarked. The differential treatment of these five departments suggests that the early Congress viewed the degree of presidential control required over executive officers differently. But as with control over prosecution, it is left to the modem unitarian to argue that the President still retained control, through removal, over each of these officers, the "relatively independent" no less than the purely executive. This does not yet capture the full story of Congress' view of its ability to create independent entities.
Consider the status of the first truly independent agency in the republic's history, the Second Bank of the United States, created in 1816.139 Certainly few agencies in the early republic had as much power over the nation as did the Bank.' But what is crucial about the Bank for our purposes is its relative independence from the President's control-indeed, in some respects, it was absolutely independent. Of the Bank's twenty-five directors, the President could appoint only five, and these were the only directors subject to his power of removal.' Obviously, directors of the Bank made what we would consider policy decisions obviously those decisions had a dramatic effect upon the nation. But the vast majority of those directors were outside the control of the President. Here, as with federal prosecution, not only did the President have relatively less control-he had no control at all.
One final bit of evidence helps confirm the view that the President need not control all of what we now consider to be departmental administration. In a recent and important essay, Saikrishna Prakash recovers something of the framers' understanding about the role of state executives in the execution of federal law.14 As he quite forcefully demonstrates, the framers fully expected that Congress could vest in state executives the power to execute particular federal laws. They understood the Constitution to permit, as Prakash puts it, a type of "field office federalism," where state executives (if not state legislatures) could be "commandeered" by Congress to help execute federal law,146 all without the control of the President. In just the way that federal executive departments could be vested with the execution of federal law, state executives could be vested with the execution of federal law.
Some questions might be raised about presidential control over federal departments, or indeed about federal control over the original bank. But there is little question about the President's control over state executives. The President had no power to remove state executives who executed federal law in a way inconsistent with the President's view about how such laws should be executed and as should be equally obvious, the President had no power to recall the authority that Congress by law had granted state executives to execute federal law.148 To the extent that the framers understood the original design to permit the vesting of the power of execution in state executives, the framers understood the original design as something other than unitary.
What this puzzle about the original departments comes to is this: the modem unitarian would predict that the framers, mindful of the unitarian injunction, would have left in the President a wide range of executive control over officers within those departments. But history shows something quite different: Congress vested different degrees of control in the
ers understood the President's power vis-A-vis the Supreme Court, then so too might it be the way they understood the President's power vis-a-vis the departments-that without this clause, the President would not necessarily have had the power to direct the departments to report to him. And if the framers did not understand the President to have the inherent power to order opinions from the departments, or if the framers did not understand the President to have that power by virtue of the Vesting Clause, then we would have decisive evidence against the unitary conception.
So understood, the clause would have an important function. Without it, there would be nothing to constrain Congress from making administrative departments wholly independent from the President, even to the extent of allowing a department to refuse to report to the President about its activities. With it, the Constitution brings about at least a minimum of presidential control over executive departments, by assuring that at least one official-the President-has access to information about the operations of those departments, and by limiting Congress' power to structure departments as it might wish. Without this clause, Congress could clearly forbid, say, the Attorney General from reporting to the President on the activities of the special prosecutor with the clause, Congress could not so
But this reading still reads "departments" in a unitary fashion, as if the President's power to demand opinions would be the same for all types of departments. To support the argument that, for the framers, all departments were not the same, there must be a second way of reading the Opinions Clause-a way that is ultimately more radical.
As James Hart noted forty-five years ago, there is a particular oddity in the structure of the original three departments established by Congress in 1789, and this oddity may help us understand the original meaning in the Opinions Clause. The statutes establishing the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Department of War both declared that "there shall be a principal officer therein, to be called the Secretary for the Department of" Foreign Affairs and War respectively.' By contrast, the statute establishing the Department of the Treasury declared that there "shall be... a Secretary of the Treasury, to be deemed head of the department."162 Why, one might ask, did the early Congress not consider
the Secretary of the Treasury a "principal officer" in just the way the Secretaries of Foreign Affairs and War were? What was it that was different about these officers that lead them to refer to some as "principal officers" and some as "heads of departments?"
Add to this curiosity the particular language of the Opinions Clause-that the President "may require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive Departments." And finally, add again the only reference to "Heads of Departments" in the Constitution, the Inferior Officers Appointment Clause, which provides that "Congress may by Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments."'6 These distinctions in language raise a number of questions. Why does the Opinions Clause speak only of "executive" departments? Are there other kinds of departments? And why speak of "Heads of Departments" in clause 1 of section 2, but "principal Officers" in clause 2?
Perhaps these puzzles are not terribly probative. Certainly the usage of the framers in debate is not wholly inconsistent.1 But clearly nothing in the modem unitarian's conception-that the framers imagined just one kind of department-could easily explain such different usages. If all departments were the same, there would be no reason to speak of the heads of Foreign Affairs and War any differently from the head of the Treasury, or the Post Office. If all departments were the same, there might be no reason to qualify the power of the President to demand written opinions by saying that he had that power over principal officers of the "executive" departments. If all departments were the same, and all equally under the President's directory control, there would be little reason to give Congress the power to vest appointments in "Heads of Departments," as the President would have the power both to direct the heads of departments to make appointments and to remove those they have appointed.'
But consider these same bits of text against the background of another conception of the original understanding-one that imagines that the framers conceived of departments differently, and contends that the President would, by the Constitution, have directory power over only some of those departments. If there were in effect two kinds of "departments" rather than just one, then we could understand the Opinions Clause to extend to the President the power to demand written opinions
over principal officers of "executive" departments, implying that the President has no constitutional authority to demand opinions from the nonexecutive departments and that Congress could choose whether to extend that power or not.
But what could these nonexecutive departments be? Here we invoke again the acts establishing the first three "great Departments." When the framers speak of "principal officers" in the way the Opinions Clause speaks of "principal Officers," they are referring to the two departments clearly established to help the President with his "executive" functions, Foreign Affairs and War, where "executive" here refers to those functions constitutionally enumerated within Article II-principally foreign affairs powers and war making powers. Putting the Opinions Clause together with the first three department acts, it appears possible that the framers spoke of "principal Officers" only when speaking of "executive Departments," and spoke of "Heads of Departments" when intending to include nonexecutive departments as well.
How would this help explain the Inferior Officers Appointment Clause? As with the Opinions Clause, many have considered this clause in part a redundancy of its own-if the President has an inherent authority to direct the departments, what function could there be in giving Congress the power to vest appointment in someone the President already controls? At most, the clause (so understood) is a convenience, possibly useful as clarification, but certainly not essential to any overarching separation of powers design.
But if we understand the framers to have understood different departments differently"-if some are "executive" in the constitutional sense and others not-and if we adopt the framers' apparent convention of speaking of "principal officers" when speaking narrowly of the heads of executive departments, then the Inferior Officers Appointment Clause has a new meaning. For it says that Congress could remove the appointment of some inferior officers from the President, and vest it in an officer (a head of a department) who was not constitutionally the mere agent of the President (as a "principal officer," such as the Secretary of War or Foreign Affairs, was) but was an officer whom Congress could make relatively independent of the will of the President (as the discussion above suggests the Secretary of the Treasury could be considered169). This does not mean that a principal officer could not be given the appointment power, for a principal officer could also be a head of department. All we claim is that the clause also means that a member of the more general classincluding those not necessarily controlled by the President-could be given this appointment power as well.
Thus, on this reading, among the "Heads of Departments" are a subset who are also "principal Officers.' These, the first acts of Congress suggest, are those officers who lead an "executive department"-for the first Congress, Foreign Affairs and War-and from whom the President has a power to demand written opinions. What would seem to follow from this by negative implication is that the President would have no
power by virtue of the constitution, express or implied, to order written opinions from those heads of departments who were not also "principal Officers" of "executive
We do not want to make too much of these textual differences, nor do we claim that there is decisive evidence in favor of any particular interpretation. But whether one adopts the more conservative understanding of the Opinions Clause, or the more radical, it is enough here to remark that both make clear the oddity in the idea that the framers imagined the President to have inherent authority to direct executive officers by virtue of the Vesting Clause of Article II alone. If that were so, there was no need to enact the Opinions Clause in any form, and plausibly little purpose in giving Congress the power to vest appointment of inferior officers in "the Heads of Departments." No doubt, standing alone the Opinions Clause does not dispose of the matter: there may be many possible reasons for the dropping of the Supreme Court opinions clause, and these might allow the clause to be considered a redundancy. But the clause does suggest a serious puzzle for those who believe that the executive power includes an inherent power to direct or supervise all administration. D. Original Understandings: Rethinking Executive Versus Administrative
The modem unitarian would predict that the founders would have vested a function as executive as "prosecution" exclusively in the control of the President they did not. The modem unitarian would predict that the original departments would follow a single organizational design, with the President recognized as the head of all discretionary authority within those departments the original departments did not follow this pattern. The modem unitarian would predict that a power as small as the power to order written reports would be unnecessary in the Constitution's unitary scheme but for the framers, it was not unnecessary.
In each case, the model of the modem unitarian bumps up against an inconsistent practice of the framers. We are naturally led to the question: Are we missing something? Is there something about the world in which the framers lived that we no longer see and that explains the widespread contemporary misunderstanding of the original constitutional theory and practice?
We suggest that there is. Together these puzzles perhaps do not prove that the unitary conception of the framers' design is false, but they
(2) a constitution could vest control overjust the political functions in the executive, and control over the administrative functions in the legislature and (3) a constitution could vest control over all political and some administrative functions in the executive, but leave to the legislature the power to decide how much of the balance of administrative power should be afforded the President. Option two describes most existing constitutional systems England is the most familiar example. Option one describes what most believe the framers created' -a President with constitutional control over the administrative functions. But we believe that it is option three that describes best the original understanding of the framers' design. That is, we believe that the framers meant to constitutionalize just some of what we now think of as "the executive power," leaving the balance to Congress to structure as it thought proper. What follows from this is that if there were some functions that were not within the domain of what the framers were constitutionally vesting in the President when they vested "the executive power," then there are some functions over which the President need not, consistent with the original design, have plenary executive control.'
There are at least two ways to understand this claim that the framers did not intend to vest in the President control of all administrative functions. The distinction between these two ways connects with the second misunderstanding we have described above-that is, it connects with how we understand how they understood these categories of governmental power. One understanding would be that the framers had in their heads clear categories of "executive power" (or in many cases equivalently "political power") and "administrative power," and by constitutionally
vesting in the President "the executive power" they intended to vest constitutionallyjust "executive power," leaving the second category, "administrative power," for Congress to vest as it thought proper. This understanding relies on clear categories of governmental power.
A second understanding does not turn on clear categorical understandings of these powers, but rather on a more ambiguous and undeveloped conception of what these powers could be. It understands the framers to believe that some powers fall clearly within the domain of "the executive" (and these they constitutionalized), but the balance (what we would roughly call administrative) they believed would be assigned pragmatically, according to the values or functions of the particular power at issue. While the first understanding treats the framers as budding constitutional formalists, who simply chose not (or forgot given the small number of administrative functions) to include a vesting clause for "the administrative power," the second treats them as speakers of a less categorical, more pragmatic, language, at least for a wide range of (what we consider) executive functions.
Our understanding is emphatically the second.' We believe that the framers wanted to constitutionalize just some of the array of power a constitution-maker must allocate, and as for the rest, the framers institutionalists find it so hard to see this undeveloped design as the framers' design because modern constitutionalists treat the terms "executive" or "legislative" or "judicial" as describing fully developed categories that carve up the world of governmental power without remainder, as if governmental power were the genus, and executive, legislative, or judicial were the only species. But the founders' vision was not so complete,
their ideas not so developed, their experience not so extensive, and their intent to constitutionalize just a part of the many issues of governmental power that they understood to confront any government.
To be convincing about our understanding of the framers' vision, we must accomplish two quite distinct tasks. First, we must make clear the type of power that we believe the framers did not constitutionally vest. Second, we must point to what in the framers' own actions indicates that they did not understand their constitution to constitutionalize the full range of (again, modern understandings of) executive powers, but rather understood Congress as free to assign powers as such assignment seemed proper. To complete the first task, we pass briefly through the first selfconscious attempt by constitutional scholars to define the scope of executive versus administrative power, a debate that rose through the nineteenth century and peaked at the beginning of this century, and that revealed a conception of the framers' design wholly alien to the modern unitarian. To complete the second, we use a model derived from this alien nineteenth century perspective to look again at familiar features of the founding debates, and ask whether the modern unitarian's model, or the nineteenth century theorists' model, better makes sense of the structures that the framers actually established.
The conclusion of these two steps will be an understanding of the framers' Constitution that is quite distinct from the current understanding. We emphasize at the start, however, that we are not arguing that the framers' understanding is the same as what we will call the nineteenth century understanding. Indeed, we believe that there are three distinct views, associated with the framers, the nineteenth century constitutional theorists, and the modern unitarians. The modern understanding is different from that of the nineteenth century theorists' because where moderns see one category (executive power), they saw two (executive and administrative). But both the modern and nineteenth century understandings are different from that of the framers, because where the first two see categories of executive power, the eighteenth century constitutionalists saw a collection of functions, none fitting firmly or completely within our current categorical structure. The nineteenth century view helps us see that the framers' was a world of more than one type of executive function, but its formalism obscures the fundamentally pragmatic approach that the original constitutionalists brought to the question of allocated federal power. To understand the framers' world, we must understand not just the differences in the substance of their constitutional structure, but also the difference in the very language with which they thought and spoke of that structure.
In the end our claim against modern unitarians is first that they import to the eighteenth century a false conception of what was meant by the term "executive power," and second that they import to the eighteenth century a wrong-headed conception of the form of constitutional discourse.
1. The Nineteenth Century View. - In our path back to the understanding of the eighteenth century, we pause first with the understanding of the scope of executive power held by nineteenth century theorists and commentators'"0 when confronted with precisely the same question of the Constitution's implicit executive structure. The nineteenth century view will give us a language with which to understand the difference between the contemporary view and that of the framers. But importantly, this language will function as no more than a heuristic-as a device to help us see the difference in understandings-and a heuristic that we will in the end discard.
Begin with a debate born at the birth of the modem administrative state. At the turn of the century, theorists in both law and political science were confronted with an increasingly uncomfortable question-who was to run the administrative agencies? Did the Constitution unambiguously vest this power in the President? Did the President have a constitutional claim to control the full range of administration, whether Congress vested in him that control or not?
Ask why the question was uncomfortable to them. For to modem observers, the question appears just daft. In the modem conception, there are three branches of government any agency of government must fall within one and administration falls within the executive. 1' Congress may create things called "administrative" agencies, but what Congress creates becomes part of the executive, subject to "the executive power." For modem readers "administrative" and "executive" are just the same idea. The framers carefully placed all executive power in the President, the existence of a separate "administrative" branch is a conspicuous violation of the constitutional plan.
But if we are to understand a different period, we must first make sense of what appears especially silly. What would one have to believe to make the question, who runs the administration, a real question?
One thought would be a firm sense of distinction between the categories of executive and administrative power. And indeed, that is precisely what the late nineteenth century theorists claimed the framers had. As they saw it, to the framers this distinction (even if to us apparently naive' 2) was a crucial one, which Grundstein describes as having had "the stature of a first principle" even if it "today [is] on the verge of obliteration."' As one of the leading nineteenth century theorists described it:
Owing to the fact that the President at the present time in fact
exercises large administrative powers and is in appearance the
head of the administrative departments the popular opinion
prevails that the framers of the constitution employed the term
executive as including what are now known as administrative
powers and that it was their intention that the President should
be the head of the administration. This is a mistake. There can be
no question but that they used the term executive in its technical sense as
covering only the political duties of the titular head of the nation. "[I]t
was undoubtedly intended, " writes W. W. Willoughby .... "that the
President should be little more than a political chief, that is to say, one
whose function should, in the main, consist in the performance
of those political duties which are not subject to judicial
control."
If one understood these notions as "naturally" distinct, then as these theorists suggested, it would also seem natural to see that while the framers had assigned "executive" power to the President, this assignment entailed no judgment about where Congress must assign administrative power, and more importantly, about who gets to control the administrative power. Again, these theorists suggested, the question was left to Congress under the Necessary and Proper Clause.' In this way, the nineteenth century theorists picked up the understanding, apparently clear (to them) in the text, that Congress had broad authority to structure the administration of government institutions as it saw fit-so long as such structures were both "necessary and proper."'
To these commentators, then, the question whether the President has a right to direct or control the actions of his agents turns upon whether the agents are exercising "executive" or "administrative" power. If executive, the President would have such a right if administrative, he would not have this right (at least not by virtue of the Constitution). If the power exercised by the agents was administrative power, the Constitution would not require Congress to vest such control in the President.
What then is the distinction between "executive" and "administrative" powers? As will become apparent in what follows, the line is not at all a clean one. But we can begin with a sketch of the difference: Among
the laws that the President executes, we can distinguish two types. One type is the set of laws necessary and proper to a power specifically described in Article II (defining the executive power) the second type is the set of laws necessary and proper to a power specifically described in Article I (defining the legislative power). As a rough first cut at the difference between administrative and executive power, we can call the laws necessary and proper to Article II powers executive, and the laws necessary and proper to Article I powers administrative. As will become clear, our claim about the framers' vision is that they saw a difference in the constitutionally required control that the President would have over administrative and executive power. In short, whatever control was required over executive power, less was required (constitutionally) over administrative.
To understand fully the source of this nineteenth century conception would require us to stray far beyond the scope of this Article. Obviously, much of the spirit of the time echoes in their hard, formal, and categorical distinctions. And just as importantly, Willoughby and Goodnow were fighting their own intellectual campaigns indeed, they, along with such aspirants as Woodrow Wilson, were locked in a campaign to reform the executive by making less political many of its administrative functions.' Enthusiastic about impartial expertise, they sought to make an apolitical space for independent administrators in American government. This spirit, and their motives, obviously draw into question the fidelity of their readings of the framers as a matter of history.
But our purpose in pointing to these scholars is simply comparative, and our use of this intellectual history merely suggestive. The aim is to use their conception of the executive to suggest a second model for executive power, one that distinguishes between two kinds of functions and the extent of executive control constitutionally required over each. With this model we will examine again the three puzzles already presented, and ask whether a model of the executive that conceives of more than one type of executive function better explains the framers' actual practice. If it does, the unitarian's single-function-and-responsibility model is incomplete: And, as we have hinted, so too will the nineteenth century theorists' model be incomplete: for again, it speaks as if the framers had a firm or clear categorical conception of administrative functions versus
executive functions. The framers had no such conception. As we will develop further below, the framers had no clear idea how their unruly intuitions about executive power would work out, but instead imagined them to become defined over time through practice.
2. Linking the Nineteenth Century View to the Constitutional Text. The nineteenth century view sees two executive functions where the modem unitarian sees one. But how are these functions divided? Does something in the text itself, or in the political context, help us understand what this nineteenth century executive would be?
An initial question is whether the text of Article II supports the idea that the framers contemplated two kinds of (what we consider) executive functions. One immediately apparent argument that it does not, presented by the modem constitutionalists, rests on the Vesting Clause. As Calabresi and Rhodes recently argued, Article II's Vesting Clause appears to vest executive power beyond those powers enumerated in the balance of Article 11.190 For unlike the Vesting Clause in Article I (which provides, "All legislative power herein granted"191), the Vesting Clause of Article II ("The executive power"19 2) does not limit its power to the enumerated powers listed in Article I1.3 Therefore, the argument goes, the framers did not understand the executive power to be limited to the particular powers enumerated and if not limited to the enumerated powers, it would follow that one cannot divide executive functions from "administrative" functions, at least for constitutional purposes.'
We think that this argument is unpersuasive. Even if the Constitution vests all executive power in the President, there is now enough reason to question whether all executive power as then understood includes all executive power as now understood. As we conceive it, the framers intended the Vesting Clause to vest constitutionally little more than the enumerated executive powers. It says who has the execu-
tive power not what that power is, just as the Vesting Clause of Article I that power is,' and the Vesting Clause of Article III says who has the what that power "extend[s] As Daniel Webster described it,
tive language in Article II-"herein granted." For the addition of "herein
suggests that the framers saw it as having an effect as slight as we argue it should
Second, not even Hamilton described the Vesting Clause as an independent source of substantive executive power, though he was in general quite eager to define a strong executive. In his catalog of the executive powers, contrasting the American executive with the British monarch, nowhere does he discuss a general executive power arising from the Vesting
Third, while the federal constitution certainly constituted a more unitary executive than most state constitutions, the same language vesting executive power in state constitutions had been understood at the time of the framing not to mark an inherent power, but to describe an authority
limited to that power enumerated. At least as a presumption, similar language in the federal constitution would suggest a similar understanding.
Finally, and perhaps most interesting for our purposes, is an argument resting on the other vesting clause similar to the Vesting Clause of Article II and more explicit than the Vesting Clause of Article I: that is Article III's clause which provides that "[t] he Judicial Power... shall be vested." If the difference between Article II and Article I entails broad inherent power in the President, does it entail the same broad grant of inherent power in Article III? Forjust like Article II, and unlike Article I, Article III vests "[t]he judicial power" (and not just the judicial power "herein granted") in "the Supreme Court." But does this mean that the judicial branch has a wide range of inherent and (legislatively) unregulable judicial authority beyond that enumerated and granted by Congress, drawn from English practice? Can the Supreme Court claim a range of implied authority to decide any issue of a judicial matter, or does the subsequent specification of "cases and controversies" exhaust that authority?
It is at least clear how an originalist should answer this structural question. For the originalist is quick to point to Justice Iredell's argument in Chisolm v. Georgia208 for the proposition that the Constitution granted no inherent judicial power to create judicial remedies where
Congress has chosen not to do so. The judicial power, Iredell believed, was just that power to hear "cases and controversies." But this did not mean any "case or controversy." As he wrote there,
I conceive, that all the Courts of the United States must receive,
not merely their organization as to the numbers of Judges of
which they are to consist but all their authority, as to the manner of their proceeding, from the Legislature only. This appears to me to be one of those cases, with many others, in which
an article of the Constitution cannot be effectuated without the
intervention of the Legislative authority. There being many
such, at the end of the special enumeration of the powers of
Congress in the Constitution, is this general one: 'To make all
laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing Powers, and all other powers vested by this
Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any
department or officer thereof.' None will deny, that an act of
Legislation is necessary to say, at least of what number the
Judges are to consist the President with the consent of the
Senate could not nominate a number at their discretion. The
Constitution intended this article so far at least to be the subject
of a Legislative act. Having a right thus to establish the Court,
and it being capable of being established in no other manner, I
conceive it necessarily follows, that they are also to direct the
manner of its proceedings. Upon this authority, there is, that I
know, but one limit that is, 'that they shall not exceed their
authority.' We believe that what Iredell says here about Article III power applies to Article II powers as well. Article III gives certain courts "the judicial power," which power "extend[s]" to certain "cases and controversies" nonetheless, Iredell argues, this does not yet imply any power of the court to decide cases or grant remedies unless Congress has acted to confer such
The same should hold for executive power. Article II gives the President "the executive power," which is defined to include a catalog of powers in section 2, and some in section 3, and at least one specified in
the full range of an enumerated power without Congress' intervention, a vesting clause notwithstanding, so too should it follow that the executive power in Article II does not extend beyond the enumerated powers there, unless Congress, through the Necessary and Proper Clause, acts to extend it. Congress must act in both cases for the power to be effective.
These arguments together suggest an understanding of the nineteenth century theorists' two-function view: if "executive power" extends to just those powers enumerated, then the "administrative power" spoken of by the nineteenth century scholars would extend to departments and agencies created by Congress independent of these Article II powers.2 And it would follow that any constitutional limit on Congress' power would track just these powers enumerated as the President's. One would test limitations on other powers granted by Congress-for example, limitations on the control over aspects of the administration unrelated to the enumerated powers-not by any Article II consideration, but instead by the reach of the Necessary and Proper Clause.
This understanding makes sense of two other central features of the original executive debate. First, it is consistent with what we view as the real question in the debate-whether the President would be one or many. Against that background, what section 1 does is simply say: We have chosen one President. Second, the nineteenth century understanding makes sense of another important feature of the founders' understanding that we have lost. The nineteenth century view distinguished between executive and administrative the former it called political, the latter not. We can recover this sense of "political" by comparing it with our judgments about legislative power, the nature of which is relatively clear. We consider a grant of legislative power to Congress, within the boundaries of constitutional limitation, to be a grant of a prerogative to select or not to select topics for legislation, or to enact or not to enact bills, all subject to the sanction of the political process only. The granting of this prerogative makes legislative decisions to act or not act political, in an early sense of that word-political in the sense that they are subject to the review of no one directly, though subject to the review of the people indirectly (through elections, popular outcry, and the like). Congress' legislative power is political in the sense that Congress exercises it without the review of anyone else within the government.
So too should we think of the original grant of "executive power." As Professor Bestor describes Blackstone's conception of "executive power:"
Executive power signified to Blackstone, as it did to the
American framers, those powers of decision and action that can
be exercised by a chief executive, or in his name, simply by virtue of the authority granted directly to him by the constitution
or the laws. Though the executive may ultimately be held responsible-by impeachment or by the repudiation at the pollsfor executive decisions made or executive actions carried out,
executive powers themselves are almost by definition discretionary, and therefore capable of being exercised without the necessity of submitting a proposed course of action to prior legislative
deliberation and
The point is stated succinctly in the following account of
present-day English constitutional practice: "For the exercise of
a prerogative power the prior authority of Parliament is not requences which result from the exercise of prerogative
Parliament too may abolish or curtail the prerogative by statute
but in regard to the exercise of the prerogative Parliament has
no right to be consulted in What marks a power as executive (within the framers' language) is that the decision whether and how that power is to be exercised lies within the discretion of that person designated as the executive. Under this conception, an executive need no more consult others before exercising executive power than the legislature need consult others before exercising its powers.
If we can use this bit of contextual understanding, if executive powers are political in this early sense of that word, and finally, if the Vesting Clause is limited in the sense we describe, then there is an entirely obvious sense in which one can distinguish "executive" functions from other functions contingently exercised by the executive. If executive powers are those granted the President under the Constitution, then the nineteenth century's "administrative" powers are those given the President or officers of the government by Congress. And while Congress has only questionable power to condition the constitutional grant of executive powers, Congress has clear authority to limit the exercise of administrative powers as a condition to its grant of these powers to any officer of the government.2 In the original conception, what constrains Congress when creating administrative power is principally the requirement that it be necessary and proper beyond that limitation, the Constitution does not speak.
In this view, then, the framers' vision about the executive comes to this: The Vesting Clause of Article II designates the President as the holder of "the executive power"-not a council, not a triumvirate, but a single person. The balance of Article II defines what that executive power is. More specifically, it defines what executive powers the President can exercise as a matter of constitutional prerogative other powers Congress can grant if it thinks proper. With respect to those exercising the President's constitutionally enumerated powers, including the President himself, Congress has considerable authority to impose obligations of law with respect to people exercising the President's constitutionally specified authority, the President must have hierarchical control but beyond these enumerated aspects of "the executive power" is an un-
defined range of powers that we would now describe as "administrative power," marking a domain within which one has a duty to act according not to one's own judgment, but according to the standards or objectives tion to vest them in officers operating under or beyond the plenary power of the President.
3. Linking the Nineteenth Century View to the Court's Early Executive Cases: Marbury and Kendall. - This view-that by constitutionalizing the "unitary executive" the framers did not believe that they were constitutionalizing who must have power over all functions that we now call administrative-gains support from early Supreme Court cases dealing with the scope of executive power. In this section, we consider just two of those cases. In both, we believe that the Court's approach can be understood through the view that we have just sketched.
Most famous of these cases is of course Marbuy v. Madison, although less for its relationship to the debate over the unitary executive than for its founding ofjudicial review. Before Chief Justice Marshall struck a statute of Congress, he sketched broadly the Court's conception of the executive, and its amenability to the control of other branches, whether Congress or the courts. This view, we suggest, ties directly to the model that we have outlined.
Recall the basic facts. John Adams had appointed William Marbury to be a Justice of the Peace in the District of Columbia.223 The Senate had confirmed his appointment, and President Adams had signed the commissions. But unfortunately for Marbury and four other similarly situated magistrates-to-be, Marshall (the same), who had been Secretary of State under Adams, failed before leaving office to deliver the commissions to Marbury and the others. Madison, the new Secretary under PresidentJefferson, refused to deliver the commissions. Marbury sued to compel him to deliver his commission.
For our purposes, we can focus on one crucial aspect to the Court's dictum. Central to Marshall's analysis is a distinction between two kinds of authority or power under which the Secretary of State may act-one that he calls "political" authority and the other authority derived from law (the same distinction we have traced). As Marshall explained:
By the constitution of the United States, the President is invested with certain important political powers, in the exercise of
which he is to use his own discretion, and is accountable only to his country in his political character, and to his own conscience. To aid him in the performance of these duties, he is authorized to appoint certain officers, who act by his authority and in conformity with his orders. In such cases, their acts are his acts and whatever opinion may be entertained of the manner in which executive discretion may be used, still there exists, and can exist, no power to control that discretion. Thus far then, Marshall sounds like a believer in a strongly unitary executive, at least to the extent that he is pointing to an absolute power in the President to exercise control over subordinates, and to the unreviewability of their acts pursuant to that authority.
Marshall then immediately links this power to a department we have just reviewed. Says Marshall,
The application of this remark will be perceived by adverting to
the act of congress for establishing the department of foreign
affairs. This officer, as his duties were prescribed by that act, is
to conform precisely to the will of the President. He is the mere
organ by whom that will is communicated. The acts of such an
officer, as an officer, can never be examinable by the courts. Thus, Marshall conceived the foreign affairs department to flow from this power that Marshall calls "political" and that we have been calling executive. In this way, Marshall sounds very much like ChiefJustice Taft, writing in Myers.2 When an officer exercises the (executive) power, which this department has by virtue of its tie to the constitutional grant of this executive power to the President, his acts "can never be examin [ed]" by a court.2
But Marshall goes on to qualify this sea of unreviewability in a crucial way:
But when the legislature proceeds to impose on that officer
other duties when he is directed peremptorily to perform certain acts when the rights of individuals are dependent on the
performance of those acts he is so far the officer of the law is
amenable to the laws for his conduct and cannot at his discretion sport away the vested rights of others. Thus, an executive officer is either an agent of the President (a "political officer") or an "officer of the law." He can serve either the President or the lawmakers (Congress), but when he serves Congress' will (as expressed in law), his performance under that will is, Marshall asserts, subject to the review by the courts.
Now it is important to qualify what Marshall has said so far, by pointing out that Marshall was not arguing that the only "political" power possessed by the President was that given by the Constitution. Though he says "by the constitution" the President is vested with political authority, Congress too, he suggests, can grant the President a "legal discretion," and when he or his officers act under that discretion, then he or his officers enjoy the same immunity from judicial review as when the officers act under a constitutional discretion. But where neither the law nor the Constitution gives any discretion, the officer is subject to the duty of the law, the President notwithstanding.
The conclusion from this reasoning is, that where the heads
of departments are the political or confidential agents of the
executive, merely to execute the will of the President, or rather
to act in cases in which the executive possesses a constitutional
or legal discretion, nothing can be more perfectly clear than
that their acts are only politically examinable. But where a specific duty is assigned by law, and individual rights depend upon
the performance of that duty, it seems equally clear that the individual who considers himself injured, has a right to resort to
the laws of his country for a
In Marbury itself, then, the Court declared that because the President had completed the last act required to complete his exercise of his appointment power, the duty fell on the Secretary of State to deliver the commissions to Marbury. Thus, according to Marshall:
The power of nominating to the senate, and the power of
appointing the person nominated, are political powers, to be
exercised by the President according to his own discretion.
When he has made an appointment, he has exercised his whole
power and his discretion has been completely applied to the
case. If, by law, the officer [appointed] be removable at the will
of the President, then a new appointment may be immediately
made, and the rights of the officer are terminated. But as a fact
which has existed cannot be made never to have existed, the
appointment cannot be annihilated and consequently if the officer is by law not removable at the will of the President the
rights he has acquired are protected by the law, and are not resumable by the President. They cannot be extinguished by executive authority, and he has the privilege of asserting them in like
manner as if they had been derived from any other source.
Now on the face of this claim-that the President controls the officials to the extent they are acting on a constitutional or legal discretion, and not when the officer is acting as an "officer of the law"-the believers in a strongly unitary executive may find nothing at all problematic. The modem unitarian's claim has always been that the President must be able to direct discretionary exercises of authority and believers in a strongly unitary executive have long yielded the point regarding "ministerial" acts. No one thinks that the President may authorize administrative officers to
law.23 So far, then, the modem unitarian view appears to be both coherent and consistent with what we have quoted. But it is not entirely consistent with how the framers and the Court in Marbuiy understood things. The believers in a strongly unitary executive say that whenever an exercise of authority is discretionary, the Constitution permits the President to control such an exercise but the original view would suggest that what the framers meant was that whenever it is a political power, derived from the Constitution, or a legal discretion granted by Congress, the President must have the power to direct the exercise of this discretion. Nothing in this entails that where Congress directs otherwise-by vesting in an officer a discretionary power beyond the President's review-the President nonetheless has power to direct or even to interfere with the exercise of that power. The modem unitarian confuses the source of the power to act (the Constitution versus laws of Congress) with the type of power acted upon (discretionary versus ministerial). Power may derive from the Constitution or from law power may be ministerial or discretionary. As we understand the founding view, Congress had a measure of authority to structure what modem observers consider to be executive with respect to power deriving from law, whether ministerial or not.
All this suggests a sharp distinction between (a) the acts that the President may control and (b) the acts that Congress may regulate. This distinction flows from the nature of the source of the authority to act (Article I's Necessary and Proper Clause versus Article II) rather than from the nature of the act (discretionary versus ministerial). The point is not unambiguous in Marbuy itself, there it is merely suggested. But the point emerges clearly from another case that many believers in a strongly unitary executive take to stand for precisely the opposite point, Kendall v.
Stokes.23
court2 Kendall is often understood to stand for the proposition that where the action enjoined upon the executive is "ministerial," then the executive can be directed by law to perform it, which suggests (wrongly we believe) that if the action is "discretionary," then the executive cannot be directed by law to perform it. But this implication follows neither in logic nor from the opinion. What is crucial to the opinion (and conceded by the dissenting justices as well) is that the authority at issue in Kendall delaw,238 powers and since derived from law, the executive could not control
The argument for the Court follows precisely the distinction drawn by Chief Justice Marshall: "The executive power is vested in a President and as far as his powers are derived from the constitution, he is beyond the reach of any other department, except in the mode prescribed by the constitution through the impeaching power."240 Thus, where the source of the President's power is the Constitution, he is free from the control of the courts or Congress.
But it by no means follows, that every officer in every branch of
that department is under the exclusive direction of the
president. Such a principle, we apprehend, is not, and certainly
cannot be claimed by the president. There are certain political
duties imposed upon many officers in the executive department,
the discharge of which is under the direction of the president.
But it would be an alarming doctrine, that congress cannot impose upon any executive officer any duty they may think proper,
which is not repugnant to any rights secured and protected by
the constitution and in such cases, the duty and responsibility
grow out of and are subject to the control of the law, and not to
the direction of the Note here the unqualified nature of Congress' power. Congress has the power to impose upon any executive officer "any duty they may think proper" so long as this is not repugnant to "rights secured by" the Constitution. A duty may be ministerial or nonministerial (discretionary or nondiscretionary). With regard to ministerial duties, all that Kendall says is: "And this is emphatically the case, where the duty enjoined is of a mere ministerial
and not anyone else, who is given the power to "take Care" of the faithful execution of the laws, and he must have the power to perform his responsibility over all who are engaged in carrying out the law.
But there is something quite odd about the structure of the Take Care Clause if it was conceived by the framers as the source of presidential power over all that we now consider administration: Unlike the other power clauses of Article II, the Take Care Clause is expressed as a duty rather than a power.2 Indeed, rather than appearing in section 2 of Article II, where the balance of the President's basic powers are articu3 context of a laundry list of other discretionary presidential duties and (arguably) powers. Most of these are expressed not as something the President may choose to do (as is the case where he has the "power" to undertake actions), but as something that he "shall" do.
This language and its placement notwithstanding, modem unitarians claim that even if a duty, the clause implies that if the President has a duty to take care that the laws are faithfully executed, he also has a power
to direct and control all administrative functions directed to the execution of those laws regardless of the law's nature, or the source of the law's authority. On this view, this directing and supervising authority is just one more executive power that must be vested exclusively in the President.
What is most striking about the centrality claimed for this clause is its relatively modem origin.25 By the beginning of the modem presidency, constitutional scholars were pointing to the Take Care Clause as the primary source of executive power. President Taft relied on the clause to support the notion that the President can act to advance federal interests without specific legal authority,2 and Theodore Roosevelt believed that the clause meant that the President could do anything so long as there was not specific legal authority forbidding But at the founding, the clause received relatively little consideration by practically everyone in the debate.257 Hamilton devoted only a few lines in the Federalist Papers to discussion of this "minor" executive power or The fact that the clause received so little initial attention suggests that one ought not take it as a broad grant of presidential power over administra-
tion, at least to the extent that it would solve the hardest and most sharply disputed questions.
More significant than the lack of debate over the scope of the Take Care Clause is the shift in the language of the clause and its relationship to the Necessary and Proper Clause. By reviewing the development of these two clauses, we hope to show that the framers shifted from the President and to the Congress a crucial aspect of the decision of how laws were to be carried into effect.
Like other clauses in Article II, the Take Care Clause came into the constitutional text with apparently little debate.259 The language "take Care that the laws be faithfully executed" emerged from the work of the Committee on Style, which reported to the convention on September 12, 1787. This Committee was the last step in a long series of debates that began with a number of resolutions from Randolph of Virginia. These resolutions were the focus of the convention that convened May 25, 1787, to discuss amendments to the Articles of Confederation.
Before the Committee on Style created this text, something close to it had appeared in various earlier drafts. Its first appearance was in Randolph's resolution number 7, which resolved "that a National Executive be instituted.., and that besides a general authority to execute the National laws, it ought to enjoy the Executive rights vested in Congress by the Confederation."
This was May 29, 1787. It was not until June 1 that the convention, now convened as a Committee of the Whole, turned to consider the executive power. Madison suggested that the committee first consider the scope of the executive power, before it decide the central questionwhether there would be one or more "executives." As Madison outlined it, the President (whether a single person or a plurality) was to have three powers:
[the] power to carry into effect the national laws to appoint to
offices in cases not otherwise provided for, and to execute such
other powers not Legislative norJudiciary in their nature as
from time to time be delegated by the national Legislature. Note the last of these three powers-the power to execute "such other powers not Legislative nor Judiciary in their nature as may from time to time be delegated by the national Legislature."262 To someone who believes that the Constitution recognizes just three powers, executive, legislative, and judicial, what could be powers "not Legislative norJudiciary in their Nature" be, such that the executive would not in any case possess them? For if the only powers are powers legislative, judicial, and executive, then it follows that a power not legislative and not judicial is executive and presumably,2 the executive would have all powers executive.2
This power to exercise powers "not Legislative and not Judiciary" suggests a limited executive power, which Congress may supplement according to itsjudgment. The language was proposed by Pinckney. It is significant if only because it suggests the possibility of a power neither legislative, nor judicial, nor executive.2 Certainly it would have been easier to say that Congress may delegate other "executive" powers if that is what Pinckney meant by "not Legislative nor Judiciary." Instead, the power of which Madison is speaking suggests a power that we, and the nineteenth century theorists, might call administrative.
Support for this reading of this obscure clause derives first from what may have been its original source-Jefferson's proposal in the early 1780s for the Virginia constitution. There Jefferson argued for a Governor who was to be granted those powers "which are necessary to execute laws (and administer the government) and which are not in their nature either legislative or judiciary," their precise nature being "left to reason."267 Clearly in this reference, Jefferson evinces an understanding of the diverse types of power- executive and administrative-that can be possessed by the executive. This understanding is further supported by the debate in the Convention following Madison's proposal. Immediately after Madison made this proposal, Pinckney rose to suggest that the third clause be struck, not because (as modem constitutionalists would think) there is no such thing as a power simultaneously not legislative not judicial and not executive, but because, in his words (as reported by Madison): "they were unnecessary, the object of them being included in the 'power to carry into effect the national laws.'"268 The President did not need a special power to execute the powers not legislative and not judicial, since this power was implied by the power to "carry into effect" the nation's laws.
In both Randolph's and Madison's view, the President had the power to execute the laws, as well as an implied power to define how it was that the laws would be "carried into effect." But what was the scope of this implied power? Members of the convention were quick to express their own concern about questions of scope. By the time the convention completed the draft of these resolutions, at least two members had reconsid-
ered the extent of the grant of this "power." On July 20, 1787, Dr. McClurg of Virginia asked the convention
whether it would not be necessary, before a Committee for detailing the Constitution should be appointed, to determine on
the means by which the Executive is to carry the laws into effect,
and to resist combinations [against] them. Is he to have a military force for the purpose, or to have the command of the Militia, the only existing force that can be applied to that use? As
the Resolutions now Stand the Committee will have no determipoint.2 James Wilson agreed that something more should be specified, and Rufus King assured the convention that the Committee on Detail would address the matter.270 Just about a week later, the Committee of the Whole finally approved the "resolution respecting the national executive,"27 ' and on July 26, 1787, the proceedings of the Committee of the Whole were sent to the Committee on Detail.
The document that emerged from that Committee reveals the extent to which the drafters had addressed McClurg's question. Two critical changes had been made. First, as the Committee on Detail returned the plan, the language at issue-the power "to carry into execution"-was removed from the President's list of powers. Therefore (under the reasoning of Pinckney) he no longer had an implied power to say how to carry into execution the laws. Instead, the President now had the duty to "take Care that the laws be faithfully executed." Second, at the same time, Article I gave Congress a power that closely tracked the power the
lost.27 Necessary and Proper Clause, "[t]o make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer
After the Committee on Detail was finished, then, the Constitution granted Congress the power to define just how these powers, which, Pinckney argued,2 included powers that we would call administrative, were to be executed. And the Constitution instructed the President to take care that he follow Congress' instructions. In this way the convention chose between a relatively broad grant of executive power to the President to select the means of executing federal law, and a relatively
269. Id. at 389-90.
narrow imposition of duty-simply to follow and to execute the laws
Through the Necessary and Proper Clause, then, it is Congress that is given the power to define the means to carry into effect any power of the federal government. The only limit on this power is the requirement that Congress act through laws and that those laws be "necessary and proper." Subject to those constraints, and linked to the Take Care Clause as sketched above, we suggest that it is Congress that is vested with the power to determine how to structure the administration and how it is to function. In at least this respect, the domain of implied executive power is Congress', not the President's.
It is time to conclude. The history of the Take Care Clause, and the text of the Necessary and Proper Clause, further support the claim that the framers viewed executive power less uniformly than the modem unitarians now view it. This section has shown that the framers toyed with a clause that appears to imagine Congress delegating something other than executive power that they at first seemed to decide in favor of a structure
President has the power to divest state officers of powers granted them by Congress if such officers disobeyed the President's direction. No one has suggested the President has such power, and we know of no example of any President purporting to exercise it.
E. The Original Executive Power: Puzzles Revisited
The modem unitarian imagines one category of executive functions. It says that the President must have plenary power to direct and control the administration of the laws. The nineteenth century view imagines two categories of executive functions-one executive, one administrativeonly one of which the President has a constitutional right to direct and control. If we had to choose between these two models, which makes more sense of the historical data? Which better solves the three puzzles of the early period?
1. Puzzle 1: Prosecution. - As illustrated above, modem unitarians cannot easily explain the actual practice of prosecution at the founding.28 In particular, they cannot explain how, in some cases, effective control over prosecution was taken away from the President. Can the nineteenth century conception explain the original practice any more completely?
The history is fully consistent with the nineteenth century theorists' conception. Prosecution is not among the list of enumerated executive powers indeed, at the framing the-e was a long history of nongovernmental prosecution, and this history would have made it odd to conceive of the powers as exclusively the government's at all. According to the nineteenth century conception, prosecution is a power incidental to Congress', and Congress may vest such authority wherever "proper."
Most of the time, it may be proper to vest it with the executivethough whether it is proper turns on a range of factors that are particular to the type of prosecution at hand. For example, in conditions like those of the founding, it made little sense to vest in the President centralized control over district attorneys, given their distance from the center, and it would be fully understandable that they would function relatively independently of the President. Under other conditions, it may be constitutionally required that Congress vest control over prosecution in the executive. But even in these conditions sometimes (say, prosecution of high-level executive officials), it may be proper to vest such power in someone other than the President-or at least, it is within the power of Congress to decide so. The decision whether or not to vest control in the President turns on its propriety, and under the nineteenth century picture of the executive branch, the factors that determine whether a vesting is proper are more than the single factor of unitariness.
2. Puzzle 2: Departments. - It is also relatively easy to see how the nineteenth century model can account for the multiplicity in the organizational forms of executive departments. Where the power exercised by the department relates to an executive power (derived from Article II)foreign affairs, war, and navy-the early Congresses properly left much of the determination of the department's structure and direction to the President. Where the power exercised by the department derives from an administrative power (stemming from Article I)-treasury and post office-the early Congresses properly took pains to control these departments, treating them as the creation of Congress, rather than the creation of the
In this diversity, then, the early Congresses reveal again the wide range of values that affect whether a particular structure should be considered proper. In answering the question, is this a proper structure, they considered not only the value of unitariness, but also the values of disinterestedness, efficiency, accountability, and others. Applying the nineteenth century vision as mechanically as possible to some modern developments,2 we think that Congress could not constitutionally make the Department of Defense into an independent agency but it could allow at least a degree of independence for such modem institutions as the National Labor Relations Board and the Federal Communications Commission.
Finally, the nineteenth century view can explain a relatively minor but puzzling inconsistency in denomination. For both the Constitution and its framers seem to conceive of at least two types of "departments"executive and not. Indeed, when first establishing the departments, Congress spoke of the Executive Departments of War and Foreign Affairs,
and administrative power, they argue that Article II is quite clear about the locus of executive power (in a President) and that Article II is not so clear about the locus of administrative power. And under this view-fueled by the progressive enthusiasm for administrative expertise-because the framers believed that the Constitution was not so clear about the locus of such power, the contours of administrative power would be left largely to Congress. It would follow that for the framers, any claim by the executive of inherent authority to direct the administration is quite fantastic-for the framers were quite clear (as the nineteenth century constitutionalist views the world) that Congress retained the power to regulate presidential control over administrative officials.294
But as we suggested at the start, the view of the nineteenth century constitutional theorists is misleading in one important respect, and it is time now to distance our ultimate view about the framers' design from the filter of the nineteenth century view. The modem unitarian argues that there is one clear category of executive power. To the extent that the nineteenth century constitutional theorists argued that there is more than one type of executive function, that argument seems certainly correct. But to the extent that the nineteenth century constitutional theorists argued that rather than one, there were just two clear categories of executive power-executive and administrative-the argument is misleading. While there is good evidence to suggest that the framers thought the structure of executive power far more complex than the single dimension offered by the modem unitarians, there is no good evidence to suggest that the framers thought the structure of executive power was as simple as the nineteenth century constitutional theorists believed. The mistake, that is, is notjust in seeing one category where there were two the mistake is also in seeing clear categories and defining judgments when the framers offered no such
Rather than constitutionalizing everything, from the top level governmental functions down through the bottom level administrative details, the framers thought it enough to draw a few clear lines and leave the balance to Congress. They thought it enough not only because they thought flexibility a virtue, but also because they had no clear models of separation to follow. Their (from our perspective) confusion, their mixing of functions at the administrative level, their failure to remark what to our eyes appears plainly wrong-headed conflations-all are evidence that the lines between the branches had not yet been drawn, either in the framers' heads, or in the text of their document. The framers were politicians-pragmatic even if principled-and their first task was rescuing a revolution from disaster. They did not have a sufficiently developed conception of the distribution of national powers to allow for clear and authoritative legal judgments about who would direct what we now call administration. On these points, their understanding was far murkier.
One example makes clear the framers' (from a modem perspective) confusion and mixture of functions at the administrative level. In March
Act,"2 vide relief to veterans from the Revolutionary War. The details of this statute are quite telling for one who pictures the framers either as the modem unitarians do or as the nineteenth century constitutional theorists did.298 ister this program. Indeed, given the constraints of geography, and the absence of any substantial federal presence throughout the nation, such a bureaucracy would have been exceptionally expensive.2 Instead, circuit courts were to receive and process applications, and submit to the Secretary of War a list of pensioners, which the Secretary of War could change if he suspected "imposition or mistake."3 In a wholly pragmatic sense, this division of labor made perfect sense-circuit courts could
most efficiently find the facts about whether an allegedly injured veteran was in fact injured, and the Secretary of War could most efficiently determine whether the claimant was in fact a veteran.
To modem separation of powers sensibilities, the statute is a constitutional howler. Under the statute, not only were Article III courts tethered with "administrative" tasks, but their work was subject to the review of the secretary of an executive department. So thought at least five of the six Supreme Court justices, who expressed their concerns-their advisory opinions, that is-to President Washington in a collection of letters.3 But when did the Invalid Pensions Act become a constitutional howler? In an age when the Court has invalidated twenty-five acts of Congress in the past twenty years,3 we are quick to accept the judgment that Congress has gone wrong constitutionally. But this is the second Congress, not the one hundred and second. While five of the six justices may have thought the statute unconstitutional, at least forty of the sixty bate in Congress is there a suggestion of this constitutional concern. Nor did President Washington indicate that there was anything problematic about the statute as written.
What the Invalid Pensions Act reveals, we think, is not a Congress blind to the constraints of the Constitution, but a Congress legislating before the contours of what is constitutional had been carved out. What the statute shows, with its mix of administrative courts and executive review, is a pragmatic approach to the problems of executive administration. What unified this peculiar structure was a multiplicity of checks and balances, not a singularity of organizational design.30 The second Congress did not see its Act as a constitutional howler, because as the Constitution was framed, it was not a constitutional howler. Why it became so, and what influences that change reveals, are important and interesting questions, but questions unrelated to the question framed by the familiar version of originalist methodology.
The conventional character of the Invalid Pensions Act is even further confirmed when we compare it with other court structures existing at the time. Courts at the founding were administrators in just the sense
we think they cannot be any more they handled matters that today would be within the executive branch, not primarily because of some principled reason why such matters should be handled by courts, but more because of the administrative ease in relying upon the existing court structures to administer state programs.3
Nor were modem administrative/judiciary borders the only borders that the framing generation crossed. We have already mentioned the lack of any centralized control of the prosecutorial power in the original republic.3 This decentralized structure led Jefferson, when attempting to stop prosecutions under the Alien and Sedition Acts, to ask his Postmaster General to instruct the local district attorney (the equivalent of today's U.S. Attorney) to cease prosecution. Obviously Jefferson here trades on more than mere authority when he requests the district attorney to stop prosecution,3 and we should take this small clue about the nature of executive authority as a reason to look at a structure of authority without our modem bureaucratic categorical divisions.
A fair picture of the founding generation, then, is not one of clearcut categories or sharply articulated boundaries between branches cutting from the top to bottom. It is instead a picture of a web of interactions, many political, many more unbureaucratic, that through the mixture of influence and authority yielded a government that, it was hoped, would work. Our structures, our intuitions, our categories, our law-all of these are ours, the product of two hundred years of theory and practice. The originalist must work to separate this intermediation from the picture of the founders he sketches.
Adding these final twists to the picture we outline is important, if only to force the critical point that the modem unitarian must face. As suggested at the start, the originalist requires either a clear limit in the constitutional text or a clear understanding in the enacting context
We have completed the final stage in our effort to dislodge the modem conception of the executive. We understand better what the framers were constitutionalizing if we distinguish executive from administrative functions, ' and view the framers as constitutionalizing only the former we understand still better if we can see the range of functions the framers were pragmatically adjusting, rather than fixed categories of executive and administrative. The framers spoke less categorically, and more pragmatically they gave us an executive at once more flexible and less universal than the executive perceived by modem unitarians. G. The Tale of the Bank
So much then about the framers' constitution, and the world within which they authored that text. There is no question that along many dimensions, the framers' world has radically changed, and along with that change, so too have shifted conventional views about the presidency. We all now quite firmly believe that the President retains a strong and inherent authority to direct a wide range of executive and administrative actions, and in the second half of this Article, we address the question of whether one can derive that authority from a faithful interpretation of the Constitution. But let us first complete our description of the original practice of executive power. One final piece of evidence helps reveal the boundaries of this vision it also marks the first successful claim by an executive of a power more expansive than what we claim the founders understood to exist. This is the confrontation between Jackson and the Bank of the United States, and Jackson's insistence that his Secretary of the Treasury remove funds from the Bank contrary to the Secretary's best judgment.
We should be clear about the purpose for which we offer the story that follows. Our aim is not so much to convince about the truth or error of Jackson's conception of the presidency. It is instead to show the first and sharpest conflict between two fundamentally different conceptions of the executive power. For in the debate that follows, we see the end of the presidency as we believe the framers saw it, and the birth of the presidency as we have come to know it.
In brief, the story of the confrontation is this: Jackson and the Bank had suffered a long and unfriendly relationship. Jackson had opposed the Bank on a number of grounds, both political and constitutional. The
Bank too had opposedJackson, perhaps most importantly forJackson, by resisting his reelection in part with bank funds.3 Spurred by the Bank's blatantly political manipulation of the money supply3 in an attempt to defeat his reelection, Jackson, upon reelection, ordered the Secretary of the Treasury to withdraw funds from the Bank. The Secretary's refusal inaugurated the executive's first midnight massacre, as Jackson fired Secretary after Secretary until he found one willing to obey his orders.3 Jackson promoted the first refusing Secretary, McLane, to Secretary of State. A second, Duane, judged that he could not in good faith exercise his authority to remove funds from the bank Jackson summarily fired him. Finally, Jackson appointed Roger Taney (later ChiefJustice Taney), who carried out the President's wish.3
The statute challenged byJackson's action plainly raises the problem of unitariness that we are discussing, for it undertook to vest a discretionary authority in the Secretary of the Treasury. The statute required that the Secretary of the Treasury deposit all funds of the United States in the Bank of the U.S.
in places which the said bank and branches thereof may be established, [and] shall be made in said bank or branches thereof,
unless the Secretary of the Treasury shall at any time otherwise
order and direct in which case, the Secretary of the Treasury
For the modem unitarian, this authority, since discretionary, must lie ultimately within the President's supervision and control.3 This was Jackson's understanding as well. Jackson argued that the President had an inherent authority to exercise the discretion vested in the Secretary of the Treasury by statute, at least through the removal power through his threats and removals, he, in .effect, exercised that discretionary power.318
Jackson's action-described by Clay as "Jackson's Thunderbolt" 9drew immediate and intense sanction by the Senate, which, on March 28, 1834, passed a resolution condemning his actions as contrary to the law and the Constitution.3 The text of this resolution is instructive. After many drafts, the Senate resolved: "That the President, in the late executive proceedings in relation to the public revenue, has assumed upon himself authority and power not conferred by the constitution and laws, denunciations across the nation, as the action of a monarch, wholly without the power of law and ominously foretelling the great power this presidency could display.
At first the debate was not overJackson's power to fire the Secretary of the Treasury. Calhoun and Webster both (at least initially) conceded the President's right of removal, secured by the Constitution, at least as interpreted by the Decision of Only later did their position shift to the view that the Decision of 1789 was in error, and that the President did not have a constitutionally vested power of removal.3 Instead, the
Our immediate ancestors, profiting by the lessons on civil liberty which had been taught in the country from which we sprung, endeavored to encircle around the public purse, in the hands of Congress, every possible security against the intrusion of the Executive. With this view, Congress alone is invested, by the constitution, with the power to lay and collect the taxes. When collected, not a cent is to be drawn from the public treasury but in virtue of an act of Congress. And among the first acts of this Government was the passage of a law establishing the Treasury department, for the safe keeping and the legal and regular disbursement of the money so collected. By that act a secretary of the treasury is placed at the head of the Department and varying in this respect from all the other Departments, he is to report, not to the President, but directly to Congress, and is liable to be called to give information in person before Congress. It is impossible to examine dispassionately that act, without coming to the conclusion that he is emphatically the agent of Congress, in performing the duties assigned by the constitution to Congress. The act further provides that a Treasurer shall be appointed to receive and keep the public money and none can be drawn from his custody but under the authority of a law, and in virtue of a warrant drawn by the Secretary of the Treasury, countersigned by the Comptroller, and recorded by the Register. Only when such a warrant is presented can the treasurer lawfully pay one dollar from the public purse. Why was the concurrence of these four officers required in disbursements of the public money? Was it not for greater security? Was it not intended that each, exercising a separate and independent will, should be a check upon every other? Was it not the purpose of the law to consider each of these four officers, acting in his proper sphere, not as a mere automaton, but as an intellectual, intelligent and responsible person, bound to observe the law, and to stop the warrant, or stop the money, if the authority of the law were wanting? The design of the law was then clear-to keep separate "sword and purse" the President was not to have control over the funds save through the check of his (relatively) independent Secretary of the Treasury.
Independence notwithstanding, Jackson defeated this design, resting his claim on an inherent power of superintendence, all following from the now familiar claim to the power of removal. Again, we can hear Jackson's argument in Clay's rebuttal:
But [even] if the power of dismissal was as incontestable as it is
justly controvertible, we utterly deny the consequence deduced
from it. The argument is that the President has, by implication,
By Clay's time, the presidency and the nation had changed. And yet Clay could still point backwards to a shared understanding of the nature of the original presidency, one perhaps eclipsed by the times, but nonetheless still alive in the memory of the nation. From the meek and timorous institution presided over by Washington, it had become, in Clay's mind at least, a monster.
How is it with the President? Is he powerless? He is felt
from one extremity to the other of this vast republic. By means
of principles which he has introduced and innovations which he
has made in our institutions, alas! but too much countenanced
by Congress and a confiding people, he exercises uncontrolled
the power of the State. In one hand he holds the purse, and in
the other brandishes the sword of the country. Myriads of dependents and partisans, scattered over the land, are ever ready
to sing hosannas to him and to laud to the skies whatever he
does. He has swept over the Government, during the last eight
years, like a tropical tornado. Every department exhibits traces
of the ravages of the storm.
Whatever the presidency had become by the end of Jackson's reign, it was a different presidency from that of the founders. As we have tried to argue, we often miss this crucial fact, in part because we have been raised on the image of the presidency Clay and Webster so passionately feared.
It has been our aim to suggest the framers used more than one lens to view the executive where we have just one that they were concerned not just with allocating what they understood to be executive power, but also with a class of authorities that we might call roughly administrative
power and that even if they had a single model for the regulation of those powers called executive, they had no single model for the allocation of those powers we would call administrative. Instead, the framers had a pragmatic and not fully worked-out understanding of the appropriate connections of control and review, leading them to adopt different structures for different problems.
What this pragmatism created was a relatively simple structure of power. Where the President claimed power by virtue of executive power granted by the Constitution, his discretion in executing that power was subject to the review of none save the people. Where members of his administration claimed administrative power by virtue of an act executing Congress' power, then their power, and the President's power to control them, was as Congress defined it. This is not a claim that the President may be separated from the superintendence of all federal law altogether. Indeed, a reasonable understanding of Congress' actions would be to presume control in the President where Congress does not otherwise specify. But there is no evidence that the framers imagined that such control was constitutionally compelled-no evidence that they saw an implicit limitation on the power of Congress to structure administration as they saw fit. One can infer no such implicit limitation on the democratic process from the multitude of views that populated the founding. Even if some members of the founding generation had a firm conception of a strongly unitary executive, there is insufficient evidence that the framers and ratifiers meant this conception to become part
The founding generation did not believe that all those who engage in what we now think to be "executive" activities must operate under the control of the President. But is this decisive for current constitutional law? Does history entail the conclusion that Congress has free rein to allocate administrative tasks to people immune from presidential supervision? For some originalists,3 the answer must be yes. The framers did not constitutionalize anything like the single value of unitariness it follows (from one version of originalism) that neither can we.
But is there an account of constitutional fidelity that might yield a contrary answer?33 Is there an account of fidelity that can produce a strongly unitary executive even if the framers did not accept that view? We believe that such an argument can be made. Our purpose here is to outline its features, without making a judgment on whether it might ultimately be made persuasive. To introduce the argument in advance: The central point is that the national government has changed dramatically since the founding, and so too has the national presidency. In light of these changes, mechanical application of the founding understandingto allow independent officials to engage in tasks that the framers never
foresaw-may well disserve the very commitments that underlay the founding itself. Under current circumstances, a strongly unitary executive is the best way of keeping faith with the most fundamental goals of the original scheme.
As noted, it is not our aim to defend fully this view against possible alternatives. Our goal is more modestly to sketch the argument so as to give a sense of its familiarity and coherence. The argument proceeds in several steps. We begin with general remarks on interpretation across changing circumstances. In the next section, we apply these ideas to the broad area of presidential power. In Part IV, we discuss the application of the method to a number of currently contested Article II issues. A. Method
Within the American constitutional tradition, most practices of constitutional interpretation can be described as practices of fidelity-practices in which the commitments of the framers have a prominent place in finding and preserving constitutional meaning.33 "Originalism" is the paradigm within this tradition. For the originalist, the commitments of the framers are the exclusive source of constitutional authority, unless subsequently changed by constitutional amendment.
Within this tradition of interpretive fidelity, everyone must confront what we can think of as the fundamental problem for constitutional interpretation, namely how a constitutional text is to be read over time. All methods of fidelity, that is, must ask how changes over time should affect understandings of the framers' commitments-what kinds of changes will count, and how they will be treated. The point may seem obscure in the abstract, but it emerges naturally from familiar practices, as we will see shortly.
Let us distinguish between two very different responses to the problem of reading over time. Some methods of fidelity track or follow changes in the constitutional text only (that is, constitutional amendments) others track or attend to nontextual changes as well (that is, changes in the world that affect the meaning of the text's application). Said differently, some methods focus on the foreground of the constitutional meaning only (the text), and some focus on both the foreground and background of constitutional meaning (text and context). So, for example, while all originalists track changes in the constitutional text when finding constitutional meaning, some originalists will also examine changes in the constitutional context that could affect meaning.3
Other originalists will noLan Instead, these latter originalists simply locate a meaning that the document originally had, and apply that meaning "in the same way" today, without regard to how the context today may have
Let us now consider those who (1) are committed to interpretive fidelity and (2) follow or track the changes in both the foreground text and background context. For such people, it follows that particular applications of a constitutional text may change over time as the context of application changes-all consistent with the command of fidelity. Brown v. Board of Education is a famous example.3 In Brown, the Court changed the application of the Equal Protection Clause (as compared with Pessy v. Frguson ) in large part because of a change in the social context since Pessy.344 Perhaps it could be said that in Pessy's context, state-run schools were so insignificant as to make state-imposed segregation constitutionally legitimate under the Equal Protection Clause. In the context of Brown, however, state-run schools were of central importance, and this change was highly relevant to interpretation. Public schools had assumed an entirely different role. This change required a different interpretation of whether school segregation violated the commitment to equal protection of the laws. No longer could the harm of segregationto the underlying constitutional principle-be legitimately ignored, even, or perhaps especially, if our concern was to respect the original constitutional principles.3
Or perhaps it was possible to think that at the time of PMessy, the view that segregation stigmatized blacks was a product not of the law of segregation, but of the "construction" placed on it by black people. This understanding of the facts, explicit in Pessy itself,3 was not sustainable by the time of Brown.
[The social] understanding of the facts upon which a constitutional ruling was sought in 1954 was thus fundamentally different from the basis claimed for the decision in 1896.... The Pessy Court's explanation for its decision was so clearly at odds with the facts apparent to the Court in 1954 that the decision to reexamine Plessy was on this ground alone not only justified but In other words, the application of the Equal Protection Clause changed because understandings of the background facts had changed.
For convenience, we will use the term "translation"-understood as a metaphor-to describe methods of fidelity that pay attention to, and try to account for or track changes in context If an argument of constitutional fidelity points to a change in the context of application to justify a changed application of a constitutional text, then we will consider that method a practice of translation. Whether the translator may account for any change in context, or whether other institutional values constrain the types of changes the translator may notice, are questions beyond the scope of this Article.3 Of course, some examples of translation are more energetic and controversial than others some purported translations are clear abuses of interpretive authority. Moreover, the very practice of translation may create risks to the project of fidelity (though we think that the failure to translate creates at least equivalent risks). It is enough for our purposes simply to focus on the distinction between methods that track changes in the background of interpretation (methods of translation) and methods that do not (some forms of originalism).
In some ways the term "translation" may appear exotic. But as we have said, the method is quite conventional. Consider two more examples to help make the point-both of them (not incidentally) involving the post-New Deal transformation of the constitutional framework.3
The first is a mildly stylized history of the Commerce Clause, granting to Congress the power to "regulate Commerce... among the several States."3 As originally understood, the clause gave to Congress a power
stead, the framers understood it only to allow Congress to regulate interstate commerce, and most commerce was unmistakably (conceived to be) intrastate, and thought rarely to affect the national economy. In light of the nature of the nineteenth century economy (and economics), the category of "Commerce .. .among the several States" could be understood to be relatively narrow, at least by modem standards. Hence the founders' understanding of the scope of the Commerce Clause was quite limited.
But by the early twentieth century, much had changed in the context of the Constitution's application, though of course not in the text. Dramatic changes in communications, transportation, and technology had produced a highly integrated national economy. Intrastate commerce commonly had significant interstate effects.35 Commerce Clause doctrine therefore faced a conceptual crisis: Should the Court interpret the clause in accordance with the framers' conception of its narrow scope, or should the Court interpret it in a way that is consistent with the text, that seems to fit with the framers' basic commitments, but also takes account of new conditions that created a quite different economy?
The Court eventually settled on the latter approach, in a way similar to the Court's own description of what happened between Plessy and Brown.355 Did fidelity require the Supreme Court to understand the twentieth century Commerce Clause to extend no further than the framers believed in the eighteenth? We do not believe so. In light of the changes in circumstances, fidelity to the original design properly allowed an extended commerce power, translated into the new context. The text of the clause reaches all interstate commerce, and that category had greatly enlarged by the twentieth century. The original purpose was to
ensure that the national government could reach all such commerce. In these circumstances, fidelity to the original design entitled the Court to understand the clause quite differently from the way the framing generation had understood it.
The post-New Deal understanding of the Commerce Clause is an example of a changed reading of a constitutional text in light of a changed context. But still this change is quite moderate (at least formally), for the new reading is quite consistent with the original text. (This is the nature of the argument we shall make with respect to presidential ) One can see, that is, how "commerce among the several States" could touch most or perhaps even all of the full range of commerce regulable under the modem Court's conception of the Commerce Clause.
Consider, however, a second example in which the translated reading is not consistent with the original text-an example generally overlooked but quite important: The First Amendment says "Congress" shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech. For a textualist, and for some originalists, it would seem clear that the executive branch, through regulations, may abridge rights of free expression without offense to the First Amendment. The text does not speak of "the executive." Nor does it refer to the judiciary-notwithstanding the curiosity that in New York Times v. Sullivan, no one complained of this fact.359 How is it that the modem Court-without even a mention of this textual inconsistencycan apply the proscriptions of the First Amendment to all government, whatever its form?3 How is it that this textually implausible application is taken to be entirely uncontroversial?
One argument that might justify the changed reading of the text of the First Amendment-again, a reading plainly inconsistent with the text-might go something like this: The limitation of the First Amendment to Congress was based on a set of distinctive assumptions about the background-most important, the assumption that de facto and de jure lawmaking power would be exercised primarily or perhaps even exclusively by Congress. In the context of the founding, the executive branch posed little or no threat to free speech because its regulatory authority was sharply limited. Any executive (or administrative) intrusions on expression would occur pursuant to a law that plainly called for such intrusions.
should now be deemed executive that was originally not so categorized, and precisely because of changed conditions and understandings.
With respect to this second question (whether a limitation on executive power is "necessary and proper"), the problem is more complex. What are the values against which Congress must test the administrative structures it establishes to determine whether they are "proper"? Should Congress look only to the values of the framers when testing a particular executive structure? Can or must Congress look to contemporary institutions and even contemporary values when testing a particular executive structure? And what is the role of reviewing courts in assessing a claim that a particular structure is necessary and proper?
To answer all these questions fully would be to enter debates far beyond the scope of this Article. For our purposes here, a few observations will suffice. First, like any number of other clauses in the Constitutionthe Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause,36 the Due Process Clause, the Equal Protection Clause3 3-both the Vesting Clause and the Necessary and Proper Clause have a degree of openendedness, at least on their face. We might understand the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause, for example, to require the interpreter to look at least in part to a current society's "standards of decency" to determine the scope of the clause's reach. Of course, an interpreter could simply look to the world that the framers saw when filling in the meaning that such clauses leave open. One could, that is, look to what was considered cruel and unusual at the framing,368 or to the process then considered due, or to the government structures then considered proper, and test a particular punishment, or procedure, or government structure against those standards.
It is clear, however, that many believe that the Constitution demands something else of a constitutional interpreter. Just as the interpreter who aims to assure that the meaning of the Constitution is preserved3 must locate those punishments now to be treated as "cruel and unusual," so
too must an interpreter who aims to assure the meaning of the Constitution is preserved locate those governmental structures permissibly thought proper now, and notjust those permissibly thought proper at the founding. This is so at the very least because of dramatically changed circumstances since the period in which the framers wrote. In other words, the interpreter should locate the equivalent sanction that the requirement of propriety compels now, by locating the equivalent demands of propriety then.
All this is very abstract we will come to particulars shortly. But first a proviso. What we have said emphatically does not mean that the constitutional words are simply bottles into which any generation simply pours its own values. The interpreter's role is to take account of changing circumstances insofar as these bear on the question how best the framers' commitments are to be implemented. As we understand it, the interpreter is bound by the duty of fidelity the Constitution should not be made to take on values that are not fairly traceable to founding commitments. In the context at hand, a new understanding of the word "executive" or "proper," if different in application from the framers' application, must be based on a claim that that understanding manifests a better means of implementing the framers' commitments in this different world. Applications of the constitutional requirements may change, not because underlying values change, but because our understanding of how best to implement those values changes, making mechanical adherence to old understandings inconsistent with fidelity. C. New Circumstances, Old Commitments
We are concerned with the task of preserving initial constitutional commitments in light of changes in the constitutional context. In what follows, we first outline some relevant initial commitments, and then sketch two types of contextual change that make new applications necessary if these old commitments are to be maintained.
From our focus on what the framers said and did, we can identify a number of values that bear on whether we categorize a particular institution as "executive" (and hence requiring plenary presidential control) and that affect whether a particular limit on presidential control is "proper." Unitariness was unquestionably one such value. As we have seen, the framers rejected a plural executive, and the Decision of 1789 shows that for some decisions, presidential control was indeed required.3 The framers believed that unitariness advanced the interests of coordination, accountability, and efficiency in the execution of the laws. All of these policies argued against a fragmented executive.37 In certain cases, it was critical that the executive be able to act with dispatch
and without dissent.37 To account for those cases, the framers decided that the executive structure should be unitary.
The Vesting Clause of Article II-by placing the executive in one rather than many presidents-embodied this judgment. It is therefore clear that the constitutional text and structure reflect commitments to the unitary virtues of coordination, accountability, and efficiency in government. These commitments account for the unitariness of the presidency and of the executive power across a certain domain.
But it is equally certain that in some cases other values were relevant, and these values may at times constitutionally trump unitariness. On the founding view, efficiency not only justifies unitariness but also occasional legislative departures from that notion it explains something of the relative independence of the district attorneys.3 So too does fear of executive and judicial aggrandizement. We have already noted the complexities in the Decision of 1789, but one lesson of that story was that sometimes the values of independence from the President could rightfully trump the interests of unitariness.3 The independence of adjudicative officers is one such interest. Maintaining congressional control over spending, to take another example, led the framers to reduce executive control over the Treasury, unitarian considerations
From these distinct values we can draw together two that are for our purposes central. First is a value in accountability-where no special reason existed to separate responsibility from the President, the pattern of original executive structures strongly supports the conclusion that the President remains accountable for the actions of government officers. 3T" Of course, the general idea of accountability is embodied not only in the allocation of executive power, but also in the grant of legislative power to Congress, accompanied by a ban on open-ended delegations of legislative power.3 Second is a value of avoiding faction.37 This goal is, of course, at the center of the constitutional structure, and it helps explain the system of checks and balances in
Accountability and avoidance of factionalism, then, are two central values of the framers' original executive. Let us focus now on two sorts of
changes in the current constitutional context that may require accommodation to continue to preserve these two original values.
The first, and least controversial, type of change is in the functions of what we are calling administrative agencies. What agencies do-the nature of their power and the way that power is exercised-is very different now from what it was at the framing period. Lawmaking and law-interpreting authority is now concentrated in an extraordinary array of regulatory agencies. This development has ensured that domestic policymaking is often done, not at the state level or even through Congress, but through large national bureaucracies.3
This massive transformation in the institutional framework of American public law was entirely unanticipated by the framers, and it fundamentally altered the original constitutional design. We do not contend that administration was itself unanticipated, or that at the founding period it was trivial. On the contrary, the original period contained a precursor of the modern administrative state.3 But what we do now is not what was done then. General managerial functions were not within the domain of the national government, much less the President. Much of the organization of the national economy was left to state courts. By contrast, the national government restricted itself largely to national improvements, subsidies, tariffs, patents, tonnage, and the disposal of public sional dominance," it seems clear that the early presidency involved little policymaking role in domestic affairs.
Things are of course different today. To take just one example, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) sets national policy with respect to broadcasting. The FCC is not fully analogous to the administrative institutions at the founding, which never (or almost never 386) had such broad policymaking discretion. The problem is intensified when we recall that the FCC is merely one of a bewildering array of national administrative entities armed with similar power. Perhaps the immunization of such entities from presidential authority would now compromise constitutional commitments, indeed the very commitments that underlay
the decision to create a (kind of) unitary presidency. Consider the original interest in coordination and the extent to which that interest would be compromised by allowing Congress to prevent the President from overseeing environmental or energy policy.3 For this reason, some institutions currently denominated administrative could arguably fall under presidential control as a matter of constitutional compulsion. This is because what administrative institutions do now is, in nature and scope, quite different from what administrative institutions did then-indeed, what such institutions do now is in terms of sheer importance more analogous to what unquestionably executive agencies did at the founding period. We will lay principal stress on this difference, suggesting that the framers' acquiescence in allowing some institutions to be independent of the President does not entail the conclusion that current, very different institutions can be similarly independent.
Second, and more controversially, some values may have become more or less important because we now have a better pragmatic underfunction3 standing of the nature of the values at issue. This is the lesson from
We begin, then, with the values of accountability and avoidance of faction, and we are confronted with changes in the types of function performed by modem regulatory agencies and in the lessons provided by experience with regulation. Consider how these two changes might work together to suggest that the modem executive must be strongly unitary, even if the framers' executive was not.
In the original understanding, officials who exercise the President's enumerated powers must operate under his control. But Congress was originally entitled to immunize some officials from presidential control when it thought proper-in particular, if those officials operated like judges, or if their duties were ministerial, or even if (as in the case of the Comptroller) their actions were discretionary but properly separated from the President's. All this of course operated in the context of a presidency that had an exceptionally narrow range of discretionary policymaking authorities in the domestic arena, at least compared to what we now find routine.394 Most of the functions performed by what we call the federal "executive branch" were originally the province of state legislatures and state courts, which had principal authority over regulation of the economy.3 Now consider the character of the modem presidency. In the aftermath of the New Deal, administrative agencies carry out a wide range of highly discretionary policymaking tasks in the domestic arena. Because of delegations of discretionary authority to administrative agencies, the functions of those who execute the law have dramatically altered.3 Because of this discretionary authority, these agencies are now principal national policymakers-in practice, crucial lawmakers, both through
regulation and interpretation. For example, control of the environment is in large measure a policy decision of the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. Parallel observations might be made for decisions relating to occupational safety and health, consumer products, and energy, including nuclear power. The same is true of implementation decisions. Rather than being ministerial, they involve highly discretionary choices about the content of domestic policy.
To say this is not to say that administrators at the founding had no policymaking power of course they did. But it is hard to dispute the view that there has been a fundamental change in the legal context, involving the scope and nature of policymaking discretion that members of administrative agencies now possess. As the scope of the discretion of administrators has increased, their function has dramatically changed. At the founding, ministerial functions were freed from presidential control, and a wide range of administrative tasks plausibly could have been considered ministerial. Similarly, entities that performed judicial functions, or that engaged in tasks related to the purse, were also free of executive control. But now many administrators exercise what seem uncontroversially to be "political" functions, in the sense that their actions involve a great deal of discretion about policy and principle in implementing federal law. It remains true that many administrators also adjudicate but the very process of adjudication frequently involves the creation of national policy under vague standards, as in, for example, the work of the National Labor Relations Board, the Federal Communications Commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Federal Trade
In short, in a period in which administrators exercise a wide range of discretionary authority, the very meaning of immunizing them from presidential control changes dramatically.40 When fundamental policy decisions are made by administrators, immunizing them from presidential control would have two significant consequences: first, it would segment fundamental policy decisions from direct political accountability and thus the capacity for coordination and democratic control and second, it would subject these institutions to the perverse incentives of factions, by removing the insulating arm of the President, and increasing the opportunity for influence by powerful private groups. Neither of these consequences was favored by the framers. Indeed, both problems were specifically what the framers sought to avoid. For both these reasonsretaining accountability and avoiding factions-an interpreter could reasonably conclude either that it makes sense to understand the term "executive" to include more of the administrative power than the framers would have (specifically) included, or alternatively, that a legislative effort to insulate what is misleadingly labeled "administration" from the President is an improper exercise of legislative authority under the Necessary and Proper Clause.
All this describes how the function of administration has changed, and in ways that raise doubts about whether independence can be given to administrators, consistent with original constitutional commitments. Now consider a second change, one equally important.
In the last two centuries, there have been large-scale shifts in the nature of our understanding of what the administrators' power is. What was striking about the nineteenth century view was the faith in the ability of administrative bodies to stand impartial in some scientific search for the true (rather than best) policy judgment. This was the progressive faith in administrative expertise.4 As Grundstein, a turn of the century theorist, wrote:
Administration... was the realm of the professional, the scientist and the neutral technician, in the affairs of government,...
set.., apart from "Politics" in the sense that while the latter had
"to do with policies or expressions of the state will" administration had to do with their 04
But the post-New Deal view questions the very presupposition of this nineteenth century model-the presupposition that the political can be so sharply separated from the administrative. To be sure, many insist on technocratic rationality-on the importance of expertise in helping people to make informed judgments about the relations between means and ends.405 This is an enduring theme in administrative law. We do not mean to disparage the importance of expertise in providing the foundation for sound public judgments. On the contrary, the absence of expertise, or the distortion of expert judgment through anecdote and interest1991
* group power, is an important obstacle to a well-functioning system of reglaw.40
It was in the nineteenth century that one of the features distinguishing the framers' world from ours changed. Here was the rise of a massive federal bureaucracy but unlike the legal culture today, the culture of the nineteenth century theorists was firm in its faith in the scientific model of administration, so that the theorists did not see constitutional problems with relatively independent agencies. The nineteenth century culture could accommodate the growth in bureaucracy by approving relatively independent agencies while staying within the bounds of fidelity.
But for us, the central fact of the eighteenth century executive (limited national government and limited delegations to federal administrators) has changed, and the central assumption of the nineteenth century solution (neutral, scientific administration) has failed. For now, we not only have a large administrative bureaucracy, but we also have profound skepticism about whether it is possible and desirable for that bureaucracy to operate free from politicaljudgment. EchoingJustice Brandeis (quoting Justice Holmes) in Erie R.R. Co. v. Tompkins,4 we could say that administration "in the sense in which courts speak of it today" can no longer be understood to be neutral, or scientific. Politics is at its core, in the sense that valuejudgments are pervasive and democratic controls on policymaking are indispensable. This raises a central problem for a modem bureaucratic state. The question the interpreter must answer is how best to accommodate this current skepticism-what structure makes most sense of the framers' design, given the change in the extent of the bureaucracy and the change in our understanding of what bureaucracy is.
The answer to this question is not simple. No doubt our understandings are complex and multiple, and no doubt the principal place for registering changes in understanding is the legislature, not the judiciary. Congress' diminished enthusiasm for the independent agency form attests to the possibility that new views about expertise and factionalism can influence legislative judgments, informed by constitutional considerations, about appropriate structures. It would be possible to say that courts should not take account of changed understandings in the process of constitutional interpretation. But it is also possible to think that changes of this kind are relevant to interpretation as well as to lawmaking, as the Court itself recently insisted in describing the shifts from Pessy to Brown and Lochner to West Coast
A structural argument for a unitary executive, then, comes down to this: Where the framers allocated a power that they thought of as political, that power was allocated to people who were themselves politically accountable. This was part of the fundamental commitments to accountexecutive. Perhaps the original design reflected a carefully calibrated set of judgments about institutional authority, with a division between lawmaking and law implementation perhaps the most important changed circumstance was the disturbance of this calibration through the delegation of policymaking authority to the President. On this view, the key founding commitments call for diffusion of power and for checks and
balances between the legislature and the executive. The principal threat of the post-New Deal period lies in the concentration of lawmaking and law-executing power within the presidency. To restore the original balance, courts must now allow a high degree of independence from presidential power, so as to prevent what the framers dreaded most: the concentration of governmental power in a single institution-here, the executive.
This argument also stresses the need to maintain fidelity with the original constitutional design. It too is an argument of translation. But it takes the post-New Deal developments as a reason for more rather than less caution about unitariness in administration. The new circumstances mean that unitariness is a far greater threat than it once was-not that unitariness is a constitutionally compelled solution.4
More particularly, this view fears that the new delegations have threatened to confer excessive power on the executive branch-to create an "imperial presidency." The changed circumstances argue in favor of a narrow reading of "executive power" and for broad congressional authority under the Necessary and Proper Clause, precisely in the interest of maintaining the original commitment to a system of checks and balances.4 On this view, congressional power to insulate administration from presidential control is a necessary quid pro quo for the exercise of discretionary lawmaking power by people other than legislators. The rise of lawmaking by nonlegislative bodies-most especially, the downfall of the nondelegation doctrine 427-makes it especially necessary to insist on congressional prerogatives under the Necessary and Proper Clause, in order to prevent an aggregation of powers in the presidency. In short, Greene urges, the post-New Deal developments mean that modern interpreters should place less value on unitariness than did the framers, because of the need to maintain fidelity with the commitment to the diffusion of
This argument is hardly without force. It shows that there is no algorithm for deciding how to maintain fidelity with past instructions in the face of changed circumstances. But we do not believe that the argument
agencies with often parochial agendas-it appears to operate as an important counterweight to factional influence over administration.
Perhaps Congress can point to the need to limit presidential authority in order to support some isolated efforts to prevent concentration of power in the President. We will offer some examples below. But it seems clear that the changed circumstances do notjustify the immunization of all or most bureaucratic power from the President. This is because it is hard to identify how independent administration is a realistic solution to the constitutional problems caused by changed circumstances. Indeed, independent administration would sacrifice many values the founders saw as essential.
We conclude that if the framers thought that the realm of "executive" power was roughly coextensive with the realm of political choice, it makes sense to say that most of modem administration must fall under the power of the executive and this is so even if the framers had a relatively capacious, but not specifically constitutionalized, conception of what counted as "the administrative." Their conception of administrative (or permissibly nonexecutive) power certainly did not extend to the broad-scale selection of domestic policies for the country as a whole. If we are to translate their structural choices into current conditions, we may conclude that a largely hierarchical executive branch is the best way of keeping faith with the original plan. At least this is so if we are asking whether the President has a degree of removal and supervisory power over people who are authorized to make high-level discretionary decisions about the content of national policy.
In this section, we briefly discuss the implications of our approach on the resolution of current issues involving the relationship between the President and the administration. Our goal is not to reach final conclusions about these questions, many of which would require far more elaborate treatment than we can provide here. We are concerned principally with a general approach, not with specific solutions. We are attempting to see how the argument from translation might bear on contemporary disputes, a surprisingly large number of which are unsettled. A. Constitutionality of Independent Agencies
We have noted that the 1980s saw a surprising rebirth of contestation It is clear from the recent cases that the so-called independent agencies are constitutional-at least in the sense that Congress has the power to provide that some administrative officers do not serve at the pleasure of
This is a historical point but it is supported by a distinctive structural
actors.44
from the President. But after Morrison v. O1son,449 execution of the laws can be split off from the President if the splitting does not prevent the President from performing his "constitutionally appointed This is a lamentably vague standard but it has considerable historical support insofar as it turns on whether the authority in question is within the Article II enumeration. ' For present purposes our conclusion is very modest: At least insofar as we are dealing with prosecutors for whom there is a special claim for independence-as is of course the case for investigation of high-level presidential appointees-some degree of independence is constitutionally acceptable. Other efforts to insulate prosecution would be more difficult, because the prosecutorial power is now intermingled with substantive policymaking. C. What Does "Good Cause" Mean?
In Morrison, the Attorney General was able to discharge the independent counsel for "good cause," and the Court emphasized this point in upholding the (for this reason misnamed?) Independent Counsel Act. But the Court has not said what "good cause" means. The Court has also failed to define "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office"-the ordinary standards for presidential removal of members of the independent commissions. Nor does anything in Humphrey's Executor speak to the particular issue, notwithstanding some casual dicta suggesting a high degree of independence.
This is an extremely important matter. There is no controlling judicial decision on how "independent" the independent agencies and officers can legitimately claim to be. If the statutory words allow for considerable presidential removal (and hence supervisory) power, the notion of independent administration of the laws can be solved simply as a matter of statutory construction. Perhaps Congress has not, in fact, created any truly independent administrators.
We think that it would indeed be possible to interpret the relevant statutes as allowing a large degree of removal and supervisory power to remain in the President. At the very least, the statutory words do not entirely immunize commissioners from the control of the President, but
instead allow him to remove them in certain circumstances. Purely as a textual matter, the words "good cause" and "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office" seem best read to grant the President at least something in the way of supervisory and removal power-allowing him, for example, to discharge, as inefficient or neglectful of duty, those commissioners who show lack of diligence, ignorance, incompetence, or lack of commitment to their legal duties. The statutory words might even allow discharge of commissioners who have frequently or on important occasions acted in ways inconsistent with the President's wishes with respect to what is required by sound policy. Perhaps in some such cases, the statutory basis for discharge has been met.
Of course, the case would be easier if the President could show that the officer's policy judgments amount not just to policy disagreements but to unquestionable inefficiency, neglect, or malfeasance-because they reflect (for example) incompetence or a refusal adequately to consider consequences. But perhaps the President's power could go further. A commissioner of the FTC might well, for example, be thought to neglect her duty if she consistently ignores what the President has said, at least if what the President has said is supported by law or by good policy justifications. At the minimum, we suggest that the statutory words could be taken to allow a degree of substantive supervision by the President.
This result might seem strongly counterintuitive in light of the frequent understanding that independent agencies are entirely immunized from presidential policymaking. But there is a partial precedent for precisely this conclusion: Bowsher v. Synar. In that case, the Court held that Congress could not delegate power to administer the GrammRudman-Hollings Act to the Comptroller General, because-and this is a central claim-the Comptroller was subject to congressional will. In the Court's view, those who execute the law must not be subject to the policymaking authority of the Congress except insofar as legislative instructions are embodied in substantive law. The relevant statute allowed the Congress to discharge the Comptroller for "inefficiency," "abuse of office," "neglect of duty," or "malfeasance." The Court said that these words conferred on Congress "very broad" removal power and would authorize Congress to remove the Comptroller for "any number of actual or perceived transgressions of legislative
The words governing congressional power over the Comptroller General and presidential power over independent agencies are substantially the same. If those words have the same meaning in these admittedly different contexts, the President turns out to have considerable power over the commissioners. If the words have the same meaning, the
President has "very broad" removal power over the commissioners of the independent agencies, with correlative powers of supervision and guidance. It would follow that the independent agencies are in fact subject to a considerable degree of presidential control "for any number of actual or perceived transgressions of presidential will." They are not, as a matter of statute, "independent" of him at all.
This is an adventurous and not unassailable conclusion. As we have noted, it is inconsistent with the general understanding that independent agencies are immune from the policy oversight of the President. It would of course be plausible to suggest that because of the difference in the contexts, the same words should have different meanings. Perhaps a statute restricting congressional power over the Comptroller General should be understood to impose thinner limitations than a statute controlling presidential power over independent commissioners-even if the words are the same. Such a reading would hardly be an implausible reconstruction of legislative goals. Congress unquestionably created many of the independent agencies in a period in which it sought to limit presidential supervisory power.
In view of what we see as the constitutional backdrop, however, courts should probably invoke a "clear statement" principle one that interprets statutes to grant the President broad supervisory power over the commissions. On this approach, courts would allow the President such power unless Congress has expressly stated its will to the contrary. Such an approach would minimize the risks of the independent agency form and promote coordination and accountability in government. It would recognize that many independent agencies perform important policymaking functions, and that the performance of such functions by truly independent agents is plausibly inconsistent with the constitutional structure. At the very least, we would require Congress to speak unamgoals.4 not answer the question of precisely when the President may discharge the commissioners. But they do indicate that he has far more authority than is usually thought.
D. May Congress Create Truly Independent Administrators? Suppose that the independent counsel could never be removed by the Attorney General, even "for good cause." Or suppose that Congress amended the statute governing the FTC so as to provide that the commissioners are independent of both Congress and the President, in the sense that they could be removed by the President only for "high crimes and misdemeanors" or "gross misconduct amounting to criminality." Would such statutes be constitutional?
Nothing in the relevant cases clearly decides these questions. Probably the best answer is that the independent counsel must be removable for "good cause" in order to qualify as an "inferior officer" (and thus be appointable, as the current law provides, by judges465 ). The notion of "inferior" implies the existence of a superior, and a truly independent counsel-that is, one not at all controllable by the Attorney General or the President-would have no superior. We may therefore infer from the Morrison Court's emphasis on the "good cause" provision that some sort of control by the Attorney General (or otherwise through the chain of command headed by the President) is a constitutional imperative for "inferior officers."466 Nothing we have said here is inconsistent with this understanding.
The question is more difficult for the Federal Trade Commissioner. He is not an inferior officer appointed by judges, and indeed he has been appointed through the normal channels, that is, by the President subject to advice and consent by the Senate. The question is therefore one of permissible constraints on the power of removal and supervision. In Bowsher and indeed Myers itself, Congress reserved to itself a role in removal-raising the problem of encroachment 467-and a truly independent commissioner (or head of OSHA, or the EPA, or the Department of Education) would not suffer from that infirmity. On the question whether Congress can create genuinely independent administrators, there is precious little guidance.
Probably the best answer is that as a general rule (and subject to important exceptions), Congress is without constitutional power wholly to immunize administrative officers exercising important discretionary policymaking authority from presidential control. Congress is without power to create a "headless Fourth Branch" of government.4
To be sure, true independence in administration does not create the distinctive dangers of encroachment and aggrandizement but it does threaten the core constitutional commitments to political accountability, expedition in office, and coordinated policymaking. If our argument from changed circumstances is persuasive, Congress cannot properly immunize such officers from the President without violating the Vesting Clause of Article II and thus exceeding its power under the Necessary and Proper Clause.
There are important exceptions to this general proposition. These would include (1) purely adjudicative officers, (2) people who perform ministerial duties, and (3) people who perform merely investigaAll three exceptions have historical roots. But subject to these exceptions, we believe that Congress could not create fully independent officials without offense to the constitutional structure, at least in the absence of special circumstances. This conclusion follows from the constitutional commitments to coordination, accountability, and prevention of factionalism.
Whether current courts should so conclude is another question. It may be that in light of the difficulty of the relevant line-drawing problems, courts should defer to legislative judgments, and the constitutional prohibition should be under-enforced by judges.4 Certainly courts should give Congress the benefit of the doubt in close cases. E. Independence Versus Aggrandizement
Here we arrive at a crucial innovation in the post-1980 cases-the distinction between encroachment and independence. The cleanest line between Bowsher and Chadha on the one hand and Mistretta and Morrison on the other is that in the first two cases Congress attempted to give itself
laws.474
Second, the prohibition on congressional participation operates as a check against open-ended delegations of power. If Congress may not delegate administrative authority to its own agents, it is likely to be clearer in delegating policymaking authority in the first instance. We can understand the Court's hostility to encroachment as having roots in the structural commitment against open-ended delegations of authority, a commitment with clear connections to the goal of providing a kind of accountability. Congress may be content not to set out law in advance if it knows that it may control implementation decisions on a case-by-case basis. Even if the Court will not play a large role in enforcing the nondelegation doctrine directly, mostly for institutional reasons, it can discipline the prospect of delegation through institutionally acceptable devices that impose incentives on Congress to limit the scope of delegation.
Courts have not yet explained the distinction between independence on the one hand and encroachment and aggrandizement on the other. We do not suggest that it should be made as critical as the Supreme Court has made it. But if the foregoing arguments are right, the distinction can be explained by reference to constitutional structure. It makes sense as a means of separating functions and discouraging broad delegation of lawmaking authority.
F. Cross-Branch Appointments
Morrison upholds cross-branch appointments,48 but the Court was properly cautious about the basic idea, which could produce many oddities. Suppose, for example, that Congress said that judges would henceforth appoint the Assistant Secretaries of State and Defense and the Assistant Attorneys General. In such cases, there would have to be an implicit structural limit on Congress' power under the Inferior Officers
Appointment Clause.4 ' Otherwise Congress could wreak havoc with the system of checks and balances.
But when are cross-branch appointments constitutional? Probably the answer lies in the Court's emphasis in Morrison on the absence of an "incongruity" in the vesting of appointment power in another branch.48 We should understand the term to refer to principles of constitutional structure, having to do with the integrity of each branch. Where there is incongruity, the Constitution contains a structural barrier to the placement of appointing authority. It follows that in the cases we have hypothesized, there would be a valid objection based on the system of checks and balances. But this idea casts no doubt on Morrison itself. Indeed, in Morrison presidential appointment might itself have been incongruous in light of the obvious conflict of interest. The congressional judgment was permissible only for this reason.
If this is the relevant concern, cross-branch appointments should be permitted only in the narrowest circumstances. On this view, Morrison was a case about the oddity of allowing the President to be the judge in his own cause. It does not stand for any broader proposition. G. Precisely Which Officers May Be Protected with a Good Cause Standard?
Both Mistretta and Morrison allow certain officials exercising important governmental responsibilities to be immunized from plenary presidential control.48 But it is surely true that some employees must serve at the will of the President. Without offering a detailed analysis of the complexities here, we suggest that there are four distinct categories of cases, and that the categories should be treated differently.
(1) High-level officials who exercise foreign affairs powers and other authorities included in the enumerated authority of the President must be at-will employees. This much follows from adherence to the original understanding. As we have seen, the founding belief in a unitary executive entailed presidential control over a range of important functions.485 Nothing in current circumstances argues in the other direction. Thus (to take the two principal examples) the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense must be at-will employees.
(2) Good cause limitations are permissible for officers who exercise adjudicative or ministerial functions. The original understanding exemplified this judgment,4 and our argument for changed circumstances does not undermine or complicate that analysis.
(3) The same conclusion applies to those few officials who have the sorts of conflicts of interest exemplified by the Federal Reserve Board and independent counsels. This conclusion builds on historical understandings.48 It also fits comfortably with current institutional arrangements.
(4) Domestic officials who do not fall within (1), (2), or (3) may be protected by "good cause" provisions, but for the most part only if those provisions are interpreted so that the relevant officials are controllable through general policy directions of the President. As we have said, a good cause standard should be interpreted to allow for a high degree of presidential supervisory authority.488 At least in most cases involving important policymaking functions, a removal standard would be unconstitutional if it were inconsistent with this idea, that is, if it entirely eliminated presidential control over general policy decisions. It follows that Congress could allow many officials to be protected by a "good cause" provision-not merely the heads of such traditionally "independent" agencies as the FCC, FTC, and SEC, but also those of (for example) the EPA and some of the Cabinet departments as well. But on our understanding, a good cause limitation does not immunize the relevant officials from the policy direction and oversight of the President.48
The framers did not constitutionalize presidential control over all that is now considered "executive" they did not believe that the President must have plenary power over all we now think of as administration. The textual argument to the contrary uses twentieth century understandings to give meaning to eighteenth century terms.
With respect to implementation of the laws, history suggests that the framers understood Congress to have broad power to structure government arrangements as it saw fit. Many prosecutors, state as well as federal, were free from the control of the Attorney General and the President. The first Congress also made the Comptroller free from presidential control, because some of his functions were related to those of Congress and the judiciary. The Postmaster General was similarly immu-
nized from presidential control, because of his distinctive role in spending taxpayer funds. The Opinions Clause would be entirely superfluous if the framers understood the President to have plenary control over administration why would the framers deem it necessary to give the President the power to demand written opinions from people over whom he had full control as a matter of constitutional compulsion? Finally, the text and history of the Necessary and Proper Clause suggest that Congress had considerable authority to structure the executive branch as it chose.
In light of all these considerations, our first goal has been to respond to the persistent notion that if we care about constitutional text and history, independent prosecutors and independent agencies are an embarrassing accommodation to political necessity, or a shameful compromise with expediency. We have shown that the belief in a strongly unitary executive does not derive from the framers themselves.
We reach this conclusion about the framers with reluctance. The belief in a strongly unitary executive has considerable appeal. It is simple and unambiguous. It fits well with important political and constitutional values, including the interests in political accountability, in coordination of the law, and in uniformity in regulation. Believing that these interests have constitutional status, we have ventured an argument on behalf of the strongly unitary executive, one that emphasizes changed circumstances and an interpretive practice concerned with fidelity to original commitments and labeled here as translation.
The crucial development in this regard is the downfall of the nondelegation doctrine and the rise of unforeseen administrative agencies exercising wide-ranging discretionary power over the domestic sphere. In view of this development, it would not be faithful to the original design to permit officers in the executive branch, making discretionary judgments about important domestic issues, to be immunized from presidential control. We have therefore sketched an argument on behalf of a strongly unitary executive, in which the President has a high degree of supervisory and removal authority over most officials entrusted with discretion in the implementation of federal law. We have applied this argument to many areas of current dispute.
We believe that this view is consistent with constitutional commitments and that it maintains fidelity with those commitments in dramatically changed circumstances. But it is important to acknowledge that our argument is based on a distinctive method, one that rejects ahistorical claims about the unitary executive. It follows that the constitutional commitment to unitary execution of the laws should not be rooted in the supposed mandates of history. It should be based instead on the effort to interpret the Constitution faithfully over time, an effort that will inevitably involve a large measure of pragmatic judgment, and historical understanding.
