 Cass R. Sunstein* It is a familiar point that government regulation that is amply justified in principle may go terribly wrong in practice. Minimum wage laws, for example, appear to reduce employment.1 Stringent regulation of new sources of air pollution may aggravate pollution problems, by perpetuating the life of old, especially dirty sources. 2 If government closely monitors the release of information, there may be less information. 3 Unintended consequences of this kind can make regulation futile or even self-defeating. 4 By futile regulation, I mean measures that do not bring about the desired consequences. By self-defeating regulation, I mean measures that actually make things worse from the standpoint of their strongest and most public-spirited advocates. We do not lack examples of both of these phenomena. It is unfortunate but true that current campaign finance laws may well provide more illustrations. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Richard Posner and David Strauss for helpful comments and to Thomas Brown for excellent research assistance. I can venture no exhaustive account here, and I attempt to describe possibilities rather than certainties. But one of my principal goals is to outline some of the harmful but unintended 7 consequences of campaign finance restrictions. I conclude with some brief notes on what strategies might be most likely to avoid the risk of unintended (or intended but unarticulated) bad consequences. My basic claim here is that we might attempt to avoid rigid command-and-control strategies for restricting expenditures, and experiment with more flexible, incentive-based approaches. In this way the regulation of campaign expenditures might be brought in line with recent innovations in regulatory practice generally.8 A. Arguments for Campaign Finance Reform In principle, the case for campaign finance regulation is very strong. We can identify at least three central grounds for such regulation.9 First and most obvious, perhaps, is the need to protect the electoral process from both the appearance and the reality of "quid pro quo" exchanges between contributors and candidates. Such exchanges occur whenever contributors offer dollars in return for political favors. The purchase of votes or of political favors is a form of corruption-a large issue in recent campaigns. 10 Corruption is inconsistent with the view that public officials should act on the basis of the merits of proposals, and not on the basis of their personal economic interest, or even the interest in increasing their 6. See infra text accompanying note 52. 7. Of course some of these effects might be intended. 8. See, e.g., Stephen Breyer, Regulation and Its Reform 156-88 (1982) (describing alternatives to classical regulation); Bruce A. Ackerman & Richard B. Stewart, Reforming Environmental Law: The Democratic Case for Market Incentives, 13 Colum. J. Envtl. L. 171,182-83 (1988) (arguing that a reform of environmental regulation relying on market incentives will improve both meaningful democratic debate and regulatory efficiency). For a popular treatment of regulatory innovation, see David Osborne & Ted Gaebler, Reinventing Government 15, 301-05 (1992) (suggesting that governments employ a market-based regulatory policy which would operate by incentives rather than by commands). 11. Thus in his discussion of the "evil" of parties, Madison lists as his first remedy, 'establishing a political equality among all." James Madison, 14 The Papers of James Madison 197 (Robert A. Rutland et al. eds., 1983). It should be noted, however, that for much of our history the principle of political equality was construed much more narrowly, for the franchise itself was not given to all. B's supporters donate less money.' 4 Moreover, as I have emphasized, a democracy is concerned with much more than numbers and intensities of preferences. By far the most important campaign finance case is of course Buckley v. Valeo,16 which must now be counted as one of the most vilified Supreme Court decisions of the post-World War II era. I offer a brief summary. In Buckley, the Court invalidated all restrictions on campaign expenditures. According to the Court, such restrictions are a kind of First Amendment "taking" from some speakers, perhaps rich ones, for the benefit of others, perhaps poor ones. In the key sentence, the Court declared that "the concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of our society in order to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First Amendment." 17 If the purpose of such laws were to increase political equality, they would be constitutionally unacceptable. The goal of political equality could not be invoked to stop people from spending money on themselves or on candidates of their choice. According to the Court, redistributive arguments for campaign finance laws are therefore impermissible; they amount to a silencing of some for the benefit of others.'8 14. The lack of correlation between ability to attract money and intensity of interests is a special case of the disparity between aggregated willingness to pay and utility. See Ronald Dworkin, Is Wealth a Value?, in Ronald Dworkin, A Matter of Principle 237, 242-46 (1985). The Court did not say that the First Amendment would forbid all campaign finance laws. Limits on campaign contributions are acceptable. Those limits could be justified not on the objectionable ground of political equality (restricting the speech of some to enhance the relative voice of others), but as an entirely legitimate attempt to combat both the appearance and reality of corruption in the form of political favors in return for cash. Government may therefore restrict the amount of money that people can give to candidates for elective office. 19 By contrast, limits on campaign expenditures are indeed impermissible, since those limits are not easily justified by the anti-corruption rationale. The central point is that someone who is spending money on her own campaign, or advertising explicitly on her own for a candidate, is not giving money to a candidate. The reality and appearance of corruption are therefore minimized. 20 According to the Court, limits on expenditures are really an effort to prevent spending by people having or able to attract a substantial amount of money. Since corruption is not at issue, these limits are illegitimate. So much for Buckley, which sets out the broad contours of constitutional law. The decision leaves many uncertainties. The post-Buckley cases reveal that there are enormous complexities in holding the line between regulation of contributions and regulation of expenditures. 22 First, it is not clear that this distinction is relevant, since expenditures on behalf of a candidate can create some of the dangers of contributions. Candidates often know who spends money on their behalf,23 and for this reason, an expenditure may in some contexts give rise to the same reality and appearance of corruption. A limit on expenditures may be necessary to pre absence of education, and inequalities of this kind may also undermine the commitment to political equality. But short of improving education, it is hard to see how regulatory tools might helpfully respond to this kind of inequality. Moreover, people usually know that contributions to PACs will go to certain candidates and not to others, and there is thus some risk of corruption here as well. A limit on contributions to PACs is far less intrusive than a limit on all expenditures; it does leave the individual with the option of making ordinary expenditures on his own. Finally, PACs are often said to have unusual political influence and for this reason to be a distinctive threat to political equality and political deliberation 25 -basic constitutional goals in a Madisonian system. For all these reasons, a limit on contributions to PACs should probably be thought very different from a limit on an expenditure by a candidate on her own behalf, or by an ordinary citizen purchasing an advertisement on her own behalf to help someone she likes. Related issues are of course raised by limits on contributions by PACs. Let us put these various complexities to one side and return to the basic issue of political equality. In rejecting the claim that controls on financial expenditures could be justified as a means of promoting political equality, Buckley seems highly reminiscent of the pre-New Deal period. Indeed Buckley might well be seen as the modern-day analogue of the infamous and discredited case of Lochner v. New York,29 in which the Court invalidated maximum hour laws.30 A principal problem with the pre-New Deal Court was that it treated existing distributions of resources as if they were prepolitical and just, and therefore invalidated democratic efforts at reform.3 1 In a key Lochner era case, Adkins v. Children's Hospital, for example, the Court invalidated minimum wage legislation. 3 2 In so doing, it said: To the extent that the sum fixed by [the minimum wage statute] exceeds the fair value of the services rendered, it amounts to a compulsory exaction from the employer for the support of a partially indigent person, for whose condition there rests upon him no peculiar responsibility, and therefore, in effect, arbitrarily shifts to his shoulders a burden which, if it belongs to anybody, belongs to society as a whole.33 The language of compulsory subsidy-of taking from some for the benefit of others-was central in the Lochner period.3 4 Regulatory adjustment of market arrangements was seen as interference with an otherwise law In its essential premises, Buckley is quite similar to the pre-1937 cases. Recall that the Court announced that "the concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of our society in order to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First Amendment."3 8 It added that the "First Amendment's protection against governmental abridgement of free expression cannot properly be made to depend on a person's financial ability to engage in public discussion."3 9 The Buckley Court therefore saw campaign expenditure limits as a kind of "taking," or compulsory exaction, from some for the benefit of others. The limits were unconstitutional for this very reason. Just as the due process clause once forbade government "interference" with the outcomes of the economic marketplace, so too the First Amendment now bans government "interference" with the political marketplace, with the term "marketplace" understood quite literally. In this way Buckley replicates Lochner. On the view reflected in both Buckley and Lochner, reliance on free markets is government neutrality and government inaction. But in the New Deal period, it became clear that reliance on markets simply entailed another-if in many ways good-regulatory system, made possible and constituted through law. We cannot have a system of market ordering without an elaborate body of law.40 For all their beneficial qualities, markets are legitimately subject to democratic restructuring-at least within certain limits-if the restructuring promises to deliver sufficient benefits. This is a constitutional truism in the post-New Deal era. What is perhaps not sufficiently appreciated, but what is equally true, is that elections based on existing distributions of wealth and entitlements also embody a regulatory system, made possible and constituted through law. Here as elsewhere, law defines property interests; it specifies who owns what, and who may do what with what is owned. The regulatory system that we now have for elections is not obviously neutral or just. On the contrary, it seems to be neither insofar as it permits high levels of political influence to follow from large accumulations of wealth. continuously adjusted legal framework as much as any other." Friedrich A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom 38-39 (1944). Compare Arnartya Sen, Ingredients of Famine Analysis: Availability and Entitlements, in Resources, Values and Development 452, 458 (1984): In fact, in guarding ownership rights against the demands of the hungry, the legal forces uphold entitlements, e.g. in the Bengal famine in 1943 the people who died in front of well-stocked food shops protected by the state were denied food because of lack of legal entitlement and not because of their entitlements being violated. 41. ConsiderJohn Rawls' remarks: The Court fails to recognize the essential point that the fair-value of the political liberties is required for a just political procedure, and that to insure their fairvalue it is necessary to prevent those with greater property and wealth, and the greater skills of organization which accompany them, from controlling the electoral process to their advantage.... On [the Court's] view, democracy is a kind of regulated rivalry between economic classes and interest groups in which the outcome should properly depend on the ability and willingness of each to use its financial resources and skills, admittedly very unequal, to make its desires felt. John Rawis, The Basic Liberties and Their Priority, in Liberty, Equality, and Law: Selected Tanner Lectures on Moral Philosophy 1, 76 (Sterling M. McMurrin ed., 1987); see also Rawls, supra note 5, at 324-31, 356-68; T.M. Scanlon, Jr., Content Regulation Reconsidered, in Democracy and the Mass Media 331, 349-50 (Judith Lichtenberg ed., 1990) ("It seems clearly mistaken to say that freedom of expression never licenses In principle, then, there are good arguments for campaign finance restrictions. Insofar as Buckley rejects political equality as a legitimate constitutional goal, it should be overruled. Indeed, the decision probably ranks among the strongest candidates for overruling of the post-World War II period. But there are real limits on how much we can learn from abstract principles alone. Many of the key questions are insistently ones of policy and fact. Was the system at issue in Buckley well-designed? How might it be improved? What will be the real-world consequences of different plans? Will they fulfill their intended purposes? Will they be selfdefeating? Might they impair democratic processes under the guise of promoting them? My goal here is to offer a brief catalogue of ways in which campaign finance legislation may prove unhelpful or counterproductive. My particular interest lies in the possibility that campaign finance legislation may have perverse or unintended consequences. The catalogue bears directly on a number of proposals now receiving attention in Congress and in the executive branch. Of course it would be necessary to look at the details in order to make a final assessment. I am describing possibilities, not certainties, and a good deal of empirical work would be necessary to come to terms with any of them. 1. Campaign Finance Limits May Entrench Incumbents. - Operating under the rubric of democratic equality, campaign finance measures may make it hard for challengers to overcome the effects of incumbency. The problem is all the more severe in a period in which it is extremely difficult for challengers to unseat incumbents. Consider the following tables: government to restrict the speech of some in order to allow others a better chance to be heard."). Year Retired re-election primaries Total reelected Re-elected as percentage of those seeking re-election Retired The risk of incumbent self-dealing becomes even more troublesome in light of the fact that dissidents or challengers may be able to overcome the advantages of incumbency only by amassing enormous sums of money, either from their own pockets or from numerous or wealthy supporters.4" Consider in this regard the candidacy of Ross Perot. The Perot campaign raises many questions, but it is at least notable that large sums of money proved an indispensable mechanism for enabling an outsider to challenge the mainstream candidates. One lesson seems clear. Campaign finance limits threaten to eliminate one of the few means by which incumbents can be seriously challenged. Whether campaign finance limits in general do entrench incumbents is an empirical question. There is some evidence to the contrary. Usually the largest amounts are spent by incumbents themselves; usually incumbents have an advantage in accumulating enormous sums, often from people who think that they have something to gain from a financial relationship with an officeholder. 48 In these circumstances, one of the particular problems for challengers is that they face special financial barriers by virtue of the ability of incumbents to raise large sums of money. Probably the fairest generalization is that campaign finance limits in general do not entrench incumbents, but that there are important individual cases in which such limits prevent challengers from mounting serious efforts. In any case, any campaign finance reforms should be designed so as to promote more electoral competition. on o ol to to or to o in m cc co to i to o o co m iqc mco r m cn The post-Buckley rise of PACs has a general implication. If individual contributions are controlled while PACs face little or no effective regulation, there could be a large shift of resources in the direction of PACs. Of course a combination of PAC limits and individual contribution limits could counteract this problem. But limits of this kind create difficulties of their own. 52 3. Limits on "Hard Money"Encourage a Shift to "Soft Money." In the 1980s, the tightening of individual contribution limits-"hard money"helped increase the amount of "soft money,"5 3 consisting of gifts to political parties. It should not be surprising to see that in recent years there has been an enormous increase in fund-raising by political parties, which dispense contributions to various candidates. In 1980, the two parties raised and spent about $19 million; in 1984, the amount rose to $19.6 million; in 1988, it increased to $45 million. 54 Consider the following table: 52. See infra notes 64-65 and accompanying text. 53. Federal law exempts certain state and local activities-like voter registration and grass roots campaign materials-from regulation. Funds for these activities are subject only to state law, which often permits corporate and labor union political contributions. See Alexander, supra note 10, at 66-67. c o o m ow l cl m In some ways the shift from hard to soft money has been a salutary development. It is more difficult for soft money contributors to target particular beneficiaries, and perhaps this reduces the risk of the quid pro quo donation. Reasonable people could believe that soft money poses lower risks to the integrity of the political process while also exemplifying a legitimate form of freedom of speech and association. But the substitution, if it occurs, means that any contribution limits are easily evaded. Candidates know, moreover, the identity of the large contributors to the party, and for this reason soft money can produce risks of corruption as well. 56. Such measures are called for in the bills referred to supra notes 45-46. 57. Of course, some of these problems might be mitigated by a combination of limits on PACs and individual contributions. 6. Limits on PACs May Increase Secret Gifts. - Many current interest groups appear unconcerned about PAC limits, even though their interests would appear to be jeopardized by the proposed limits. 63 Perhaps it will be easy for them to evade any such limits, especially by offering "soft money" and also by assembling large amounts as a result of contributions from unidentifiable sources. We lack detailed evidence on this issue, but there is reason to think that the concern is legitimate. It is possible that limits on PACs will make it harder to identify sources of money without materially decreasing special interest funding. The current proposals do not respond to this risk. 59. See Tim Curran, Campaign Finance Reform Bill Besieged by Four Separate contributions could drastically reduce campaign activity). What I have said thus far suggests considerable reason for caution about campaign finance proposals. It also suggests that those who design such proposals should be attentive to the risks of futile or self-defeating reform. I do not attempt here to describe a fully adequate regulatory system. But I will outline two possibilities that appear especially promising. Both of them respond to the largely unfortunate American experience with command-and-control regulation in the last generation. Such regulation-consisting of rigid mandates and flat bans-is peculiarly likely to be futile or self-defeating. 66 Mandates and bans invite efforts at circumvention. Because of their rigidity, they tend to have unintended adverse consequences; creative members of regulated classes are likely to come up with substitutes posing equal or greater risks.6 7 To say this is not to say that mandates and bans are necessarily inferior to alternatives. But it is to say that we ought to explore approaches that make self-interested adaptation less likely. In principle, there are strong arguments for campaign finance limits, especially if these are taken as part of a general effort to renew the old aspiration of deliberative democracy. In some respects, the Supreme Court's decision in Buckley is the modem analogue to Lochner v. New York, offering an adventurous interpretation of the Constitution so as to invalidate a redistributive measure having and deserving broad democratic support. The special problem with Buckley is that it permits economic inequalities to be translated into political inequalities, and this is hardly a goal of the constitutional structure. 74 Properly designed campaign finance measures ought to be seen as fully compatible with the system of free expression, insofar as those measures promote the goal of ensuring a deliberative democracy among political (though not economic) equals. designed with high levels of aggregate speech in mind. 75. The point suggests the need for public and private monitoring mechanisms, so as to overcome the predictable problems of implementation.