 Copyright © 1995 by California Law Review, Inc. Cass R. Sunstein V. Against Rules, I: Is the Rule of Law Too Conservative or Problems with Rules Cass R. Sunsteint Many of the most difficult issues in law involve the choice between rules and rulelessness in cases where both seem unacceptable. The principal goal of this Article is to point the way toward a more refined understanding of the ideal of the rule of law, one that sees a degree of particularity, and a degree of law-making at the point of application, as important parts of that ideal. The Article defends a form of casuistry and describes the potentially democratic foundations of the casuistical enterprise in law. It begins by describing the distinctive advantages of rules and law via rules, especially as a means for providing a consensus on what the law is from people who disagree on much else. It also discusses three attacks on decisions according to rules: the view that rules are excessively conservative; the view that controversial political and moral claims always play a role in the interpretation of rules, and thus that rules are not what they appear to be; and the view that rules are obtuse because they are too crude to cover diverse human affairs, and because judges should not decide cases without closely inspecting the details of disputes. The Article suggests several ways to avoid the dilemmas posed by rules and rulelessness: (a) a presumption in favor of privately adaptable rules, that is, rules that allocate entitlements without specifying outcomes, in an effort to promote goals associated with free markets; (b) a recognition of legitimate rule revision, in which public officials and private citizens are allowed to soften the hard edges of rules; and (c) highly contextualized assessments of the virtues Copyright © 1994 California Law Review, Inc. -William an essential component of the judicial process .... One other capital imperfection [of Common Law is] . .. the unaccommodatingness of its rules.... Hence the hardness of heart which is a sort of endemical disease of lawyers .... Mischief being almost their incessant occupation, and the greatest merits they can attain being the firmness with which they persevere in the task of doing partial evil for the sake of that universal good which consists in steady adherence to established rules, a judge thus circumstanced is obliged to divert himself of that anxious sensibility, which is one of the most useful as well as amiable qualities of the legislator. There are two stylized conceptions of legal judgment. The first, associated with Jeremy Bentham 4 and more recently with Justices Hugo Blackand Antonin Scalia,6 places a high premium on the creation and application of general rules. On this view, public authorities should avoid "balancing tests" or close attention to individual circumstances. They should attempt instead to give guidance to lower courts, future legislators, and citizens through clear, abstract rules laid down in advance of actual applications. The second conception, associated with William Blackstone and more recently with Justices Felix Frankfurter7 and John Marshall Harlan,8 places a high premium on law-making at the point of application through case-bycase decisions, narrowly tailored to the particulars of individual circum Seizure Case"). It would be hard to overstate the importance of the controversy between the two views. The controversy arises in every area of law; 10 it often involves fundamental liberties. 1 Of course, familiar understandings of the rule of law prize, as a safeguard of freedom, broad rules laid down in advance; but the American legal system also values close attention to the details of each case. In every area of regulation-the environment, occupational safety and health, energy policy, communications, control of monopoly power-it is necessary to choose between general rules and case-bycase decisions. I argue here that the disadvantages of rules and rule-bound justice are often insufficiently appreciated, and that legal systems sometimes do and should abandon rules in favor of a form of casuistry. 4 In the casuistic enterprise, judgments are based not on a preexisting rule, but on comparisons between the case at hand and other cases, especially those that are unambiguously within a generally accepted norm. Bounded rationality-in the form of ignorance about relevant facts, values, and future developments or circumstances-provides an important reason for proceeding in this way. When people lack sufficient information to design (satisfactory or sufficiently finely tuned) rules, they might resort to case analysis instead. But bounded rationality is not the only problem. The argument for case analysis depends as well on the diversity and plurality of values. t5 These ideas have an obvious bearing on law, and they have consequences for ethics, too, though I will not discuss ethical issues here. Law has a toolbox containing many devices. Lawyers have customarily compared standards ("do not drive unreasonably fast") to rules ("do not go over 60 miles per hour"), with rules seeming hard and fast, and standards seeming open-ended. 8 There are indeed differences between rules and standards. But the rules-versus-standards debate captures only a part of what is at stake, and it is important to have a fuller sense of the repertoire of available devices. In this section I outline a number of these devices; my goal is to clarify some terms that will come up throughout the discussion. By "untrammeled discretion," I mean the capacity to exercise official power as one chooses, by reference to such considerations as one wants to consider, weighted as one wants to weight them. A legal system cannot avoid some degree of discretion, in the form of power to choose according to one's moral or political convictions.22 As we will see, the interpretation of seemingly rigid rules usually allows for discretion. But a legal system can certainly make choices about how much discretion it wants various people to have. Often a system of rules is thought to be the polar opposite of a system of untrammeled discretion. As I have noted, there is no such polar opposition. Provisions that appear to be rules may not eliminate discretion. There is a continuum from rules to untrammeled discretion, with factors, guidelines, and standards falling in between. 23. A qualification is necessary for rules whose content depends on ex post factors not within the control of the judge-as in "the outcome depends on what the Pope says" or "an amount not higher than Frank Thomas' batting average." These are rules, but their content is not supplied in advance. This point shows that an alternative definition of rules could look to the extent to which the relevant criteria are easy to ascertain for individual cases. See Stephen McG. Bundy & Einer R. Elhauge, Knowledge About Legal Sanctions, 92 MICH. L. REv. 261,271 n.25 (1993). On this view, rules cannot exist where it is hard to know relevant criteria. One source of uncertainty would be discretion to make decisions ex post, but uncertainty could also arise if, for example, an adjudication under provisions specified ex ante would depend on certain facts that are hard to ascertain. Consider, for example, the ban on insider trading under Rule 10(b)(5) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1933, which is well-specified ex ante, but which requires determinations of knowledge, materiality, and so forth that cannot be made easily and that will depend on educated, but error-prone, guesses. See id., supra, at 270-71. For some purposes, the "easy to ascertain criteria" conception of rules is preferable to the "ex ante specification" conception, especially if we are concerned with predictability. While the two conceptions overlap, the latter is a bit easier to describe and work with, and therefore I use it here. Analysis, 42 Dutn treatment. It is familiar to find rules that have explicit or implicit exceptions for cases of necessity or emergency. It is unfamiliar to find rules without any such exceptions. For example, a person may be banned from taking the life of another; this is a rule, but self-defense is a valid excuse. Many constitutions allow abridgements of individual rights in case of emergency. The American Constitution allows the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus in The consequences of making exceptions depend on the details. An exception could be narrow but vague, as in the idea that reasonable limits on free speech can be made only under conditions of war. The conditions are rare and the exception therefore narrow, but the meaning of the exception is vague (what are "reasonable limits?"). Or the exception could be narrow and specific, as in the idea that under conditions of war, members of the Communist party may not work for the military in any capacity. An exception might be broad and vague or broad and specific. A specific exception might well convert the rule with exceptions into a complex rule or a formula. A legal system may contain presumptions or presumptive rules. The law may presume, for example, that when the government regulates speech on the basis of its content, the regulation is unconstitutional. 29 But the presumption might be rebutted by claims of a certain kind and strength, as when government can show a clear and present danger. The law might presume that an employer may not discriminate on the basis of race; but the presumption might be rebutted by a showing that, for example, a black actor is necessary to play the part of Othello. We might contrast both untrammeled discretion and rule-bound procedures with approaches that allow particular judgments to emerge through the decision-maker's assessment and weighing of a number of relevant factors, whose precise content has not been specified in advance.30 The key point is that several factors are pertinent to the decision, but there is no rule, suspended unless when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may require it."). scrutiny" of content-based regulation of speech). notes 157-190 and accompanying text (discussing judgments based on factors). Rules are often compared with standards.3 3 A ban on "excessive" speeds on the highway is familiarly thought to involve a standard; so too G. Guidelines Avoiding factors, rules, or standards, the law might establish ceilings and floors, or it might identify positions from which officials or citizens may deviate if they can demonstrate good cause. Guidelines of this sort may be mandatory or they may be merely suggestive. Mandatory guide Principles are not an alternative to rules, factors, guidelines, or standards. Their legal status is obscure, in part because the term "principles" refers to several different phenomena. In law, principles are often said to be both deeper and more general than rules.37 We might say that rules are justified by principles, usually political or moral in character. The justification of the rule might be used to interpret its meaning; courts may resort to the principle in trying to understand the rule. For example, there is a (moral) principle to the effect that it is wrong to take human life without sufficient cause; the law implements this principle with a range of rules prohibiting homicide. Similarly, there is a (moral) principle to the effect that it is wrong not to keep your promises; the law contains a range of rules for enforcement of contractual obligations. Commonly, the term "principle" in law refers to the moral or political justifications behind rules. between laws and legal principles used by courts, for instance to invalidate laws). One final complication. A decision in a case sometimes seems to turn on a "principle," as in the idea that speech may not be restricted unless there is a clear and present danger, or that discrimination on the basis of race is presumed invalid, or that no contract is valid without consideration. In this usage, a principle is not distinguishable from a standard or a presumption, and at some points below, I will use the terms interchangeably. The last category is not a simple alternative to the others, but it is quite an important tool that helps provide a clue to how law often operates. Sometimes a legal system proceeds by comparing the case at hand to a case (or to cases) that have come before.4" The prior case is inspected to see whether it "controls," or should be extended to, the case at hand. The prior case will be accompanied by an opinion, which may contain a rule, a standard, a set of factors, or something else. The court deciding the present case will inspect relevant similarities and differences. That court, not bound by the previous opinion, may produce a rule, a standard, a set of factors, or something else. With analogy, we do not have a decision by rule, because the rule is not specified in advance of the process of analogical thinking. (discussing the role of analogical reasoning in law). A system of rules is often thought to be the signal virtue of a system of law. Indeed, the rule of law might seem to require a system of rules.47 The idea has a constitutional source. The due process clause of the American Constitution is sometimes interpreted so as to require rules, or rule-like provisions, and to forbid a system based on analogies, standards, or factors.48 This is particularly important in the areas of criminal justice and freedom of speech, where the "void for vagueness" doctrine requires the state to set forth clear guidance before it may punish private conduct.49 Vagueness exemplifies a failure of the rule of law. But what specifically does the concept of the rule of law entail? It is possible to identify several characteristics. 50 A system committed to the rule of law seems to require (1) clear, general, publicly accessible rules laid down in advance; (2) prospectivity and a ban on retroactivity; (3) a measure of conformity between law in the books and law in the world;5' (4) hearing rights and availability of review by independent adjudicative officials; (5) separation between law-making and law-implementation; (6) no rapid changes in the content of law; and (7) no contradictions or inconsistency in the law. These are the customary characteristics of a system committed to the rule of law. Of course, no legal system is likely to comply with these seven goals; failures of the rule of law, understood in such terms, are commonplace. the temporary suspension of students from public school). or erratic enforcement). A great virtue of rules is that they circumscribe permissible grounds for both action and argument; by doing so, they reduce costs of many diverse kinds. In a heterogeneous society containing people of limited time and capacities, this is an enormous advantage. I am suggesting that rules can help people cope with pluralism (even though the existence of pluralism can make it difficult to generate rules.)5" Once generated, rules save a great deal of effort, time, and expense. By truncating the sorts of value disputes that can arise in law, rules also ensure that disagreements will occur along a narrowly restricted range. I now discuss some of the characteristic virtues of decisions according to rules. First, however, it is important to note that rules fall in several different categories. Here is a nonexhaustive account, tied to my special concerns. B. Defending Rules as Rules Rules might produce incompletely theorized agreements-agreements among people who disagree on questions of theory or on fundamental values. 57 Rules might do this in three different ways. First, people can sometimes agree that a rule is binding, or authoritative, without agreeing on a high theory of why it is binding, and without agreeing that the rule is good. Theories of legitimate authority are highly pluralistic, and acceptance of rules can proceed from diverse foundations.5 8 Second, people can sometimes converge on a particular rule without taking a stand on large issues of the right or the good. The rule of stare decisis-acceptance of precedents -is a familiar example; we can accept that rule from diverse theoretical perspectives. So too, people can urge a sixty miles per hour speed limit, a prohibition on bringing elephants into restaurants, a ten-year minimum sentence for homicide, and much more without taking a stand on debates between Kantians and utilitarians, and indeed without offering much in the way of general theory at all.59 Of course acceptance of any legal provision requires a reason or a principle; my point is only that a wide range of starting points can sometimes yield the same rule and even the same reason or principle, so long as these are described at a low or intermediate level of generality. When legislatures and bureaucracies issue rules, they often do so without getting into highlevel theory.60 Third, people may agree on the meaning of a rule despite their disagreement on much else. Rules also sharply diminish the level of disagreement among people who are subject to them, and among people who must interpret and apply them. Once a rule is in place, large-scale theories need not be invoked in order for us to know what the rule means, and whether it is binding. This generalization is a bit crude; 6' but it is fundamentally right. In the following section, I am concerned principally with the advantages of Decisions in Particular Cases If we understand rules to be complete or nearly complete ex ante specifications of outcomes in particular cases, we can readily see that rules have extraordinary virtues. Because of their simplifying effects, rules produce enormous gains where decisions would otherwise be extremely expensive. Every day, people operate as they do because of rules, legal and nonlegal. Often the rules are so internalized that they become second-nature, greatly reducing the costs of decisions and making it possible for people to devote their attention to other matters.6 2 Because they resolve cases in advance, rules are disabling, but they are enabling, too. Like the rules of grammar, they help make social life possible. If a rule says that there will be one and only one President, we do not have to decide how many presidents there will be. If a rule says that a will must have two witnesses, we do not have to decide, in each case, how many witnesses a valid will requires. Rules facilitate private and public decisions by establishing the frameworks within which they can be made, freeing up time for other matters. For example, the justification of a speed limit is to promote safety; that justification is hardly a rule. This is because the purpose of a rule is not itself a rule; it is a justification that, in all likelihood, does not settle all cases before the fact. and habits can be internalized. (1978) (protecting snail darters vithout regard to costs). other non-prospective standards). 2. Rules Are Impersonal and Blind; They Promote Equal Treatment and Reduce the Likelihood of Bias and Arbitrariness We have seen that rules may reduce human error caused by confusion or ignorance. They can also counteract something worse: bias, favoritism, or discrimination in the minds of people who decide particular cases. In this way, rules are associated with impartiality, a notion which is captured in the idea that Justice, the goddess, is "blindfolded."70 Rules are blind to many features of a case that might otherwise be relevant, and that are relevant in some social contexts, or to many things on whose relevance people have great difficulty in agreeing-religion, social class, good or bad looks, height, and so forth. (discussing anthropomorphic depictions of "blind Justice"). Decision-Makers in Particular Cases72 A special advantage of rules is that judges (and others) can be emboldened to enforce them even when the particular stakes and the particular political costs are high.7 3 Because rules resolve all cases before the fact, rules can make it easier for officials to stick with certain unpopular judgments when they should do so, but might be tempted to back down. The key advantage here (one that can be a disadvantage too) stems from the fact that rules decide cases before they arise. By settling cases in advance, rules also make it unnecessary and even illegitimate to return to first principles. Ifjudges are allowed to decide the content of law without a firm rule, and if they have to go back to first principles each time, they under a "clear congressional command"). federal ban on flag burning violated defendant's First Amendment rights). for the Government In modem regulation, a pervasive problem is that members of regulated classes face ambiguous and conflicting guidelines, so that they do not know how to plan. For people who are subject to public force, it becomes especially important to know what the law is before the actual case arises. Indeed, it may be more important to know what the law is than to have a law of any particular kind. Consider, for instance, the Miranda rules. A special virtue of those rules is that they tell the police specifically what must be done, eliminating the guessing games that can be so destructive to ex ante planning. So, too, in the environmental area, where prospectively clear rules, even if strict, are often far better than the "reasonableness" inquiry characteristic of the common law. Under a multifactor test, by contrast, neither government officials nor affected citizens may reliably know their obligations in advance. When rules are at work, it is clear who is responsible and who is to be blamed if things go wrong. This is most obviously valuable when the rulemaker has a high degree of accountability and legitimacy: consider the President and Congress. One problem with a system based on standards or factors-environmental law, for example-is that no one knows whom to Official Discretion in Their Particular Case A special advantage of rules is that because of their fixity, ex ante quality, and generality, they make it unnecessary for citizens to ask an official for permission to engage in certain conduct. Rules turn citizens into right-holders, able to expect certain treatment as a matter of right. Standards, guidelines, or factors are more likely to make citizens into supplicants, requesting official help. Importantly, factors and standards allow mercy, in the form of relief from the consequences of rigid rules. But rules the comparative advantage of forbidding officials from being have unmoved by, or punitive toward, a particular applicant's request. It is also plausible to think that case-by-case judgments systematically favor the well-to-do. Litigation is extremely expensive, and for litigants to seek fine-grained, individualized judgments, they need resources. In an ideal world, case-by-case particularization might allow for more equitable judgments tailored to particular facts. But in this world, it may result in a pervasive form of inequality, in which people without resources stand on the sidelines, or are unable to persuade officials that their case warrants favorable treatment. I now identify three arguments against rules. The first challenge is that rules embody "formal equality" and are for this reason too conservative or too closely associated with excessively free markets; in this way, rules are said to be sectarian after all. The second challenge, making the way for casuistry, is that rules cannot do what is claimed of them, since a degree of case-by-case judgment will indeed break out at the moment of application. On this view, casuistry is inevitable or nearly so. The third challenge is that the generality of rules, and their blindness to particulars, is a political vice, because a just system would allow equity through adaptation to the particulars of individual cases. This third challenge points toward casuistry as a substitute for rule-making and rule-application. I conclude that there is nothing in the first challenge, some important truth in the second, and some enduring wisdom in the third. Before exploring these arguments, it is important to examine a common but misleading claim about rules. Some people think that the requirements of the rule of law provide an important check on partisanship or selectivity in decision-making." On this view, the rule of law is a requirement of generality, and this requirement forbids law from imposing selective benefits or selective burdens. In this notion lies much of the debate over the ideas of impartiality and neutrality in law. There is some truth in this claim, but it also contains an important confusion. We should conclude that any requirement of equal treatment depends on a substantive account establishing whether there are relevant differences between the cases to which a law applies and the cases to which it does not. If a law says that in order to receive federal employment, everyone who is not white must take certain tests, we can easily see that the grounds for the distinction are illegitimate. In such a case, Justice Jackson's analysis seems sufficient and unimpeachable. But sometimes the plea for generality is based on more controversial grounds. In such cases, the requirement of generality hides a range of substantive judgments, and those judgments cannot be supplied by the requirement itself. These points provide reason to doubt Friedrich Hayek's influential discussion of rules and the rule of law. 6 Hayek identifies the rule of law with a norm of "impartiality." Its antonym is a system of "planning," in which the state picks winners and losers. Hayek claims that general rules lead to impartial decisions among different groups. Because the rule of law does 87. Id. at 223 (finding government services acceptable when private enterprise is unable to provide them, or when a government acts analogously to a private market participant). 94. See supra text accompanying notes 50-51. 95. Of course, the laws that underlie markets may be standards rather than rules; consider the law of torts, which is pervaded by standards. Unless we are prepared to succumb to Hobbesian pessimism 'in this dangerous century,' I do not see how a Man of the Left can describe the rule of law as 'an unqualified human good'! It undoubtedly restrains power, but it also prevents power's benevolent exercise. It creates formal equality-a not inconsiderable virtue-but it promotes substantive inequality by creating a consciousness that radically separates law from politics, means from ends, processes from outcomes. By promoting procedural justice it enables the shrewd, the calculating, and the wealthy to manipulate its forms to their own advantage. And it ratifies and legitimates an adversarial, competitive, and atomistic conception of human relations.9 7 There is much to be said about this passage. For present purposes the key point is that the passage takes the rule of law to require much more than in fact it does. Does the rule of law forbid the pursuit of substantive equality through, for example, progressive income taxes, welfare and employment programs, antidiscrimination laws, and much more? Like Hayek, Horwitz appears to identify the rule of law with (a particular conception of) market ordering. The identification is unwarranted. socialism). Calling themselves rule-skeptics, some people question the feasibility of rules and the rule of law.98 Usually they focus on the internal point of view-on how lawyers and judges, operating within the legal system, figure out what rules mean. If rules are really understood as a full ex ante allocation of legal rights, it is said, rules are impossible or very close to it. Fixity in this ex ante sense is not possible. Encounters with particular cases will confound the view that things really have been fully settled in advance. In this view, the need for interpretation, and the likelihood of competing interpretations founded on disagreements about the good or the right, defeat the project of following rules. If contests over substance are unavoidable, the project of rulefollowing and (a certain understanding of) the rule of law may well seem threatened.'I At least this is so if such contests involve moral and political issues in particular cases, for when they do, the meaning of the rule is determined by moral and political judgments at the point of application. Consider a real case, that of Church of the Holy Trinity v. United States. ' 08 In that case the Court held that it was acceptable for a church to pay for the transportation to the United States of a rector, notwithstanding a 104. See HAYEK, ROAD TO SERmOM, supra note 12, at 72 ("Stripped of all technicalities, [the Rule of Law] means that government in all its actions is bound by rules fixed and announced beforehand In an especially illuminating discussion of the virtues and vices of rules, Frederick Schauer argues for "presumptive positivism," in which interpreters take rules in their literal meaning except in the most absurd or imaginable unreasonable cases."' assumptions, 12 but notice that there is a large difference between literal interpretation and presumptive positivism, since the latter calls for a form of casuistry, in which interpreters are always faced with the question: "Is this application bizarre?" The change from literalism to presumptive literalism is a change from rule-bound decisions to a species of case-by-case judgment, though it is a distinctive species to be sure. Some intriguing work in cognitive psychology tends to support Holmes' suggestion. Suppose that we have a single class of things: birds, or vehicles, or nations, or works of art, or mammals. How do we know whether members of a single class are alike or different? It turns out that people generally have a mental picture of a model or typical example of the category, and they then reason analogically, asking whether a member of the class is "like" or "unlike" the model or typical example. 51 5 Thus people tend to think that a canary is more "bird" than a penguin, though both are birds; a truck is more "vehicle" than an elevator; an apple is more "fruit" than a coconut. Experiments show "the robust psychological reality of the typicality of a single exemplar of a given class .... The typicality of an exemplar is then routinely measured by the distance between the exemplar and the class as a whole."' "16 113. Hart makes the same point in his discussion of the distinction between law via examples and law via rules. See HART, supra note 25, 127-29. Consider especially this suggestion: [T]he authoritative general language in which a rule is expressed may guide only in an uncertain way much as an authoritative example does. The sense that the language of the rule will enable us simply to pick out easily recognizable instances, at this point gives way; subsumption and the drawing of a syllogistic conclusion no longer characterize the nerve of the reasoning involved in determining what is the right thing to do. Instead, the language of the rule seems now only to mark out an authoritative example, namely that constituted by the plain case. This may be used in much the same way as a precedent .... [A]II that the person called upon to answer can do is to consider (as does one who makes use of a precedent) whether the present case resembles the plain case "sufficiently" in "relevant" respects. Turn now to a case that involves more than one rule. Suppose the Supreme Court says that in the face of interpretive doubt, statutes should be construed so as not to apply outside the territorial boundaries of the United States," 7 and also that in the face of interpretive doubt, statutes should be interpreted with deference to the views of the administrative agency charged with enforcing them." 8 Suppose that a case arises in which the agency charged with enforcing a civil rights law concludes that the law applies outside the United States. What should a court do when faced with interpretive rules that conflict? A legal system may contain no rule-like answer to this question. If it does not, disputes will break out at the point of application, when judges exercise discretion so as to accommodate the two rules, or to develop principles for harmonizing them. Ifjudges or others are concerned to ensure that the system really is one of rules, they may come up with rules of priority, so that conflicts between rules can be resolved by reference to rules. But the rules of priority will not always be identified in advance. At least in some cases, they will have to be settled at the point of application. not apply when U.S. firms employ American citizens abroad). How damaging are these expost judgments to the project of following rules, or to the rule of law? They are not as damaging as they might seem. Almost all real-world cases involving the meaning of rules are very easy. Although they are contestable, the ex post substantive judgments that underlie readings of rules are often widely shared, or at least supported by good reasons even if not widely shared. Usually the literal application of statutory language does not produce absurdity. 1 9 Rules of priority, laid down ex ante, are sometimes available when more than one rule applies.' 20 These refinements are enough to allow the rule of law to survive as a project. If officials cannot look into the reasonableness of the application, some unfortunate results will follow in particular cases, 2 5 but we might believe that the results will be superior, in the aggregate, to those that would follow from allowing officials to apply rules literally only in cases in which the application makes sense. We might distrust a situation in which judges felt free to explore the justification for the rule and the reasonableness of the application when deciding whether to apply the rule. 119. This is a central point in Schauer's endorsement of presumptive positivism. See SCHAUER, language unless the result is "egregiously at odds" with common sense moral judgments). Whether literal readings, when feasible, are reasonable or right is a complex issue, having to do with our faith in interpreters, our faith in those who make rules in the first place, the aggregate risk of error, and the possibility of legislative corrections of absurd results in particular cases.'12 The choice between literal meanings and exceptions for absurdity is itself a decision about the appropriate nature of law. But this is not a point about feasibility. In many spheres, people do not rely on rules at all. A rule-book for telling jokes would not be all that helpful: maybe people who rely on such books are funnier than they would otherwise be, but if you really tried to tell jokes by following clear rules laid down in advance, you probably would not be very funny. There are no clear rules for dealing with friends in distress. Doctors are familiarly said to follow rules, and surely they often do, but some illuminating accounts treat medicine as largely a matter of casuistry, in which experienced people do not follow rules, but instead build up judgments analogically and from experience with past cases. They rely The first problem with rules is that it can be very hard to design good ones. In many areas, people lack enough information to produce rules that will yield sufficiently accurate results. Consider, for example, the regulation of cyberspace. Many observers and participants think that it is premature for Congress to design rules for this activity, and that it would be far better to rely on common law methods of case-by-case judgment and analogy.130 Production of rules entails high ex ante investment of political and informational costs. Sometimes those costs are too high for lawmakers, who do not know enough to produce good rules, and for affected persons, who would be faced with excessive rigidity.' 31 Now suppose that a rule is in place. If strictly followed, the rule will often produce arbitrariness and errors in particular cases. As we have seen, the justifications that underlie the rule will not support all instances to which the rule applies by its terms.' 32 More generally, experience will turn up considerations or contexts that make it odd or worse to apply the rule. 33 For this reason it is sometimes inefficient 34 to make decisions by rule, because any rule that people can generate will produce too much inaccuracy. standard of the same degree of complexity."). cases. At least in principle, it is possible that the aggregate error rate would be lower with individualized decisions. Or consider the matter of criminal sentencing. While open-ended discretion has been persuasively criticized, 137 it seems clear that the range of relevant variables is very wide and that rigidly rule-bound decisions could produce much error and injustice.1 3 1 In modem regulatory law, this problem is associated with the pervasive phenomenon of "site-level unreasonableness."' 3 9 This phenomenon occurs when a general rule is applied to situations in which it makes no sense. Consider a requirement that all eating places have two fire exits, or that all places of employment be equipped with ramps as well as staircases, or that all pollution sources use certain expensive antipollution devices.' 40 The general rule can produce enormous costs for few benefits in the particular site or in many particular sites; yet administrators often insist on mechanical compliance with the general rule. Perhaps it would be best to dispense with rules and instead to allow firms to comply by showing adequate performance under a set of factors, a process to be overseen by flexible inspectors.' B. Rules Can Be Outrun by Changing Circumstances Rules are often shown to be perverse through new developments that make them anachronistic.' 4 2 Those who issue a rule cannot know the full range of situations to which the rule will be applied, and in the new circumstances, the rule may be hopelessly outmoded. Consider the regulation of banking and telecommunications. With the development of automated teller machines, prohibitions on branch banking make absolutely no sense; with the rise of cable television, a regulatory framework designed for three television networks is built on wildly false assumptions. 143 Even welldesigned rules in the 1970s may be utterly inadequate for the 1990s. In the OSHA, the FAA, and other regulatory regimes). standards in Executive Order No. 12,866, discussed in Pildes & Sunstein, supra note 55. An argument for rules is that they provide fixity and allow stability even when circumstances have changed.145 A legal system that changes whenever circumstances have changed may give too much room for discretion and allow too little in the way of predictability. But it is sufficient for present purposes to say that rules may badly misfire under new conditions, and that sometimes this is an argument against rules, or at least against certain kinds of rules.' 4 6 Similarly, courts that proceed casuistically might allow the democratic process large room for deliberation and evaluation. When people are differently situated, it may be unfair or otherwise wrong to treat them the same, that is, to apply the identical rule to them. If the rule is that everyone must use stairs, people in wheelchairs will face special disadvantages. If a rule says that everyone must pay to enter museums, people without money will be unable to go to museums. If a rule says that every employee must lack the capacity to become pregnant, many women will be frozen out of the workforce.147 By ignoring special circumstances, general rules can harm or discriminate against identifiable groups with distinctive characteristics, and in that sense reflect bias despite or even because of their generality. A familiar understanding of equality requires the similarly situated to be treated the same; a less familiar but also important understanding requires the differently situated to be treated differently, also in the interest of equality. General rules might produce inequality to the extent that they do not allow people to speak of relevant differences. When rules yield a good deal of inaccuracy in particular cases, people in a position of authority may simply ignore them. Discretion is exercised through a mild form of civil disobedience, and this is hard to police or even 144. See infra text accompanying notes 252-263 for a discussion of a kind of rule system that allows evolution with changing circumstances, as through privately adaptable rules. See also RICHARD A. EPsrEIN, SIMPLE RuLES FOR A COMPLEX WoR.LD (1995). E. Rules Allow Evasion by Wrongdoers Conduct that is harmful, and that would be banned in an optimal system, will be allowed under most imaginable rules, because it is hard to design rules that ban all conduct that ought to be prohibited. Because rules have clear edges, they allow people to "evade" them by engaging in conduct that is technically exempted but that creates the same or analogous harms. Rules, in short, are under-inclusive as well as over-inclusive if measured by reference to their background justifications. If judges cannot proceed by analogy, and extend the rule where the justification so suggests, people will be able to engage in harmful conduct because of a mere technicality. This is another possible source of inefficiency through rules. A familiar conception of procedural justice-embodied in the Due Process Clause-grants people a hearing in order to show that a statute or regulation has been accurately applied. Thus, for example, the Supreme Court has held that someone who is deprived of welfare benefits has a right to a hearing to contest the legitimacy of the deprivation. 155 This understanding of due process fits well with a system of rules. The whole point of When a rule fails, a judge may rely on a standard or may instead use the process of analogy, which does not tell us in advance whether we will have a rule, a standard, or something else. Judges and others who reject rules may also rely on a set of factors, and I will discuss judgments based on factors as a useful way to approach and evaluate rulelessness. Like analogies, guidelines, and standards, factors reveal some of the vices and virtues of rulelessness; in their opposition to rules, they overlap with judgments based on standards or analogies. But judgments based on factors have some distinctive features as well, and these are of independent interest. In Furman v. Georgia,'5 7 the Supreme Court held that a rule-free death penalty violated the Due Process Clause not because it was excessively barbaric for the state to take life, but because the states allowed undue discretion in the infliction of the ultimate penalty of death.15 8 The problem with the pre-1970 death penalty was procedural, in the sense that states did not limit the discretion of juries in deciding who deserved to die.1 North Carolina responded to Furman by enacting a "mandatory" death penalty, eliminating judge and jury discretion. 60 Under North Carolina law, a mandatory death penalty was to be imposed for a specified category of homicide offenses. No judge and no jury would have discretion to substitute life imprisonment in cases falling within that category. No judge and no jury would have discretion to decide who would live and who would die. In this way, North Carolina attempted to apply sharp rule-of-law constraints to the area of death sentencing. fail[s] to allow the particularized consideration of relevant aspects of the character and record of each convicted defendant before the imposition upon him of a sentence of death. . . .A process that accords no significance to relevant facets of the character and record of the individual offender or the circumstances of the particular offense excludes from consideration in fixing the ultimate punishment of death the possibility of compassionate or mitigating factors stemming from the diverse frailties of humankind. It treats all persons convicted of a designated offense not as uniquely individual human beings, but as members of a faceless, undifferentiated mass to be subjected to the blind infliction of the penalty of death.'63 What ultimately emerged from Woodson is a system in which the death penalty is generally decided through the consideration of a set of Woodson arose in an especially dramatic setting, but the Court's preferred method-factors rather than rules-can be found in many areas. For example, the Court has offered no rules for deciding how much in the way of procedure is required before the state may take liberty or property) 67 Any "rules," the Court suggests, would be too inaccurate and too insensitive to individual circumstance.168 Instead the Court requires an assessment of three factors: the nature and weight of the individual interest at stake; the likelihood of an erroneous determination and the probable value of additional safeguards; and the nature and strength of the government's interest.' 69 This somewhat open-ended multifactor test is quite different from what is anticipated by some conceptions of the rule of law. It sacrifices predictability for the sake of accuracy in individual cases. This is a pervasive choice in the American legal system.170 B. Factors Without Rules What are the features of a system based on factors? 1. Multiple and Diverse Relevant Criteria It is obvious that in a system of factors, decisions are based on multiple and diverse criteria. No simple rule or principle can be successfully applied to the case. In a system of factors, it is often impossible to describe in advance exactly what is relevant. People know too little to be able to say. Because of the informational burdens faced by those who lay down the list of factors, two outcomes are likely. First, the relevant terms, as they are identi The second possibility is that the relevant factors will be listed at a high level of specificity, but there will be some proviso at the end, including, for example, "such other factors as are deemed relevant"-to show awareness that new and relevant factors may come up.172 The legal terms are specific but nonexhaustive. Both of these strategies are pervasive in American law.' 73 3. Absence of a Clear, A Priori Sense of the Weight of the Criteria It is typical of a system of factors that the relevant criteria cannot be assigned weights in advance. In deciding how much of a hearing is required before someone may be deprived of something, for example, we do not know how much weight to give to the government interest in efficiency, or how much weight to assign to the individual interest in ensuring against mistaken deprivations. 174 Answers to questions of weight are offered in the context of concrete controversies. As we will soon see, this notion is related to the problem of incommensurability. The rule of law is abstract in the sense that it attends to only a small part of a complex situation. If people are admitted to college only on the basis of test scores, we have a rule. (I put to one side the case of complex rules or formulas.)17 5 But a system of factors tends to look closely at a wide range of particulars. In the college admission setting, for example, officials might examine not just test scores, but also grades, extracurricular activities, family background, geography, race, gender, and much more. In article may present a mechanical hazard by creating an unreasonable risk of injury). in order to test On the other hand, it would be a mistake to say that a system of factors is attentive to all aspects of the situation. There is no such thing as attention to "all" particulars. Human and legal perception are inevitably selective. Even in a discretionary admissions program, for example, the authority is not expected to care about an applicant's initials or foot size. Similar constraints are imposed in the context of capital sentencing. 17  The set of relevant factors is disciplined by the context in which the assessment occurs. These points suggest that a system based on factors attends to much of the whole situation, but certainly not to all of it. And because decision by factors entails attention to much of the whole situation, and thus to a range of particulars, it is familiar to see people arguing that their case is relevantly different from those that have come before. A litigant in case A can always say that in some particular way, his case is relevantly different from case B. In decisions by reference to factors, courts are highly attentive to particulars. Their decisions do not necessarily govern other situations; they are often said to be "fact-bound." Abstractions and broad principles are generally avoided. They may be too broad, contentious, sectarian, divisive, and confusing. A special fear is that abstractions will be both over-inclusive and under-inclusive. A prime goal of decision by reference to factors is the avoidance of error through insufficiently considered rules or principlesinsufficiently considered in the sense of insufficiently attuned to the full range of particular cases. 179 6. Attention to Precedent; Analogical Reasoning Rules provide consistency; but a system based on factors aspires to do the same. Such a system attempts to ensure that all similarly situated people are treated similarly. A must be treated the same as B, unless there is a principled reason to treat the two differently. Usually the factors at work in law are valued in qualitatively different ways. Moreover, those factors cannot be placed on a single metric; they are not commensurable. To understand these claims, something must be said about diverse kinds of valuation and about the difficult problem of incommensurability. It does seem clear that human beings value goods, things, relationships, and states of affairs in diverse ways; all goodness is goodness-of-akind.'8 5 There is of course a distinction between instrumental and intrinsic goods. We value some things purely or principally for use; other things, like knowledge or friendship, have intrinsic value. But the distinction between intrinsic and instrumental goods captures only a part of the picture. Intrinsically valued things produce a range of diverse responses.' 8 6 Some bring about wonder and awe. Consider, for instance, a mountain or certain artistic works. Toward some people, we feel respect; toward others, affection; toward still others, love. Negative valuations are similarly diverse: to lose money is to lose an instrumental good (though one that might be used for intrinsic goods, like the preservation of human life), while to lose a friend is an altogether different matter. Our responses to intrinsic bads are likewise diverse. Be Commensurable Now let us return to the idea that the Constitution requires deprivation hearings when justified by an assessment of three factors: the individual interest at stake; the likelihood of error and the probable value of additional safeguards; and the government's interest, pecuniary and nonpecuniary, in avoiding complex procedures.' 8 8 It would be odd to say that this assessment can be made through lining up the relevant variables along any single metric. If we devise a scale, we will have to recharacterize the relevant goods in a way that changes their character and effaces qualitative differences. Perhaps this is justified for pragmatic reasons, but something will be lost as well as gained. All this leaves two principal questions. Under what circumstances is it appropriate to rely on rulelessness rather than rules? And under what circumstances might a legal system be expected to use one scheme rather than the other? A. Positive and Normative It is unlikely that we will be able to generate a reliable and general positive theory on these topics. Legislation is a complex product of legislative self-interest, private influence, and public-spirited motivations on the part of both legislators and those who influence them. Judicial choices between rules and rulelessness are at least equally difficult to attribute to a single behavioral influence or set of behavioral influences. It is hard to imagine a simple testable hypothesis that would not be falsified by many results in the world. much more generally). 192. Examples include the reaction of Democratic Congresses to Republican Presidents in the environmental area. See Robert V. Percival, Checks Without Balance: Executive Office Oversight of the Environmental Protection Agency, 54 LAW & CorrEMp. PROBS. 127, 173-78 (1991). Some of these speculations are borne out by comparing the legal system in England with that in the United States.' 9 5 In England, lawmaking and law-interpretation are far more rule-bound than in the United States. The Parliament is less likely to delegate discretionary authority to judges.1 96 For their part, English judges treat statutes as rules, interpreting them literally and sometimes refusing to investigate whether the particular application of the rule makes sense as a matter of policy or principle.' 9 7 In contrast, in the United States, lawmaking often takes place in the process of confrontation with particular cases.' 98 How might this be explained? Is it possible to say that one or the other nation is proceeding more sensibly? Perhaps not; perhaps the differences are attributable to contextual differences.' 99 It is notable that laws in England are drafted by an Office of Parliamentary Counsel, a highly professional body that consists of skilled authors of laws.2 00 The Parliamentary Counsel brings about a uniform style of drafting. It is also closely attuned to the interpretive methods of English judges, and the Counsel drafts legislation with close knowledge of literalism and of the prevailing canons of construction.20 ' The judges' practice is itself uniform and relatively simple. In a parliamentary system, the government and the legislature are allied, and the high degree of party control means that there is a level of homogeneity in England at the lawmaking stage.2 °2 Moreover, and critically, Parliament revisits statutes with some frequency, and it fixes mistakes that are shown as such when particular cases arise.20 3 The situation in the United States is very different. There is no centralized drafting body, and hence no uniformity in terminology, and little professionalization. In America, the drafters of legislation are multiple and 194. See Scalia, supra note 2, at 1178-79 (arguing that in our federal judiciary, where the Supreme Court hears so few of the total cases, a rule granting discretion has the effect of forcing the lower courts to be the courts that "clos[e] in on the law," as opposed to the Supreme Court). How can a legal system minimize the problems posed by unreasonable generality on the one hand and those of potentially abusive discretion on the other? The best approaches involve (a) a highly contextualized, indeed casuistical inquiry into the likelihood of error and abuse with either rules or rulelessness, and hence an "on balance" judgment about risk; (b) a large space for legitimate rule revisions; and (c) a presumption in favor of a particular kind of rule, that is, the privately adaptable rule that allocates initial entitlements but does not specify outcomes. Jeremy Bentham favored clear rules, laid down in advance and broadly communicated.2" 7 In at least some of his writings, he also favored adjudicative flexibility, allowing judges to adapt rules to the complexities of individual cases.20 8 Bentham was aware that rules could misfire as they encountered particular controversies, especially if we understand the notion This suggests a paradox: How could someone advocate clear rules without asking judges to follow them? Bentham's ingenious answer involved the different audiences for law. The public should hear general rules; the judges should hear individual cases. 2 11 This is the important idea of an "acoustic separation" for legal terms,2 12 justified on utilitarian grounds. There is such a separation in many areas of law, including the law relating to excuses for criminality, and perhaps in tax law as well.2 13 Following this idea, we might suggest that legislatures should lay down rigid rules for the public-"conduct rules"--but that interpreters should feel free to ignore them in contexts where they produce absurdity. Officials might follow more flexible "decision rules" that deviate from conduct rules and indeed that work as standards. In some ways this is the American legal practice. 2 14 American judges do not create systematic deviations between conduct rules and decision rules; but they do make exceptions to literal language in cases of absurdity. Of course it is important to develop subsidiary principles to discipline the development of decision rules and the general idea of "absurdity," and to give these ideas concrete application in the modem regulatory state. Modem administrative agencies, more than courts, might be entrusted with the job of adapting general rules to particular circumstances.2 1S There are, however, two large difficulties with the Benthamite strategy. The first involves the right to democratic publicity-more particularly, the right to know what the law is. The Benthamite strategy severely compromises that right. The rule of law-and democratic values-would be jeopardized if people are unaware that the law is not what the statute books say that it is. Benthamite approaches are therefore unacceptable to the extent that utilitarian judgments about acoustic separation run into liberal principles of publicity.2 16 In a similar vein we might think that it is an insult to the moral autonomy of the citizenry to be told that the law is something other than what it is in fact. There is a serious problem from the standpoint of democratic citizenship, since members of the polity, given the right and duty to decide on the content of law, will by hypothesis lack knowledge of what the law really is. This ignorance will compromise the process of democratic assessment of law. Many legal systems allow people to deviate from rules in certain circumstances. Indeed, many public officials have at least a tacit power to revise the rules when rule-following would be senseless. Citizens as a whole often have the same power.219 Legitimate rule revisions make rules "on the books" operate differently from how they appear. Moreover, rule revisions can help promote the democratic character of the law, by allowing constraints on the application of rules to cases where they no longer fit with public convictions. Instead of relying on an argument about a broad right of "privacy," the Supreme Court should have invalidated the law on the narrower ground that citizens need not comply with criminal statutes, or applications of criminal statutes, that are unenforced and that find no support in anything like common democratic conviction. A judgment of this kind would have had the advantage of incomplete theorization: it might have produced broader support for the decision among a range of people, including those who reject any "right of privacy" or who are uncertain about its foundations and limits. involving Georgia's ban on homosexual sodomy, might well be understood as a repeat of Griswold. The ban on homosexual sodomy is rarely enforced against consenting adults. Prosecutors simply do not initiate proceedings, for prevailing social norms would not permit many prosecutions of this kind. To be sure, citizens did not successfully seek repeal of the statute; but the statute's nonenforcement made political mobilization most unlikely. The simple fact of widespread nonenforcement strongly suggests that the statute was out of keeping with prevailing norms. Realistically speaking, the ban on consensual homosexual sodomy is instead a weapon with which police officers and others can harass people on invidious grounds. The existence of an unenforced law, used for purposes of harassment, is objectionable for that reason alone. We can draw a general conclusion. Citizens have engaged in legitimate rule revision (or revision of application of rules) when they violate rules that lack support in popular convictions-unless those convictions are themselves demonstrably unjust. It is not clear whether American law fully recognizes the citizen's right to revise rules in this way; the doctrine of desuetudo has no clear place. But the dilemmas posed by rules and rulelessness might be less severe if citizens, like officials, were permitted to depart from rules in the cases I have described. Through this route, we might well respond to Bentham's problem in a way that avoids the dangers of Bentham's solution. Often a legal system should make the choice between rules and rulelessness on the basis of a contextual inquiry into the aggregate level of likely errors and abuses. 230 In this sense, the choice depends not on any rule, but on a form of casuistry. I have suggested that when judges or other interpreters are perceived to be ignorant, corrupt, or biased, or in any case when they diverge in their judgments from the people who make rules, a legal system should and probably will proceed with rules.2 31 Even a poor fit, in the form of overinclusive and underinclusive rules, can be tolerated when individualized decisions would result in a similar level of inaccuracy. We might favor ruleness when there is no special reason to distrust those who make decisions. So too, individualized decisions are likely to be dispensed with when it is possible to come up with rules that fit well. 230. See generally Kaplow, supra note 24, for a discussion of the context-dependent nature of any inquiry into the benefits of rules and standards. Factors or standards are more likely to be the basis for decision when opposing interests have roughly equivalent power in the lawmaking body, and when they are equally willing to take their chances with a bureaucracy or a judge.24 ° This may be so because they are both highly organized, or because they are both weak and diffuse. A possible example is the Occupational Safety and Health Act, which is quite vague,24 in part because its opponents and adversaries are both powerful. Rules are also more likely to be unacceptable when the costs of error in particular cases are very high. The enormous danger of error can make overinclusive and underinclusive rules intolerable. It is one thing to have a flat rule that people under the age of sixteen cannot drive: the social and economic costs of mistaken denials of a license are relatively low. It is quite another thing to have a flat rule that people falling in a certain class will be put to death. It is for this reason that rule-bound decisions are unacceptable in inflicting capital punishment, 243 and to some extent in criminal sentencing generally. 2 " (But here we must believe not only that rules make for error, but also that case-by-case decisions will make for less error.) This point also helps to explain the dramatic difference between criminal liability, which is generally rule-bound, and criminal sentencing, which Rules are also less acceptable when circumstances are changing rapidly. When circumstances are changing, rules are likely to be inaccurate. Consider, for example, a congressional decision to issue a statutory standard for permissible emissions levels for coal-fired power plants. Surely any such standard will soon be out of date because of technological change. In these circumstances it may be best to enact privately adaptable rules, 2 48 to delegate decisions to institutions capable of changing them rapidly, or perhaps to allow case-by-case judgments based on relevant factors. D. Privately Adaptable Rules An ambitious strategy might emerge from distinguishing between two sorts of rules, or, more accurately, between rules having and lacking a certain important characteristic. 2 52 Some rules allocate initial entitlementsthese unquestionably count as rules-but at the same time maximize individual flexibility and minimize the informational burden on government, by allowing private adaptation to determine ultimate outcomes. Consider, as a defining example, background rules in the law of contract, which can be adapted by the parties as they choose.25 3 , A background rule states a presumption: it applies if the parties do not provide otherwise, but the parties are freely entitled to alter it if they choose. The line between privately adaptable rules and commands is one of degree rather than one of kind. What I am describing is a characteristic present to a greater or lesser degree in some rules, not a crisply defined category of rules. Even command-and-control regulation allows a degree of private adaptation, in the sense that people are permitted to go out of business or to change their line of work so as to escape regulation entirely. Notably, all rules, including the most adaptable rules, allocate entitlements. The allocation may well have an effect on people's preferences, since people tend to prefer things that have been initially allocated to them;258 it might also affect distributions and hence end-states as well.2 59 Indeed, it is insufficiently appreciated that government cannot avoid the task of allocating entitlements and of doing so through rules. Laissezfaire is a chimera; what is familiarly described as laissez-faire is actually a particular set of legal rules. Our rights, as we live them, do not come from A key feature of privately adaptable rules is their association with free alienability of rights. Ownership rights are of course freely alienable, and in this way they respond well to the fact that owners and prospective purchasers know how valuable the relevant rights are to them. The informational burden on government is therefore minimized. The surrounding rules do not operate as personal orders. To be sure, privately adaptable rules are coercive. The law of property is itself coercive insofar as it prevents nonowners from claiming what they would otherwise claim and doing what they would otherwise do.262 The virtue of privately adaptable rules is not that they are not coercive and not that they are "natural"; it is that they reduce the costs of rule-making and harness private information and preferences 6 3 in the service of outcomes that are themselves not identified ex ante. Or consider the area of telecommunications, an area that has for too long been burdened by unduly rigid rules. For much of its history, the Federal Communications Commission has been faced with the task of deciding how to allocate licenses.2 69 In making this decision, it has alternated between rules and factors. In using factors, the FCC has referred to local ownership, minority ownership, participation by owners in public affairs, broadcast experience, the adequacy of technical facilities, the background and qualifications of staff, the character of owners, and more. 270 The problems with both rules and factors are entirely predictable-inaccu What alternatives are possible? In a famous early article, Ronald Coase argued that the government should allocate broadcasting licenses through a system of privately adaptable rules17 2-based on property rights and market transfers, as property law does (for example) for ownership of newspapers and automobiles. In the recent past the FCC has experimented with auctions, and the results have been outstanding.27 3 There is an obvious objection to Coase's proposal. Perhaps broadcasting licenses should not be regarded as ordinary property; perhaps the criterion of private willingness to pay is an inadequate basis for awarding licenses. This objection contains an important point. 274 Broadcasting may promote a range of "nonmarket" values, captured in the aspiration to promote education, attention to public affairs, diversity of view, and high-quality programming. 75 But this objection is not a justification for departing from privately adaptable rules in favor of command-and-control regulation. Any non-market values might be promoted by more flexible means. Thus the rules for auctions might be designed so as to ensure auction credits for those applicants who promise to promote nonmarket values.2 76 This example shows that privately adaptable rules might well be used not to oppose regulatory goals, but instead to harness market forces in the interest of those very goals.2 77 E. Abolition Sometimes both rules and factors are intolerable; sometimes market forces cannot or should not be harnessed. Having eliminated both rules and factors, the law might use a lottery instead as a method of allocating costs and benefits.2 78 (Of course the decision to hold a lottery is supported by a rule.) This is a possible solution to the problems posed by a military draft, where rule-bound judgments seem too crude, and where rule-free judgments are too obviously subject to discrimination and caprice. Lotteries are used Alternatively, the legal system, having found both rules and rulelessness inadequate, might abolish the relevant institution or practice itself. (The abolition must of course be accomplished by rule.) Hence the narrowest and probably the best argument for abolition of the death penalty takes the following form. Rules are unacceptable because they eliminate the possibility of adaptation of criminal sentencing to individual circumstances.2 8 1 Privately adaptable rules would make little sense in the context of criminal punishment, with the possible and controversial exception of plea bargaining. Rule-bound death sentences are excessively impersonal. But rule-free systems, including those based on factors, are unacceptable too, because they allow excessive discretion and create a risk that irrelevant or illegitimate considerations will enter the decision to impose capital punishment. When judgments are to be made about who is to live and who is to die, a high degree of accuracy is necessary, and errors based on confusion, variable judgments, bias, or venality are intolerable. The problem is that human institutions cannot devise a system for making capital decisions in a way that sufficiently diminishes the risk of error. Rule-bound systems create too many errors; so too with systems based on factors. A system committed to the rule of law is committed to limiting official discretion, but it is not committed to the unrealistic goal of making every decision according to judgments fully specified in advance. Nonetheless, rules are an admirable device for obtaining agreement on the content of law, and also for reducing discretion at the point of application. Often people possible combinations might be imagined. questioned this strategy on both economic and democratic grounds, but sometimes flexible, contextual interpretation of rules, adapting the general to the particular, can bring about something like the best of both worlds. More generally, privately adaptable rules are a promising effort to minimize the problems of excessive generality, by opting for rules that allow private adjustment, harness private ordering, and reduce the informational costs imposed on government. Some people who favor such rules intend their arguments to be a challenge to regulation and a basis for approval of unrestricted (though rule-governed) "free" markets."' 2 But privately adaptable rules may enjoy an important rebirth in the context of government regulation-in the creation of rules that are designed to accomplish regulatory goals, but that do so by specifying initial entitlements rather than final outcomes, and that harness market forces in the interest of socially chosen ends. I have also suggested that legitimate rule revisions are pervasive, and that the choice between rules and rulelessness might well be based on a highly pragmatic, contextualized inquiry the costs of the two approaches in the area at hand. Thus understood, the choice would itself be based on the practice of casuistry, in which judgments for or against rules emerge not from rules, but from careful assessments of particular circumstances. I have urged that casuistry may well be given democratic foundations insofar as it places a premium on rights to participate and to receive a response.2 83 Casuistry is hardly all there is to a well-functioning legal system, and it has important limitations. But if what I have argued here is correct, a form of casuistry plays an important role in the interpretation of rules themselves, and it occupies a distinguished and prominent place even in a legal system committed to rule-bound justice and the rule of law. Mandatory retirement age296 Presumption that pre-termination evidentiary hearing is required29 8 Mandatory death penalty for certain offenses 300 (invalidated) Casey "undue burden" standard28 5 "voluntariness" standard2 87 inevitable discovery exception to the warrant requirement 2 9 corporate transactions involving interested director voidable when ,,unfair,, 29t assessment of relevant factors under Second Restatement of Conflict of Laws2 93 Judgments before social security grid Retirement when incompetence can 297 be demonstrated Balancing test in determining the need for a hearing 99 Untrammeled jury discretion over imposition of death penalty 30' (opinion of Stewart, Powell, and Stevens, JJ.). No barrier under Tenth Amendment to congressional authority under Commerce Clause "Per se" rule in antitrust 30 6 No contracts without consideration 3 8 Absolute protection of endangered species Rule of deference to agency interpretations of ambiguous 3t2 statutes Caveat emptor3t 4 Contract at will-employer and employee may fire or quit as they choose, unless contract provides otherwise Balancing risk against benefit" 3 Tenth Amendment barrier to congressional authority under Commerce Clause when "traditional governmental functions" are involved 0 5 "Rule of reason" in antitrust30 7 Promissory estoppel when reliance is reasonable Consideration of loss of species as a relevant factor3 " Deference to agency interpretations when reasonable to defer3 13 Seller liable for "latent defects" 3 5 Employer may not discharge in violation of public policy317 Species Act). Negligence per Se322 Inquiry into legislative intentions 3t 9 Administrative/executive authority may be immunized from President if this does not intrude on President's core functions 32 1 Negligence if conduct is unreasonable