 Rights and Their Critics The Bill of Rights has now been part of the United States Constitution for more than two hundred years. In the recent past, that short document has inspired reform movements throughout the world-not merely in the Soviet Union, Hungary, Romania, Poland, and East Germany, but in such places as South Africa, China, and Taiwan as well. It is therefore nothing short of remarkable that the international interest in the Bill of Rights has come at a time when the very concept of rights, or of a polity pervaded by rights, is under attack in the United States. claim about the pathologies of legal practices during the Warren Court era. More generally, it is urged that a culture of rights encourages a form of selfishness and an unwillingness to compromise that are incompatible with citizenship.' Along related but distinct lines, academic critics have suggested that aggressive judicial review or perhaps judicial review itself, protecting identified rights, is by its nature incompatible with democracy.4 These various claims have received hospitable receptions in prominent places. Many of the Supreme Court's recent decisions embrace the idea that the creation of rights can be destructive to democratic governance.5 The attack on "substantive due process" reflects this claim quite vividly.' In recent deliberations, Congress and the executive branch have been increasingly attentive to the view that government, instead of recognizing rights, should encourage people to exercise greater responsibility.7 On this view, those who are disadvantaged should take their welfare into their own hands and should not expect assistance from government operating in response to claims of right. Moreover, it is said, those who are advantaged should respond not to rights laid down by the state, but to their own sense of responsibility to people in need. If the 1960s and the early 1970s were an era of rights, it seems likely that the 1990s will be a period in which responsibilities move increasingly to the fore. INTERPRETING WELFARE RIGHTS 274-83 (1994); President Bill Clinton, Address Before the National Baptist Convention (Sept. 9, 1994) (describing a "crisis of values" and a "lack of individual responsibility"); Dan Quayle, The Poverty of Values, Address Before the Commonwealth Club of California (Sept. 8, 1994) ("[O]ur public policy today, unfortunately, reflects a philosophy of rights and entitlements rather than responsibility."). My goal in this Essay is to disaggregate and to evaluate the claims now brought against rights. I suggest that much of the attack is based on confusion and on a failure to make necessary distinctions. The attack is best aimed at particular rights, not at rights as such. In its usual form, it depends on a misunderstanding of what rights are and of what they do. It rests on empirical claims that are hard to support. It offers a cultural diagnosis that is only part of a complex picture, for there has been no general shift to rights from responsibilities. Numerous charges have been made against rights, and it will be useful to begin by separating distinct claims that tend to be run together. We might disaggregate the charges into six different categories. Some people suggest, as part of their critique of rights, that rights are essentially social and collective in character and that the rhetoric of rights obscures this point.1 3 For example, rights come from the state in the sense that they depend for their existence on collective institutions. 4 Without the law of property, set out by the collectivity, property rights cannot be secure. Without the law of contract, saying that agreements are enforceable under certain conditions, contracts could not exist in the way that we understand them. In the critics' view, many claims based on rights, and especially claims for individual rights, tend to disguise the social character of rights and in particular the need for collective and communal support. 5 The result, it is said, is confusion and an inability to draw lines between rights that are desirable from the social point of view and rights that are not. Other critics charge that rights have a strident and absolutist character, and that for this reason they impoverish political discourse. 6 Rights do not admit of compromise. They do not allow room for competing considerations. For this reason, they impair and even foreclose deliberation over complex issues not realistical In one of his greatest aphorisms, Justice Holmes wrote that "[g]eneral propositions do not decide concrete cases."2' Rights,. of course, take the form of general propositions. For this reason they are said to be indeterminate and thus unhelpful.22 If we know that there is a right to private property, we do not know whether an occupational safety and health law or a law requiring beach access is permissible. In fact, we know relatively little. Standing by itself, the constitutional protection against govemnment "takings" tells us very little about how to handle particular problems. This is true of rights generally. To say that there is a right to equal protection of the law is not to say, for example, that affirmative action programs are acceptable, mandatory, or prohibited. In fact, the right to equal protection of the law re ("Individual rights are D. Excessive Individualism A different objection is that rights are unduly individualistic and associated with highly undesirable characteristics, including selfishness and indifference to others.25 Rights miss the "dimension of sociality;"" they posit selfish, isolated individuals who assert what is theirs, rather than participating in communal life. Rights, it is said, neglect the moral and social dimensions of important problems. 23 See Henry Richardson, Specifying Norms as a Way to Resolve Concrete Ethical Problems, Similarly, American law is said to be unequipped even to describe the harms faced by a community destroyed by the closing of a plant employing most of its members. These harms include the loss of a rich neighborhood life-"roots, relationships, solidarity, sense of place, and shared memory . . ."' On the critics' view, the individualistic character of recent formulations has left Americans with a crucial linguistic and conceptual deficiency. Rights talk is a principal culprit. Since rights are claimed by individuals, it is said, rights promote and encourage a community whose members think of social problems in the most narrow, self-interested terms. To some critics, a key problem with rights is that they tend to be used for what the critics see as pernicious ends. Partly because rights are indeterminate in the abstract, they can be used as an excessively conservative and antidemocratic force, protecting exist- ing distributions from scrutiny and change."' Some people think that the historical function of rights has been to insulate current practice from legitimate democratic oversight. Thus the Fifth Amendment was invoked to protect slavery before the Civil War;31 thus the Fourteenth Amendment was used to attack social welfare legislation thus the First Amendment is used to invalidate campaign finance legislation3 today.4 in the early part of this century;, 2 On this view, rights are too readily invoked in the service of goals that are unworthy or that at least should be subject to democratic rather than judicial resolution. A key problem with rights is A final and especially prominent objection is that the emphasis on rights tends to crowd out the issue of responsibility. In American law and in American public discourse, some critics complain, it is too rare to find the idea that people owe duties to each other, or that civic virtue is to be cultivated, prized, and lived. Rights, and especially new protections of rights since the 1960s, are said to be a major problem here. The very same ideas that prompted the judicial revolution When black people insist on rights and "demand ...from [their] oppressors [] more lenient standards of conduct," they produce a state of dependency worse than slavery." Professor Mary Ann Glendon, an especially prominent and evenhanded critic of rights, is similarly concerned about the effects of rights on responsibilities.4 2 Thus Glendon devotes a good deal of space to the "duty to rescue," a duty not recognized by American law.43 If a person ignores someone who is drowning, he will not be held accountable, even if rescue could occur with little effort. Glendon deplores this result, arguing at a minimum for a statement, in law, that such a duty exists. On Glendon's view, it is important to attend to responsibility as well as rights. American law does this far too infrequently. Along similar lines, Glendon challenges the view (on which insistent4 ) that the the current Supreme Court is increasingly Constitution imposes no affirmative duties on government. She suggests, that police officers should be obliged to protect people from serious threats and that social workers should have a duty to protect children from domestic violence when they are on notice that such violence will occur. Above all, Glendon fears that judicial decisions that fail to recognize these duties have harmed public discourse and social understandings. The important point is the general one: Critics of rights argue that the emphasis on rights diminishes individual commitments to duty and responsibility. In this section, I attempt to clarify some of the conceptual issues at stake in the critique of rights. I suggest as well that the A. Definitional Issues Begin with a definition of rights. This is a regrettably complex issue, and I will have to deal with it briefly and tentatively here." Sometimes the term "rights" is intended to refer to important human interests, or (what is not the same thing) to those interests that operate as "trumps" in the sense that they cannot be compromised by reference to collective policies or goals. If we identify rights with important human interests, the critique of rights loses its force. Who could object to social protection of important human interests? The conception of rights as interests that operate as "trumps" against the collectivity raises more difficulty, largely because it is not clear that this conception is really helpful. The first problem is that almost every right is defeasible at some point, and defeasible just because the collective interest is very strong. In American law, no right is absolute. If, for example, the rest of the human race will be eliminated because of the protection of a right, the right will certainly be redefined or legitimately infringed, probably under some version of the "compelling interest" test. The real question then becomes when rights are defeasible because of collective justifications-under what conditions and for what reasons. The formula of "trumps" is misleading for this reason. We need to know what sorts of reasons are admissible and how weighty they must be; these are the key questions in the exploration of rights. Rights characteristically limit the kinds of arguments that can be used by way of justification, and they characteristically require justifications of special weight.47 Above all, rights exclude certain 45 For similar assessments, see McClain, supra note 1, at 990-94. 46 For an especially instructive discussion of the definition of rights, see RAZ, supra The second problem is that. many conceptual puzzles are interests operating raised by "against" the collectivity. Often rights are something that the collectivity recognizes and protects in order to protect its interests. If this is so, there is no easy opposition between rights and the collectivity. In fact many rights are best understood as a solution to a collective action problem and especially to a prisoner's dilemma faced by people lacking legal entitlements; property rights themselves have this character. 9 Rights are collectively conferred and designed to promote collective interests. They are protected by social institutions for social reasons. In such cases, rights may in a sense operate against the collectivity once they are conferred; government may not take property just because it wants to do so. But even in such cases, rights are guaranteed in the first instance both by and for the collectivity (which of course has no existence apart from the individuals who compose it). If I were to choose between living in a society which enjoys freedom of expression, but not having the right myself, or enjoying the right in a society which does not have it, I would have no hesitation in judging that my own personal interest is better served by the first option." The point suggests that many rights deserve to exist because of their collective consequences. are hardly critical of rights. On the contrary, they take rights to be crucial instruments for promoting economic goals. 2 Those who emphasize the need to base social and legal practices on a conception of the human good, or of human flourishing, will also make room for rights insofar as rights can be shown to be a method of promoting human flourishing. Under this view, a conception of the good is prior to a conception of the right; but rights are a crucial part of the good, or a crucial way of achieving the good, for purposes of both theory and practice. Of course deontological writers offer a very different conception of rights, seeing them not as instruments for maximizing utility or wealth, or as a way of promoting the best conception of the human good, but as reflecting respect for individuals as persons.57 Here we may indeed have an opposition between the individual and the community. Under this conception of rights, it remains necessary to justify any particular understanding of rights, and thus to offer reasons for their existence. But perhaps those Let us put these conceptual difficulties to one side and define rights in a way that should be congenial to both supporters and critics of rights: Rights are legally enforceable instruments for the protection of their claimants. Rights are thus practical instruments that can be invoked in courts of law by individuals or groups against both private parties and the state. (To say that rights operate against society is not to say that their justification is not social. Rights operating, against society may have social justification; consider the right to free speech or the right to private property.) This is a highly pragmatic conception of rights, one that tries to put philosophical issues to one side and to identify instead the actual functions of rights in the world. I think that it is this understanding of rights, and not the contested theoretical issues, that underlies the critique of rights. Now shift to the place of rights in American constitutionalism. A good deal of work in constitutional law has dealt with the role of "republican" thought in the American tradition." The republican ideal prizes a deliberative conception of democracy-one in which popular sovereignty entails not simple majoritarianism, but an effort to ensure a form of reason-giving in the public sphiere. ° Efforts to revive the republican tradition have been designed in part to oppose the view that the protection of antecedently given "rights" is the sole purpose of the American constitutional tradition. On the contrary, the notion that rights are antecedently given leads to real confusion. Many rights are protected as such because they are a precondition for democratic deliberation," Some critics of the "republican revival" think that republicanism and rights are at odds. On this view, republicanism is "ominous" insofar as it prizes democratic deliberation and downgrades private rights.' But this is a misreading of the republican tradition. The Framers of the Constitution were certainly republicans, and they certainly believed in rights. Modern forms of republicanism are enthusiastic about rights. If deliberation and citizenship are desirable, rights of free speech, for example, seem indispensable, and we may be led to guarantee rights of religious liberty,67 rights of private property, and rights in the criminal justice sys 62 See, e.g., Morton J. Horwitz, Republicanism and Liberalism in American Constitutional to himself, but that he teaching each citizen "that he does not belong property"). can Revival in Constitutional Theory: The Ominous Implications, 79 CAL. L. REV. 267 (1991). Precommitment and the Paradox of Democracy, 67 See Stephen Holmes, in Of course a commitment to republicanism-a vagu6 and general creed capable of many diverse specifications-does not lead to any particular constellation of rights. But republicans are likely to make much use of rights to promote their own deepest ideals. From the previous discussion we can see a wide range of strands in the challenge to rights. The challenge is highly eclectic. Moreover, there are some truths in many of these points, and it will be useful to explore those truths. I discuss some of these issues in Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and (1991) (showing that social norms, with law-like functions, can emerge spontaneously). more fragile protection of property and person than modem polities seek. century, Friedrich Hayek: It is regrettable, though rot difficult to explain, that in the past much less attention has been given to the positive requirements of a successful working of the competitive system than to these [previously discussed] negative points. The functioning of a competition not only requires adequate organisation [sic] of certain institutions like money, markets, and channels of information-some of which can never be adequately provided by private enterprise-but it depends above all on the existence of an appropriate legal system, a legal system designed both to preserve competition and to make it operate as beneficially as . In no system that could be rationally defended would the state possible . . . just do nothing. An effective competitive system needs an intelligently designed and continuously adjusted legal framework as much as any other. It seems correct too to say that civic virtue-responsibility to one's neighbors and to one's nation-is an important part of Despite the various partial truths in the attack on rights, there is a pervasive problem in that attack: Rights need not have the functions or consequences that they are alleged to have. The challenge to rights is properly directed against certain kinds of rights, not against rights in general. At most, the challenge to rights creates a contingent, partial warning about the appropriate content of rights and about the possibly harmful role of certain social institutions safeguarding rights. It is not what it purports to be, that is, a general claim about rights as a social institution. More specifically, the current devaluation of rights suffers from two serious problems. Both of these problems are products of some pervasive confusions. I mean to put to one side and not to assess the question whether nonhuman creatures or objects should have rights, for the ultimate protection of human beings or for other reasons. The two problems can be brought together if we attend to a familiar conceptual confusion. 6 Often critics write as if rights and responsibilities are opposed, or as if those who favor the former are completely different from those who favor the latter. As they see it, rights are individual, atomistic, selfish, crude, licentious, antisocial, and associated with the Warren Court. Responsibilities, on the other hand, are seen as collective, social, altruistic, nuanced, and associated with appropriate or traditional values. But this understanding is quite inadequate, for some rights lack the characteristics claimed for them, and other rights have the features associated with responsibilities."' For example, the right to freedom of speech may be owned by individuals, but it is a precondition for a highly social process, that of democratic deliberation. That right keeps open the channels of communication; it is emphatically communal in character. It ensures a sine quo non of sociality, an opportunity for people to speak with one other. Indeed, everyone who owns a speech right does so partly so as to contribute to the collectivity; it is this fact that explains the government's inability to "buy" speech rights even when a speaker would like to sell.7' So too, the right to associational freedom is hardly individualistic. It is meant precisely to protect collective' action and sociality. 76 A related confusion is embodied in the notion that rights posit a wholly autonomous, asocial "subject." Rights do no such thing. They are political instruments with no necessary metaphysical foundation. diverse functions of the right to property). See Wesley N. Hohfeld, Some Fundamental Legal Conceptions As Applied in Judicial does not seem important to my purposes here. is taken up in Part III infra. people's wealth,""7 "to preserve and protect socialist property,"' to "work conscientiously," 9 and "to concern themselves with the upbringing of children."9 The Soviet Constitution offers a cautionary note against enthusiasm for responsibilities, at least if these are to be treated as an explicit, legally codified concern of the state (putting the Hohfeldian point to one side)." These points suggest a broad conclusion about the recent criticism of rights. Those who believe in more reflective public deliberation are making an important point; we have far too little such deliberation, and part of the problem involves unduly simple arguments based on alleged rights. But the critics should not claim to be making so general a criticism of rights. Instead, they should offer a fine-grained account allowing people to identify both the sorts of interests that cannot be intruded on without special justification and the sorts of institutions that should protect various interests. Surely such an inquiry will justify a redescription of certain interests in terms that have nothing to do with rights or that treats rights not as axiomatic but as the outcomes of a complex set of judgments. For example, consider the problems of environmental protection and plant closings. 2 But it is equally certain that many "rights" will survive in their current state. It is important to insist that such an inquiry will suggest that the category of human rights is not coextensive with the category of constitutional rights or the category of judicially enforceable rights. Constitutional rights qualify as such for special and partly contingent reasons, having to do with institutional issues and with the reasons for distrust of ordinary politics in the particular nation.9" Constitutional rights are usually and rightly thought to have a "vertical" dimension, allocating power between the government and the individual. But they also have an important "horizontal" dimension, allocating power among different branches of government by, for example, granting authority to the judiciary Perhaps these basic arguments would not entirely satisfy many critics of rights. Perhaps they would want to characterize the problem as the constant resort to the legal system as a remedy for social ills, rather than the use of public deliberative processes and, best of all, of self-help and nongovernmental institutions. In the last generation we have seen quite absurd claims of right in cases involving the law of tort and the law of the Constitution. Is it unconstitutional-invasive of right-for government to require people to wear helmets when they ride motorcycles?" Many people think that such questions are rhetorical and that such cases give rights a bad name. business versus But it is important to sort out the relationships between "rights talk" and "the impoverishment of political discourse. "' Some critics suggest that political discourse is in significant part a creature of what happens with courts and law."0 But this is an empirical claim, and it may not be true. To be sure, political discourse is often impoverished, and correctives for the current situation should be a principal concern of current reformers. This is a central issue for modern democracies. If one looks at the prominent places for political discussion-say, the television and most popular radio stations-one will find little deliberation and little serious attention to public issues, and such attention as there is appears Sometimes the banality consists of reflexive claims about rights. and banal.' Important questions, however, remain: To what extent can this phenomenon be attributed to "rights talk" within the judiciary and the legal system? By what mechanism has "rights talk" produced problems in public deliberation? Can an association be shown? Careful work has shown that many arguments about the social effects of judicial decisions tend to be overstated, specula they might focus on the There is enormous room for reform here, drawing on experience in other nations and involving changes both in private sector practices and in the regulatory system governing the media.",4 For example, the government might offer larger subsidies to high quality broadcasting or encourage more attention to public issues through licensing policies. It might offer guidelines or recommendations designed to work against the culture of the soundbite. It might attempt to encourage opinion polls that involve public deliberation rather than quick and often ill-considered individual reactions." 5 All this seems plausible. What I am questioning is the suggestion that "rights" are a major culprit here. On the contrary, rights of some sort are likely to be an important part of any effort to improve public deliberation. sense of social I have suggested that many of the most enthusiastic and vivid challenges to rights are based on the idea that the American emphasis on rights, and perhaps especially on legal rights, has caused a weakened responsibility. The Hohfeldian impose responsibilities, while responsibilities point-that rights create rights-severely complicates this idea. But putting that point to one side, we should acknowledge that an insistence on people's rights ought not to disparage people's responsibilities. This idea could perhaps qualify as a twenty-first-century analogue to the Ninth Amendment.' Certainly we should keep in mind the important point that people may have a right to do something that deny or disparage others retained by the people." U.S. CONST. amend. IX. issues of pregnancy and abortion. Under the Constitution, women have a right to have abortions. But it is important to insist that this is a right that ought not to be exercised, or to have to be exercised, very often, and that in a society with 1.5 million abortions per year, something is extremely wrong. Even people who favor the abortion right ought to be clear that an abortion is a tragic event and that steps should be taken to make abortions rare. In the aftermath of the Supreme Court's refusal to overrule Roe v. Wade,"7 it is perfectly appropriate for people on all sides of the issue to shift public debate in the direction of ways to minimize the incidence of abortion. Efforts to discourage pregnancies that will result in abortions, and even to discourage abortion itself through moral suasion, should not, as a general rule, be taken as unfortunate interferences with a "right," even if some such efforts might be rejected as punitive or discriminatory. to join a cult of victimhood, role in lack rights The fear of an association between the recognition of legal rights and failures in responsibility and self-help seems plausible in to desirable goods many settings. People who in may-from fear, self-interest, or sheer desperation-engage socially productive conduct. (Of course they may engage in unproductive and even dangerous conduct instead.) For example, there is a familiar and wholly reasonable fear that a "right to welfare" could discourage productive labor. It is possible too that people who think of themselves as victims, needing and enforcing rights, will fail to engage in activity that is ultimately rewarding to themselves and to society as a whole. If we acknowledge all this, how, if at all, might the abortion right be justified? The answer has everything tq do with social context and with failures of social responsibility. Under conditions of equality on the basis of sex and without. widespread poverty, the argument for an abortion right would be far weaker."2 Surely it is correct to say that in a society in which duties to the vulnerable were taken seriously, the case for a right to abortion would be much less plausible than it now is. In such a society, men as well as women would be required (by social norms and perhaps by draws herself. See GLENDON, supra note 111. claim. There have been many different strands in recent critiques of rights. Some of those strands point to legitimate concerns. We can identify rights claims that are genuinely absurd, and it is important to acknowledge that a society pervaded by rights may be pathological. My basic point here is that the category of rights is extremely broad and that for this reason, no general critique of rights will make much sense. Those who blame "rights" have misdescribed their real target. In the last generation, morever, there has been no general shift from responsibilities to rights. Instead there have been multiple particular shifts in both directions. not whether we should have rights, but what rights we should have. Some of what I have discussed here bears on that question, but to make much progress on it, much more will have to be said about both values and facts. I conclude with the suggestion that we should cease discussing -whether rights are desirable and cease opposing rights to responsibilities. We should embark instead on the more fine-grained task of deciding what categories of rights are appropriate in what settings. Cass R. Sunstein obtained his J.D. degree, graduating magna cum laude, from Havard Law School in 1978. After graduation, he served as a law clerk for the Honorable Benjamin Kaplan, Supreme Judicial Court of Massachuetts for one year, followed by a clerkship with the Honorable Thurgood Marshall, Supreme Court of the United States. In 1980, Mr. Sunstein worked as an AttorneyAdvisor in the Office of Legal Counsel at the United States Department of Justice before joining the University of Chicago Law School faculty in 1981. in soft cover R. Stone and Richard A. Epstein). Remembering the Sixties (forthcoming 1996). (with Richard Pildes). (with Lawrence Lessig). Interpreting Statutes in the Regulatory State, 103 HARV. L. REV. 405 (1989) (recipient of 1990 award of American Bar Association for best annual scholarship in administrative law). In Defense of the Hard Look: Judicial Activism and Administrative Law, (with Richard B. Stewart). Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Separation of Powers, 23 ARIz. L. REV.