University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1995 

Five Theses on Originalism 
Five Theses on Originalism 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Five Theses on Originalism," 19 Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy 311 (1995). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

FIVE  THESES  ON  ORIGINALISM

CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN*

Thank you all. It's a pleasure  to be here for many reasons,  one
of which  is  that  I  see  in  the  room  people  I  have  known  at  ex-
tremely  diverse  stages  of my  life,  from  students  who  were  stu-
dents  in  my  very  first  classes  at  the  University  of  Chicago  to
teachers  I had when I was  a student. But I won't identify them;  it
might  embarrass  them  and  make  them  feel  less  young  than  in
fact they  are.  So  thank you for having  me.

These remarks  will come in five  parts.  I have  five theses,  and I
am  going  to  allocate  three  minutes  to  each  of  them.  Each  of
them would of course  require  a fuller  defense  than  I can supply
here.'

First:  No  approach  to  interpretation  is  self-justifying.  Any  sys-
tem of interpretation  needs ajustification. In that sense, personal
judgments  are  unavoidable.2

To  this  proposition,  originalism  is  not  at all  an  exception.  It
needs  a defense  of some sort. Those who find  originalism  attrac-
tive  must mount a defense  in terms of some account of the right
or  the  good.  References  to  legitimacy  and  political  authority
don't supply  that  defense;  they  are  question-begging.

In the end, any system of interpretation  needs  to be backed by
a  claim  that  that  system,  more  than  any  other, will  make  for  a
good  system  of constitutional  law.  There  is  no  way  of avoiding
our own judgments  on that  question.

Second,  constitutionalism  in its American  version has  two  fun-
damental  goals.  The  first involves  rule  of law values. There  is  an
intimate  connection  between  constitutionalism  and  rule  of law
values:  to-wit,  the protection of stability, certainty, predictable  ex-
pectations,  and  limits  on  official  discretion,  including  promi-
nently limits  on judicial  discretion.3

*  Karl  N. Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  The  University

of Chicago  Law School  and Department  of Political  Science.

1.  More  detailed  discussion  will  appear  in  CAss  R.  SuNs-rIN, LEGAL  REASONING  AND

PorrcA  CoNzucr,  ch.  8  (forthcoming  1996).

2.  See CASs  1.  SuNsrSm,  THE PARTIAL CoNsrTrrioN  96-104  (1993).
3.  See generaly THE FDERAti.sr  No.  78  (Alexander Hamilton)  (defending  lifetime ten-
ure ofjudges as essential  to judicial discretion); Antonin Scalia,  The Rule of Law as a Law of
Rules,  56 U.  CHh  L  REv.  1175,  1177-80  (1989)  (arguing  that adherence  to  legal  rules
prevents  arbitrariness).

HeinOnline  -- 19 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 311 1995-1996

312

Harvard Journal of Law  &  Public Policy

[Vol.  19

A  second  goal  of American  constitutionalism  involves  demo-
cratic  concerns.  On  this view,  constitutionalism  attempts  to  fur-
nish  the  preconditions  for  democratic  self-government.  In  its
best form, our system of constitutionalism  has the  rule of law and
democratic  self-government  at  its foundations.4

Three:  There are two forms  of originalism, hard and soft. Hard
originalism,  which  is  the  more  famous,  is unacceptable.  For  the
hard  originalist, we  are  trying  to do  something  like  go back  in  a
time  machine  and ask  the  Framers  very  specific  questions  about
how  we  ought  to  resolve  very  particular  problems.  The  hard
originalist view  is  the  dominant  theme  of Judge  Bork's  book.'

Justices  Scalia  and Thomas sometimes speak as if they are hard
originalists.6  Hard originalism  is an unacceptable  project because
it is  inconsistent with  too much  that is both settled and worthy in
many  areas,  including  free  speech,  religious  liberty,  racial  dis-
crimination,  and  sex  discrimination.  The  problem  with  hard
originalism-putting  the epistemological  problems  to one side-
is not that it is indeterminate,  but that it would result in an unac-
ceptably narrow set of liberties for the United States in the Twen-
tieth  Century.7

There  have  been heroic  efforts  to  show that the  Framers'  con-
ception  of religious  liberty,  race  equality,  sex  equality,  and  free
speech  is  acceptably  ample.8  These  heroic  efforts  are,  I  believe,
notjust heroic but also a bit comic. We  ought not to be fooled. It
is not the  case that the Framers'  views justify the set of results that
even  those  most  suspicious  of  rights-based  constitutionalism
would  find  minimally necessary.

4.  See SuNsrEjN,  supra  note  1, at  13341.
5.  See ROBERT  H. BOR,  THE  TEMFTING  OF AMERICA:  THE  PoLTmCAL  SEDUCTION  OF  THE

LAW  143-60  (1990).

6.  See,  e.g.,  U.S.  Term  Limits v.  Thornton,  115  S. Ct.  1842,  1875  (1995)  (Thomas, J.,
dissenting)  (relying on  observations  made  by James Madison  in support  of the  constitu-
tionality of Congressional  term  limits);  United States  v. Lopez,  115  S. Ct.  1624,  1643-44
(1995)  (Thomas, J.,  concurring)  (examining  the  meaning  of  "commerce"  commonly
held at the  time of the Constitution's drafting);  Harmelin v. Michigan,  501  U.S. 957, 966-
69  (1991)  (Scalia, J.)  (looking  to  historical  influences  of English  and American  law  in
determining that the Eighth  Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punish-
ment contains  no proportionality  guarantee).

7.  See Cass R.  Sunstein,  WhatJudge Bork Should Have Said, 23  CONN. L.  REv. 205,  209-10

(1991).

8.  See,  ag., Michael  W. McConnell,  Originalism and the Desegregation Doctrine, 81  VA.  L.
REv.  947 (1995)  (arguing that the original meaning and intent of the Fourteenth Amend-
ment  did support the  school desegregation  that Brown  v.  Board of Educ.,  347 U.S.  483
(1954),  ushered  in,  despite  the scholarly  consensus to  the  contrary).

HeinOnline  -- 19 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 312 1995-1996

No.  2]

Five Theses  on  Originalism

The  fact  that  hard  originalism  is  inconsistent  with  a minimal
approach  to  free  speech,  religious  liberty,  and  race  and  sex
equality  is  important  because  any  system  of  interpretation  de-
pends  on  a justification  (recall  thesis  one).  That justification
must, broadly speaking, have  a connection  to whether such a sys-
tem  would make  the  world better  or worse.  Abstract  words  like
political legitimacy  and  political  theory won't do  the job. This  is
why  hard originalism  is  very hard  to defend  in principle.

On what account, I ask, would hard originalism be better  than
the  interpretive  alternatives?  This  is  the  unanswered  question.
People  who  purport  to  be hard  originalists  tend to  rest  content
with large-sounding  but question-begging  abstractions.

Fourth:  Soft  originalism  is  a valuable  project  and  it has  great
advantages  over  the  alternatives,  originalist  and  nonoriginalist.
For  the soft  originalist it matters  very much what  history  shows;
but the  soft originalist will take  the  Framers'  understanding  at a
certain  level  of abstraction  or  generality.  As Judge  Bork  rightly
argues,  it  matters  that  the  First  Amendment,  for  the  Framers,
had  a  large  connection  with  democratic  self-government.9  A
democratic  conception  of the  First Amendment  is  defended  in
significant  part  by  virtue  of the  fact  that  that  was  the  Framers'
understanding.' 0  A  conception  of the  Equal  Protection  Clause
that  takes  from  the  history  a ban  on  second-class  citizenship  in
the  United States  provides  a  defensible  interpretive  strategy.  In-
deed,  it  is  a  desirable  interpretive  strategy;  it  helps  orient  our
inquiry.

Soft originalism  thus does  not run afoul of the  problems faced
by hard originalism, and  it is  much better for rule  of law reasons
and  for  democratic  reasons  than  nonoriginalist  alternatives  of
the  sort  defended  by Ronald  Dworkin"  and  practiced  on occa-
sion  by  the Warren  Court.'"

Fifth:  It would be very  good  to  converge,  if we  could,  on soft
originalism.  Soft  originalism  does  have  a  problem,  however:  its
incompleteness  as  a  theory  of  interpretation.  Soft  originalism

9.  See Robert H. Bork, NeutralPrincipes and SomeFirst Amendment Probems, 47 IND.  LJ. 1,

26-34  (1971).

10.  See CA  s  R. SuNsrN,  DEMOCRACY  AND  THE  PROBLEM  OF FREE  SPEECH  (1990).
11.  See generally RON.D M.  DwoRRI,  Lmw's  EMm.tE  (1986)  (questioning whether  past

politics  can be  decisive  of present rights).

12.  See,  e.g.,  Griswold  v.  Connecticut,  381  U.S.  479  (1965)  (creating  a  constitutional
right to  privacy);  Mapp  v.  Ohio,  367  U.S.  643  (1961)  (applying  the  exclusionary  rule
against  the States);  Brown v.  Board  of Educ.,  347  U.S.  483  (1954)  (holding  that school
segregation violates  the  Equal  Protection  Clause  of the Fourteenth  Amendment).

HeinOnline  -- 19 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 313 1995-1996

314

Harvard Journal of Law  &  Public Policy

[Vol.  19

needs  supplementation.  At  its  best,  our  practice  in  the  United
States has two supplementary devices, neither  of which should  be
foreign  to  nor incompatible  with  Federalist  Society  aspirations.
One supplementary  device  is  Burkean;  the  other is  Madisonian.
From  the standpoint  of the  rule  of law,  the  problem  with soft
originalism  is  that the  soft  originalist identifies  constitutional  as-
pirations  at a level  of imprecision.  How  is  it that we  can  have  a
system  committed  to  the  rule  of law in  the face  of that fact?  We
don't  have  to  look  terribly  far.  As  Burke  saw,  the  great  legal
achievement  of the English system is the  common law.15  And  our
system of constitutional law is in significant part a process of case-
by-case  development.  The origin  of constitutional  doctrine is  not
principally  in the  understandings  of the  founders,  but  rather in
rules developed  by the Supreme  Court over generations  and gen-
erations.  Our  rules  come  from  case-by-case  development,
Burkean  style.  That  is where  the  rule  of law  under our  constitu-
tional system has its vindication, not by particular understandings
of the Founders. 4

What  about  democracy?  A  measure  of judicial  restraint  is
highly desirable.  What I would like  to suggest is that we have had
too  little of it and  that the  source  ofjudicial  restraint  ought  not
to  be  principally  or  at all  in  hard  originalism,  but  ought to  be
instead in more self-consciously democratic  or, to be a little more
precise, Madisonian  considerations.  This  is a suggestion  that  the
supplement to soft originalism  ought to be an account of democ-
racy, or republicanism-one  that sees  the judicial  role  as passive
and restrained,  except in  cases where Madisonian  considerations
themselves  argue  for a judicial  role.

We  can  have  a lot of debate  about what  that  particularly  en-
tails.  That was  (roughly) John Hart Ely's  project.1 5 I  suggest that
a version of that project is the right way to pursue  the democratic
aspirations  of good  Madisonians  (noting  that  "democratic"  was
not a word that  Madison was  thrilled with).16

Let me suggest that the Burkean  and Madisonian  supplements
to soft originalism  are far more promising than hard originalism,

13.  See  EDMUND  BuIu4,  REFLEarIONS  ON  THE  REVOLUTION  IN FRANCE  348  (Gateway

1962)  (1790).

14.  See EDWARD  H. LEVI,  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LEGAL  REASONING  1-2  (1949);  DAVID  A.
STRAuss,  COMMON  LAW  CONSTrtmONAuSM  (1995)  (unpublished manuscript, on  file with
author);  Cass R.  Sunstein,  On Analogical Reasoning, 106  HAiv. L. REv.  741,  754  (1993).

15.  See generally JoHN HART ELY,  DEMoccAGY AmD DisRUsT  (1980).
16.  See SuNsrmN,  supra note  1, at ch.  5.

HeinOnline  -- 19 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 314 1995-1996

No.  2] 

Five Theses  on  Opiginalism 

315

which  is really a misguided  surrogate for the constitutional values
of the  rule  of law  and  democratic  self-government.  Soft original-
ism,  thus  supplemented,  brings  out  the  underlying  judgments
more  clearly  and  more  honestly-and,  most important,  it does
not  rely  on  question-begging  or  (I  think)  impenetrable  claims
about legitimate  authority.

HeinOnline  -- 19 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 315 1995-1996

HeinOnline  -- 19 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 316 1995-1996

