 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. The First Amendment in Cyberspace Cass R. Sunsteint I go on this great republican principle, that the people will have virtue and intelligence to select men of virtue and wisdom. Is there no virtue among us? If there be not, we are in a wretched situation. No theoretical checks, no form of government, can render us secure. To suppose that any form of government will secure liberty or happiness without any virtue in the people, is a chimerical idea. If there be sufficient virtue and intelligence in the community, it will be exercised in the selection of these men; so that we do not depend on their virtue, or put confidence in our rulers, but in the people who are to choose them.' [T]he right of electing the members of the Government constitutes more particularly the essence of a free and responsible government. The value and efficacy of this right depends on the knowledge of the comparative merits and demerits of the candidates for public trust, and on the equal freedom, consequently, of examining and discussing these merits and demerits of the candidates respectively.2 "[T]elevision is just another appliance. It's a toaster with pictures."3 t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Elena Kagan, Larry Lessig, Geoffrey Stone, David Strauss, and Eugene Volokh for helpful comments, and to Sophie Clark for research assistance and valuable discussions. An overlapping but much shorter essay, The Future of the First Amendment, appears as an afterword to CASS R. SUNSTEIN, DEMOCRACY AND THE PROBLEM OF FREE SPEECH (2d ed. 1995). MADISON 341, 397 (Gaillard Hunt ed., 1906) In his report, Madison objects to the Sedition Act on First Amendment grounds. Imagine you had a device that combined a telephone, a TV, a camcorder, and a personal computer. No matter where you went or what time it was, your child could see you and talk to you, you could watch a replay of your team's last game, you could browse the latest additions to the library, or you could find the best prices in town on groceries, furniture, clothes-whatever you needed. * The vast resources of art, literature, and science were available everywhere, not just in large institutions or big-city libraries and museums; * Services that improve America's health care system and respond to other important social needs were available on-line, without waiting in line, when and where you needed them; * You could live in many places without foregoing opportunities for useful and fulfilling employment, by "telecommuting" to your office through an electronic highway . . . * You could obtain government information directly or through local organizations like libraries, apply for and receive government benefits electronically, and get in touch with government officials easily .... Sunstein communicate with one another.6 Perhaps there will be a formal codification movement before too long; certainly the norms and constraints are codified in the sense that, without government assistance, they are easily accessible by people who want to know what they are.7 The Commerce Department's claims about location have started to come true. What it meant to "live in California" became altogether different, after the invention of the airplane, from what it meant in (say) 1910. With the advent of new communications technologies, the meaning of the statement, "I live in California" has changed at least as dramatically. If people can have instant access to all libraries and all movies, and if they can communicate with a wide range of public officials, pharmacists, educators, doctors, and lawyers by touching a few buttons, they may as well (for most purposes) live anywhere. There are two free speech traditions in the United States, not simply one.8 There have been two models of the First Amendment, corresponding to the two free speech traditions. The first emphasizes well-functioning speech markets. It can be traced to Justice Holmes' great Abrams dissent,9 where the notion of a "market in ideas" received its preeminent exposition. The market model emerges as well from Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo,10 invalidating a "right of reply" law as applied to candidates for elected office. It finds its most recent defining statement not in judicial decisions, but in an FCC opinion rejecting the fairness doctrine. people,""3 through the work of Alexander Meiklejohn, who associated the free speech principle not with laissez-faire economics, but with ideals of democratic deliberation.14 The Madisonian tradition culminated in New York Times v. Sullivan15 and the reaffirmation of the fairness doctrine in the Red Lion case,16 with the Supreme Court's suggestion that governmental efforts to encourage diverse views and attention to public issues are compatible with the free speech principle--even if they result in regulatory controls on the owners of speech sources. Those who endorse the marketplace model do not claim that government may not do anything at all. Of course government may set up the basic rules of property and contract; it is these rules that make markets feasible. Without such rules, markets cannot exist at all.22 Government is also permitted to It is regrettable, though not difficult to explain, that in the past much less attention has been given to the positive requirements of a successful working of the competitive system than to these [previously discussed] negative points. The functioning of a competition not only requires adequate organization of certain institutions like money, markets, and channels of information-some of which can never be adequately provided by private enterprise-but it depends, above all, on the existence of an appropriate legal system, a legal system designed both to preserve competition and to make it operate as beneficially as possible.... Sunstein protect against market failures, especially by preventing monopolies and monopolistic practices. Structural regulation is acceptable so long as it is a content-neutral attempt to ensure competition. It is therefore important to note that advocates of marketplaces and democracy might work together in seeking to curtail monopoly. Of course, the prevention of monopoly is a precondition for well-functioning information markets. The second model, receiving its most sustained attention in the writings of Alexander Meiklejohn,28 emphasizes that our constitutional system is one of deliberative democracy. This system prizes both political (not economic) equality and a shared civic culture. It seeks to promote, as a central democratic goal, reflective and deliberative debate about possible courses of action. The Madisonian model sees the right of free expression as a key part of the system of public deliberation. But the argument for Madisonianism does not rest only on history; it is partly evaluative as well. We are unlikely to be able to make sense of our considered judgments about free speech problems without insisting that the free speech principle is centrally (though certainly not exclusively) connected with democratic goals,32 and without acknowledging that marketplace thinking is inadequately connected with the point and function of a system of free expression. A well-functioning democracy requires a degree of citizen participation, which requires a degree of information;33 and large disparities Sunstein in political (as opposed to economic) equality are damaging to democratic aspirations.34 To the extent that the Madisonian view prizes education, democratic deliberation, and political equality, it is connected, as the marketplace conception is not, with the highest ideals of American constitutionalism. I do not believe that these questions are rhetorical. We know enough to know that even in a period of limitless options, our communications system may fail to promote an educated citizenry and political equality. Madisonian goals may be severely compromised even under technologically extraordinary conditions. There is no logical or a priori connection between a wellfunctioning system of free expression and limitless broadcasting or Internet options. We could well imagine a science fiction story in which a wide range of options coexisted with little or no high-quality fare for children, with widespread political apathy or ignorance, and with social balkanization in which most people's consumption choices simply reinforced their own prejudices and platitudes, or even worse. easily widely viewed programming will be affected by the desires of advertisers, in such a way as to produce shows that represent a bland, watered-down version of conventional morality, and that do not engage serious issues in a serious way for fear of offending some group in the audience.37 Consider, by way of summary of existing fare, the suggestion that TV favors a mentality in which certain things no longer matter particularly: skills like the ability to enjoy a complex argument, for instance, or to perceive nuances, or to keep in mind large amounts of significant information, or to remember today what someone said last month, or to consider strong and carefully argued opinions in defiance of what is conventionally called "balance." Its content lurches between violence of action, emotional hyperbole, and blandness of opinion.... Commercial TV... has come to present society as a pagan circus of freaks, pseudo-heroes, and wild morons, struggles on the sand of a Colosseum without walls. It thus helps immeasurably to worsen the defects of American public education and of tabloid news 38 in print. Sunstein conceptions of free speech, even in a period in which scarcity is no longer a serious problem. The defense stresses the risks of sensationalism, ignorance, failure of deliberation, and balkanization-risks that are in some ways heightened by new developments. In the process I discuss some of the questions that are likely to arise in the next generation of free speech law. The Turner case is by far the most important judicial discussion of new media technologies, and it has a range of implications for the future. I therefore begin with that case, turning to broader issues of law and policy in Part V. It is important, however, to say that Turner involved two highly distinctive problems: (a) the peculiar "bottleneck" produced by the current system of cable television, in which cable owners can control access to programming; and (b) the possible risk to free television programming created by the rise of pay television. These problems turned out to be central to the outcome in the case. For this reason, Turner is quite different from imaginable future cases involving new information technologies, including the Internet, which includes no bottleneck problem. Significantly, the Internet is owned by no one and controlled by no organization. But at least potentially, the principles in Turner will extend quite broadly. This is especially true insofar as the Court adopted ingredients of an entirely new model of the First Amendment and insofar as the Court set out principles governing content discrimination, viewer access, speaker access, and regulation of owners of speech sources. In the last decade, it has become clear that cable television will be in potential competition with free broadcasting. In 1992, motivated in large part by concerns about this form of competition, Congress enacted the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act (the Act).41 The Act contains a range of provisions designed to protect broadcasting and local producers, and also at least nominally designed to protect certain consumers from practices by the cable industry. The relevant provisions include rate regulations for cable operators, a prohibition on exclusive franchise agreements between cable operators and municipalities, and restrictions on affiliations between cable programmers and cable operators.42 A major part of the Act was motivated by the fear that cable television's success could damage broadcast television.43 If cable flourishes, perhaps broadcasters will fail? The scenario seems at least plausible in light of important differences in relevant technologies. Broadcast television comes, of course, from transmitting antennae. It is available for free, though in its current form, it cannot provide more than a few stations. By contrast, cable systems make use of a physical connection between television sets and a transmission facility, and through this route cable operators can provide a large number of stations. Cable operators are of course in a position to decide which stations, and which station owners, will be available on cable television; cable operators could thus refuse to carry local broadcasters. To be sure, cable operators must respond to forces of supply and demand, and perhaps they would do poorly if they failed to carry local broadcasters. But because they have "bottleneck control" over the stations that they will carry, they are in one sense monopolists, or at least so Congress appears to have thought. Sunstein local broadcast television stations. These "must-carry" rules were the focus of the Turner case. Section 5 adds a different requirement.48 It governs "noncommercial educational television stations," defined to include (a) stations that are owned and operated by a municipality and that transmit "predominantly noncommercial programs for educational purposes"49 or (b) stations that are licensed by the FCC as such stations and that are eligible to receive grants from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.50 Section 5 imposes separate must-carry rules on noncommercial educational stations. A cable system with more than thirty-six channels must carry each local public broadcast station requesting carriage;51 a station having between thirteen and thirty-six must carry between one and three;52 and a station with twelve or fewer channels must carry at least one.53 What was the purpose of the must-carry rules? This is a complex matter. A skeptic, or perhaps a realist, might well say that the rules were simply a product of the political power of the broadcasting industry. Perhaps the broadcasting industry was trying to protect its economic interests at the expense of cable. This is a quite reasonable suggestion, for it is unlikely that market arrangements would lead to a situation in which significant numbers of Americans are entirely without access to television broadcasting. The scenario that Congress apparently feared-a victory of cable television over the broadcasting industry, with the result that forty percent of Americans would lack television at all-seems wildly unrealistic. Insofar as Congress was responding to the interests of local broadcasters, it may well have been catering to interest-power rather than attempting to protect otherwise deprived consumers. be a product of private self-interest, and not good for the public at all. It is undoubtedly true that industries will often seek government help against the marketplace, invoking public-spirited justifications for self-interested ends.54 Whether and to what extent this is a constitutional (as opposed to a political) problem may be disputed.55 But it points to a distinctive and legitimate concern about governmental regulation of the communications industry. In its response, the Court created something very much like a new model for understanding the relationship between new technologies and the First Sunstein Amendment. This model is a competitor to the marketplace and Madisonian alternatives. And while it is somewhat unruly, it is not difficult to describe. It comes from the five basic components of the Court's response to the cable operators' challenge. 56. Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 114 S. Ct. 2445, 2456-58 (1994). 57. It is also quite vulnerable. All goods are scarce, in a sense, and hence the scarcity rationale has never been a secure one. See Ronald H. Coase, The Federal Communications Commission, 2 J.L. & ECON. 1, 14, 20 (1959). Perhaps market failures of a certain sort justified special controls on local broadcasting. See OWEN & WILDMAN, supra note 26, at 275-76. But if this is true, the question becomes whether there are market failures, and of what sorts, rather than whether there is "scarcity." Hence the Court's crisp distinction between scarce sources and nonscarce sources is quite crude. legislative findings, which showed not only a (by hypothesis questionable61) congressional interest in encouraging the sorts of programming offered by local broadcasters, but also a distinctive and legitimate concern that cable operators have a strong financial interest in favoring their own affiliated programmers, and in doing so at the expense of broadcast stations. The findings therefore suggested that the cable operators have an economic incentive not to carry local signals. 61. It is questionable because it is content-discriminatory. In the end, content discrimination of this sort might be legitimate, see infra text accompanying notes 77-82 (discussing Justice O'Connor's analysis), but there is of course a presumption against it. Sunstein cable operators would not be forced to alter their own messages to respond to the broadcast signals. So too, the Court said that a speaker-based regulation would not face special judicial hostility so long as it was content-neutral. It was important in this regard that the regulation of this particular industry was based on the special characteristics of that industry-in short, "the bottleneck monopoly power exercised by cable operators and the dangers this power poses to the viability of broadcast television."65 In such a case, the Court concluded, legislative selectivity would be acceptable. would be acceptable as content-neutral regulations of speech. Content-neutral regulations may well be invalid if they fail a kind of balancing test.66 The Court concluded that "intermediate scrutiny" would be applied.67 The Court said the appropriate test, drawing on familiar cases,68 would involve an exploration whether the regulation furthers an important or substantial government interest and whether the restriction on First Amendment freedoms is no greater than necessary to promote that government interest. The Court had no difficulty in finding three substantial interests: (a) preserving free local television, (b) promoting the widespread dissemination of information from a multiplicity of sources, and (c) promoting fair competition in the market for television programming.69 On the Court's view, each of these was both important and legitimate. important government interest and be narrowly tailored to achieve that interest). promotes values central to the First Amendment."70 Hence the Court expressed special concern, in a perhaps self-conscious echo of Red Lion, over the cable operator's "gatekeeper[] control over most (if not all) of the television programming that is channeled into the subscriber's home."71 The Court also emphasized "[t]he potential for abuse of this private power over a central avenue of communication. "72 It stressed that the First Amendment "does not disable the government from taking steps to ensure that private interests not restrict, through physical control of a critical pathway of communication, the free flow of information and ideas."73 On the other hand, the Court thought that it was impossible to decide the case without a better factual record than had been developed thus far.74 As it stood, the record was insufficient to show whether the must-carry rules would serve these legitimate interests. Would local broadcasters actually be jeopardized without the must-carry rules? Here we should return to the possibility, of which the Court was surely aware, that the rules were really an effort to favor the broadcasting industry, not to help viewers. Sunstein and show that the regulation promoted that interest. But Justice O'Connor found that the government could not meet its burden. It is for private speakers and listeners, not for the government, to decide what fraction of their news and entertainment ought to be of a local character and what fraction ought to be of a national (or international) one. And the same is true of the interest in diversity of viewpoints: While the government may subsidize speakers that it thinks provide novel points of view, it may not restrict other speakers on the theory that what they say is more conventional.79 Justice O'Connor referred independently to the interests in public-affairs programming and educational programming, finding that these interests are "somewhat weightier" than the interest in localism. But in her view, "it is a difficult question whether they are compelling enough to justify restricting other sorts of speech."80 Because of the difficulty of that question, Justice O'Connor did not say whether "the Government could set some channels aside for educational or news programming."8 (This is of course a central issue for the future.) In her view, the Act was too crudely tailored to be justified as an educational or public-affairs measure. The Act did not neutrally favor educational or public-affairs programming, since it burdened equally "CNN, C-Span, the Discovery Channel, the New Inspirational Network, and other channels with as much claim as PBS to being educational or related to public affairs."82 Whether or not a neutral law favoring educational and publicaffairs programming could survive constitutional scrutiny, this Act could not, for it was insufficiently neutral. A. Description I have noted that there have been two free speech traditions and two principal models of free speech. The marketplace model eschews content regulation; it is animated by the notion of consumer sovereignty. The Madisonian model may permit and even welcome content regulation; it is rooted in an understanding of political sovereignty. There is now a third model-the Turner model-of what government may do. An interesting question, not fully resolved by Turner itself, has to do with the extent to which the Turner model will incorporate features of its predecessors. Remarkably, every Justice on the Court appeared to accept (a), (b), and (c) and parts of (d) (with minor qualifications). Perhaps the most notable feature of the Court's opinion is its emphasis on the legitimacy and the importance of ensuring general public (viewer) access to free programming. In this way, the Court accepted at least a modest aspect of the Madisonian ideal, connected with both political equality and broad dissemination of information. This general goal is likely to have continuing importance in governmental efforts to control the information superhighway so as to ensure viewer and listener access. The Turner Court has put its stamp of approval on that goal. Recall in particular that the government justified the must-carry rules on the theory that without those rules, ordinary broadcasters would be unable to survive. The consequence would be that people without cable would be without broadcasting at all. The Court enthusiastically accepted this claim. It said that "to preserve access to free television programming for the 40 percent of Americans without cable" was a legitimate interest.84 This holding suggests that the government may provide access not only through subsidies, but also through regulation. Sunstein including content discrimination having these goals, with considerable skepticism. The result is a large degree of confusion with respect to whether and how government may promote Madisonian aspirations. I will return to this point. The Court's major internal dispute involved the question whether the content neutrality of the must-carry rules was impeached by the history suggesting that Congress was particularly enthusiastic about local programming. This is an issue on which reasonable people may disagree; it turns largely on the extent to which statements in the legislative history will be used to cast light on legislative goals. But the issue of content discrimination seems, on inspection, to rest on a matter not discussed by anyone on the Court; it is principally that matter, not the legislative history, that raises special issues about content discrimination. In fact, the Court should have analyzed the two sections differently. The validity of section 4 turned on whether the factual record could support the 86. See Monroe E. Price & Donald W. Hawthorne, Saving Public Television: The Remand of Turner Broadcasting and the Future of Cable Regulation, 17 HASTINGS COMM. & ENT. L.J. 65, 91-95 (1994), for an argument that on remand, the district court should uphold section 5 even if it finds section 4 unconstitutional. idea that the section was necessary to ensure the continued availability of free public television. On this score the Court's basic solution-a remand-was quite reasonable, even if the statute was treated as content-based. On remand, the question would be whether content regulation of this sort was sufficiently justified as a means of saving free public television. magazine had to educate too, or that speakers on a comedy show had to have serious bits as well. Sunstein But why did no Justice suggest that the two sections embodied content discrimination? This question is much harder to answer. Now let us proceed to a larger matter. As I have noted, the Turner Court did not accept a Madisonian model of free speech. The distinction between content-based and content-neutral restrictions was crucial to the opinion, and that distinction hardly emerges from a Madisonian model, which would carve up the free speech universe in a different way. But the Court certainly did not accept the marketplace model in its entirety. In addition to emphasizing the legitimacy of ensuring access to free programming-and of doing so through regulation rather than subsidy-the Court stressed more or less democratic justifications for the must-carry rules, including broad exposure to programming on public issues, and to a multiplicity of sources of information. It might be argued both that Turner is insufficiently responsive to marketplace concerns and that Turner is a Madisonian failure insofar as the Turner model appears to do nothing about the problem of low-quality programming and insufficient exposure to public debate. An especially distinctive feature of the Court's opinion is its ambivalence about the legitimacy of governmental efforts to promote diversity. There is ambivalence on this score because while the Court invoked diversity as a goal, it also made its skepticism about content-based regulation quite clear, and many imaginable efforts to promote diversity are content-based. Consider the fairness doctrine as well as many European initiatives to promote diversity in the media.88 The Court found it necessary to insist that Congress was not trying, through the must-carry rules, to ensure exposure to local news sources. On the other hand, the Court suggested that a content-neutral effort to promote diversity may well be justified. Hence the Court offered a number of justifications for regulation of cable technology. As we have seen, the Court expressed concern over the cable operator's "gatekeeper[] control over most (if not all) of the television programming that is channeled into the subscriber's home."89 The Court emphasized "[t]he potential for abuse of this private power over a central avenue of communication."90 The Court stressed that the First Amendment "does not disable the government from taking steps to ensure that private interests not restrict, through physical control of a critical pathway of communication, the free flow of information and ideas."91 And thus the Court emphasized "the importance of local broadcasting units" in promoting attention to public issues.92 In these ways, the Turner opinion contains an echo, albeit a faint one, of the highly Madisonian analysis in Red Lion. 2. Substantive Doctrine and Institutional Constraints The question then arises: If diversity is a legitimate goal, why might the Turner model be superior to the Madisonian model? One possible view is that the Turner model is not superior, but that it should be regarded instead as a cautious and incompletely theorized step94 that appropriately leaves gaps for 88. See SUNSTEIN, supra note 12, at 77-81 (noting that several European high courts have found that governments were not merely permitted to promote diversity in the media, but were constitutionally obliged to do so); see also ELI NOAM, TELECOMMUNICATIONS Sunstein future refinement. Perhaps the Turner model will have to be elaborated, as it clearly can be, to make clear that well-tailored efforts to promote diversity and broader democratic goals are legitimate even if they are content-based. judicial judgment. See Cass R. Sunstein, Incompletely Theorized Agreements, 108 HARV. L. REV. (forthcoming May 1995). Turner model may well be better, at least in broad outline, than the Madisonian and marketplace alternatives. There are important countervailing considerations. As indicated above,97 the application of the Turner model to technologies other than cable raises serious problems, for cable presents the special question of "bottleneck control." Many of the other new technologies raise questions not involving anything like "bottleneck control," which was central to the resolution in Turner. In general, regulation of the Internet raises no such problem. In Turner, moreover, the principal access issue was the right to hear; in other cases, the central issue, also one of access, will involve the right to speak. Sometimes the principal question will be whether certain speakers can have access to certain audiences. In other contexts, regulatory efforts may involve educational goals more straightforwardly, as in guarantees of free media time to candidates or in provisions to ensure public-affairs programming or programming for children. 97. See the introduction to Part III supra. 98. There is of course a large and insufficiently analyzed problem: defining the relevant market. Perhaps those interested in Madisonian goals should focus on the entirety of the free speech market, seeing magazines, broadcasting, and even books as aspects of a single market, to be taken as a whole. I cannot address this issue here. Sunstein connected with any plausible conception of the basic point or points of a system of free speech. A. New Possibilities and New Problems: Referenda in Cyberspace and Related Issues It should be unnecessary to emphasize that the explosion of new technologies opens up extraordinary new possibilities. As the Department of Commerce's predictions suggest, ordinary people might ultimately participate in a communications network in which hundreds of millions of people, or more, can communicate with each other and indeed with all sorts of service providers-libraries, doctors, accountants, lawyers, legislators, shopkeepers, pharmacies, grocery stores, museums, Internal Revenue Service employees, restaurants, and more. If you need an answer to a medical question, you may be able to push a few buttons and receive a reliable answer. If you want to order food for delivery, you would be able to do so in a matter of seconds. If you have a question about sports or music or clothing, or about the eighteenth century, you could get an instant answer. People can now purchase many goods on their credit cards without leaving home. It may soon be possible to receive a college education without leaving home.102 As I have suggested, the very notions of "location" and "home" will change in extraordinary ways. Many of the relevant changes have already occurred. Consider the fact that in 1989, there were about 47.5 million cable television subscribers, accounting for 52.5% of television households-whereas by 1995, there were 59 million subscribers, accounting for 61.8% of television households.103 Consider the following chart:'04 102. See In 2050, Computers May Be Collegian's "Campus", CHI. TRIB., Nov. 7, 1994, at 4. It is revealing that many of the footnotes in this Essay come from newspapers and weekly news magazines. With respect to communications technologies, development is occurring so rapidly that other sources are often obsolete upon publication. Millions of TV Households Millions of Homes Passed by Cable Homes Passed as a % of TV Homes Millions of Cable Households Cable Subscribers as a % of Homes Passed Cable Penetration of TV Households Technology Number of Users Internet America Online Prodigy Women's Wire Sunstein 1. Economics and Democracy Technological developments enjoyed by so many people bring with them extraordinary promise and opportunities from the standpoints of both Madisonianism and the marketplace. From nearly108 any point of view, nostalgia for preexisting speech markets makes little sense. 108. The qualification is necessary because of threats posed by the new technologies to the possibility of commonly shared experience and to exposure to positions contrary to one's own. See infra text accompanying notes 121-28. Clinton established connections with millions of e-mail users, putting his address into their system and inviting them to give reactions on public issues. Candidates generally are obtaining and publicizing e-mail addresses.114 Thus presidential candidate Lamar Alexander launched his campaign with a forum via America Online, in which he spoke to all those who chose to join the forum.11' The Madisonian framework was based partly on the assumption that large-scale substantive discussions would not be practicable.116 Technology may well render that assumption anachronistic. Moreover, education about public issues will be much simpler and cheaper. The government, and relevant interest groups, will be able to state their cases far more easily. And after touching a few buttons, people will be able to have access to substantial information about policy dilemmas-possible wars, environmental risks and regulations, legal developments, trials, medical reform, and a good deal more. Consider as simply one example, the astonishing service LEXIS Counsel Connect. With this service a lawyer can have access to essentially all proposed laws. A lawyer can also join substantive "discussion groups," dealing with, for example, the Simpson trial, recent tax developments, risk regulation, securities arbitration, affirmative action, LEXIS Counsel Connect, cyberspace, the First Amendment in cyberspace, and much more. The proliferation of law-related discussion groups on law-related topics is one tiny illustration of a remarkable cultural development. Thus the Usenet includes more than 10,000 discussion groups, dealing with particle physics, ring-tailed lemurs, and Rush Limbaugh, among countless others.120 calls for avoiding "information haves" and "have-nots." 120. Elmer-DeWitt, supra note 107, at 4, 9-10. A special advantage of the Internet is its grassroots, "bottom-up" quality. In contrast to the mass media, in which a large broadcaster speaks to millions, the Internet allows individual citizens to spread news or commentary to one person, or to hundreds, or to thousands, or to millions. The problem of access to the media is in this respect greatly reduced. A Sunstein At least from the standpoint of the founding era, and from the standpoint of democratic theory, the new technology also carries with it significant risks. There are two major problems. The first is an absence of deliberation. The second is an increase in social balkanization. The Madisonian view of course places a high premium on public deliberation, and it disfavors immediate and inadequately considered governmental reactions to pressures from the citizenry. 121 The American polity is a republic, not a direct democracy, and for legitimate reasons; direct democracy is unlikely to provide successful governance, for it is too likely to be free from deliberation and unduly subject to short-time reactions and sheer manipulation. From the inception of the American system a large point of the system of republicanism has been to "refine and enlarge the public view" through the system of representation.122 This process of refinement and enlargement is endangered by decreased costs of communication. As I have noted, discussions in cyberspace may well be both substantive and deliberative; electronic mail and the Internet in particular hold out considerable promise on score.123 But communications between citizens and their representatives may also be reactive to short-term impulses, and may consist of simple referenda results insufficiently filtered by reflection and discussion. In the current period, there is thus a serious risk that low-cost or costless communication will increase government's responsiveness to myopic or poorly considered public outcries, or to sensationalistic or sentimental anecdotes that are a poor basis for governance. Although the apparent presence of diverse public voices is often celebrated, electoral campaigns and treatment of public issues already suffer from myopia and sensationalism,124 and in a way that compromises founding ideals. On this count it is hardly clear that new technologies will improve matters. They may even make things worse. The phenomenon of "talk radio" has achieved considerable attention in this regard. It is surely desirable to provide forums in which citizens can speak With one decentralized system has the distinct virtue of promoting Jeffersonian aspirations to citizenship. another, especially on public issues. But it is not desirable if government officials are reacting to immediate reactions to misleading or sensationalistic presentations of issues. The answer is by no means simple. Of course a system of this kind would have advantages. It might well overcome some of the problems produced by extremes of wealth and poverty, at least insofar as poor people could both speak and hear far more cheaply. But the aspiration to an informed citizenry may not be well served. Under the hypothesized system, perhaps most people would be rarely or poorly informed. Perhaps their consumption choices would disserve democratic ideals.126 If the system of free expression is designed to ensure against an "inert people," we cannot know, a priori, whether a system of well-functioning free markets would be desirable. The hypothesized system would have another problem: It would allow people to screen out ideas, facts, or accounts of facts that they find disturbing. In the current system, people are often confronted with ideas and facts that they find uncongenial. This is an important democratic good; it promotes education and discussion. A well-functioning system of free expression is one in which people are exposed to ideas that compete with their own, so that they can test their own views and understand other perspectives even when they disagree. This process can produce a capacity for empathy and understanding, so that other people are not dehumanized even across sharp differences in judgment and perspective. Important forms of commonality and respect might emerge simply by virtue of presenting the perspectives of others from others' points of view. Sunstein A system of individually designed communications options could, by contrast, result in a high degree of balkanization, in which people are not presented with new or contrary perspectives. Such a nation could not easily satisfy democratic and deliberative goals. In such a nation, communication among people with different perspectives might be far more difficult than it now is; mutual intelligibility may become difficult or even impossible. In such a nation, there may be little commonality among people with diverse commitments, as one group caricatures another or understands it by means of simple slogans that debase reality and eliminate mutual understanding. It is far from clear how government can or should overcome these various problems. Certainly government should not be permitted to censor citizen efforts to communicate with representatives, even if such communications carry risks to deliberative ideals. It does seem clear, however, that government should be cautious about spurring on its own the use of new technologies to promote immediate, massive public reactions to popular issues. Government by referendum is at best a mixed blessing, with possible unfortunate consequences wherever it is tried.127 The electronic media should not be used to create a form of government by referendum. Regulatory efforts to facilitate communication need not be transformed into an effort to abandon republican goals. A large question for both constitutional law and public policy has yet to receive a full democratic or a judicial answer: To what extent, if any, do Madisonian ideals have a place in the world of new technologies, or in cyberspace? Some people think that the absence of scarcity eliminates the argument for governmental regulation, at least if it is designed to promote attention to public issues, to increase diversity, or to raise the quality of public debate.'29 If outlets are unlimited, why is regulation of any value? In the future, people will be able to listen to whatever they want, perhaps to speak to whomever they choose. Ought this not to be a constitutional ideal? The question is meant to answer itself, but perhaps enough has been said to show that it hardly does that. Recall first that structural regulation, assigning property rights and making agreements possible, is a precondition for wellfunctioning markets. Laissez-faire is a hopeless misdescription of free markets. A large government role, with coercive features, is required to maintain markets. Part of the role also requires steps to prevent monopoly and monopolistic practices. Sunstein 1. Advertising It is commonly thought that viewers and listeners purchase a communications product, and that their purchase decisions should be respected; but this picture is not altogether right. The decisions of viewers and listeners are different from most consumption decisions, in the sense that viewers and listeners often pay nothing for programming, and often they are, in a sense, the product that is being sold. For much commercial programming, a key source of revenues is advertisers, and programmers deliver viewers to advertisers in return for money. For this reason the broadcasting market is not a conventional one in which people purchase their preferred products. People's viewing and listening time is bought and sold. In an era of numerous options, the influence of advertising over programming content should be less troublesome, since controversial points of view should find an outlet. Certainly there is no such problem on the Internet. But there will nonetheless continue to be a structural problem in broadcasting markets, since viewers' demand for programs will not be fully responsible for the programs that are actually provided. Many imaginable proposals could help counter this problem. Such proposals should not be found unconstitutional even if consumer sovereignty is the overriding policy goal.'33 If we put the questions raised by advertisers to one side, we might urge that there is a decisive argument in favor of the marketplace model and against Madisonianism. The marketplace ideal values "choice," whereas the Madisonian alternative can be seen to reflect a form of dangerous paternalism, or disrespect for people's diverse judgments about entertainment options.'34 Perhaps Madisonianism is illiberal insofar as it does not respect the widely divergent conceptions of the good that are reflected in consumption choices. The argument is certainly plausible. In most arenas, consumers are allowed to choose as they wish, and governmental interference requires special justification. But in this context, at least, the argument from choice is quite unconvincing, for it wrongly takes people's consumption choices as definitive or exhaustive of "choice." In fact the notion of "choice" is a complex one that admits of no such simple understanding.'35 In a democratic society, people make choices as citizens too. They make choices in democratic arenas as well as in stores and before their computers. What those choices are depends on the context in which they are made. Sunstein programming, attention to public issues, and diverse views. Perhaps the public-or a majority acting in its democratic capacity-believes that education and discussion of public issues are both individual and collective goods. Any system of expression has cultural consequences; it helps create and sustain a certain kind of culture. Perhaps the public wants to ensure a culture of a certain sort, notwithstanding consumption choices.139 Perhaps it seeks to protect children and adolescents, and sees regulation of broadcasting as a way of accomplishing that goal. Perhaps people believe that their own consumption choices are less than ideal, and that for justice-regarding or altruistic reasons, or because of their basic commitments and judgments, regulations should force broadcasters or cable operators to improve on existing low-quality fare. Would measures stimulated by such thoughts be objectionable, illegitimate, or even unconstitutional? Would they interfere in an impermissible way with something called "choice"? I do not believe so. Surely any such efforts should be policed by courts, so as to ensure that government is not discriminating against or in favor of certain viewpoints. The mere fact that the democratic majority seeks to overcome consumption choices is not legitimating by itself; the democratic judgment may be unacceptable if it involves viewpoint discrimination or content discrimination suggestive of viewpoint bias. But rightly conceived, our constitutional heritage does not disable the public, acting through the constitutional channels, from improving the operation of the speech market in the ways that I have- suggested. Whether it should do so is a question to be answered democratically rather than judicially. 3. Analogies An important issue for the future involves the use of old analogies in novel settings. The new technologies will greatly increase the opportunities for intrusive, fraudulent, harassing, threatening, libelous, or obscene speech.141 With a few brief touches of a finger, a speaker is now be able to communicate to thousands or even millions of people-or to pinpoint a message, perhaps a commercial, harassing, threatening invasive message, to a particular person. A libelous message, or grotesque invasions of privacy, can be sent almost costlessly. Perhaps reputations and lives will be easily ruined or at least damaged. There are difficult questions about the extent to which an owner of a computer service might be held liable for what appears on that service.142 At this stage, it remains unclear whether the conventional legal standards should be altered to meet such problems. For the most part, those standards generally seem an adequate start and must simply be adapted to new settings. For purposes of assessing cyberspace, there are often apt analogies on which to draw. In fact the legal culture has no way to think about the new problems except via analogies. The analogies are built into our very language: e-mail, electronic bulletin boards, cyberspace, cyberspaces,'43 and much more.1" Thus, for example, ordinary mail provides a promising foundation on which to build the assessment of legal issues associated with electronic mail. It is far from clear that the standards for libelous or fraudulent communication must shift with the new technologies. To be sure, there will be new and somewhat vexing occasions for evaluating the old standards. Judges may not understand the novel situations, especially those involving the Internet. In particular, the low cost of sending and receiving electronic mail, and of sending it to thousands or millions of people, may produce some new developments and put high pressure on old categories. Certainly it is likely that new and unanticipated problems will arise and a degree of judicial caution is therefore desirable in invoking the First Amendment. But it is by no means clear that the basic principles will themselves have to be much changed. I have noted that the government has said that "universal access" is one of its goals for the information superhighway. The question of access has Sunstein several dimensions. To some extent it is designed to ensure access to broadcasting options for viewers and listeners-the central problem in Turner. Here a particular concern is that poor people should not be deprived of access to a valuable good. Currently the expense of Internet connections is prohibitively high for many families. This may entail a form of disenfranchisement and to some extent the problem is to ensure access for certain speakers who want to reach part of the viewing or listening public. In cyberspace, of course, people are both listeners and speakers. The point might be generalized. For any particular speaker, part of the advantage of having access to a certain means of communication is that everyone, or almost everyone, or a wide range of people, can be reached. The Postal Service, for example, is justified in part on the ground that a national system of mail is necessary or at least helpful for those who send mail; we can be assured that any letter can reach everyone. The claim is controversial. But perhaps a requirement of universal access can be justified not as an inefficient"48 effort to subsidize people who would be without service, but on the quite different ground that universal service is a way of promoting the communicative interests of those who already have service. The interests of the latter group may well be promoted by ensuring that they can reach everyone, or nearly everyone. There are, however, significant inefficiencies in this model of crosssubsidization,150 and a system of open-ended competition may well be better than one based on universal access. It may be that open-ended competition will provide universal access in any case, or something very close to it. Or it may be that open-ended competition, combined with selective subsidies, would be better than the regulatory approach. This question cannot easily be answered in the abstract. Certainly debate over universal access should not be resolved by constitutional fiat. This is an area for public debate and a large degree of experimentation. In general, any regulatory controls should take the form of flexible incentives rather than rigid commands. Command-and-control systems are usually ineffective in achieving their own goals; they tend to promote interestgroup power, in which well-organized private groups are able to use governmental authority to redistribute wealth or opportunities in their favor; they also tend to be inefficient.151 I cannot discuss this issue in detail here, but the explosion of new technologies reinforces the point. It is predictable that owners of some services will attempt to obtain governmental aid to disadvantage actual or potential competitors.152 Especially in an era of rapid and only partly foreseeable technological change, the government's basic duty is to provide a framework for competitive development,153 rather than specification of end-states. Any 153. This is a Hayekian point connected with the difficulty of foreseeing the future. See HAYEK, supra Sunstein such specifications will likely prove counterproductive in light of developments that cannot now be predicted. The ultimate shape of constitutional constraints on regulation of the electronic media cannot be foreseen. Too many new possibilities will come into view. Too many distinctions will become relevant. Consider, for example, the fact that for many dozens of years, there has been a clear difference between two different kinds of communication. The first is ordinary broadcasting or publishing, in which an owner makes available a certain range of communications; offers that range of communications as an indivisible package for hundreds, thousands, or millions of subscribers; and sells advertising time for commercial interests. The second involves the mail, in which one person typically sends a message to another, or in which one person might send a message to a group of people; in any case mail involves highly differentiated, rather than indivisible, communication, in the sense that no single "package" is made available to wide ranges of people. Moreover, no advertisers need be involved. Many of the complexities in free speech law have arisen from this distinction, though the implications of the distinction are of course sharply contested. 154. Consider the FCC's quite promising auction system, in which points are granted to minority and women applicants. See John McMillan, Selling Spectrum Rights, J. ECON. PERSP., Summer 1994, at 145. characteristic. Often the purchaser of the relevant information will pay for it without the intermediation of advertisers.'55 In such a future, the constitutional issues will take on different dimensions. A key question will be the extent to which the owner or manager of the "mail" may be held liable for injuries that occur as a result of use of some service. It will be plausible to say that just as the United States and Federal Express are not liable for harms caused by packages they carry, so too the owner of an electronic service ought not to pay damages for harms that owners cannot reasonably be expected to prevent or control. But it is far too soon to offer particular judgments on the issues that will arise. Many actual and imaginable legislative efforts are designed to ensure competition in the new communications markets. There is no constitutional problem with such efforts.'57 The only qualification is that some such efforts might be seen as subterfuge for content regulation, disguised by a claimed need to promote monopoly; but this should be a relatively rare event. If government is genuinely attempting to prevent monopolistic practices, and to offer a structure in which competition can take place, there is no basis for constitutional complaint. Here First Amendment theorists of widely divergent views might be brought into agreement. competition). Sunstein 2. Subsidizing New Media It is predictable that government might seek to assist certain technologies that offer great promise for the future. Some such efforts may in fact be a result of interest-group pressure. But in general, there is no constitutional obstacle to government efforts to subsidize preferred communications sources. Perhaps government believes that some technological innovations are especially likely to do well, or that they could receive particularly valuable benefits from national assistance. At least so long as there is no reason to believe that government is favoring speech of a certain content, efforts of this kind are unobjectionable as a matter of law.158 They may be objectionable as a matter of policy, since government may make bad judgments reflecting confusion or factional influence; but that is a different issue. In her dissenting opinion in Turner, Justice O'Connor suggested that the appropriate response to government desire for programming of a certain content is not regulation but instead subsidization.159 This idea fits well with the basic model for campaign finance regulation, set out in Buckley v. It also fits with the idea, found in Rust v. Sullivan,161 that the Valeo.'60 government is unconstrained in its power to subsidize such speech as it prefers. Hence there should be no constitutional objection to government efforts to fund public broadcasting, to pay for high-quality fare for children, or to support programming that deals with public affairs.'62 Perhaps government might do this for certain uses of the Internet. 158. This follows from Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173 (1991). 159. Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 114 S. Ct. 2445, 2478 (1994) (O'Connor, J., dissenting). 160. 424 U.S. 1 (1976) 161. 500 U.S. 173 (1991). 162. There is a question of policy in the background, made highly visible by controversy over government funding of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and the National Endowment for the Humanities. In principle, such funding is justified in light of the "public good" features of the relevant products and in light of the possibility that the funded sources can increase opportunities for preference formation by providing greater exposure to high-quality material. See ANDERSON, supra note 135, at 149. But the ultimate value of funding depends on a range of more practical and empirical issues that cannot be decided a priori, including the actual products that result, the opportunities to provide private funding instead, and the alternative use of government money. raise serious risks of viewpoint discrimination. It therefore seems unexceptionable for government, short of viewpoint discrimination, to subsidize those broadcasters whose programming it prefers, even if any such preference embodies content discrimination. So too, government might promote "conversations" or fora on e-mail that involve issues of public importance, or that attempt to promote educational goals for children or even adults.163 4. Leaving Admittedly "Open" Channels Available to Others Who Would Not Otherwise Get Carriage Suppose that a particular communications carrier has room for five hundred channels; suppose that four hundred channels are filled, but that one hundred are left open. Would it be legitimate for government to say that the one hundred must be filled by stations that would otherwise be unable be pay for carriage? Let us suppose that the stations would be chosen through a content-neutral system, such as a lottery. From the First Amendment point of view, this approach seems acceptable. The government would be attempting to ensure access for speakers who would otherwise be unable to reach the audience. It is possible that as a matter of policy, government should have to provide some payment to the carrier in return for the access requirement. But there does not seem to be a First Amendment problem. In her dissenting opinion in Turner, Justice O'Connor suggested the possibility that carriers could be required to set aside certain channels to be filled by a random method.64 The advantage of this approach is that it would promote access for people who would otherwise be denied carriage, but without involving government in decisions about preferred content. This approach should raise no First Amendment difficulties. Conventional Market Failure, But To Ensure Universal or NearUniversal Consumer Access to Networks The protection of broadcasters in Turner was specifically designed to ensure continued viewer access to free programming. Notably, the Court permitted government to achieve this goal through regulation rather than 163. See supra text accompanying notes 112-15 (discussing role of new technologies in connection with elections). Sunstein through subsidy. Of course subsidy is the simpler and ordinarily more efficient route. If government wants to make sure that all consumers have access to communications networks, why should government not be required to pay to allow such access, on a kind of analogue to the food stamp program? The ordinary response to a problem of access is not to fix prices but instead to subsidize people who would otherwise be without access. The Turner Court apparently believed that it is constitutionally acceptable for the government to ensure that industry (and subscribers), rather than taxpayers, provide the funding for those who would otherwise lack access. Harassing Broadcasting or Messages New technologies have greatly expanded the opportunity to communicate obscene, libelous, violent, or harassing messages-perhaps to general groups via stations on (for example) cable television, perhaps to particular people via electronic mail.'65 Invasions of privacy are far more likely. The Internet poses special problems on these counts. As a general rule, any restrictions should be treated like those governing ordinary speech, with ordinary mail providing the best analogy. If restrictions are narrowly tailored, and supported by a sufficiently strong record, they should be upheld. at the University of Michigan.166 A student is alleged to have distributed a fictional story involving a fellow student, explicitly named, who was, in the story, raped, tortured, and finally killed. The first question raised here is whether state or federal law provides a cause of action for conduct of this sort. Perhaps the story amounts to a threat, or a form of libel, or perhaps the most plausible state law claim would be based on intentional infliction of emotional distress. The next question is whether, if a state law claim is available, the award of damages would violate the First Amendment. At first glance it seems that the question should be resolved in the same way as any case in which a writer uses a real person's name in fiction of this sort. And it certainly does not seem clear that the First Amendment should prohibit states from awarding damages for conduct of this kind, so long as no political issue is involved.167 Perhaps the ease of massive distribution of such materials, which can be sent to much of the world with the touch of a button, argues in favor of loosening the constitutional constraints on compensatory damages. telecommunications providers of obscene materials. Sunstein The best justification for expansive terms of this kind would be to protect children from harmful materials. It is true that the Internet contains pornography accessible to children, some of it coming from adults explicitly seeking sexual relations with children. There is in fact material on the Internet containing requests to children for their home addresses.'72 Solicitations to engage in unlawful activity are unprotected by the First Amendment, whether they occur on the Internet or anywhere else. For this reason, regulation designed to prevent these sorts of requests should not be held unconstitutional. Different questions would be raised by the imposition of civil or criminal liability not on the distributors having specific intent to distribute, but on carriers who have no knowledge of the specific materials at issue, and could not obtain such knowledge without considerable difficulty and expense. It might be thought that the carrier should be treated like a publisher, and a publisher can of course be held liable for obscene or libelous materials even if the publisher has no specific knowledge of the offending material. But in light of the relatively low costs of search in the world of magazine and book publishing, it is reasonable to think that a publisher should be charged with having control over the content of its publications. Perhaps the same cannot be said for the owner of an electronic mail service. Here the proper analogy might instead be the carriage of mail, in which owners of services are not held criminally or civilly liable for obscene or libelous materials. The underlying theory is that it would be unreasonable to expect such owners to inspect all the materials they transport, and the imposition of criminal liability, at least, would have an unacceptably harmful effect upon a desirable service involving the distribution of a great deal of protected speech. If carriers were held liable for distributing unprotected speech, there would inevitably be an adverse effect on the dissemination of protected speech too. In other words, the problem with carrier liability, in this context, is that it would interfere with protected as well as unprotected speech. Sunstein 8. Imposing Content-Based Regulation Designed To Ensure Public Affairs and Educational Programming It can readily be imagined that Congress might seek to promote education via regulation or subsidy of new media. It might try to ensure attention to public affairs. Suppose, for example, that Congress sets aside a number of channels for public-affairs and educational programming, on the theory that the marketplace provides too much commercial programming. This notion has in fact been under active consideration in Congress. Thus a recent bill would have required all telecommunications carriers to provide access at preferential rates to educational and health care institutions, state and local governments, public broadcast stations, libraries and other public entities, community newspapers, and broadcasters in the smallest markets.175 Turner certainly does not stand for the proposition that such efforts are constitutional. By hypothesis, any such regulation would be content-based. It would therefore meet with a high level of judicial skepticism. On the other hand, Turner does not authoritatively suggest that such efforts are unconstitutional. The Court did not itself say whether it would accept content discrimination designed to promote Madisonian goals. Certainly the opinion suggests that the government's burden would be a significant one. But it does not resolve the question. Do Madisonian ideals have an enduring role in American thought about freedom of speech? The Supreme Court has not said for certain; its signals are quite mixed; and the existence of new technologies makes the question different and far more complex than it once was. It is conceivable that in a world of newly emerging and countless options, the market will prove literally unstoppable, as novel possibilities outstrip even well-motivated government controls.