 Cass R. Sunstein: "Free Speech and Democracy" Choosing the Right Paradigm both as aspiration and as reality. In this regard, I would like to introduce to you our keynote speaker. Free Speech and Democracy equality is quite compatible with its commitment to free speech. At the end of this talk, I will attempt to illustrate this proposition with reference to a number of areas of current dispute. The second tradition, and the second model, is focused on public deliberation. It owes its origins to the work of James Madison.9 The second model can be traced from Madison, with his attack on the idea of seditious libel, to Justice Louis Brandeis, with his suggestion that "the greatest threat to democracy is an inert people,"' 0 through the work of Alexander Meiklejohn, who associated the free speech principle with ideals of democratic deliberation." The Madisonian tradition culminated in New York Times v. Sullivanl2 and the reaffirmance of the fairness doctrine in the Red Lion case,' 3 with the Supreme Court's suggestion that governmental efforts to encourage diverse views and attention to public issues are compatible with the free speech principle -- even if they result in regulatory controls on the owners of speech sources. Choosing the Right Paradigm Those who endorse the marketplace model do not claim that government may not do anything at all. Of course government may set up the basic rules of property and contract; it is these rules that that make markets feasible. Without such rules, markets cannot exist at all."' Government is also permitted to ensure against market failures, especially by preventing monopolies and monopolistic practices. Structural regulation is acceptable so long as it is a content-neutral attempt to ensure competition. It is therefore important to note that advocates of marketplaces and democracy might work together in seeking to curtail monopoly. Of course the prevention of monopoly is a precondition for well-functioning information markets. Free Speech and Democracy Madison's view, doomed the Sedition Act on constitutional grounds. 23 If interpretation of the First Amendment is to be based partly on historical considerations, the marketplace model is hard to sustain. I do not believe that these questions are rhetorical. We know enough to know that even in a period of limitless options, our broadcasting system may fail to promote an educated citizenry and political equality, and Madisonian goals may be severely compromised even under technologically extraordinary conditions. There is no logical or a priori connection between a well-functioning system of free expression and limitless broadcasting options. We could well imagine a science fiction story in which a wide range of options coexisted with little or no high-quality fare for children, with political inequality, with widespread political apathy or ignorance, and with social balkanization in which most people's consumption choices simply reinforced their own prejudices and platitudes, or even worse. Quite outside of science fiction, it is foreseeable that free markets in communications will be a mixed blessing. They could create a kind of accelerating "race to the bottom," in which most people see low-quality Choosing the Right Paradigm programming involving trumped-up scandals or sensationalistic anecdotes calling for little in terms of quality or quantity of attention. Free Speech and Democracy cast stations. The findings therefore suggested that the cable operators have an economic incentive not to carry local signals. This fact led to the important problem supporting the Act: Without the must-carry provision, Congress concluded, there would be a threat to the continued availability of free local broadcast television. 28 On the Court's account, the elimination of broadcast television would in turn be undesirable not because broadcasters deserve protection as such -- they do not -- but (a) because broadcast television is free and (b) because there is a substantial government interest in ensuring access to free programming, especially for people who cannot afford to pay for television. As Congress had it, the mustcarry rules would ensure that the broadcast stations would stay in business. The Court said that this purpose -- the protection of access to free programming through the protection of broadcast stations -- was unrelated to the content of broadcast expression and therefore legitimate. On a broadly similar principle, universal access to the Internet might be thought desirable. To be sure, such access would be most unlikely to be constitutionally mandated, since the right to vote is technically not involved. But universal access could be seen to be part of the goal of political equality. More generally, universal access might be necessary if the network is to serve its intended function. Choosing the Right Paradigm or almost everyone, or a wide range of people, can be reached. The United States mail might be justified in part on the ground that a national system of mail is necessary or at least helpful to ensure that any letter can reach everyone. Perhaps a requirement of universal access can be justified not as an inefficient 1 effort to subsidize people who would be without service, but on the quite different ground that universal service is a way of promoting the communicative interests of those who already have service. The interests of the latter group may well be promoted by ensuring that they can reach everyone, or nearly everyone. Free Speech and Democracy sures give reason to believe that interest-group pressures, rather than a legitimate effort to improve educational and public-affairs programming, are at work. But if the relevant measures actually promote Madisonian goals, they should be upheld. There is of course reason to fear that any such measures have less legitimate purposes and functions, and hence a degree of judicial skepticism is appropriate. But narrow measures, actually promoting those purposes, are constitutionally legitimate. Choosing the Right Paradigm influence. That may be the best decision, all things considered; but why is it unconstitutional for government to attempt to replace this system with an alternative apparently better from the standpoint of political equality? The Court offered no answer. Its analysis was startlingly cavalier. Campaign finance laws should be evaluated not through axioms, but pragmatically in terms of their consequences for the system of free expression. To say this is emphatically not to say that pornography is wholly without constitutional protection. Speech that is not at the First Amendment "core" cannot be regulated without a legitimate showing of harm. Here the state can legitimately regulate speech in the interest of anticaste goals. Narrow restrictions on hate speech should therefore be upheld. Second, public colleges and universities may have somewhat greater room than do governments generally to regulate hate speech, and this is so by virtue of their educative goals. It should be recalled that educational institutions regulate speech all the time; they grade speech, they require teachers to teach some things but not others, they punish or reward speech during appointments and tenure decisions. It would be far too broad to say that educational institutions may not reward or punish speech. Congress is not debarred from all action upon freedom of speech. Legislation which abridges that freedom is forbidden, but not legislation to enlarge and enrich it. The freedom of mind which befits the members of a self-governing society is not a given and fixed part of human nature. It can be increased and established by learning, by teaching, by the unhindered flow of accurate information, by giving men health and vigor and security, by bringing them together in activities of communication and mutual understanding. And the federal legislature is not forbidden to engage in that positive enterprise of cultivating the general intelligence upon which the success of self-government so obviously depends. On the contrary, in that positive field the Congress of the United States has a heavy and basic responsibility to promote the freedom of speech.37 Choosing the Right Paradigm It is regrettable, though not difficult to explain, that in the past much less attention has been given to the positive requirements of a successful working of the competitive system than to these [previously discussed] negative points. The functioning of a competition not only requires adequate organization of certain institutions like money, markets, and channels of information -- some of which can never be adequately provided by private enterprise -- but it depends, above all, on the existence of an appropriate legal system, a legal system designed both to preserve competition and to make it operate as beneficially as possible.... In no system that could be rationally defended would the state just do nothing. An effective competitive system needs an intelligently designed and continuously adjusted legal framework as much as any other. 28. Id. 29. For more detailed discussion, see Sunstein, The First Amendment in Cyberspace, supra speech in detail). An extremely truncated version of that discussion is presented here. STANLEY INGBER: Following each of our speakers and panels, we have set aside a block of time for you, the audience, to ask questions and make comments. Microphones have been set up on both sides of the aisle. Since we are taping these proceedings for publication as a book, please begin your remarks by identifying yourself and stating your professional affiliations. As we're waiting, I'll break the ice with the first question. Choosing the Right Paradigm think, for the Meiklejohn-Bork view. The history is not unambiguously supportive of the view that political speech is the only kind of speech protected by the First Amendment; there are broader suggestions. In any case, that position is foreclosed by judicial precedent, just from a lawyer's point of view. Even though some art and entertainment may have no political component, it would be impossible, given existing law, to say that they were unprotected by the First Amendment. CASS SUNSTEIN: The only gay material I know is the Robert Mapplethorpe photographs and I think that the Mapplethorpe material probably was political in the relevant sense. There were political statements that Mapplethorpe was making that bore directly and self-consciously, and everyone understood this, on issues of what the state does. So the Mapplethorpe stuff was political in the relevant sense. To put it more clearly, what Mapplethorpe is for is not what is for; Mapplethorpe's work had components of a political pornography statement. CASS SUNSTEIN: That's an important concern. Let's see how to approach it. One question we might ask is whether the framers had judgments of value which underlay their conception of what speech is protected or not? And there the answer is "absolutely." If you read the writings of Joseph Story or other materials of that early period, they were clear that freedom of speech didn't include all words, that licentious speech or libelous speech was regulable. Now think about that -- "licentious." Furthermore, libelous then meant a lot more than it does now. So certainly the authors of our free speech principle thought that judgments of value had to be made, should be made, would be made. Choosing the Right Paradigm expression without making judgments of speech value is not possible, and people who think it's possible ought to think a little more. If you think about a case involving attempted bribery which is hopelessly ineffectual, or a threat to assassinate the president that's really pathetic, or an attempt to defraud commercially that's so transparent that no one's going to be defrauded, each of these three cases -- attempted bribery, attempted fraud and an attempt to assassinate the president -- have speech that is protected by the First Amendment? If so, then the view that we ought not to make judgments about value is truly radical. It purports to be simply the stand of convention and common sense. But if it has the effect of protecting speech in these cases, this is a very radical position. Many statutes become unconstitutional. Most conspiracies in the United States, happily, aren't going to harm anybody. Fortunately the government tries to stop them even so. Now does the government have to show that conspiracies, insofar as they're proved by speech, are actually going to produce something before you can criminalize them? So the first part of the answer is that the framers certainly thought judgments about value would be made. The second is that I think it's impossible to run a system of free expression without making those judgments, and the sad thing is we make them covertly without saying so. CASS SUNSTEIN: Yes. Well, two things. I think the simplest way of thinking of who is lower caste is to look at indicators of social well being, like jobs, poverty and wealth, political representation, subjection to crime and so forth. So along those dimensions, African-Americans are very obviously a second class and women slightly less obviously, but also so. What I'd like to do is to look at dimensions of social well being and see who's systematically low. That's what Lincoln was thinking about. CASS SUNSTEIN: Maybe I've been unclear, but there are two different ideas. One is the notion of political equality, which is not economic equality. The second notion is the anti-caste idea, as to which systematic disparities along economic dimensions are relevant in showing second class citizenship. Note that the anti-caste principle is not egalitarian, because to say that people defined in terms of a morally irrelevant characteristic like skin color should not be systematically below another group, is not to say that everyone should have the same income. So my view is that if we had a society in which people with blue eyes, let's say, were systematically below people with brown eyes, there'd be a problem. Whereas, if there's a society where there's large disparities in economic well being fairly randomly distributed, on my view, from the standpoint of the American constitutional lawyer, that society does not have a problem. It would, of course, have some social, rather than constitutional, problems. So the notion that anti-caste can be measured by seeing whether one group defined in terms of a morally irrelevant characteristic is systematically below another does not constitute an argument for economic equality as a constitutional norm. Choosing the Right Paradigm acknowledge the complexities of examples like the Mapplethorpe example. But I'm wondering if there isn't a more fundamental difficulty with that distinction. In some cases, it may be the harm, that you say is the second prerequisite to the regulation of free speech, flows directly from its political character, as in the case of pornography. I'm not sure I'm happy with the suggestion that pornography's message is not a political one. Many anti-pornography feminists would say that the message of pornography is precisely a political one. It makes the political argument that they are second class, that women are there to be hurt, that they are there to be exploited, that they are there simply for men's pleasure. And this political argument has an effect. In fact, it coincides rather nicely with some empirical evidence that suggest that observers of some kinds of violent pornography will be less likely to believe that a rape occurred when they're shown a depiction of a rape; they're more likely to believe that the woman somehow "asked for" it or "deserved" it. So doesn't it pose a great difficulty for your theory that it may be that the harm created or caused by pornography rests precisely on the politics of the message that it conveys? CASS SUNSTEIN: That may be a problem. If we had a speaker who said, "Women are second class, they like the sorts of things we see in pornography and those things are great, and nations that allow them are really free," I would say that's at the core of First Amendment protection. So if it's the case that pornography is rightly described as making an argument to that effect, then the Madisonian thinks you have to have a clear and present danger or something of that sort justifying regulation. Then we don't have the commercial speech analogy anymore. But I think there's a difference between pornography, even if it has political effects, and those statements I just made. Pornography may have political effects of the sort you described, but it's not accurately described as intended and received as a contribution to public debate about some issue. If, on the other hand, government is trying to regulate pornography because of its political effects -- meaning, let's say, because it's creating a world in which women's role is not the right one, and we could describe it that abstractly -- then I get worried about the legitimacy of the government's reason for regulating pornography. Government should not be allowed to regulate pornography because pornography contains a politically wrong message. This is why it seems to me better from a First Amendment point of view to regulate pornography (if it is to be regulated) on the grounds that it's associated with tangible real world harms, like harms in the production and harms in the use rather than harms Free Speech and Democracy caused by persuading people about certain things. What I wouldn't want is the government regulating literature because the political message was wrong or the political effects were wrong. CASS SUNSTEIN: Well, most simply, violence in the production and use. CASS SUNSTEIN: Sure, if you can prove causation. So if I see a civil damage remedy, maybe with a damage cap ... CASS SUNSTEIN: thing political speech within the meaning of the First Amendment. (Audience): Isn't that what you said about I don't think it's encoded. CATHY CROSSON (Audience): Cathy Crosson, Indiana University. Cass, I disagree with many, many of your stated and unstated assumptions which I think you need to unpackage. I think the over-arching question to me is what is our agenda here? I seem to read your remarks' global impact as basically a position that a niggardly approach to free speech is justified by a project of equality. The final assumption I find very troubling is that government is, in any substantial sense, really about the task of promoting equality. When I look around in the context of the onslaught on the welfare system and other attacks on the lower caste, I find very troubling the idea that we should entrust greater power to censor speech on a government that I do not think in any way is about promoting the dissolution of castes in our society.