 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://about.jstor.org/terms JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. http://www.jstor.org Law is a normative enterprise; it is inevitably philosophical. For this reason, the distinction between legal theory and legal practice is at most one of degree. Certainly it can be shown that much legal practice takes theoretical issues for granted, but this does not mean that it is not pervaded by theoretical claims. On the other hand, there are real hazards for lawyers who use political philosophy to inform legal practice, especially when the philosophy is designed for a first-best world, or when it rests on assumptions that do not hold for us. Moreover, legal practice might seek to bracket philosophical questions, in order to facili tate change over time, to allow an incompletely theorized agreement on particular outcomes among people who disagree on first principles, and to avoid various forms of hubris. support the view that even mundane claims about the content of law have large-scale theoretical components. In part 2, I discuss some of the problems that arise when lawyers rely on what philosophers think. In part 3, I explain why a system of legal practice might limit its philosophical ambitions, in the process contrasting an antitheoretical, highly practical judge— Justice John Marshall Harlan—with Ronald Dworkin's Her cules. An important point here is that people who diverge sharply on large principles might well be able to agree on spe cific cases. This point helps explain why in a heterogeneous society, a normative practice, including law, might seek to bracket philosophical questions, and do so successfully. All descriptive claims about the content of law depend in some important way on ideas about the right, the good, or both. When we read Supreme Court opinions or appellate briefs, or if we listen to how lawyers discuss their cases, we find many claims about liberty, rights, equality, and justice. For example, the Constitution says that no state shall deprive any person of the equal protection of the laws. What does this mean? How do we even go about knowing what it means? Suppose that a state discriminates against homosexuals, fails to provide welfare ben efits, creates an affirmative action program, or stops people under eighteen from voting. Has there been a constitutional vi olation? Begin with the text. Very rapidly it becomes clear that the word "equal" has multiple meanings. The term could be a pro hibition on irrational differentiation; it could guarantee mini mally decent conditions for all; it could forbid caste systems; it could require a legitimate public purpose for all laws; it could forbid large disparities in wealth. Because of the multiplicity of textually plausible readings, we will be forced to resort to something supplemental to text in order to bring it to bear on disputed cases. Unless we can get help elsewhere, it will be necessary to make some substantive judgment about the appro priate conception of equal protection under the Constitution. On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 269 democracy, majoritarianism, rights, and much else. Here too, large-scale theoretical claims seem unavoidable. have some. The first question is: On what principle of equality are those precedents based? But this question will not be easy to answer. Suppose, for example, that the Court has forbidden school segregation. How does this precedent bear on affirmative action or substandard welfare benefits? To decide, we will have to choose how to characterize the precedents, and to do that, we will have to say something substantive about the appropriate equality principle. Precedents are not brute facts. And if the precedents are genuinely helpful, we have to ask whether they should be binding. And to answer that question, we will have to discuss the need for stability in law, the possibility of mistake, the potential for democratic correction, and so forth. appropriate spheres of human action. Judgments about causa tion are of course rooted in theories of moral responsibility. Nor can judges say whether there is an act or an omission—a relevant distinction in many areas of the law—without positing a morally privileged state of affairs. To do that, we will have to discuss theoretical questions. Similar things can be said about criminal law, which is pervaded by issues of intention, fault, and responsibility; these issues cannot be approached without theoretical claims. versial. Easy cases can claim to be easy only on the basis of reasons. in legal education in the last decades has stemmed from work by economists, philosophers, and others who have shown that many of the conventional legal categories—even conventional conceptions of how to describe "the facts"—turn out to depend on philosophical claims, and often on controversial ones. In this sense, legal practice has inescapable theoretical dimensions. self-conscious about this fact. Sometimes the claims that under lie law are taken as self-evident—as in the view that an abortion is an act rather than an omission, or that the meaning of a text is determined by investigating the views of its drafters, or that emotion and reason are at opposite poles, or that democracy and majoritarianism are the same thing, or that there is sharp distinction between "words" and "conduct." Such claims depend on complex theoretical judgments that ought to be brought into the open and evaluated as such. and Philosophers None of this necessarily means that lawyers should turn to philosophy or to great philosophers for the answers to their On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 271 questions. There are several characteristic risks with efforts of this sort. First, lawyers may misunderstand philosophers (as they sometimes misunderstand economists). Here as elsewhere, a little knowledge may be a dangerous thing. Second, and more interestingly, lawyers may fail to understand the difficulties in bringing philosophical arguments to bear on concrete legal dis putes. The application may seem mechanical, but it usually requires an act of translation, and one that involves a large element of construction. Suppose that we seek to be good Lock eans, and that we want to know how to deal with the question whether government should forbid private race discrimination. When a private employer refuses to hire blacks, the employer has not committed any act of conventional force or fraud. Does this mean that Locke is opposed to the Civil Rights Act of 1964? It should be obvious that there is no purely factual answer to this question. Instead, lawyers will be forced not to try to un cover some fact, but to offer the best constructive interpretation of Locke, recognizing that the relevant interpretation is neither pure discovery nor pure invention. The Lockean who approves or disapproves of Civil Rights Acts is hardly the historical Locke. Even when a philosopher makes explicit claims about a topic, the application can be far from clear. The Lockean pro viso about the need to leave "enough and as good for others" cannot realistically be said to decide questions about welfare en titlements. tive plausibility and real-world administrability. Even if wealth maximization is not in the end a good approach to justice, it might be shown that greater social wealth is at least roughly connected with the achievement of important human values. And if those other values cannot easily be promoted by common law courts—consider utility—perhaps wealth maximization is not so bad after all.1 In any case the philosophical defects with wealth maximization, even if they run deep, may not be decisive for law. free speech principle that places a special premium on political discussion is extremely attractive.2 But perhaps this approach would be too readily subject to abuse in the real world. Perhaps any institutional judgments about the category of what counts as "the political" would be too biased and unreliable to be ac ceptable. For good institutional reasons, we might adopt a free speech principle of a philosophically inadequate sort, simply because that inadequate approach is the only one that we can safely administer. instead on an awareness of institutional limits faced by human beings in certain situations. On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 273 Surely not. The Miranda approach may be the best means of combining real-world administrability with substantive plausibil ity. If so, it may be more than good enough despite its philo sophical inadequacy. The phenomenon of philosophically inad equate but nonetheless justified legal strategies seems to be a pervasive part of a well-functioning system of law. account. We may think, with Rawls, that the difference principle is required by good thinking about justice, without believing that the Constitution mandates that principle, or even that the United States Congress should pursue that principle in light of the multiple constraints that it faces. In this way philosophical commitments may inform understandings about law without leading to particular judgments about legal disputes. and Hercules Legal positivists sometimes think that law has nothing to do with philosophy, at least in the quiet narrow sense that the legal enterprise can often operate without offering any philosophical or theoretical claims at all.5 In this way, positivists believe that legal practice and legal theory can be sharply distinguished. As against the positivists, Ronald Dworkin famously argues that there is an inevitable evaluative or normative dimension to state ments about what the law is.6 Often, at least, one cannot say "what the law is" without also saying something about "what the law should be." That is, when lawyers disagree about what the law is with respect to some question—can the government ban hate speech? cross-burning?—they are disagreeing about "the best constructive interpretation of the community's legal prac tice."7 Thus Dworkin argues that interpretation in law consists of different efforts to make a governing text "the best it can be." This is Dworkin's conception of law as integrity. judge has to cast the existing materials in their best light, and to do this, the judge must often (and perhaps always) take a stand on some large theoretical questions. On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 275 with the search for reflective equilibrium in politics and ethics.8 Much of practical reasoning, in law and elsewhere, entails an effort to produce general theories by close engagement with considered judgments about particular cases. Those judgments may serve as provisional "fixed points" for inquiry, in the sense that we have a high degree of confidence in them and cannot readily imagine that they could be shaken. In searching for reflective equilibrium, what we think tentatively to be the gen eral theory is adjusted to conform to what we think to be our considered views about particular cases. The particular views are adjusted to conform to the general theory and vice versa. should think about free speech law.10 Dworkin begins with a noninstrumental, "constitutive" conception of free speech, in accordance with which speech is protected because of the need to respect the moral autonomy of the citizenry. On Dworkin's view, moral autonomy is insulted whenever government at tempts to prevent people from hearing things that they hnd persuasive.11 Dworkin brings this idea to bear on the area of libel; he concludes that the Constitution imposes hrm barriers against liability for public or private libel. Or consider the area of race discrimination. On Dworkin's account, the judge must ask: Does the legal prohibition on race discrimination reflect a category of suspect classifications stemming from a general right to be treated as equals; or a right against the use of certain banned categories; or a right not to be subject to prejudice? Dworkin concludes that the third theory is best and that affir mative action is therefore constitutional.12 Dworkin emphasizes that in answering such questions, law yers will not be pure philosophers. They do not simply develop the best theory from the standpoint of principle; they must offer their answers in a way that is attuned to the need for "fit" and to the courts' proper role. But this concession may be insufficient. In deciding whether, for example, a restriction on private libel offends the first amendment, lawyers usually do not ask which interpretation makes the amendment the best it can be. They do not begin or end with a high-level conception of the values promoted by the amendment. These are broad and abstract questions. They are too hard, large, and open ended for legal actors to handle. They call for responses that are, in one sense, too deeply theorized. On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 277 That is, Harlan's writings show the possibility of a form of what we might call low-level normative practice, diverging from full scale normative theory. at which the statute is unambiguously aimed. Of course, the description of relevant similarities and differences will have evaluative dimensions, and these should be made explicit. But lawyers and judges will not engage in anything like general moral theorizing. If a distinction between legal practice and legal theory is to be sustained, I think that this is the place to start. Everyday legal thinking proceeds without taking high level stands on questions of the right or the good. for something as modest and cautious as that. It might there fore be concluded that legal practice is simply a form of legal theory without the requisite self-consciousness or ambition. On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 279 sometimes it is possible to get them to agree on particular solu tions or on low-level principles.14 An incompletely theorized agreement15 is often possible on the view that case A is rele vantly similar to case B—even if those who join the agreement could not decide as between utilitarianism or Kantianism, or come to closure on the appropriate role of religion in society. This is especially important in a legal system, for people must be able to converge on particular judgments even if they dis agree on matters of high principle. It might even be said that allowing this form of convergence is one of the most crucial tasks for a system of adjudication in a liberal democracy. advantage of a form of day-to-day normative practice that is distinct from abstract and general normative theory. In a legal system, precedents are far more than an effort "to clear our own heads." If a judge or a lawyer is to attempt to reach reflective equilibrium, precedents will have at most the status of considered judgments about particular cases, and these might be revised when they run into conflict with something else that he believes and that is general or particular. In the legal system, precedents have a much firmer status. To be sure, precedents are not immune to revision, but the principle of stare decisis ensures that they operate as relatively fixed points. I conclude that the search for reflective equilibrium is a mis leading description of law, and in some ways an unattractive prescription, for participants in a legal system aspiring to stabil ity should not be so immodest as to reject judgments reached by others whenever those judgments could not be made part of reflective equilibrium for those particular participants. Of On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 281 course, it is only a mixed blessing to have fixed points that may be wrong as a matter of principle. For this reason, observers of or participants in the legal system may be pushed in the direc tion of theoretical challenges to current legal materials. These challenges should hardly be disparaged; sometimes they pre vail, and rightly so. But legal practice often operates with a kind of consensus on theoretical issues, a consensus in which people who diverge on large-scale issues can agree on how to approach particular controversies. reflective equilibrium of the ordinary sort, acknowledging as he does that the existing legal materials must usually be accepted even if they seem wrong. Does Harlan have some advantages over Hercules? I think that he does. Insofar as Harlan avoids resort to large-scale theory, he not only avoids unrealistic expec tations for people engaged in law, but also promotes a system in which people who disagree on a great deal can converge on the particular judgments of which a system of adjudication must consist. This too is at best a mixed blessing. It may perpetuate errors. It may tolerate inequality and unfair treatment. But a blessing that is mixed is a blessing nonetheless. offer here, but a few remarks are in order. Full theorization consists of much more than a legal system of numerous, hetero geneous, hierarchically arranged courts can be expected to of fer. Because of the need for predictability and stability in law, judges must reason from cases with which they disagree, and the resulting judgments are unlikely to be fully theorized. If this is so, a system of legal practice may well be able to claim the requisite legitimacy if it is democratic (broadly speaking) and if individual judges seek to produce the limited but important sorts of consistency that Harlan can yield. If this is correct, a system in which judges reason by analogy, and do not seek reflective equilibrium, might itself be justified as part of the reflective equilibrium reached by informed observers who take institutional issues into account. There is a final challenge to what I am describing as Justice Harlan's method, and this challenge bears directly on the rela tionship between theory and practice in law. The challenge would emphasize that Harlan's method, and especially his em phasis on incompletely theorized particulars, is necessary only because of our failure to develop general principles, which ought to be evaluated in their own right. The method of anal ogy, for example, is based on the question: Is case A relevantly similar to case B, or not? Is a ban on homosexual sodomy like a ban on the use of contraceptives in marriage, or like a ban on incest? We have seen that to answer such questions, one needs a theory of relevant similarities and differences. By itself, analogi cal reasoning supplies no such theory. It is thus dependent on an apparatus that it is unable to produce. On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 283 pies to decide cases; but this is not an objection to reasoning from particular cases, which helps us to decide what our (low level) principles are. But this humble point may establish only that analogies help us discover principles, which are in an ulti mate sense freestanding. In Kant's formulation, examples may be like walkers for children, helping people who are ethically immature to begin to orient themselves like adults.17 Thus "ca suistry is most suitable to the capacity of the undeveloped and so is the most appropriate way to sharpen the reason of young people in general."18 Convictions about particular cases—the stuff of practice—are like a ladder that can be discarded once we have climbed to the top. The claim may be right even if we acknowledge, as we should, that the effort to develop broader levels of abstraction is often a check against partiality and error in particular cases. In ethics as in law, judgments about particulars should be provi sional in the sense that sometimes they must be revised precisely because they cannot be squared with other judgments that are particular and general; but in certain endeavors, those particu lar judgments may deserve a kind of priority. They may deserve priority because they are more fully and carefully attuned to the multiple considerations likely to be at stake, and because general rules may be so broad and abstract as to ignore perti nent features of good judgment. Of course, nothing in this view amounts to a denial of the need for general principles and rules, to counteract bias, to minimize costs of decision, and to bring about the various virtues associated with the rule of law. Often, at least, general principles do seem inadequate to the matter at hand. Too many factors will be relevant, and too many variations will be possible, to allow a general formulation adequately to capture the range of right results in the cases. Sometimes any general theory will be too rigid and too inflexi ble. Part of the reason is that the relevant goods are diverse and plural, and most general theories are poorly attuned to this fact. In the law of free speech, for example, the Supreme Court has not offered a theory to account for its judgments. It has not explained what speech counts as "high value" and what speech falls in a lower tier. It is tempting to say that this is a major failure in constitutional law, and that the Court would do much better to tell us in plain terms what "test" it is using. But perhaps any test, described at a high level of generality, will be subject to decisive counterexamples, and will therefore be inadequate to the task. On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 285 am calling normative practice, operating modestly with low level convictions. The practice of law is theory-laden. In their day-to-day work, many lawyers and judges are actually making theoretical claims. In some ways, it is most unfortunate that this point is not recog nized more often. The absence of self-consciousness about the theoretical claims may conceal those claims from view and make it harder to see that they represent a choice among plausible alternatives. The attack on legal formalism is above all an insis tence that legal work that purports to be mechanical is actually based on controversial substantive claims. Those claims ought to be brought out into the open and evaluated. 1. As contended in Richard A. Posner, Problems of Jurisprudence (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1990). 3. See Ronald de Souza, The Rationality of Emotion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989); Martha Nussbaum, The Therapy of Desire (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994). ReasoningHarvard Law Review 106:741.1 discuss these issues further in "Political Conflicts and Legal Agreements," forthcoming in the 1995 Tanner Lectures in Human Values, ed. S. McMullin. Partial Constitution (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993). tles Over Free Speech," New York Review of Books, (11 June 1992): 55, where the governing theory is also developed at an exceedingly high level of generality and where analogical reasoning plays no role. In fact, many of Dworkin's particular discussions are based on a form of deduction, in which he develops a general theory and evaluates partic ular cases by reference to that theory. function of this statement is to point to revisability. In the relevant section, Rawls is discussing the analogy between the sense of grammar On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 287 and the sense of justice, and suggesting that a knowledge of one person's sense of either would be a good beginning. of Example," in her Constructions of Reason (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989). result of patterns that reach deep into cognitive processes, and that there is no identifiable "principle" to make one thing analogous to another but instead patterns that are constitutive of human reasoning. The cognitive role of judgments of analogy would take me far beyond the present discussion.