University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1995 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Introduction Feature: Right after Communism: Introduction 
Introduction Feature: Right after Communism: Introduction 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Introduction Feature: Right after Communism: Introduction," 4 East European 
Constitutional Review 61 (1995). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Ins5iutonal and  psychological perspectives  on postcommunist  rights

FEATURE:
Rights After  Communism

WINTER  1995

Introduction
Cass R. Sunstein

Contrary to the suggestion  in much Western polit-
ical thought,  rights do not fall from  the sky. They
depend  for  their  existence  on  public  institutions.
They cost money, perhaps  a  great  deal  of money.
(This  is  true  not  only  for  social  and  economic
rights but for so-called negative rights as  well; gov-
ernment  cannot  protect  property  and  life  itself
without resources.)  Rights will not exist without a
rights-bearing  culture,  that is,  a  culture  in  which
ordinary  people  are  at  least  sometimes  willing  to
take  serious  personal  risks  by  challenging  power-
ful people by insisting that rights are at  stake. The
protection of rights will require government  to act
in  both  public  and  private  spheres,  sometimes
within the family itself (as, for example, in the pre-
vention  of domestic  violence).

These are the principal lessons that emerge from
the  following  essays  on  rights  after  Communism.
Ewa  Letowska  shows  that  the  activity  of  the
ombudsman-a  potentially  crucial  actor  in Eastern
Europe-has  been necessary  to  ensure that rights on
paper  actually  mean  something  in  the  real  world.
Ombudsman action was required in Poland to estab-
lish that a woman could not be refused employment
because  the job of engine driver  was  "too hard  for
her"; ombudsman  action was also necessary  to upset

a conviction of a professor who had criticized  a par-
ticular decision of the minister  of education as remi-
niscent  of  "socialist  pathology."  (The  prosecution
itself certainly  deserved  that appellation even  if the
decision  at  issue  did  not.)  Kim  Lane  Scheppele
shows  that  paper  guarantees  of  sex  equality  can
coexist  with  extensive  sex  discrimination  and
inequality. Consider the fact that in Poland, 90 occu-
pations are closed to women by law, and that no laws
in Eastern Europe ban sexual harassment. Russia has
created  extensive  constitutional  protections  for  the
accused  and  committed  those protections  to paper;
but  the  Supreme Court of Russia  has  held  that  the
privilege  against  self-incrimination  is  sufficiently
protected if the defendant is told  that he has a right
to give  a statement of confession  (on the astonishing
theory  that  this  statement  implicitly  conveys  the
right not to give such  a statement).

Inga  Mikhailovskaia's  important  empirical
study  shows,  among  many  other  things,  that  the
right  to  religious  liberty  and  the  right  to receive
and  distribute  information  are  ranked  as  "impor-
tant"  or  "very  important"  by  less  than  half  of
respondents, whereas  the right to social security  is
so ranked  by  nearly  96  percent. This  finding  has
many possible implications.  Certainly it is reason-

HeinOnline  -- 4 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 61 1995

able to say that the finding suggests  what will hap-
pen in  the future: The rights people  actually  have
will  likely have  some  connection  with  the  rights
that  they  want.  But  we  might  react  as  well  by
insisting  that  the  responses  are  disturbing,  since
the  category  of rights,  and  especially  of constitu-
tional rights, need not be coextensive  with the cat-
egory  of  important  human  interests.  Rights  are,
among  other  things,  pragmatic instruments  whose
acknowledgment in law is designed to accomplish concrete
social tasks. To say that there  ought not to be  a legal
right to (for example) environmental  quality is not
to disparage environmental  protection;  so too with
the  right  to fair  compensation  for  one's  labor;  so
too  with  the  right  to  equal  pay  for  equal  work.
The  acknowledgment  of  these  things  as  rights
may not accomplish  anything  in the world;  rights
of this  sort  may not realistically  be  subject  to pro-
tection  through  courts  or  through  other  public
channels. We do not disparage  such interests if we
refuse to recognize  them as  rights, or if we reserve
the  category  of  legal  rights  to  human  interests
whose  protection  as  rights  will  actually  do  some
good for human beings.

There  is  a final  point. One of Mikhailovskaia's
questions  opposes  individual  rights  to  the interests
of the  state,  and  asks  whether  the  former  can  be

EAST  EUROPEAN  CONSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW

abridged because  of the latter. But many rights actu-
ally  serve  collective interests,  by making  it possible
to have and  maintain a certain kind of society  with
a  certain  sort  of culture.  Consider  here  the  legal
philosopher Joseph  Raz's  striking  suggestion:  "If  I
were  to  choose  between  living  in  a  society  which
enjoys  freedom  of expression,  but  not  having  the
right  myself,  or  enjoying  the  right  in  a  society
which  does not have  it, I  would have no  hesitation
in judging  that  my own personal  interest  is  better
served  by  the  first  option."  Rights  and  Individual
Well-Being,  in  Ethics  in  the  Public  Domain  39
(1994). Part of the reason for a system of free speech
is not to protect  the individual speaker, but to allow
processes  of public  deliberation  and  discussion that
serve public goals by, for example, constraining gov-
ernmental power and makingjust and effective out-
comes  more likely.

This point--often ignored  in the West as well as
the East-suggests that  many rights  deserve  to exist
because of their consequences for society in general.
A  point of this  kind permeates  the  essays  that  fol-
low. It  helps  account  for  the  need  for  real-world
institutions  safeguarding  constitutional  guarantees,
and  for  the  more  than  occasional  difficulty  of
obtaining  such  institutions  in view of the complex
psychology of rights.

HeinOnline  -- 4 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 62 1995

