 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Cass R. Sunstein* We think utility, or happiness, much too complex and indefinite an end to be sought except through the medium of various secondary ends, concerning which there may be, and often is, agreement among persons who differ in their ultimate standard; and about which there does in fact prevail a much greater unanimity among thinking persons, than might be supposed from their diametrical divergence on the great questions of moral metaphysics. As mankind are much more nearly of one nature, than of one opinion about their own nature, they are more easily brought to agree in their intermediate principles . . . than in their first principles Why didn't the [Sentencing] Commission sit down and really go and rationalize this thing and not just take history? The short answer to that is: we couldn't. We couldn't because there are such good arguments all . . YTy listing all the over the place pointing in opposite directions. crimes that there are in rank order of punishable merit.... Then collect results from your friends and see if they all match. I will tell you they won't. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This essay is an expansion of certain sections of the first of my I994 Tanner Lectures on Human Values, delivered at Harvard University in November I994; the lectures themselves will appear under the title Political Conflict and Legal Agreement, in I7 THE TANNER LECTURES ON HUMAN VALUES (Grethe B. Peterson ed., forthcoming I996). I am especially grateful to my audiences at Harvard for their extraordinary graciousness and for their probing comments and questions. Of the many people who offered help on that occasion, I single out for special thanks my commentators Jean Hampton and Jeremy Waldron, and also Joshua Cohen, Christine Korsgaard, Martha Minow, Martha Nussbaum, John Rawls, Tim Scanlon, and Amartya Sen. For extremely helpful comments on the manuscript, I am grateful to Bruce Ackerman, Ruth Chang, Joshua Cohen, Jon Elster, Charles Fried, Amy Gutmann, Don Herzog, Stephen Holmes, Elena Kagan, Dan Kahan, Larry Lessig, Saul Levmore, William Meadow, Frank Michelman, Martha Minow, Martha Nussbaum, Susan Moller Okin, Wiktor Osiatynski, Richard Posner, Joseph Raz, Frederick Schauer, Stephen Schulhofer, AnneMarie Slaughter, Mark lushnet, Candace Vogler, and Lloyd Weinreb. I am also indebted to participants in a work-in-progress lunch at the University of Chicago and to members of legal theory workshops at Oxford University and the University of California, Berkeley. I am also grateful to Sophie Clark for research assistance. Parts of this commentary will appear in a book, LEGAL REASONING AND POLITICAL CONFLICT (forthcoming I996). like that; again, grand principles have to be I prefer not to [talk] applied in concrete cases. My job involves reasoning from the specific case . . . INTRODUCTION There is a familiar image of justice. She is a single figure. She is a goddess, emphatically not a human being. She is blindfolded. And she holds a scale. There is much dispute about whether well-functioning democracies should try to resolve such disagreements, and about how they should do so if they do try.4 Perhaps government should seek an "overlapping consensus"5 among reasonable people, thus allowing agreements to be made among Kantians, utilitarians, Aristotelians, and others. Perhaps participants in a liberal democracy can agree on the right even if they disagree on the good.6 Thus a sympathetic observer describes the liberal "hope that we can achieve social unity in a democracy through shared commitment to abstract principles."7 3 Nomination of Ruth Bader Ginsburg to Be Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States: Hearings Before the Senate Judiciary Comm., 1o3d Cong., Ist Sess. I80 (I993) (statement of then-Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg). marizing RAWLS, cited above in note 4). This is a promising approach, and in some settings, it may work. But an investigation of actual democracy, and of law in actual democracies, raises questions about this view. Democracies and law in democracies - must deal with people who very much disagree on the right as well as the good. Democracies must deal with people who tend to distrust abstractions altogether. Participants in law are no exception. Judges are certainly not ordinary citizens. But neither are they philosophers. Indeed, participants in law may be unwilling to commit themselves to large-scale theories of any kind, and they will likely disagree with one another if they seek to agree on such theories. Judges also have to decide many cases, and they have to decide them quickly. Decisions must be made rapidly in the face of apparently intractable social disagreements on a wide range of first principles. These disagreements will be reflected within the judiciary and other adjudicative institutions as well as within the citizenry at large. At least this is so if adjudicative institutions include, as they should, some of the range of views that are included in society generally. 8 Consider the notion of overlapping consensus as set out in RAWLS, cited above in note 4, at 133-72. The idea of an incompletely theorized convergence on particulars is related. Both ideas attempt to bring about stability and social agreement in the face of diverse "comprehensive views." But the two ideas are far from the same. I am most interested in the problem of producing agreement on particular outcomes and low-level principles (defined below at p. I 740) to justify them, with the thought that people who disagree on general principles can often agree on individual cases. Rawls is interested in a related but different possibility that people who disagree on comprehensive views can agree on certain political abstractions and use that agreement for political purposes. See id. at 43-46. Of course this is also true. on the result and on relatively narrow or low-level explanations for it. They need not agree on fundamental principle.9 They do not offer larger or more abstract explanations than are necessary to decide the case. When they disagree on an abstraction, they move to a level of greater particularity. The distinctive feature of this account is that it emphasizes agreement on (relative) particulars rather than on (relative) abstractions. This is an important source of social stability and an important way for diverse people to demonstrate mutual respect,10 in law especially but also in liberal democracy as a whole. phy to questions in metaphysics. (On Rawls' view, see RAWLS, cited above in note 4, at xix-xx.) Just as the political philosopher may attempt not to take a stand on metaphysical questions, so the lawyer, the judge, or the political participant may urge outcomes that make it unnecessary to solve large questions in political philosophy. In a liberal society committed to allowing people of different fundamental views to live together with mutual respect, the Rawlsian strategy may sometimes founder on confusion, limitations of time and capacity, and fears that political liberalism is itself too sectarian to serve as a defining political creed. I do not mean to suggest that the Rawlsian project is unable to surmount these concerns. Certainly there must be constraints on the content of incompletely theorized agreements, and those constraints take the form of abstractions. But I do mean to suggest that participants in liberal political culture often seek agreement on what to do rather than exactly how to think. When they reach these agreements from diverse starting points, they can promote liberal goals in a way that has some distinctive advantages. I do not attempt here to sort out all of the relations between the idea of an overlapping consensus and the notions I have in mind; more detailed discussion will appear in SUNSTEIN, LEGAL REASONING AND POLITICAL CONFLICT, cited above in note *. agreement on foundations may produce disagreement on particulars. What I am emphasizing is that, when closure cannot be based on relative abstractions, the legal system is often able to reach a degree of closure by focusing on relative particulars. Examples of this kind are exceptionally common. They are the day-to-day stuff of law. 11 Interesting issues of collective choice lurk in the background here. Important problems of cycling, strategic behavior, and path dependence may arise in multimember bodies containing people with divergent rationales, each of whom wants to make his rationale part of law. See generally KENNETH J. ARRow, SOCIAL CHOICE AND INDIVIDUAL VALUES passim (2d ed. I963) (analyzing problems of public choice). There may also be complex bargaining issues as some officials or judges seek to implement a broad theory as part of the outcome, while others seek a narrow theory, and still others are undecided between the two. These important issues are beyond the scope of the present discussion, though it would be most illuminating to have a better grasp, theoretically and empirically, of the sorts of bargaining games that occur when officials and judges decide on the scope of the theory to accompany an outcome. Cf DOUGLAS G. BAIRD, ROBERT H. GERTNER & RANDAL C. PICKER, GAME THEORY AND THE LAW 6-49 (1994) (applying game theory models to analyze how players choose among different legal regimes). among those deeper reasons if it is not necessary to do so. This phenomenon raises questions about many prominent accounts of judging, particularly that of Ronald Dworkin, which I discuss below.'4 By emphasizing incompletely theorized agreements, I intend partly to describe existing practice. These agreements are a pervasive phenomenon in Anglo-American law and, in particular, in judge-made law. Indeed, they play an important function in any well-functioning democracy consisting of a heterogeneous population. The persistence of such agreements offers a challenge to people who think that areas of law actually reflect some general theory, involving (for example) Kantian or utilitarian understandings.'5 I want, however, to make some normative claims as well. These claims are connected with the distinctive morality of judging and perhaps the distinctive morality of politics in a pluralistic society. It is customary to lament an outcome that has not been completely theorized, on the ground that any such outcome has been inadequately justified; but there are special advantages to incompletely theorized agreements in law (and elsewhere). Such agreements are especially well suited to the institutional limits of the judiciary, which is composed in significant part of multimember bodies, consisting in turn of highly diverse people who must render many decisions, live together, avoid error to the extent possible, and show each other mutual respect. The virtues of incompletely theorized agreements extend as well to social life, to workplace and familial life, and even to democratic politics. I will note these possibilities without discussing them in detail here. 14 See infra pp. 1757-60. 15 See, e.g., RONALD DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE 240-50 (I986) (arguing that tort law requires inquiry into abstract "justice"); RiCHARD A. POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF LAW 23 (4th ed. (arguing that the common law actually promotes economic efficiency). Of course, advocates I992) of a deep theory might urge that incompletely theorized agreements, taken as a class, tend to reflect a certain theory even if the theory has not been adopted self-consciously, and that those decisions that are inconsistent with the theory should be abandoned. Incompletely theorized agreements play a pervasive role in law and society. It is rare for a person, and especially for a group, to theorize that is, to accept both a highly abstract theany subject completely ory and a series of steps that relate the theory to a concrete conclusion. In fact, people often reach incompletely theorized agreements on a general principle. Such agreements are incompletely theorized in the sense that people who accept the principle need not agree on what it entails in particular cases. People know that murder is wrong, but they disagree about abortion. They favor racial equality, but they are divided on affirmative action. Hence there is a familiar phenomenon of a comfortable and even emphatic agreement on a general principle, accompanied by sharp disagreement about particular cases.'6 This sort of agreement is incompletely theorized in the sense that it is incompletely specified - a familiar phenomenon with constitutional provisions'7 and regulatory standards in administrative law. Incompletely specified agreements have distinctive social uses. They may permit acceptance of a general aspiration when people are unclear about what the aspiration means, and in this sense, they can maintain a measure of both stability and flexibility over time. At the same time, they can conceal the fact of large-scale social disagreement about particular cases. Concrete Ethical Problems, My special interest here is in a third kind of phenomenon incompletely theorized agreements on particular outcomes, accompanied by agreements on the low-level principles that account for them. These terms contain some ambiguities. There is no algorithm by which to distinguish between a high-level theory and one that operates at an intermediate or low level. We might consider Kantianism and utilitarianism as conspicuous examples of high-level theories and see legal illustrations in the many (academic) efforts to understand such areas as tort law, contract law, free speech, and the law of equality to be undergirded by highly abstract theories of the right or the good.'8 By contrast, we might think of low-level principles as including most the general class of princiof the ordinary material of legal doctrine ples and justifications that are not said to derive from any particular large theories of the right or the good, that have ambiguous relations to large theories, and that are compatible with more than one such theory.'9 By the term "particular outcome," I mean the judgment about who wins and who loses a case. By the term "low-level principles," I refer to something relative, not absolute; a principle is low-level only when compared to more abstract alternatives. I also mean the terms "theories" and "abstractions" (which I use interchangeably) in a relative sense: the notions "low-level," "high-level," and "abstract" are best understood as comparative, like the terms "big" and "unusual." The "clear and present danger" test is abstract when compared with the judgment that members of the Nazi Party may march in Skokie, Illinois,20 but the test is relatively particular when compared with the constitutional abstraction "freedom of speech." The idea of "freedom of speech" is relatively abstract when measured against the notion that campaign finance laws are acceptable, but the same idea is less abstract than the grounds that justify free speech, such as the principle of autonomy.21 The notion of a completely theorized judgment can be understood in the abstract: it refers to a judgment on a particular set of facts combined with all relevant vertical and horizontal judgments, as in a judgment in a free speech case accompanied by an understanding of all other free speech cases, or perhaps of all cases, and of all principles, at all levels of generality, that explain or justify that judgment. lower the level of abstraction. People are sometimes able to converge on a point of less generality than the point at which agreement is difficult or impossible. In law, the point of agreement is often highly parin the sense that it ticularized involves a specific outcome and a set of reasons that typically do not venture far from the case at hand. As I have said, reasons are, by their very nature, more abstract than the outcome for which they account. In analogical thinking, a judge cannot go from one particular to another; it is necessary to identify a principle or a reason to unify or separate the particulars. To the extent that law prizes reason-giving, it contains an impulse toward abstraction. Full particularity is rare.22 What I am emphasizing is the lawyer's impulse to offer reasons on which people can unite from widely diverse foundations. 22 See infra section II.C. 23 See JOSEPH RAZ, THE MORALITY OF FREEDOM 58 (I986) ("[T]he practice [of proceeding through the mediation of rules] allows the creation of a pluralistic culture. For it enables people to unite in support of some 'low or medium level' generalizations despite profound disagreements concerning their ultimate foundations, which some seek in religion, others in Marxism or in Liberalism, etc.'). tools can allow the achievement of incompletely theorized agreements on particular outcomes, though in interestingly different ways.25 It should now be clear that I am especially concerned with the use full accounts of the founof ambitious thinking to produce "depth" dations of a decision, in the form of attempts to find ever deeper reasons behind the outcome. Incompletely theorized agreements do not offer such accounts. But such agreements also fail along the dimenthat is, they do not try to rationalize the law by sion of "width" showing how an outcome in one case fits coherently with particular outcomes in the full range of other cases. Judges, of course, attempt to produce local coherence, especially through reasoning by analogy. But they do not try for global coherence. It seems clear that people may converge on a correct outcome even though they do not have a full account for their judgments. Jones may know that dropped objects fall, that bee stings hurt, and that snow melts, without knowing exactly why these facts are true. Much the same is true for law and morality. Johnson may know that slavery is wrong, that government may not stop political protests, and that every person should have just one vote, without knowing exactly why these things are so. Judge Wilson may know that under the Constitution, discrimination against the handicapped is generally permitted, and that discrimination against women is generally banned, without having an account of why the Constitution is so understood. We may thus offer an epistemological point: people can know that X is true without entirely knowing why X is true. This is very often so for particular conclusions about law. 25 I emphasize "can" rather than "will." Analogies are frequently disputed, and people often disagree on the meaning of a standard ("unreasonable risk," "discrimination," and so forth). case rightly reflects the fact that any regulation of abortion would be ineffective in promoting its own purposes. We can find incompletely theorized political agreements on particular outcomes in many areas of law and politics - on both sides of the affirmative action controversy, both sides of the dispute over the death penalty, and in all facets of the debate over health care reform. There are two especially important methods by which law might resolve disputes without obtaining agreement on first principles: rules and analogies. Both of these methods attempt to promote a major goal of a heterogeneous society: to make it possible to obtain agreement where agreement is necessary, and to make it unnecessary to obtain agreement where agreement is impossible. Though Justice Breyer does not stress the point, it seems clear that the seven members of the Commission were unlikely to agree that deterrence provides a full account of the aims of criminal sentencing.29 In these circumstances, what route did the Commission follow? In fact, the Commission adopted no general view about the appropriate aims of criminal sentencing. Instead, the Commission adopted a rule one founded on precedent: "It decided to base the Guidelines pri marily upon typical, or average, actual past practice."30 The Commission reached an incompletely theorized agreement on the value of starting (and usually ending) with past averages. Hence unusual judicial sentences would be filtered out through adoption of typical or average practices. Consciously articulated explanations, involving lowlevel reasons, were used to support particular departures from the past. Justice Breyer saw this effort as a necessary means of obtaining agreement and rationality within a multimember body charged with avoiding unjustifiably wide variations in sentencing.31 The example suggests a quite general point. Through both analogies and rules, it is often possible to achieve convergence on particular disputes without resolving large-scale issues of the right or the good. For judges and officials at least, this is an important virtue. for deciding whether an outcome is good. The fact that there is agreement about a rule does not mean that the rule is desirable. Perhaps the rule is bad, or perhaps the judgments that go into its interpretation are bad. The resolution of the Sentencing Commission deserves approval only if average practices were not pervasively unjust. Perhaps the Sentencing Commission incorporated judgments that were based on ignorance, confusion, or prejudice.32 Perhaps a more deeply theorized approach would have produced better guidelines.33 Some of the same things may be said about analogies. People in positions of authority may agree that a ban on same-sex marriages is analogous to a ban on marriages between uncles and nieces. But the analogy may be misconceived because there are relevant differences, because the similarities are far from decisive, or because the principle that accounts for the judgment of similarity cannot be sustained. The fact that people agree that case A is analogous to case B does not mean that case A or case B is rightly decided. Problems with analogies and low-level principles might lead us to be more ambitious. Participants in law may well be pushed in the direction of general theory precisely be cause low-level reasoning offers an inadequate and incompletely theorized account of relevant similarities or relevant differences. All this should be sufficient to show that the virtues of incompletely theorized outcomes - and the virtues of decisions by rule and are partial. Those virtues should not be exaggerated, by analogy and sometimes participants will have to raise the theoretical stakes. But no system of law is likely to be either just or efficient if it dispenses with incompletely theorized agreements. In fact, it is not likely even to be feasible. What might be said on behalf of incompletely theorized agreements, or incompletely theorized judgments, about particular cases? As I have indicated, incompletely theorized agreements may be unjust or otherwise wrong. Indeed, we are accustomed to thinking of incomplete theorization as reflective of some important problem or defect. When people theorize by raising the level of abstraction, they do so to reveal bias, or confusion, or inconsistency. Surely participants in a legal system should not abandon this effort. A. The Case for Incomplete Theorization I. Multimember Institutions. Second, incompletely theorized agreements can promote two goals of a liberal democracy and a liberal legal system: to enable people to live together,36 and to permit them to show each other a measure of reciprocity and mutual respect.37 The use of rules or low-level principles allows judges on multimember bodies and hence citizens generally to find commonality - and a common way of life - without producing unnecessary antagonism. Perhaps more important, incompletely theorized agreements allow people to show each other a high degree of mutual respect, civility, or reciprocity. Ordinary people frequently disthe Middle East, pornography, agree in some deep way on an issue and sometimes they agree not to discuss that issue gay marriages much, as a way of deferring to each other's strong convictions (even if they do not at all respect the particular conviction that is at stake).38 If reciprocity and mutual respect are desirable, it follows that judges, perhaps even more than ordinary people, should not challenge a litigant's or one another's deepest and most defining commitments, at 35 The institution of the concurring opinion shows that judges sometimes reject a colleague's low-level justification, perhaps because they accept the result but would prefer a different lowlevel justification, perhaps because they would prefer a lower-level or higher-level justification. As concurring opinions proliferate, we may begin to reach full particularity in the sense of an agreement on an outcome without agreement on a low-level rationale. See, e.g., Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 240 (Douglas, J., concurring); id. at 257 (Brennan, J., concurring); id. at 306 (Stewart, J., concurring); id. at 3IO (White, J., concurring); id. at 314 (Marshall, J. concurring); infra PP. I754-57. This phenomenon is revealing insofar as it demonstrates the possibility of agreement on an outcome unaccompanied by agreement on any set of reasons. But judges struggle very hard to avoid full particularity, and they seek incompletely theorized agreements as a way of providing an explanation and a degree of guidance despite their differences. least if those commitments are reasonable and if there is no need for them to do so. Thus, it would be better if judges intending to reaffirm Roe v. Wade could do so without challenging the belief that the fetus is a human being,39 or if judges seeking to invalidate the death penalty could do so without saying that the punishment of death is invalid because of its sheer brutality.40 Institutional arguments in law, especially those involving judicial restraint, are typically designed to bracket fundamental questions and remove them from the realm of the judiciary.41 The allocation of certain roles has the important function of allowing outcomes to be reached without forcing courts to make decisions on fundamental issues.42 Those issues are resolved by reference to institutional competence, not on their merits.43 To be sure, some fundamental commitments might appropriately be challenged in the legal system or within other multimember bodies. Some such commitments are ruled off-limits by the authoritative legal materials. Many provisions involving basic rights have this function.44 Of course, it is not always disrespectful to disagree with someone in a fundamental way; on the contrary, such disagreements may reflect profound respect. For example, objections to judgments based on prejudice may reflect respect for the person at the same time that they attempt to overcome the judgments at issue. When defining commitments are based on demonstrable errors of fact or logic, it is appropriate to contest them. The same is true when those commitments are rooted in a rejection of the basic dignity of all human beings, or when it is necessary to undertake the contest to resolve a genuine problem.45 But many cases can be resolved in an incompletely theorized way, and that is all I am suggesting here. cally charged facts."). (responding to Rawls). not we are dealing with a multimember body. The first consideration here is that any simple general theory of a large area of the law is likely to be too crude to fit with free speech, contracts, property the best understandings of the multiple values that are at stake in that area. Monistic theories of free speech or property rights, for example, fail to accommodate the range of values that speech and property implicate. Human goods are plural and diverse, and they cannot be ranked along any unitary scale without doing violence to our understanding of the qualitative differences among those very goods.46 People value things not just in terms of weight but also in qualitatively different ways. In the area of free speech, a simple top-down theory is likely to run afoul of powerful judgments about particular cases. For this reason, monistic theories are usually inadequate.47 stressing, for example, autonomy or democracy its point or points Of course, a "top-down" approach might reject monism and point to plural values.48 But any such approach is likely to owe its genesis to a range of particular cases, and its proof and considered judgments about particular cases, on which it can build. Top-down approaches based on plural values may seem convincing, but incompletely theorized judgments are well suited to a moral universe that is diverse and pluralistic, not only in the sense that people disagree, but also in the sense that each of us is attuned to pluralism when we are thinking well about any area of law.49 Second, incompletely theorized agreements serve the crucial function of reducing the political cost of enduring disagreements. If judges disavow large-scale theories, then losers in particular cases lose much less. They lose a decision but not the world. They may win on another occasion. Their own theory has not been rejected or ruled inadis the authoritative rationale missible. When disconnected from abstract theories of the good or the right, the losers can submit to legal obligations, even if reluctantly, without being forced to renounce their deepest ideals. To be sure, some theories should be rejected or ruled inadmissible; this is sometimes the point of authoritative legal materials. But it is an advantage, from the stand for the result 47 See T.M. Scanlon, Jr., Freedom of Expression and Categories of Expression, 40 U. PITT. L. (rejecting autonomy theory as a full account). Analogical reasoning is REV. 519, 5I9-20 especially desirable here. This way of thinking allows judges and lawyers to build doctrine with close reference to particular cases and thus with close attention to the plurality of values that may well arise. This plurality will confound "top-down" theories that attempt, for example, to understand speech only in terms of democracy, or property only in terms of economic efficiency. point of freedom and stability, for a legal system to be able to tell most losers - many of whom are operating from foundations that have something to offer, or that cannot be ruled out a priori that their own deepest convictions may play a role elsewhere in the law. The third point is that incompletely theorized agreements may be valuable when what is sought is moral evolution over time. Consider the area of constitutional equality, where considerable change has occurred in the past and is likely to occur in the future. A completely at least if it takes rule-like form - would be theorized judgment unable to accommodate changes in facts or values.50 Incompletely theorized agreements are a key to debates over constitutional equality, which raise issues about whether gender, sexual orientation, age, disability, and other characteristics are analogous to race. Incompletely theorized agreements have the important advantage of allowing a large degree of openness to new facts and perspectives. At one point, we might think that homosexual relations are akin to incest; at another point, we might find the analogy bizarre. A completely theorized judgment would, of course, have many virtues if it were correct. But at any particular moment in time, this is an unlikely prospect for human beings, including judges, in constitutional law or elsewhere.51 Fourth, incompletely theorized agreements may be the best approach available for people with limited time and capacities. The search for full theorization may be simply too difficult for participants in law to complete, and so too for others attempting to reason through difficult problems. A single judge faces this problem as much as a member of a multimember panel. In this respect, the principle of stare decisis is crucial: attention to precedent is liberating, not merely confining, since it is far easier for judges to decide cases if they can take much law as settled. The rule of precedent thus assists in the process of obtaining agreements among people who disagree on first principles. Indeed, precedents can lower the level of theorization by making more foundational views irrelevant or even inappropriate52 and by binding judges to outcomes that they would like to reject.53 In any event, incompletely theorized agreements have the advantage, for ordinary lawyers and judges, of humility and modesty: they allow past judgments to be treated as given and make it unnecessary to create the law anew in each case. (using stare decisis to (discussing virtues of rules). Fifth, and finally, incompletely theorized agreements are well adapted to a system that should or must take precedents as fixed points. This is a large advantage over more ambitious methods, since ambitious thinkers, in order to reach horizontal and vertical coherence, will probably be forced to disregard many decided cases. In light of the sheer number of adjudicative officials, law cannot speak with one voice; full coherence in principle is unlikely in the extreme." The area of contract law is unlikely to cohere with the field of tort law, or property law; contract law is itself likely to contain multiple and sometimes inconsistent strands. Multiple and sometimes inconsistent strands are a natural outgrowth of incompletely theorized agreements, which are themselves a way of minimizing the extent and depth of conffict. To be sure, the existence of such agreements may increase conffict by virtue of inconsistency. 54 The point counts against Dworkin's Hercules metaphor, see DWORKIN, supra note I5, at 239-40, and also against efforts to find an analogy between legal reasoning and the search for reflective equilibrium. cf Sunstein, supra note 27 (criticizing extravagant enthusiasm for rules). comes based on grounds that have not been stated publicly. If judges on a panel have actually agreed on a general theory, and if they are truly committed to it, they should say so (even if, for reasons I have suggested, they should usually be reluctant to commit). Judges and the general community will learn much more if they are able to discuss the true motivating grounds for outcomes. All these are valid considerations, and nothing I am saying here denies their importance. There is an association between the effort to attain incompletely theorized agreements and the rule of law ideal. Insofar as our system prizes rule by law rather than rule by individual human beings, it tries to constrain judgments before particular decisions are made. Indeed, a prime purpose of the rule of law is to rule off limits certain deep ideas of the right or the good, at least in the sense that those ideas ought not to be invoked by officials occupying particular social roles.56 Among the forbidden or presumptively forbidden ideas are, often, high-level views that are taken as too hubristic or sectarian for judges precisely because they are so high-level. The presumption against high-level theories is an aspect of the ideal of the rule of law to the extent that it is an effort to limit the exercise of judicial discretion at the point of application. (connecting the law-politics distinction with the need to distinguish between the sphere of adjudication and the sphere of legislation). stract arguments of high principle have come from participants in deliberative democracy - James Madison, Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Martin Luther King, Jr., and Rachel Carson.59 To be sure, incompletely theorized agreements play a key role in democratic arenas too; consider laws that are supportable by reference to diverse foundations, such as those protecting endangered species or granting unions a right to organize. But high-level theories are an indispensable part of democratic politics. reluctant to develop a theory to account for its new approach to sex equality, but relied instead on a set of relevant factors. See id. at 682-87. (I am grateful to Susan Moller Okin for raising this issue.) 59 Carson is probably the most contentious example on this list, but her book was in many ways the foundation of the environmental movement. See RACHEL CARSON, SILENT SPRING 277-97 (discussing problems in judge-led reform). ples need not be conservative). judges, and American history itself, suggest that courts will rarely attempt to replicate the Warren Court's role. And judges who use such theories may well blunder. Judges are not trained as political philosophers, and in many cases, use of abstractions not developed by close reference to particular problems has led to major mistakes.63 Even more fundamentally, judges lack a democratic pedigree, and it is in the absence of such a pedigree that the system of precedent, analogy, and incompletely theorized agreement has such an important place. The right to a democratic system is one of the rights to which people are entitled, and in such a system, judicial invocation of large theories to support large decisions against democratic processes should be a rare event.64 To be sure, judges have a duty to interpret the Constitution, and that duty authorizes them to invoke relatively largescale principles, seen as part and parcel of the Constitution as democratically ratified. Many people think that judicial activity is best characterized by reference to use of such principles,65 and it would be wrong to deny that there are occasions on which this practice occurs and is legitimate. low-level principles. calls for At this point, it should be remarked that incompletely theorized agreements are not necessarily conservative, and it would therefore be vice versa). wrong to identify enthusiasm for such agreements with a belief in Burkeanism or traditionalism for law.67 Many incompletely theorized agreements are highly critical of existing social practices; consider the judgment that sex discrimination is unacceptable, a judgment that may rest on diverse theoretical foundations but at the same time lead to sharp challenges to many current social and legal practices. Whether incompletely theorized agreements produce approval or disapproval of existing practice depends on their content, not on the fact of their incomplete theorization.68 Of course, high-level theories need not be critical of current practices; many such theories are designed to defend them.69 C. Full Particularity? Reason-giving is usually prized in law, as of course it should be. Without reasons, there is no assurance that decisions are not arbitrary or irrational, and people will be less able to plan their affairs. 67 A form of Burkeanism is defended in ANTHONY T. KRONMAN, THE LOST LAWYER 19-52 (1993). Much of what Kronman says about practical reason is convincing, see id. at 53-1o8, but one may accept what he says, or much of it, without accepting his form of traditionalism. offers full particularity because, by their very nature, reasons are more abstract than the outcomes that they justify. Once offered publicly, reasons may therefore apply to cases that the court, in justifying a particular decision, does not have before it.72 This is why reason-giving promotes planning. Perhaps the most famous (or infamous) illustration of full particularity comes from Justice Stewart: I shall not today attempt further to define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced within that shorthand description [of hard-core pornography]; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. But I know it when I see it, and the motion picture involved in this case is not that.73 All well-functioning legal systems value the enterprise of reasongiving. But there is a good reason to be wary of reason-giving: reasons may be both over- and under-inclusive. In this way, reasons are like rules, which are also over- and under-inclusive if measured by reference to their justifications.74 Whenever a court offers reasons, there is a risk of future regret - not simply because the court may be confined in a subsequent case and thus have to avoid inconsistency, but because the reasons offered in case A may turn out, on reflection, to generate a standard, a principle, or a rule that collides with the court's considered judgment about case B. The constraint produced by the reason may limit discretion and promote predictability, but it may also produce a bad result. There is another difficulty with reason-giving. One might sometimes know something without knowing the reasons for it. For exam 72 Consider John Dewey's rendition of "the old story of the layman who was appointed to a position in India where he would have to pass in his official capacity on various matters in controversies between natives. Upon consulting a legal friend, he was told to use his commonsense and announce his decisions firmly; in the majority of cases his natural decision as to what was fair and reasonable would suffice. But, his friend added: 'Never try to give reasons, for they will usually be wrong.'" John Dewey, Logical Method and Law, IO CORNELL L.Q. 17, 17 (I924). ple, one may know that this is Martin's face, and no other face, without knowing, exactly, why one knows that fact. Or one might know that a certain act would be wrong, without knowing, exactly, why it would be wrong. It is certainly possible to know that something is true without knowing why it is true. 75 See Mark Johnson, Some Constraints on Embodied Analogical Understanding, in ANALOGIcAL REASONING 25, 39 (David H. Helman ed., I988) ("[A]nalogies cannot be understood as propositional or conceptual mechanisms for reflecting on already-determinate experiences; rather, we can actually speak of them as constitutive of our experience, because they are partially constitutive of our understanding, our mode of experiencing our world. Analogy is a basic means by which form, pattern, and connection emerge in our understanding and are then articulated in our reflective cognition and in our language."). see also (discuss amounts to a capacity to think very quickly of a resolution that takes account of everything that matters, including a wide array of competing considerations, and that coheres well with the rest of our particular and general judgments. Compare this striking description of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt: Frances Perkins later described the President's idea . . . as a "flash of almost clairvoyant knowledge and understanding." He would have one of these flashes every now and then, she observed, much like those that musicians get when "they see or hear the structure of an entire symphony or opera." He couldn't always hold on to it or verbalize it, but when it came, he suddenly understood how all kinds of disparate things fit together.... Roosevelt made up for the defects of an undisciplined mind with a profound ability to integrate a vast multitude of details into a larger pattern that gave shape and direction to the stream of events.77 When someone is thought to be wise about particulars in law, it is because she is able to see how to resolve a case without doing violence to other judgments at the horizontal and vertical levels. She is thus able to decide cases, and to decide who wins and who loses, while minimally endangering other valued goods and goals. She may not be able to explain what underlies her decisions (though we should hope that she can). Something of this sort underlies the conviction that a person is "judicious," and it helps explain why full-scale theorization is so rare in law. Of course, someone generally described as judicious might be wrong much of the time, and more ambitious theory might be introduced to show where the errors lie. Enthusiasm for incompletely theorized agreements meets with many adversaries. An especially distinguished example is Ronald Dworkin, who urges, at least as an ideal, a high degree of theoretical self-consciousness in adjudication.78 Dworkin argues that when lawyers disagree about what the law is, they are disagreeing about "the best constructive interpretation of the community's legal practice."79 Dworkin claims that interpretation in law consists of different efforts to make a governing text "the best it can be."80 This is Dworkin's conception of law as integrity. There is no presumption against abstraction. In his hands, the relevant theories are large and abstract; they sound like political philosophy or moral theory.8' These theories are derived from or brought to bear on particular problems. But this is not how real lawyers and real judges proceed. If they can, they avoid broad and abstract questions. Let us distinguish here among four situations: the individual judge thinking through a case on his own and sitting on a single-judge district court; the individual judge writing for a single-judge district court; the individual judge thinking through a case privately but also sitting on a multimember court; and the individual judge writing or participating in an opinion to be joined by members of a multimember institution. The constraints in the four situations are different. In all of them, the judge would probably prefer to decide a case knowing that the outcome and supporting rationale can be justified by reference to a range of diverse and more general theories. If so, it is unnecessary for the judge to choose among them; if so, the judge may put aside the more theoretical debates, knowing, for example, that whether he is a Kantian or a Benthamite - whether he cares about fairness or someone who has assaulted another must pay compensadeterrence tion for the wrong done. constitutional interpretation: The Constitution is foundational of other law, so Hercules' interpretation of the document as a whole, and of its abstract clauses, must be foundational as well.... [.lt must be a justification drawn from the most philosophical reaches of political theory .... In constitutional theory philosophy is closer to the surface of the argument and, if the theory is good, explicit in it. when individual judges on a multimember body have a highly abstract theory but are unable to persuade their colleagues to accept it.82 But often, the avoidance is not strategic in this way but stems instead from the fact that highly abstract questions can be too hard, large, and open-ended for legal actors to handle. Members of a multimember panel may especially fear that any responses will go wrong when tested against concrete cases not before the court, will be too sectarian and hubristic, and will take too long to offer, because they are too deeply theorized. On multimember bodies, efforts to answer such abstract questions can prevent people who disagree on large principles from reaching consensus on particular outcomes when, in fact, those outcomes, and low-level explanations, could command agreement from a variety of perspectives. Dworkin anticipates an objection of this kind. He notes that it might be paralyzing for judges to seek a general theory for each area of law, and he acknowledges that Hercules is more methodical than any real-world judge can be.84 But Hercules, in Dworkin's view, "shows us the hidden structure of [ordinary] judgments and so lays these open to study and criticism."85 Of course, Hercules aims at a "comprehensive theory" of each area of law, while ordinary judges, unable to consider all lines of inquiry, must seek a theory that is "par 82 If the judge has thought the relevant issues through in an ambitious way and made the moral judgments that are raised by the issue (to the extent that they are legally relevant), we may have more assurance that the process of adjudication is reliable, in the sense that it is likely to lead to results that are just. What I am emphasizing is that the judge might sign an opinion that contains a more modest account. (referring to the need "to gain the votes of other justices and to make their joint decision sufficiently acceptable to the community so that it can continue to act in the spirit of a community of principle at the constitutional level"). tial." But Hercules' "judgments of fit and political morality are made on the same material and have the same character as theirs."86 It is these points that I am denying here. The decisions of ordinary judges are based on different material and have a different character. They are less deeply theorized not only because of limits of time and capacity, but also because of the distinctive morality of judging in a pluralistic society. I will qualify this claim below.87 But for the moment, I suggest that the ordinary judge is no Hercules with less time on his hands, but a different sort of figure altogether. Borrowing from Henry Sidgwick's suggestions about method in ethics,88 advocates of ambitious thinking might respond in the following way. There is often good reason for judges to raise the level of abstraction and ultimately to resort to large-scale theory. As a practical matter, discrete judgments about particular cases will often prove inadequate.89 Sometimes, people do not have clear intuitions about how cases should come out. Sometimes, seemingly similar cases provoke different reactions, and it is necessary to raise the level of theoretical ambition to explain whether those different reactions are justified or to show that the seemingly similar cases are different after all. Sometimes, different people simply disagree. By looking at broader principles, we may be able to mediate the disagreement. In any case, there is a problem of explaining our considered judgments to make sure that they are not just an acciabout particular cases and at some point, the law may well want to offer that dent90 explanation. local priority). low-level principle is finally made part of a more general theory. Perhaps this would be a paralyzing task, and perhaps our judge need not often attempt it. But it is an appropriate model for understanding law and an appropriate aspiration for evaluating legal practice. There is some truth in this response. Very probably, moral reasoners should try to achieve vertical and horizontal consistency, not just the local pockets of coherence offered by incompletely theorized agreements. In democratic processes, it is appropriate and sometimes indispensable to challenge existing practice in abstract terms. But the response ignores some of the distinctive characteristics of the arena in which real-world judges must do their work. Some of these limits involve bounded rationality and thus what should happen in a world in which people face various constraints; others involve appropriate judicial (and in some ways political) morality and mutual interaction in a world in which judges are mere actors in a complex system and in which people legitimately disagree on first principles. In light of these limits, incompletely theorized agreements have the many virtues described above, including the facilitation of convergence, the reduction of costs of disagreement,93 and the demonstration of humility and mutual respect. As I have noted, incompletely theorized agreements are especially well adapted to a system that must take precedents as fixed points; lawyers could not try to reach full integrity without severely compromising the system of precedent. Usually, local coherence is the most to which lawyers may aspire.94 Just as legislation cannot be un (discussing the law of tort); POSNER, supra derstood as if it came from a single mind, so precedents, compiled by many people responding to different problems in many different periods, will not reflect a single authorial voice. C. Legitimacy Dworkin's conception of law as integrity offers a theory of what it means for law to be legitimate. Hercules can produce vertical and horizontal consistency among judgments of principle in law. Do incompletely theorized agreements comport with any plausible conception of legitimacy? We have seen that a legal system pervaded by such agreements need not yield anything like full coherence. Perhaps this is a decisive defect. 95 In Rawls' understanding of the search for reflective equilibrium, we consult "our considered convictions at all levels of generality; no one level, say that of abstract principle or that of particular judgments in particular cases, is viewed as foundational. They all may have an initial credibility." RAWLS, supra note 4, at 8 n.8. (I977) (comparing "Scientific Policymakers" with "Ordinary Observers"); POSNER, supra note I5, at 23-24 (arguing that economic theory often underlies opinions that appear to be based on other grounds). scribes it, is neither necessary nor sufficient for legitimacy, judicial or otherwise. Legitimacy stems not simply from principled consistency on the part of adjudicators (or someone else) but from a justifiable exercise of public force. That theory should be founded in a theory of authority98 and hence (if we are democrats) in suitably constrained democratic considerations. In this light, Dworkin's conception of integrity offers an excessively court-centered conception of legitimacy. It sees legitimacy not as an exercise of legitimate authority, or as an outcome of well-functioning democratic procedures, but instead as a process of distinction-making undertaken by judges.99 Even if done exceptionally well, distinction-making by principled judges is an inadequate source of legitimacy. 98 See RAz, supra note 23, at 2I-69 (offering a theory of authority). 99 There is some anbiguity in Dworkin's treatment, since integrity is a political virtue, not simply a legal one. I am not sure of the intended relation between political integrity and integrity in law. See DWORKIN, supra note I5, at I86-2I9. Hence I am not sure of Dworkin's views on the general question of political legitimacy. disagree - because of the need for predictability and stability in law, because of the need to avoid judicial hubris, and because similarly situated people should be treated similarly.'02 But across the broad expanse of the law, the resulting judgments are unlikely fully to cohere. Incompletely theorized agreements have virtues, but as I have noted, their virtues are partial. Stability, for example, is brought about by such agreements, and stability is usually desirable, but a system that is stable and unjust should probably be made less stable. Agreement is important, but disagreement is important too, for it can be a creative force in revealing error and injustice. In this final section, I offer some qualifications to what has been said thus far. In brief: some cases cannot be decided at all without introducing a fair amount in the way of theoretical ambition. Moreover, some cases cannot be decided well without increasing the level of theoretical ambition. If a good abstraction is available, and if diverse judges can be persuaded that the abstraction is good, there should be no taboo against its judicial acceptance. The claims on behalf of incompletely theorized agreements are presumptive rather than conclusive. Thus far, the discussion has offered a static description of the legal process - a description in which judges are deciding what to do at a certain time. Of course, low-level principles are developed over long periods, and a dynamic picture shows something different and more complex. First, the understanding of these low-level principles may shift and perhaps deepen. At one point, libel of a public figure might seem analogous to libel of a private figure and therefore be unprotected; at another point, it might seem more analogous to political speech and therefore be protected. In this process, courts may move to higher levels of abstraction. Second, a characteristic role of observers of the legal process is to try to systematize cases in order to see how to make best sense of them, to show that there is bias and inconsistency, or to show that no sense can be made of them at all. In any process of systematization, more abstraction will be introduced. Observers may try to invoke some higher-level idea of the good or the right in order to show the deep structure of the case law, or to move it in particular directions, or to reveal important, even fatal inconsistencies. A demonstration that the law makes deep sense might be a source of comfort and occasional reform. A demonstration that the law makes no sense, or reflects an ad hoc compromise among competing principles, might produce discomfort and large-scale change. It is very rare for any area of law to be highly theorized. Most of the time, people starting from divergent points can accept (or reject) relevant outcomes. But I do not mean to say that it would always be bad for theories to be introduced, nor do I deny that small-scale, lowlevel principles can become part of something more ambitious. A descriptive point first: it is important to note that, after a period of time, the use of low-level principles may well result in a more completely theorized system of law. The process of low-level judging can yield greater abstraction, or a highly refined and coherent set of principles. In the areas of free speech and discrimination, some such process has occurred, resulting in occasionally ambitious claims, even if it would be far too much to say that full theorization or coherence can be found.106 An especially interesting phenomenon occurs when a once-contestable analogy becomes part of the uncontested background for ordinary or when the uncontested background is drawn into legal work sharp question, sometimes via analogies. Thus, for example, the view that bans on racial intermarriage are "like" segregation laws is now taken largely for granted; it is part of the way that lawyers order their conceptual world. So too, perhaps, with the view that sex discriminaa view that would have been untion is "like" race discrimination thinkable in Supreme Court opinions as late as, say, I965. Ordinarily, the slippage from the uncontested to the contested occurs in law through encounters with particular cases that reveal gaps or problems with the conventional view.107 In American law, views that once were sometimes become or not even as views at all taken as natural dislodged in this way. The original attack on the monarchical legacy took this form;'08 so too did the attack on racial hierarchy; so too did the New Deal, which depended on an insistence that common law categories were far from natural and prepolitical but instead were a conthe contested can become scious social choice.109 Eventually, uncontroversial as new categories emerge and harden through repeated encounters with particular cases. tion.110 Who could object to judicial adoption of what is by hypothesis a good theory? If agreement is possible on a good abstraction, a legal system will have done its job especially well; consider, as possibilities, antitrust or equal protection law. But any abstractions will likely have been developed through the generalization and clarification of incompletely theorized outcomes, accomplished by constant reference to concrete cases against which the theory is measured. At least part of the test of the theory if it is a theory of law meant for is how well it accounts for the cases and for conjudicial adoption sidered judgments about the cases, though of course judicial mistakes are possible, and these may be corrected by the theory, subject to the constraints of stare decisis. It may even happen that an area of judge-made law will become less theorized over time. A once-acceptable general theory may come to seem inadequate, and confrontations with particular cases may show its inadequacy and make it unravel. The Supreme Court's decisions in the Lochner era were relatively well-theorized, in the sense that they were founded on a recognizable general theory of the permissible role of the state.112 The general theory was not replaced with a new one all of a sudden, or even at all; instead, it came apart through particular cases that attacked the periphery and then the core."13 This is a familiar phenomenon, as the process of case-by-case decision tests 110 Consider, for example, Alexander Meiklejohn's suggestion that New York 7Tmes Co. v. Sullivan was "an occasion for dancing in the streets," as reported in Harry Kalven, Jr., The New York Times Case: A Note on "The Central Meaning of the First Amendment," I964 SuP. CT. REV. I9I, any general theory and exposes its limits. Over time, an area of law may become more theorized or less so; over long periods of time, it may go from one to the other, and back again. count of law that is highly sensitive to the characteristics of the system in which it is situated. Among those characteristics are confusion or uncertainty about general theory, deep disputes about the right and the good, and a pressing need to make a wide range of particular decisions. B. Disagreement What of disagreement? The discussion thus far has focused mostly on the need to obtain agreement or convergence. This is only part of the picture. In law, as in politics, disagreement can be a productive revealing error, showing gaps, moving discussion and creative force in appropriate directions. The American political order has placed a high premium on "government by discussion,"114 and when the process is working well, this is true for the judiciary as well as for other institutions. Progress in politics and even law is often fueled by failures of convergence and by sharp disagreement on both the particular and the general. Second, people's disagreements on general principles may produce disagreements over low-level propositions as well. People who think that an autonomy principle accounts for freedom of speech may also think that the government cannot regulate truthful, nondeceptive commercial advertising - whereas people who think that freedom of speech is a democratic idea may have no interest in commercial advertising at all. People who think that tort law is founded on Kantian understandings may think that strict liability is required, whereas utilitarians may disagree. Academic theorizing about law can have a salutary function in part because it tests low-level principles by reference to more ambitious claims. Disagreements can be productive by virtue of this process of testing. Henry Hart and Albert Sacks of course defended the view, influential for the last generation, that courts engage in principled reasoning and elaboration of basic social commitments, while the political process involves an ad hoc set of judgments often producing unprincipled compromises.115 This view finds its most extreme statement in Dworkin's Hercules metaphor, which sees constitutional courts as "the forum of principle."116 But as description, this view is historically myopic. Courts do offer reasons and principles, but those principles tend to be modest and low-level. By contrast, high principle has had its most important and most defining moments inside the political branches of government, not within courtrooms. The founding, the Civil War, the New Deal, and other periods of social reform17 - prosuggressivism, the civil rights movement, the women's movement gest that the key forum of principle in American government has been democratic rather than adjudicative. see also supra note 8I. Note in this regard that Dworkin's discussion of "passivism" in constitutional law, see DWORKIN, supra note I5, at 369-79, does not deal with the need for devices to limit the power of judicial review in light of the judges' likely biases and institutional weaknesses, and it fails to see the possibility that, because of those weaknesses, there is a gap between the actual meaning of the Constitution and judicial pronouncements about that meaning. See id. at 370; cf Lawrence G. Sager, Fair Measure: The Legal Status of Underenforced Constitutional (discussing that gap). The presumption in favor Norms, 9I HARV. L. REv. 12I2, of theoretical modesty is one way of disciplining judicial power in light of judicial weaknesses. example. A key task for a legal system is to enable people who disagree on first principles to converge on outcomes in particular cases. Incompletely theorized agreements help to produce judgments on relative particulars amidst conflict on relative abstractions. involving broad claims about the right and the good - plays an appropriate role in the political sphere. In law, I have argued that there is, and should be, a presumptive taboo against making broad and general claims; there is, and should be, no such taboo in the world of public reason. But citizens and representatives, like judges, must make decisions about concrete controversies in the face of sharp or even intractable disagreements on first principles. Entirely outside of law, and in the world of ordinary democratic discussion, incompletely theorized agreements play an important role. should not be incompletely theorized. Many people claim that law should reflect a high-level theory of the right or the good, and they will not be satisfied with incompletely theorized agreements.119 The choice between the two approaches will turn on issues that are both high-level and quite controversial. accept some while rejecting others. See supra pp. 1745-51. rized judgment in support of incompletely theorized agreements is certainly imaginable.