 Number 1 Reinventing the Regulatory State Richard H. Pildest Cass R. Sunsteintt I. Background: A New and Probably Permanent Feature Introduction t Professor of Law, University of Michigan Law School. if Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, The University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. We are grateful to Bruce Ackerman, Steven Croley, Richard Fallon, Elizabeth Foote, Lisa Heinzerling, Jim Krier, Kyle Logue, Richard Posner, Sophie Clark, and Peter Strauss for helpful comments. For research assistance, we thank Deborah Hamilton. IV. Regulatory Ends: Costs, Benefits, Comparative Risks, 43 46 46 48 B. Expert Perspectives on Risk, Rationality, and Policy 52 C. Lay Perspectives on Risk, Rationality, and Policy 55 D. Incommensurability and Disaggregating Costs H. An Expert Cadre? Justice Breyer's Proposal ...... I. Further Issues about Participatory Reforms ....... 1. Inefficiency Reinventing the Regulatory State Probably the most important development in administrative law in the 1980s came not from federal courts, nor even from Congress, but from Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush. In two executive orders, President Reagan asserted vigorous centralized control over the regulatory process. The first such order, Executive Order 12291, laid out a set of substantive principles, most notably cost-benefit analysis, and said that these principles would be binding on executive agencies to the extent permitted by law.' This Order also contained an important procedural provision. It required all major regulations to be accompanied by a "regulatory impact analysis," which would be submitted for review and approval to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs ("OIRA"), an institution within the Office of Management and Budget ("OMB"). 2 The order amounted to an effort to promote centralized OMB control of the regulatory process, to be conducted in accordance with presidential policies favoring deregulation and close attention to cost. are important goals, particularly in light of the need for sensible priority setting in a nation that devotes extraordinary resources to some minor problems and low levels of funding to some major problems.' In addition, the cost of regulation-perhaps as high as $400 billion annually,7 with up to $124 billion spent on environmental regulation alone--is too high for the benefits received.9 We could obtain the same level of benefits far more cheaply. Perhaps centralized presidential control could diminish some of the characteristic pathologies of modern regulation-myopia, interestgroup pressure, draconian responses to sensationalist anecdotes, poor priority setting, and simple confusion. In theory, OMB control promised to bring about not only greater political accountability, but also more in the way of technocratic competence, thus returning to the original New Deal goal of combining democratic and technocratic virtues. ° Many people thought that the new system of OMB oversight was admirably well suited to overcoming the difficulties in the regulatory process." Despite these points, the Reagan orders were extremely controversial. The criticisms fell into four basic categories: 1. Some people said that the orders involved an unlawful and counterproductive transfer of authority from regulatory agencies to OMB. This transfer of authority, it was said, disregarded the comparative expertise of the agencies and violated the law, which gave the President no power to bring about any such transfer. 2 The transfer was especially controversial in light of the perception that OMB would be unduly biased against regulation. 3 6 See Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle: Toward Effective Risk Regulation 19, 23-28 (Harvard, 1993). See also Carnegie Commission on Science, Technology, and Government, Risk and the Environment: Improving Regulatory Decision Making (1993). 2. Some people complained that the process of regulatory oversight was too secretive. In their view, the lack of public visibility disguised a new system in which well-organized private groups-particularly regulated industries-were allowed to dictate national policy.'4 Especially during the period of Vice President Quayle's Council on Competitiveness, some feared that regulatory policy was being made by a "shadow government" operating at the behest of private factions and accountable, in practice, to no one with an adequate claim to public legitimacy. 3. Some people complained that the reviewing process dwarfed OMB's limited resources and resulted in excessive delay. The few officials at OIRA lacked the time and capacities to engage in truly expert assessment of regulation and its complex costs and benefits. Because OMB was unable effectively to assess the wide range of regulations submitted to it, its principal function was to slow things down. The result was to deprive the public of desirable or necessary regulations and, on occasion, to violate the law. 6 4. Some people complained about the substantive principles reflected in the Reagan orders. In their view, cost-benefit analysis was too partisan a standard to capture the full array of considerations properly invoked by regulatory agencies. In practice and perhaps in principle, critics urged, the idea of cost-benefit analysis was a device not for producing the right kind and amount of regulation, but for diminishing the role of regulation even when it was beneficial. This substantive agenda, it was said, violated the President's duty under the Take Care Clause and also was unjustified in light of the need for regulation in many areas of modern life.' In light of the extraordinary importance of OMB oversight to so much of American government, many observers were extremely curious to see how President Clinton would reform the Reagan initiatives. The process of reform was surprisingly slow. Whereas President Reagan had issued the first of the two executive orders within one week of assuming office, President Clinton did not respond for many months. On September 30, 1993, however, President Clinton issued his long-awaited repeal and replacement of Executive Orders 12291 and 12498.18 President Clinton's Order, Executive Order 12866, is a dramatic and in many ways quite surprising step. First and in some ways foremost, it maintains the basic process inaugurated by President Reagan, including the essential procedural provision of Executive Order 12291: the requirement that major regulations be submitted to OMB for general review and oversight.'9 It also includes the essential procedural provision of Executive Order 12498: the requirement that agencies submit an annual regulatory plan, compiled in conjunction with OMB." At least equally important, Executive Order 12866 also maintains much of the substantive focus of the Reagan orders, including the emphasis on cost-benefit analysis as the basic foundation of decision.2' President Clinton thus rejected the view that an assessment of costs and benefits is an unhelpful or unduly sectarian conception of the basis of regulation. At the same time, the Clinton Order marks a number of important substantive and procedural shifts. Executive Order 12866 includes a set of innovations specifically designed to overcome the problems faced in the Reagan and Bush administrations. In particular, it addresses unnecessary conflicts between agencies and OMB, and the appearance (or perhaps the reality) of factional influence over the review processY It also places the Vice President squarely in charge of the regulatory processY It reduces the number of rules that OMB will review, perhaps by as much as one-half. It seeks to overcome the "ossification" of rule making, in part by encouraging negotiated rule making.' The Order also includes a new, complex, and somewhat unruly set of substantive principles to govern agency decisions. Some of these principles are an outgrowth of the commitment to "reinventing government" in the service of more flexible management.' Some of them qualify the commitment to cost-benefit analysis, though in ambiguous ways. Some of them point in the direction of comparative risk assessment." Apart from their merits as policy reforms, some of these innovations are of uncertain legality. This Article evaluates Executive Order 12866 as part of President Clinton's program for "reinventing government." We do this in an effort to help point the way toward procedural and substantive reforms that might increase coordination and rationality in federal regulation, and in this way diminish currently excessive costs, while at the same time promoting the democratic character of regulatory processes through methods that will take advantage of appropriately informed public judgments about risk. To introduce some of our themes in advance: The modern regulatory state delivers insufficient benefits at unnecessarily high costs. A range of imaginable improvements could decrease the costs of regulation and thus reduce prices, increase employment, and promote international competitiveness. Through such steps, reduced costs could also reduce poverty and thus risks to life and health." Through similar steps, reforms could reallocate regulatory resources to places where they will do the most good. In this way, regulatory programs could deliver greater protection of safety and health and, in the process, save many lives. We offer a range of proposals designed to accomplish this task. A special goal is to incorporate public judgments about risk so long as they are appropriately informed and reasonable, even when those judgments diverge from expert understandings. We spend considerable space on this complex subject, contending that public judgments often reflect a distinctive kind of rationality, one that rejects some conventional forms of cost-benefit balancing. Executive Order 12866 might well be administered in a way that takes advantage of this insight. In short, we offer the following recommendations: 1. OIRA should see, as one of its principal missions, the goal of rationalizing regulatory policy by ensuring good priority setting, comparison of risks in terms of seriousness, and careful attention to the most important problems. To this end, it should issue guidelines and recommendations for the best use of limited public and private resources, together with information about the concrete, actual consequences of current efforts and about ways of improving them.' The ultimate goal should be neither to stop nor to spur regulation, but instead to make sure that regulation works well. ments about how different risks should be treated. We offer comments on all three proposals below. 0 5. The government should shift from command-and-control regulation to more experimentation with information disclosure as a remedy for risk and with economic incentives. Informational remedies should be based on a careful understanding of how people process information and develop trust, a key ingredient of successful risk communication. If methods of information processing are not kept in view, informational remedies can be futile or even counterproductive. Moreover, the use of incentives should be limited to certain specific circumstances that we identify. niques that is attuned to some of the complexities of social valuation of different risks in different contexts of social life. Almost since the birth of the modern administrative agency, American presidents have struggled to assert more centralized control over the regulatory state. Indeed, a recent study asserts that "the history of the presidency in the twentieth century has been the history of presidents' attempts to gain control of the sprawling federal bureaucracy."3' Typically, these attempts have generated sharp congressional resistance. "1 Forrest McDonald, The American Presidency: An Intellectual History 329 (Kansas, solidated into one, in order to minimize duplication and inefficiency. Roosevelt forwarded this recommendation to Congress, which declined to act on it.3 2 Roosevelt then created a second commission, the Keep Commission, to study a broader array of administrative reforms. In some ways a precursor of Vice President Gore's recent National Performance Review, the Keep Commission found that many civil servants were underemployed and resistant to new technologies, such as typewriters and adding machines. It also concluded that the system of supply acquisition was hopelessly chaotic. 3 The Keep Commission forwarded eleven formal reform proposals to Congress. When it did so, the century's first major battle between Congress and the White House over control of administration was joined. Congress not only declined to act on any of the proposals, but also expressed outrage at the Executive's effort to seize "an authority previously the exclusive and unchallenged domain of Congress."' In addition, Congress prohibited the use of government funds for such commissions in the future and even refused to appropriate funds to publish the Keep Commission's report.35 At Congress's invitation, President Taft attempted to centralize and coordinate the budgetary process. Although Congress rejected Taft's particular proposals, by 1921 Congress granted the President effective oversight control of agency fiscal requests by enacting the Budget and Accounting Act.38 This was an extraordinary development, in many ways a precursor of current efforts to centralize the regulatory process. For the first time, the President would be given statutory authority to submit an annual budget to Congress. Wilson's wartime presidency aggressively set into motion the vision of a more managerial presidency.3 7 In the period after the war, the ideas of consolidation and efficiency-motivated reorganization swept the business communi First Comprehensive Presidential Inquiry Into Administration, 23 W Pol Q 5 (1970). ty. Congress eventually followed suit in 1932 with the Government Reorganization Act,3 8 which granted the President unilateral authority, subject to legislative veto,39 to reorganize the administrative branch. Franklin Roosevelt's Brownlow Commission revived Wilson's famous distinction between policy and administration;' the Commission saw "policy" as the joint domain of the President and Congress, whereas "administration," it asserted, must be under the direct and exclusive command of the President. Despite an initial congressional outcry, most of the Committee's proposals were enacted.4 A key reform, with lasting consequences, was the creation of the Executive Office of the President.' In 1949, the Hoover Commission produced yet another effort to create a more coordinated and managerial presidency. It issued 277 specific proposals for reorganizing and consolidating agencies. More than half of these were adopted via statute or executive order, with the purpose of creating a "clear line of command from the top to the bottom, and a return line of responsibility and accountability from the bottom to the top."43 The most direct precursor to the current structure of executive oversight of regulation was the Nixon Administration's system of "Quality of Life" reviews. Nixon's response to the expanding administrative bureaucracy was to create a "counter-bureaucracy" in the White House. He doubled the executive office staff, created the modern OMB, and established the Domestic Council (chaired by a top aide, John Ehrlichman). The Council met with representatives of different departments having jurisdiction over a problem and tried to develop coordinated policy positions for presidential approval.' In the "Quality of Life" review process, agencies were required to submit significant rules to OMB in advance of publication in the Federal Register. OMB's principal duty was to circulate the agency draft to other agencies for review and comment. Although the process was intended to apply to all agencies, only EPA and OSHA were actually subject to the reviewing process. OMB's goal was rarely substantive; it served instead a coordinating function.4 5 President Ford continued the interagency review process and added to it a process designed to control the effects of regulation on inflation. Most important, the Council on Wage and Price Stability ("CWPS") reviewed regulations to assess these effects. In addition,- OMB promulgated a circular to agencies arguing that the inflationary impact of a proposed rule could best be assessed through a quantitative cost-benefit comparison." The Council's role was principally technical, consultative, and advisory. It was understood that the relevant agency might well persist in the face of CWPS disagreement. Despite often antagonistic relationships between the agencies and CWPS, many observers believed that CWPS enhanced both public participation and the agencies' analytical capabilities.' Congress ultimately enacted a statute allowing CWPS to participate in rule making and to explore adverse effects on inflation.48 President Carter, built on the Ford precedent through a successor the Regulatory Analysis Review Group ("RARG"). RARG consisted of representatives from major agencies, OMB, CWPS, and the Council of Economic Advisors. The purpose of this fifteen-agency group was to conduct interagency review of cost-effectiveness analyses, which were required of "significant" rules from relevant agencies. Notably, the Executive Order establishing the RARG review process did not require costbenefit analysis.4 9 In fact RARG reviewed relatively few rules, though the President did resolve a few highly controversial issues. See Carnegie Commission, Risk and the Environment at 48-49 (cited in note 6). to cost-benefit analysis; (2) a requirement that a Regulatory Impact Analysis, including a cost-benefit analysis, accompany all "major" rules; and (3) a formal mechanism for OMB oversight, with a general understanding that OMB had some (undefined) substantive control. President Reagan considered subjecting the independent agencies to the new Order, but ultimately declined to do so, partly because of concerns about legal authority, but mostly because of fears of an adverse congressional reaction. 50 The independent agencies were asked voluntarily to comply with Executive Order 12291, but not one of them formally acknowledged their willingness to do so. President Clinton's Executive Order 12866 is the latest step in this process; we will investigate it shortly. Our current point is more general. From the recent evidence, it seems clear that presidential oversight of the regulatory process, though relatively new, has become a permanent part of the institutional design of American government. This new institutional arrangement has occurred for reasons parallel to the development of a centralized 'o Peter M. Shane and Harold M. Bruff The Law of Presidential Power 358-60 budget in the 1920s. Any president is likely to seek assurance that an unwieldy federal bureaucracy conforms its actions to his or her basic principles. Any president is likely to be concerned about excessive public and private costs. And any president is likely to want to be able to coordinate agency activity so as to ensure consistency and coherence and to guard against the imposition of conflicting duties on people who must comply with the law. The result of these forces is that a centralizing and rationalizing body, housed within OMB and devoted to regulation, has emerged as an enduring, major, but insufficiently appreciated part of the national government. Executive Order 12866 makes three major institutional changes from the Reagan-Bush procedures. It imposes new disclosure requirements. It attempts to sort out the allocation of authority among agencies, the White House, and OIRA. Finally, it includes the independent agencies within some aspects of presidential oversight. As we have said, there are strong reasons for creating and maintaining an executive office entrusted with the job of coordinating modern regulation, promoting sensible priority setting, and ensuring conformity with the President's basic mission.53 In view of the wide array of regulatory programs administered by modern government, the absence of such an office would probably guarantee duplication, parochial perspectives, and inefficiency. A number of separate agencies and programs deal with environmental and other risks, and it is therefore important to share information, to reduce inconsistency, and to devote scarce resources to places where they will do the most good. ' See Carnegie Commission, Risk and the Environment (cited in note 6); Breyer, degree of "guerilla warfare."55 What is needed instead is a definition of shared goals and objectives, accompanied by good and continuous working relations, clear jurisdictional authority, and mutual investment in the basic goals of improving regulatory performance according to agreed-upon criteria. Following this provision, the Clinton Administration has created a set of Regulatory Policy Officers within each agency.59 These officers are specifically charged with improving the regulatory process by ensuring conformity with Executive Order 12866. The officers work with a new Regulatory Working Group created by the Order, chaired by the OIRA Administrator, and attended by specially appointed White House Regulatory Policy Advisors.60 The purpose of this system is to promote early interaction and cooperation by coordinating agency and OIRA behavior, and also to ensure exchange of information among agencies, with a particular eye toward sensible treatment of problems that cut across agencies.6 In a similar attempt to limit conflicts and to reduce unnecessary layers of bureaucratic oversight, Executive Order 12866 also attempts to reduce the number of rules to be reviewed by OIRA, cutting the number in half from previous years. 2 The Order seeks to promote democratization as well by creation of the Regulatory Working Group. requiring the OIRA Administrator to meet with members of the public and to convene conferences to this end.' It is impossible to tell at this stage whether these institutional innovations will accomplish a great deal. Much of the evidence will come from the regulations that eventually emerge. If cooperation is an end in itself, it is a limited one, and the success of the new process will be measured principally by substance-what emerges from it. Two early reasons for concern are the apparent absence of clear OIRA focus on regulatory consequences, and the apparent failure to develop a close sense of regulatory priorities through general publicity about the nature of various risks and the costs of eliminating them.Y It would be highly desirable for OIRA to attempt to place problems in broad risk categories and to attempt to regulate risks that are of the highest priority.' For democratic reasons, it would also be desirable for OIRA to make information about risk categories broadly available to the public and to be responsive to the weight that the public places on various risks. The EPA undertook an early effort to this effect and updated it in 1990.' The 1990 study identified a number of "relatively high-risk problems," including habitat alteration and destruction, species extinction and loss of biological diversity, ozone depletion, and global climate change. It also found a number of "relatively medium-risk problems," including pesticides, surface water toxins, acid deposition, and airborne toxins. And it identified a number of "relatively low-risk" problems, including oil spills, radionuclides, groundwater pollution, and thermal pollution.' A 1994 report of the National Academy of Sciences basically approved the EPA's ranking and approach.' This might serve as a model for the federal government as a whole. ward reaching those goals. Executive Order 12866 contains no mechanism of this kind. The Reagan orders contained no provisions governing disclosure or regulation of communications between private parties and OIRA, or within the executive branch itself. The absence of formal procedures was itself a cause of considerable controversy.69 Many people alleged that private communications had occurred and that OIRA was basing its decisions on pressure from business groups with self-interested stakes in the outcome.7" See text accompanying notes 14-15. is much tory policy.7 2 There that government does not know-about the facts, about the intensity of possible public reactions, about the consequences, and about possibly creative alternatives. Informal and consultative processes with outsiders may be critical. They can help ensure the development of sensible reforms before people become firmly committed to one or another view. If government cannot speak informally with outsiders, regulatory policy may be created in a vacuum and hence in ignorance. A flat ban on ex parte communications would therefore be troubling. The problem with disclosure requirements is that they may deter beneficial processes of informal information gathering. On the other hand, selectivity is hard to avoid in government communications with outsiders, and there is at least the appearance of partisanship and factionalism whenever one group, and not others, has access to public officials. The reality of factionalism may exist if a powerful executive branch entity is listening closely to the views of one group of interests. The result may be a form of government by private groups, the defining evil in the great Schechter Poultry case.73 In any case, a failure to disclose ex parte communications may breed harmful and unnecessary suspicion. No administrator in Washington turns to full-scale notice-and-comment rulemaking when she is genuinely interested in obtaining input from interested parties. Noticeand-comment rulemaking is to public participation as Japanese Kabuki theater is to human passions-a highly stylized process for displaying in a formal way the essence of something which in real life takes place in other venues. To secure the genuine reality, rather than a formal show, of public participation, a variety of techniques is available-from informal meetings with trade associations and other constituency groups, to roundtables, to floating "trial balloons," in speeches or leaks to the trade press, to the more formal techniques of advisory committees and negotiated rulemaking. during notice-and-comment rule making, and it does not require disclosure of such communications.7 4 Congress deliberately chose to restrict such communications in formal proceedings, without adding restrictions in notice-and-comment rule making.7 5 The absence of explicit restrictions in informal proceedings, such as notice-and-comment rule making, counts strongly against judicial imposition of any additional procedural requirements, including disclosure of ex parte communications. v6 Nonetheless, disclosure of some private contacts may be required by the APA as it has come to be understood. In a series of cases, the Supreme Court has said that courts should review agency action on the basis of the record that was actually before the agency.77 The idea of "record review" means that agencies must compile some kind of record even in informal proceedings. That idea has survived the notion that courts may not add to the procedural requirements of the APA.78 With respect to disclosure requirements, the question then arises: What if substantive communications that were an important factor in the agency's deliberations are not made available to reviewing courts? Perhaps the full record before the agency, including undisclosed substantive communications, must be before a court in order for it to undertake review. An early case so suggested.79 On this view, there cannot be one record before the court and another before the agency. At least those undisclosed communications that had a real effect on the outcome must be made part of the record for judicial review. The University of Chicago Law Review If the agency's decision is sustainable on the basis of what the agency provides to the court, its legal obligations may well be satisfied. This seems the most plausible understanding of the APA, though the conclusion is not clear, and though, for reasons to be stated shortly, we believe that the APA requires less disclosure than it should as a matter of sound policy. 2. OIRA must provide written explanations of any rule that it returns for further review.' 3. Only the OIRA Administrator may receive oral commu nications from people who are outside the executive branch.' 4. When OIRA personnel are speaking with people outside the executive branch, an agency representative must be invited, and written communications from outsiders must be forwarded to the agency.85 5. OIRA must include a publicly available log with a record 6f all written communications that have been forwarded, and with full disclosure of all substantive oral communications with people outside the executive branch.86 6. After publication of the regulatory action, OIRA must disclose all written communications between OIRA and the agen cy. In this way, internal executive branch communications are opened up for public scrutiny.'7 On balance, these disclosure requirements are a healthy idea. In order to safeguard the appearance and the reality of independence from private interests, it is important for people to know what sorts of private contacts have occurred. As we have noted, the principal objection to disclosure requirements is that they will impose a "chilling effect" on desirable communications. But there is no evidence of any such effect. Indeed, the Clean Air Act imposes relatively onerous disclosure requirements on the Environmental Protection Agency," with apparently no adverse consequences for EPA rule making. Moreover, there is no reason to believe that there are high costs to keeping track of what has been done.89 Thus far, we have discussed communications between the agency and private citizens. Internal executive branch communications involve a separate issue. Even if some communications with outsiders must be disclosed, no one believes that current law requires disclosure of all intra-executive branch communications. Indeed, Article II of the Constitution may forbid Congress to require disclosure of at least some such communications, and in any case Congress has made no decision to do so.' Disclosure of internal executive contacts is somewhat more troublesome. As the cases involving executive privilege acknowledge, it is important to ensure a degree of open give-and-take within the executive branch.9' If the President were required to disclose all of his discussions with, for example, the Secretary of State, free internal communication would be impossible, and the President would be far less able to perform his constitutional duties. Something of the same may well be true of informal communications between OIRA and the agencies (though it is not clear that executive privilege applies to communications not involving the President himself). 2 The case for disclosing intra-executive branch dis cussions is also weakened by the fact that the spectre of factionalism is less plainly involved. Under the Reagan orders, there was no explicit provision for resolving internal executive branch conflicts. The official government position was that agency heads would be entrusted with making ultimate decisions.93 Many people alleged, however, that in practice OMB was permitted to displace the agency heads, who in effect took orders from OMB officials. 4 At the very least, a spirit of adversariness and hostility prevailed between OIRA and the agencies.95 The legal issues are unsettled, in part because theory and practice diverge in this area. In addition, these conflicts have yet to be adjudicated. What we might call the conventional view relies on the following three points: (a) neither the President nor the agency head may violate the law, and to that extent both must follow the substantive statutory standard, whatever their policy views may be; (b) apart from the special case of independent agencies (taken up below), the President is always permitted to discharge people whose decisions displease him;" and (c) ' See Memorandum for the Honorable David Stockman, Director, Office of Management and Budget, in Peter M. Shane and Harold M. Bruff, The Law of Presidential Power 357 (Carolina Academic, 1988). Executive Order 12291 did say that the Presidential Task Force on Regulatory Relief, chaired by the Vice President, "shall resolve any issues raised under this Order or ensure that they are presented to the President." Exec Order No 12291 § 3(e)(1), 3 CFR at 129 (cited in note 1). Reinventing the Regulatory State the President has no authority to make the decision himself, at least if Congress has conferred the relevant authority on an agency head.97 On this view, an agency head who rejects the President's policies knows that he is risking his job. For this reason, and because of the general understanding that the President is in charge of the executive branch, agency heads will generally follow the President on matters of importance. Most likely, they will acquiesce in the President's preference, even when that preference runs contrary to their own. In practice, then, the distinction between presidential influence and command might be thin indeed. require EPA to take a particular course of action, it is far from clear that this arrangement would violate the law. The boundary between presidential influence and command is surely difficult to police-judicially or otherwise. ' See McGarity, Reinventing Rationality at 100-01 (cited in note 13) (discussing Vice President Bush's resolution of a major conflict between OSHA and OMB). In private conversations, Professor Thomas Kauper, Assistant Attorney General, Department of Justice, Antitrust Division, 1972-76, and Sally Ann Payton, Chief Counsel, Urban Mass Transportation Administration, United States Department of Transportation, 1973-76, have described this White House role in interbranch conflicts involving executive agencies during their tenure in office. Commission, 1975-76 (describing mechanisms for resolving EPA-NRC conflicts). Reinventing the Regulatory State overridden by the White House, it might seem a striking assertion of authority. Indeed, many Democrats had vigorously complained that Presidents Reagan and Bush had displaced authority vested by law in the relevant agency head. It would be ironic if President Clinton successfully asserted the very authority that had been so controversial in the hands of his predecessors. President acting at the request of the President, shall notify the affected agency and the Administrator of OIRA of the President's decision with respect to the matter." Id. The Order does not specify whether the affected agency is to take the President's decision as advisory or binding. The University of Chicago Law Review Moreover, it will be difficult, for reasons noted above, for these issues to be litigated. The presidential review process is likely to be invoked only for singularly important regulatory initiatives, and even then, only when executive branch conflicts cannot be worked out cooperatively. Indeed, in the first eight months since the Order took effect, the process had yet to be employed."o When the process is invoked, the heads of executive agencies are unlikely to say that presidential command has overridden agency judgment, rather than that presidential input has made for a more informed agency decision. President Reagan declined to include the independent agencies within the requirements of his two executive orders. In part, this appears to have been a political judgment. The Democratic Congress, skeptical of the executive orders in general, might well have been outraged by an assertion of presidential authority over the independent agencies, which Congress often considers "its own." But the judgment was based partly on law as well. The extension of the executive orders to the independent agencies would have raised difficult constitutional and statutory questions. Under President Reagan, the Department of Justice concluded that the President had the legal authority to extend the orders, but no one disputes the novelty and complexity of the question. On the other hand, strong policy reasons favor including the independents within some degree of presidential authority. Often a substantial overlap exists between the work of independent and executive agencies. Consider the antitrust responsibilities of the FTC and the Department of Justice, or the labor policy of the NLRB and the Secretary of Labor, or the labelling policies of the FDA and the Department of Agriculture. It is important to coordinate these activities so as to ensure a degree of coherence and consistency. Also, and equally important, much of the independent agencies' work lies squarely within any administration's highest priorities. The FCC, for example, controls communications policy, an issue of central importance to Vice President Gore. Some of the most important work in the area of health and safety is conducted by independent agencies, including the FDA and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission ("NRC"). If the independents are placed outside of the President's domain, much of national policy may escape the Administration's grasp except to the extent that other, indirect mechanisms of control act as a surrogate. President Clinton has moved to incorporate the independent agencies within the system of presidential oversight, at least in a modest way. The unified regulatory agenda, including all proposed regulations, will require the participation of the independents.0 9 More important, the annual regulatory plan must include submissions from the independent agencies, and here the Vice President has an opportunity to advise and consult."0 This is only a modest step, for there is no clear evidence that the agency's discretion may be overturned or even influenced by the President. But it is still bold and dramatic, simply because it is unprecedented. President Clinton might have gone further than Presidents Reagan and Bush both because of less-intense political fear-a Democratic Congress is less likely to object to such a step from a Democratic President-and also because of an especially strong commitment to centralized presidential oversight of the large policy judgments made by independent agencies. " These include appointment of the Chair, replacement of the retirees, and others. See Strauss, 84 Colum L Rev at 590-91 (cited in note 97). In fact, there is little evidence that, in the long run, the independents deviate significantly from presidential wishes. See Terry M. Moe, Regulatory Performance and Presidential Administration, 26 Am J Pol Sci 197, 221 (1982). also contains a lengthy historical discussion. agencies can exist, but we do not know precisely how independent Congress has made them or could choose to make them. If the statutory words allow some scope for presidential removal and hence supervisory power, the degree of independent administration of the laws can be solved simply as a matter of statutory construction; the constitutional issue need not be reached because a degree of presidential power exists as a statutory matter. It might be possible to interpret the relevant statutes as allowing a degree of removal and supervisory power to remain in the President. Purely as a textual matter, the words "good cause" or "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office" seem to grant the President something in the way of supervisory and removal power. Perhaps they allow him, for example, to discharge, as inefficient or neglectful of duty, those commissioners who have frequently or on important occasions acted in incompetent ways. Perhaps too they allow him to discharge officials whom he finds incompetent because of their consistently foolish policy choices." 4 If this is a correct interpretation of the removal provisions, certainly a degree of procedural supervision would be acceptable. 11 See Geoffrey P. Miller, The Debate Over Independent Agencies in Light of Empirical Humphrey's Executor, which describes the commissioners of the FTC as "independent of executive authority, except in its selection." 295 US at 625. For a recent application of this understanding, see Borders v Reagan, 518 F Supp 250 (D DC 1981), vacated, 732 F2d 181 (DC Cir 1982), invalidating President Reagan's attempt to remove a member of the District of Columbia Judicial Nomination Commission. Although the statute contained no express removal provision, the court interpreted the statute to establish a fixed tenure in office not subject to presidential removal. This result followed from the statutory understanding that Commission members "be isolated from political considerations and political changes in order that they may exercise their decisions free from outside influences," 518 F Supp at 255; the intent of the statute "was to ensure complete independence of Commission members from any presidential direction so that the members could be single.minded in their pursuit and evaluation of merit," id at 260. ty of Congress except insofar as legislative instructions are embodied in substantive law." The relevant statute allowed Congress to discharge the Comptroller for "abuse of office," "neglect of duty," or "malfeasance."" 8 The Court said that these "very broad" terms meant that Congress had "in effect retained control over the execution of the Act ..... "' In the Court's view, "[these terms are very broad and, as interpreted by Congress, could sustain removal of a Comptroller General for any number of actual or perceived transgressions of the legislative will."2 Read in a certain way, this language in Bowsher might be thought to have significant implications for the legitimacy of presidential supervision over the independent agencies. On a strong reading, Bowsher could be taken to hold that traditional removal constraints still leave the President with considerable legally permissible latitude to remove-and hence supervise-independent agency heads. On a weaker reading, Bowsher is not applicable to the presidential setting at all, and even if it is, it merely recognizes that, however legally constrained removal authority might be, as a practical matter even supposedly independent officials can still be subject de facto to considerable pressure and oversight. The opinion is unclear on whether the Bowsher Court was concerned that the Comptroller General was insufficiently independent of Congress as a matter of law or of fact. The University of Chicago Law Review Perhaps it would be wrong to say that the Court would or should embrace this strong view of Bowsher as a matter of constitutional compulsion. But even if it would not, Bowsher might still be grounds for courts to invoke a clear-statement principle, one that allows the President a degree of supervisory power over the commissions. For those troubled by the independent agency form as a matter of policy or constitutional law, such an approach would minimize the risks of this form and promote coordination and accountability in government. Such an approach would recognize that many independent agencies perform policy-making functions identical in nature to those of the executive agencies, and that the performance of such functions by truly independent agents raises sufficiently serious structural questions to require clear congressional authorization.'22 On the weaker reading of Bowsher, which tends to find support in subsequent cases, 2 ' the Court did not call into question the traditional understanding that independent agencies are highly insulated, as a statutory matter, from presidential oversight. Bowsher recognized that some influence and pressure might exist as a practical matter, but the Court did not legitimate this influence by acknowledging any legal basis for such de facto oversight, certainly if exercised by the President over the independents. limitations than a statute controlling presidential power over independent commissioners. Such a reading would hardly be an implausible reconstruction of legislative goals. ferent legal issues would be raised. On its face, however, the Order is acceptable. If the President may discharge commissioners for "neglect of duty" or "inefficiency in office," surely he is entitled to ask for a statement of annual plans, and at least to offer his suggestions on whether those plans are sensible. It is now time to discuss substantive issues. The Reagan orders, of course, were founded on distinctive ideas about regulatory failure. Executive Order 12866 takes a new position on that problem. 4 To cite just three examples, air quality, water quality, and automobile safety have significantly improved, in part as a result of regulation. Dori Meinert, Air cleaner in '92; expected to be better in '93, San Diego Union-Tib B3 (Nov 5, 1993) (between 1983 and 1992, the number of Americans living in counties with air quality considered unhealthy by federal standards fell from 100 million to 54 million); Casey Bukro, 20 years later, Earth Day's legacy lingers, Chi Trib § 1 at 1, 10 (Apr 16, 1990) ("Seventy-four percent of rivers now meet water quality standards."); Mike McKesson, Safety matters, poll shows buyers want it but don't quite get it, Chi Trib § 17 at 6 (May 29, 1994) (noting that the rate of traffic deaths per 100 million vehicles has dropped significantly each year since 1980); Sandra Blakeslee, Concentrations of Lead in Blood Drop Steeply, NY Times A18 (July 27, 1994) (studies show that regulatory phaseout of lead additives for gasoline between 1976 and 1991 led to 78 percent decline of average level of lead in bloodstreams). See also Cass R. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution 77-81 (Harvard, 1990) (cataloguing regulatory successes as well as failures); United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report 1994 (Oxford, 1994) (showing dramatic international increases in life expectancy, literacy, GNP per capita, and other indicators of well-being). Annual rate of increase in death rates (per 100,000 population) Along most dimensions, moreover, there seems to be no problem with the stock of available resources.2 At the same time, however, public concerns about risk have risen significantly. 27 The public seems to appreciate neither the reductions that have been made nor the full factual picture about risk levels. These considerations point to a serious conflict between public perceptions of risk on the one hand and trends and facts on the other. A 1978 study makes the point especially vivid. The authors gave respondents information about the fatality rate for one risk-in the first sample for motor vehicles, in the other for electrocution. The authors then asked for risk estimates for a series of other risks. The following table shows the ratio of the respondents' risk perceptions to the actual risks: TABLE 2. Perceived versus Actual Risks" 8 Cause of death Smallpox Poisoning by vitamins Botulism Perceived risk/actual risk where motor vehicle accident risk is reference point (base risk of zero) 1.27 1.97 Perceived riskactual risk where electrocution risk is reference point (base risk of zero) 1.16 1.96 ' See Jerry Taylor, The Challenge of Sustainable Development, Regulation 35, 37-38 Oxford University. Measles Fireworks Smallpox vaccination Whooping cough Polio Venomous bite or sting Tornado Lightning Nonvenomous animal Flood Excess cold Syphilis Pregnancy, childbirth, and abortion Infection hepatitis Appendicitis Electrocution Motor-train collision Asthma Firearms Poisoning Tuberculosis Fire and flames Drowning Leukemia Accidental falls Homicide Emphysema Suicide Breast cancer Diabetes Motor vehicle accident Lung cancer Stomach cancer All accidents Stroke All cancer Heart disease All disease The University of Chicago Law Review Second, and relatedly, there is a sharp conflict between expert and lay judgments about risks." 9 Though this conflict is still widely ignored, and its foundations are not precisely understood, it should be treated as a central question confronting regulatory policy, for it bears directly on many issues of law and policy.3 ° Experts' level of technical knowledge with regard to risk has increased dramatically, in part because of the maturation of the disciplines of risk assessment and risk management. Yet public willingness to permit policy to be made on the basis of this knowledge has declined dramatically. The most noteworthy example in the last decade was the impasse over long-term nuclear waste disposal. While scientists viewed the technical problem as "trivial,"13 public opposition made site selection and preparation almost impossible. As one participant put it, "It is embarrassingly easy to solve the technical problems, yet impossible to solve the political ones." 13 2 Consider a comparison between EPA and public understandings of environmental risk: Public ranking of risks 1. Hazardous waste sites 2. Exposure to worksite chemicals 3. Industrial pollution of waterways 4. Nuclear accident radiation 5. Radioactive waste EPA experts ranking Medium-to-low High Low Not ranked Not ranked As we will see, this paradox is different from the first, since the first turns on factual misperceptions, whereas the second at least potentially involves a disagreement in judgments of value. 6. Chemical leaks from underground storage tanks 7. Pesticides 8. Pollution from industrial accidents 9. Water pollution from farm runoff 10. Tap water contamination 11. Industrial air pollution 12. Ozone layer destruction 13. Coastal water contamination 14. Sewage-plant water pollution 15. Vehicle exhaust 16. Oil spills 17. Acid rain 18. Water pollution from urban runoff 19. Damaged wetlands 20. Genetic alteration 21. Nonhazardous waste sites 22. Greenhouse effect 23. Indoor air pollution 24. X-ray radiation 25. Indoor radon 26. Microwave oven radiation Medium-to-low High Medium-to-low Medium High High High Low Medium-to-low High Medium-to-low High Medium Low Low Medium-to-low Low High Not ranked High Not ranked Some of these disparities reflect differences in purely factual assessments; others reflect differences in valuation. It may well be, for example, that the public concern over microwave oven radiation is based on a simple misperception of facts. There is a "fact" about the level of radiation that microwave ovens emit (though public assessments may also reflect judgments about the value of microwave ovens, the possibility of individual control, and so. forth). On the other hand, evaluations of ozone layer destruction are not based only on facts-there may well be no "fact" that experts can identify-but also on assessments about how to proceed in circumstances of uncertainty in which future generations are at risk. Consider more generally the following chart, showing disparities between public and expert perceptions of risk: The University of Chicago Law Review TABLE 4. Ordering of Perceived Risk for Thirty Activities and Technologies 4 League of Women College Voters Active Club students members Experts Activity or technology Nuclear power Motor vehicles Handguns Smoking Motorcycles Alcoholic beverages General (private) aviation Police work Pesticides Surgery Fire fighting Large construction Hunting Spray cans Mountain climbing Bicycles Commercial aviation Electrical power (nonnuclear) Swimming Contraceptives Skiing X-rays High school and college football 1 Reprinted with permission from Paul Slovic, Perception of Risk, 236 Science 280, 281 (Apr 17, 1987). © 1987 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. "Experts" here means fifteen people selected nationwide for their professional interest and expertise in risk management. Included among the fifteen were a geographer, an environmental policy analyst, an economist, a lawyer, a biologist, and a government regulator of hazardous materials (ages ranged from twenty-nine to sixty-eight, with a median of fortytwo). Paul Slovic, Baruch Fischhoff, and Sarah Lichtenstein, Characterizing Perceived Risks, in Robert W. Kates, Christoph Hohenemser, and Jeanne X. Kasperson, eds, Perilous Progress: Managing the Hazards of Technology 91, 116 (Westview, 1985). "Active Club" is an organization of business and professional people devoted to community service activities. Id. Railroads Food preservatives Food coloring Power mowers Prescription antibiotics Home appliances Vaccinations The third paradox stems from the fact that public frustration with the bureaucracies designed to deal with these issues pushes in two quite different directions for reform. On the one hand, the sense of inconsistent, duplicative, and cumulatively burdensome regulation leads to demands for more centralized national control, especially at the presidential level. On the other hand, the sense that remote federal bureaucracies make policy without regard to the concerns or values of the people affected suggests the need for more participatory, decentralized decision-making structures. There can be a sharp conflict between these two understandings-producing a paradox involving the desire for centralization, coordination, and hierarchical control on the one hand, and the need for participation and democratic deliberation on the other. ler of the Currency), in forming toll-free hotlines, and in using computers, electronic bulletin boards, and e-mail as means to facilitate public discussion." 7 We will return to the first two paradoxes below. For the present, we evaluate the Order's efforts to address the paradox between centralization and democratic participation. To do so, we begin by considering recent discoveries about the relationship between government institutions and the public in the risk-regulation process. The extent of public trust in various regulatory authorities is a critical, but widely neglected, element in risk regulation. To say that trust plays an important role may seem obvious or banal. But an understanding of the mechanisms of creating trust is central to more effective regulatory policy. manage the former, as compared to government and industry officials, who manage the latter. Public officials must understand the dynamics of trust creation and destruction in order to develop more effective regulatory policy. Trust is difficult to build and easy to destroy. In the public mind, negative events are more salient than positive ones: the former carry considerably more weight. In addition, sources of trust-destroying news are viewed as more credible than sources of trust-building news. They also receive more media attention. Finally, distrust, once started, tends to perpetuate itself, partly, perhaps, because of risk aversion with respect to catastrophic events. As one example of these processes of risk aversion, studies have shown that people report that they generally have little confidence in animal studies as predictors of the human health effects of chemicals. Yet when told that a specific chemical has been found carcinogenic in animals, people express "4 June Fessendon-Raden, Janet M. Fitchen, and Jenifer S. Heath, Providing Risk Information in Communities: Factors Influencing What is Heard and Accepted, 12 Sci Tech & Human Values 94, 96 (Summer/Fall 1987). " David Vogel, National Styles of Regulation: Environmental Policy in Great Britain "considerable confidence" in the relevance of this study for human health.' The problem of trust is exacerbated by conflicts between expert and lay systems for evaluating risk. This is perhaps the central difficulty in contemporary risk regulation, with pervasive consequences for the design of regulatory policy. To build the trust necessary to find acceptable regulatory solutions, agencies should recognize the conflict between expert and lay assessments, pay attention to lay evaluations of risk, and seek to communicate risk information effectively. For reasons explored below, we believe that policymakers should view lay and expert reasoning as two distinct styles of rational risk assessment, neither of which has a monopoly on rationality. Governmental efforts to base policies on expert risk assessments are likely to be viewed as "democratic elitism."45 Such efforts could undermine themselves by destroying the trust necessary to make programs work. The dynamics of trust suggest several points about the regulatory process, only some of which are addressed by Executive Order 12866. First, government should do more to advertise in in improving water quality, good faith its own successes workplace safety, and the like. This matter is not discussed in the Clinton Order. It is a conspicuous gap, for public skepticism about risk regulation is likely to be fueled if people are unaware that numerous programs have succeeded. A special public goal of the Clinton Administration in general has been to provide "national performance review," so as to encourage government to deliver on its promises, to create good incentives for public employees, and to allow citizens to monitor governmental performance.'46 Ironically, Executive Order 12866 fails to provide a mechanism for ensuring review of OIRA's performance under the Order itself. We suggest that such a mechanism be created. 47 It is important for the government to provide a record of the actual effects of its initiatives-to establish goals and to report on progress in meeting those goals. their conflicts with each other. These contests tend to destroy trust in experts as a whole. By encouraging alternative structures, such as negotiated rule making, the Clinton approach might well have the effect (whether intended or not) of creating decision-making structures that build trust." Third, any perception that presidential oversight is corrupted through the illegitimate influence of interest groups-even in isolated instances-will have pervasive adverse effects on public trust in oversight institutions. The Clinton Order makes an effort to respond to the last two of these points, and perhaps we can expect that in its implementation it will respond to the first point as well. One of the most hotly disputed issues in law and policy involves the use of analytical decision-theory techiques for guiding regulatory choices. The most familiar issue involves the role of cost-benefit analysis ("CBA"). Less familiar, but increasingly important, is the emerging role of comparative risk assessment ("CRA"). While CBA advocates explore whether a particular policy is justified, CRA has a more confined role. The goal of CRA is to ensure better priority setting by ranking risks in terms of their seriousness. CRA is concerned with ensuring that the most serious risks are addressed first, rather than with the more controversial determination of whether the benefits of any particular regulation exceed its costs. "8 But see Susan Rose-Ackerman, Consensus Versus Incentives:A Skeptical Look atRegulatory Negotiation, 43 Duke L J 1206 (1994) (comparing regulatory negotiation unfavorably with economic incentives). net benefits," and to "propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that the benefits of the intended regulation justify its costs."50 At the same time, the Clinton Order offers an expansive and eclectic list of the kinds of benefits that must be taken into account. These include "potential economic, environmental, public health and safety, and other advantages; distributive impacts; and equity." 5' The concern for distributive impacts may be related, in part, to recently emerging controversies over the race-related impacts of environmental policy; a subsequent Executive Order deals with that concern directly.5 2 The Order also emphasizes that "qualitative measures of costs and benefits that are difficult to quantify" remain "essential to consider." The text of Executive Order 12866 suggests ambivalence and caution toward CBA. On the one hand, the basic commitment to a form of CBA is maintained. This is an especially important development, for it ratifies an aspect of the Reagan orders that had been particularly controversial. On the other hand, the list of factors that must be included in this analysis is broadened significantly, with open-ended and potentially ambiguous variables. It is reasonable to wonder whether a form of CBA can remain coherent if it does not use a single metric or if it emphasizes qualititative differences. Indeed, the actual use of CBA by OMB during the 1980s justifies at least some concern whether CBA even in its purportedly purest form, as undertaken by actual government agents, is likely to avoid a high degree of discretionary judgment about relevant values. One detailed study notably concludes that there were "literally hundreds of cases of OMB intervention into agency rulemakings to urge less stringent regulations, and at most a handful of cases of OMB urging the agencies to regulate more stringently.""5 Perhaps OMB was responding reasonably to consistent agency overreaching and hence to consistent failure to justify regulation in light of its costs. More plausibly, however, CBA at times became a political tool for pursuit of an antiregulatory agenda based on something other than actual numbers. Executive Order 12866 is less clear, but it points in the same direction. The Order requires that "each agency shall consider, to the extent reasonable, the degree and nature of the risks posed by various substances within its jurisdiction."'5 7 It also requires each agency's Regulatory Plan to include a statement with each proposed action, explaining how the action will reduce risks "as well as how the magnitude of the risk addressed by the action relates to other risks within the jurisdiction of the agency."5 8 The Order does not, however, expressly require comparative risk assessment. The reasons for its failure to take this step are con nected, we believe, to the Order's ambivalence toward cost-benefit analysis. A. Competing Conceptions of Rationality and Value 1. Common critiques. 159 It might still be possible to rank risks while taking account of social judgments of the sort we defend below. We mean to be raising complexities about comparative risk assessment, while still recognizing that the technique has much promise. with this endeavor, while any relevant distributional considerations can also be kept in mind. More specifically, it may well be possible to adjust the analysis for any distributional biases, by reassessing certain variables when they are first assigned or by undertaking a separate distributional assessment. 62 Thus, we might undertake CBA in the ordinary fashion, and then take distributional goals into account at an independent stage of inquiry. Executive Order 12866 might well be taken to suggest this approach in its references to "distributive impacts" and "equity." A third objection to CBA was that scientific uncertainty made it impossible to say anything concrete or quantitative about the benefits of much regulation.'" Often we do not know how potent a carcinogen is, or the magnitude of risks associated with a certain pollution problem. At best, we can extrapolate from animal data, where human analogues may be weak, and from epidemiological data, where it is hard to control for confounding variables, where subpopulations may not be typical, and where links between doses and responses may be highly uncertain. In these circumstances, the assignment of a number for "benefits" will be based on a great deal of guesswork and perhaps on tacit, unarticulated judgments of value. It will hardly be a purely scientific enterprise,"6 for a range of policy judgments will be involved as well. Judgments about costs may be more tractable, but there are many problems here too. 6 Ex ante estimates will usually depend on industry projections which, as past practice has shown, are likely to be self-serving.6 7 In any case, technological change makes projected costs a hazardous enterprise. Sometimes new devices will develop to provide controls at greatly reduced expense. 1 Compare the human development index and the separate discussion of distributional effects. See United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report 1993 10-20 (Oxford, 1993); United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report 1994 at 96-100 (cited in note 124). 1 See the careful discussion in Robert A. Pollak, Regulating Risks, 33 J Econ Lit (forthcoming March 1995), reviewing Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle (cited in note 6). The University of Chicago Law Review difficulty of projection sometimes leads government to require a margin of safety, reflecting a form of risk aversion designed to allocate the burden of scientific uncertainty. But this problem is not necessarily a sufficient reason to abandon the attempt. Sometimes CBA can be undertaken because the uncertainties are relatively small. Sometimes it is possible to project a range of estimates. When this is not possible, it might be useful to do the best we can with those variables that can be identified. Perhaps it will not be feasible to do a CBA, but government can move in that direction by identifying the range of known costs, known benefits, and factual uncertainties. Charny, Economics of Death, 107 Harv L Rev 2056 (1994), reviewing Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, Private Choices and Public Health: The AIDS Epidemic in an Economic Perspective (Harvard, 1993). Reinventing the Regulatory State or in advance of actual democratic deliberation which of these competing frameworks of values to bring to bear on particular regulatory problems. mon metric is how many annual deaths or injuries are likely to occur from a given risk.174 This difference makes it necessary to say something about expected utility theory. Notably, expected utility theory was originally understood as a positive rather than a normative theory,'75 though economists now use it both for positive and normative purposes. As a positive approach, expected utility theory is at best an incomplete success, for it meets a large number of well-documented anomalies-some reflecting irrationality (seen as such in light of common understandings of that term), some reflecting complex judgments of value that cannot easily be shown to be irrational.7 ' As a positive approach, the chief virtue of expected utility theory lies in the absence of a well-specified, administrable competitor. 7 As a normative approach, however, expected utility theory has yet to find a substantial defense in principle.'7 8 In any case, the relatively unrestrictive assumptions of expected utility theory certainly do not require that regulators look at the simple question: How many lives are at stake because of risk X? But experts and many others adopt an approach to regulation that emphasizes sheer numbers, an approach that looks at the single value of lives saved. 1 This emphasis on sheer quantity pervades Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle (cited in note 6), though Breyer does not exclude the possibility that other factors are relevant. '7 A candidate is "regret theory." See Graham Loomes and Robert Sugden, Regret Theory: An Alternative Theory of Rational Choice Under Uncertainty, 92 Econ J 805 (1982). ed the same as involuntarily incurred risks. Risks that involve especially gruesome deaths, such as those from AIDS-related illnesses, might be thought different from other risks. It is possible to defend, with reasons, the idea that (for example) catastrophic or irreversible risks deserve priority over noncatastrophic and reversible risks (other things being equal or nearly so), and very hard to defend the opposite idea. 80 Widespread cultural understandings of this sort not only have a democratic pedigree, they also make sense.'8' Risks are qualitatively different, and even if they all involve life, they should not be thought the same. "s We are using as our criterion some general version of the search for reflective equilibrium, in which particular and general judgments come into coherence. See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 20-21 (Harvard, 1971). The American people have no doubt that more people die from coal dust than from nuclear reactors, but they fear the prospect of a nuclear reactor more than they do the empirical data that would suggest that more people die from coal dust, having coal-fired burners. They also know that more lives would be saved if we took that 25 percent we spend in the intensive care units in the last few months of the elderly's lives, more children would be saved. But part of our culture is that we have concluded as a culture that we are going to, rightly or wrongly, we are going to spend the money, costing more lives, on the elderly. We made that judgment. Posner, Private Choices and Public Health (cited in note 168). approve of other regulations that do not interfere so pervasively with individual choice, even if they do worse from the standpoint of cost per life saved.'83 For this reason, lay understandings are not merely a competing conception of rationality, but can be richer and more rational than the expert alternatives.' To the extent that CBA promises a disciplined analytic tool for assisting regulatory choices, it is appealing. In light of its substantive appeal and promise of administrability, it may well be a useful approach for regulators to follow. But to the extent that it contains a contestable conception of rationality and value-one that experts favor but that is often at odds with more widely shared and also-respectable conceptions of rationality-it becomes a means of suppressing competing understandings of both reason and value, and of selecting an approach that cannot easily be shown to be superior in principle. An important task of contemporary regulatory strategies is thus to determine "how to make the decisionmaking process more democratic."'8 5 Attention to the divergence between expert and lay judgments reveals several more specific problems with traditional CBA that, we believe, have not been sufficiently appreciated. Much the same can be said for CRA. 88 B. Expert Perspectives on Risk, Rationality, and Policy It is hard to challenge the view that law and policy should be assessed on the basis of inquiries into the advantages and disadvantages of different courses of action. Nor do we disagree with the proposition that comparisons should be made across regulatory programs, so as to ensure that social resources are devoted to the most serious problems. Better priority setting is an important social goal. CBA and comparative risk assessment (measuring risks against one another, without measuring risks against dollars) often appear to be the most promising means of systematizing such inquiries. (Harvard, 1990), for discussion of the ignition interlock issue. Ethical Problems with Evaluating Societal Hazards 188 (Reidel, 1985). Yet this process of seeking consistency can incorporate contentious assumptions about what it would mean for policy choices to be consistent and rational. In particular, this approach requires regulators to create a single metric along which diverse regulatory policies can be compared. The tools of analytic decision theory are used to formulate such a metric. Thus, this approach uses probabilistic, quantitative techniques that treat risk in aggregate terms-as the expected number of injuries, deaths, or other adverse consequences over a given time. It emphasizes the end states that policies produce, not the processes by which harms are imposed or through which policy is made. This kind of aggregation-use of a common metric (such as dollars spent per life saved, or even total lives saved)-and emphasis on end states is required to make the kinds of comparisons across policies such techniques seek.187 Through these techniques, information such as that in the following table is generated. To many, this information is startling and disconcerting; it suggests that federal regulation is pervasively arbitrary and chaotic: TABLE 5. Cost-Effectiveness of Selected Regulations" Regulation Unvented Space Heater Ban Aircraft Cabin Fire Protection Standard Auto Passive Restraint/Seat Belt Standards Steering Column Protection Standard Underground Construction Standards Trihalomethane Drinking Water Standards Aircraft Seat Cushion Flammability Standard Alcohol and Drug Control Standards Auto Fuel-System Integrity Standard Standards for Servicing Auto Wheel Rims Aircraft Floor Emergency Lighting Standard Concrete & Masonry Construction Standards Crane Suspended Personnel Platform Standard Cost per premature death averted ($ millions 1990) "a7 As we will see, there is no well-specified set of criteria used by experts in ranking risks. We are attempting to set out some of the implicit understandings. Passive Restraints for Trucks and Buses (Proposed) Side-Impact Standards for Autos (Dynamic) Children's Sleepwear Flammability Ban Auto Side Door Support Standards Low Altitude Windshear Equipment and Training Standards Electrical Equipment Standards (Metal Mines) MSHA Trenching and Excavation Standards Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance Hazard Communication Standard Side-Impact Standards for Trucks, Buses, Grain Dust Explosion Prevention Standards Rear Lap/Shoulder Belts for Autos Standards for Radionuclides in Uranium Mines EPA Benzine NESHAP (Original: Fugitive Emissions) EPA Ethylene Dibromide Drinking Water Standard EPA Benzine NESHAP (Revised: Coke Byproducts) EPA Asbestos Occupational Exposure Limit Benzene Occupational Exposure Limit Electrical Equipment Standards (Coal Mines) MSHA Arsenic Emission Standards for Glass Plants Ethylene Oxide Occupational Exposure Limit OSHA-il Arsenic/Copper NESHAP Hazardous Waste Listing for Petroleum Refining Sludge Cover/Move Uranium Mill Tailings (Inactive Sites) Operations) Cover/Move Uranium Mill Tailings (Active Sites) (Proposed) Reinventing the Regulatory State Formaldehyde Occupational Exposure Limit Atrazine/Alachlor Drinking Water Standard Hazardous Waste Listing for Wood-Preserving Chemicals We do not disagree with the general claim that these differences are reason to examine whether something has gone wrong. On the contrary, poor priority setting is an unmistakable fact of modern bureaucratic life, and better priority setting is a crucial task for modern government. And in view of the enormous disparities in the seeming cost-effectiveness of various programs in reducing risk, who could object to the idea that we should systematize costs and benefits and compare them in order to make more rational policy choices? This is the foundation of the experts' case for CBA. "Soft" benefits must be properly valued, and distributional considerations must be taken into account where appropriate, but on the experts' view these are marginal refinements to the basic CBA approach. On that view, CBA must still be followed in order to enable us to make more consistent regulatory policy, to set our priorities more effectively, to discipline analysis, and to constrain what would otherwise be ill-informed decisions or pure political power struggles over the direction of policy. These concerns also favor some centralized institution that can make these kinds of comparative assessments across agencies and programs. 189 Arguments of this sort do support some form of comparative risk assessment and CBA. But the ambivalence toward CBA reflected in Executive Order 12866 is nonetheless justified,"9 and we aim to support that ambivalence here by emphasizing three less well-understood problems with CBA techniques. After discussing these problems, we briefly suggest modifications to Executive Order 12866 that might more effectively respond to these problems. There is a strikingly consistent finding in risk studies: Laypeople assess risk through different value frameworks from those implicitly embedded in expert approaches. Laypeople do not look only or even primarily to expected annual mortality; they Notwithstanding these differences among citizens, there is a pervasive and sharp distinction between lay and expert perspectives. It is important to be clear about where this difference lies. Some of the difference does stem from simple confusion, or from heuristics that produce systematic errors.'95 But in many cases, the difference does not result from misinformation or from cognitive distortions about risk analysis. (Stanford, 1992), for an optimistic account of citizens' capacities to assess risks. Reinventing the Regulatory State These different systems of value mean that judgment about risk is frequently context dependent. Decision-analytic techniques traditionally used by experts are concerned with aggregate annual mortality or morbidity rates. However, for laypeople, the most salient contextual features include: (1) the catastrophic nature of the risk; (2) whether the risk is uncontrollable; (3) whether the risk involves irretrievable or permanent losses; (4) the social conditions under which a particular risk is generated and managed, a point that connects to issues of consent, voluntariness, and democratic control; (5) how equitably distributed the danger is or how concentrated on identifiable, innocent, or traditionally disadvantaged victims, which ties to both notions of community and moral ideals; (6) how well understood the risk process in question is, a point that bears on the psychological disturbance produced by different risks; (7) whether the risk would be faced by future generations; and (8) how familiar the risk is.'99 Different formulations for these and similar distinctions include how "dreaded" and how "observable" particular risks are. In particular, "[clitizens' responses to technological risks ... are far more likely to be dictated by their perceptions of whether they can exercise personal control in the event of an accident than by the careful weighing of the worths of uncertain outcomes."2" People systematically assign a high valuation to risks that are perceived to be involuntarily run-compare public reactions to risks from smoking to public reactions to risks from nuclear power accidents. About 150,000 people die each year from smoking-related causes, as compared with no apparent deaths from nuclear power accidents;2"' yet enormous resources are invested issues quite thoughtfully, even in the presence of expert uncertainty. in preventing the latter, and until recently almost no resources were invested in preventing the former. (It is notable that recent regulatory efforts with respect to smoking have followed and produced important changes in social norms, a point that we take up below.) Qualitative differences of this kind are not included within ordinary cost-benefit techinques to the extent that the latter concentrate only on end states. Consider also the fact that the quantitatively identical level of exposure to certain chemicals is viewed as more acceptable by research scientists, exposed during the course of carrying out basic research, than by laboratory assistants, who clean the hazards up after an experiment is finished.0 4 To aggregate these different perspectives and assume that one common value is at stake in reducing mercury exposure is therefore wrong. For the scientist, the meaning of the risk, and the appropriate level of social resources to be spent to eliminate it, depend on the fact that it is tied up with professional work that is highly valued socially, personally rewarding, voluntarily assumed, and associated with traditions of scientific inquiry. If people do value risks differently depending on these sorts of contextual features, and if these valuations are reasonable, then democratic policy should 22 See text accompanying notes 177-84. For some notations on the complex notion of See generally Richard H. Pildes, The Unintended Cultural Consequences of Public (1988). See also Amartya Sen, Freedoms and Needs: An Argument for the Primacy of Political Rights, New Republic 31, 32-33 (Jan 11, 1993) ("There are deep and fundamental and intuitively understood grounds for rejecting the view that confines itself merely to checking the parity of outcomes, the view that matches death for death, happiness for happiness, fulfillment for fulfillment, irrespective of how all this death, happiness, and fulfillment comes about."). recognize the relevant contextual differences. Something of this kind may be reflected in the obscure use of the word "equity" in Executive Order 12866. All this is no reason to be complacent about the dramatic disparities shown in Table 5. Divergences in regulatory policies that are so extreme might well reflect little more than interestgroup pressures, confusion, lack of appreciation for trade-offs, or reflexive responses to sensationalist anecdotes. Moreover, we do not mean to suggest that policymakers should blindly defer to citizen assessments of risks in all circumstances. Ours is a republic, not a pure democracy, and a high premium is placed on deliberation rather than on snapshots of public opinion."' It therefore makes sense to ensure that citizens' judgments result from an appropriately structured deliberative process. 20 9 ' See Hill, Democratic Values and Technological Choices at 112-42 (cited in note The University of Chicago Law Review As we have said, citizen valuations are hardly uniform; ordinary people disagree with each other, just as experts do. Sometimes citizens misunderstand the problem. Not all differences between lay and expert assessments reflect rational though complex lay judgments, or different conceptions of rationality and different frameworks of value. Knowledge about the bases for citizen evaluations of risk has increased dramatically in recent years. We now know that where these evaluations differ from expert ones, they might do so for any of a number of reasons. In some contexts, lay evaluations rest on what can properly be characterized as mistaken factual understandings, including those that result from distortions in information processing and similar cognitive errors. What we emphasize here is that in other contexts, what to experts, policymakers, and others might appear to be factual misunderstandings actually reflect different and legitimate valuations of risk. 197), for a discussion of citizen deliberation in the context of nuclear power. On the effect of deliberation on judgments, see Norman Frohlich and Joe A. Oppenheimer, Choosing Justice: An Experimental Approach to Ethical Theory 95-113 (California, 1992); John M. Orbell, Alphons J.C. van de Kragt, and Robyn M. Dawes, Explaining Discussion-Induced Cooperation, 54 J Personality & Soc Psych 811 (1988). probability that an event will occur if the occurrence of similar events comes easily to mind, but will underestimate the probability otherwise. psychological and sociological changes; survivors were "characterized by a loss of direction and energy," other "disabling character changes," and a "loss of communality."2 13 One evaluator attributed this loss of direction specifically to "the loss of traditional bonds of kinship and neighborliness." 214 The nonlinearity of lay evaluations of risk in the context of potential disasters may thus reflect a high premium on avoiding the distinctive kinds of losses associated with disasters. If so, differences between lay and expert assessments rest on genuine value differences (four times as many deaths may be much more than four times as bad) rather than on factual errors in cognitive processes of ordinary people. Impacts on Health: A Role for Behavioral Science, 4 Envir Impact Assessment Rev 41 (1983). suade others that a particular perspective reflects the most appropriate set of public values, but there is no purely scientific solution to this conflict. When differences in risk assessment rest on differences in the underlying values at stake, conflicts can be legitimately resolved only through deliberative democratic decision making.219 Experts should be full participants, but when deliberation ends, the outcome produced by the process should be respectedY0 Our final point is that often there is no way to know, a priori, whether expert and lay differences turn on facts or values (putting to one side the complex relation between the two). Yet another reason for promoting participation in regulatory processes (to the extent that it is feasible"') is therefore that public participation is required to elicit the reasons that lay assessments of risk might differ from expert ones. This participation should take the form of informed deliberation about regulatory means and goals. Only after policymakers understand the reasons behind these differences can they know whether the reasons rest on factual errors or value conflicts; only with such information can policymakers know how best to respond to the systematic problem of conflicts between expert and lay evaluations of risky The tentativeness of Executive Order 12866 with respect to CBA might well be taken to reflect understandings, explicit or implicit, of this general sort. The right response to these understandings would be based on the simple principle that policy involving risk should be seen as a political process to be informed by expert judgment and analysis, rather than as a technocratic process in which citizens are entitled to participate at best sporadically. More specifically, a reinvented regulatory state that appreciates this principle might seek to (1) adapt analytic models so that they better incorporate appropriately informed lay evaluations; (2) design, to the extent feasible, more effective mechanisms for citizen participation and education to enable articula 21 See Daniel Hausman and Michael McPherson, Preference, Belief, and Welfare, 84 Am Econ Rev 396, 398 (1994) (arguing that in area of risk assessment, welfare should not be understood in terms of private preferences, but instead in terms of standards that emerge from processes of "rational and open deliberation"). tion of informed perspectives; (3) emphasize contextual features of risk-exposure and process concerns as well as those of end states; and (4) focus on the importance of building public trust in risk-producing and risk-managing institutions. Thus far, our principal suggestion has been that CBA is inadequate to the extent that it is solely concerned with end states. A generalization of this criticism is that traditional CBA is obtuse-in the sense of insufficiently fine grained-insofar as it tries to measure diverse social goods along the same metric. Suppose, for example, that we are told that the cost of a certain occupational safety regulation is $1 million, and that the benefit is $1.2 million. To make a sensible evaluation, we need to know a great deal more. What do these numbers mean? To which groups do they refer, with what histories and claims? Are the cost-bearing groups those that are appropriately faced with this burden, because (for example) they are imposing nonvoluntary risks on others? Or consider the decision whether to fund more AIDS research rather than research exploring the risks posed by destruction of the ozone layer. What is the relevance of the fact that AIDS often comes from voluntary activity, in which the associated risk may be known?22 3 That gay men are disproportionately at risk? That AIDS strikes young people with many productive years ahead of them? That the risks posed by destruction of the ozone layer might be faced mostly by future generations and very broadly shared throughout the population? How would we know if we are devoting too much of our limited regulatory resources to AIDS or ozone layer research?' Or consider the problem of distributional effects of regulatory problems and solutions. Does it matter if a certain environmental hazard is concentrated in low-income or minority neighborhoods? Does it matter if the costs of disposing of hazardous waste, for example, are borne disproportionately by minority group members? A recent executive order answers such questions in the affirmativeY A point made much of in Philipson and Posner, Private Choices and Public Health We do not do well if we see such diverse goods as greater lower prices, employment, protection of endangered species, distributional effects, and cleaner air along a single metric, one that erases the qualitative differences among these goods. 6 At least in principle, it would be better to have a disaggregated system for assessing the qualitatively different effects of regulatory impositions. Not all benefits are fungible, nor are all costs. This is a separate problem from the more familiar difficulty of comparing costs and benefits against each other once they have been aggregated. Public deliberation will be enhanced when analytic tools are used to generate information calibrated to the kinds of considerations that appropriately informed citizens consider relevant. It should be unnecessary to emphasize that regulatory choices typically have effects along multiple dimensions. Rather than reducing these to a single metric of "costs" or "benefits," it is better to enable decision makers to assess the different kinds of effects on different interests. To be sure, there are advantages in simplicity, and on this count conventional CBA has virtues in spite of its crudeness. But for those who want aggregate data on costs and benefits, nothing precludes arguing that the disaggregated data should be used in a simpler way.227 E. Expressive Dimensions of Regulatory Policies A third problem with CBA approaches is that they necessarily focus on the quantitative or material effects of policies. They cannot take into account what we will call the expressive dimensions of legal and political choices. By expressive dimensions-what might be understood as cultural consequences of choice-we mean the values that a particular policy choice, in the specific context in which it is taken, will be generally understood to endorse. Policy choices do not just bring about certain immediate material consequences; they also will be understood, at times, to be important for what they reflect about various value commitments-about which values take priority over others, or how various values are best understood. Both the material consequences and the expressive consequences of policy choices are appropriate concerns for policymakers"' ' Compare the annual Human Development Report of the United Nations Development Programme (published by Oxford), offering disaggregated data and a general index to allow for cross-country comparisons. See Cass R. Sunstein, Well-Being and the State, 107 Harv L Rev 1303, 1319-23 (1994). Reinventing the Regulatory State The expressive dimensions of policy choices can become relevant in several ways. Let us take a contentious and somewhat stylized example. Trade issues often involve difficult trade-offs between the interests of current workers and those of current and future consumers (and perhaps future workers as well). Lowering protective tariffs might displace current workers, who might or might not be able to find substitute employment, while enhancing consumer welfare by making the same goods available more cheaply. An aggregate cost-benefit analysis would require that all these effects be treated as qualitatively the same. We might reject that approach, however, on the view that the interests of various workers and various consumers are qualitatively distinct. In that case, we could not resolve this conflict simply by determining which choice maximized net benefits. Instead, we would face a political and moral choice about how to assess the interests of the workers affected as against those of the consumers benefited. Of course, we would still want to know as much as possible about the precise quantifiable effects on workers and consumers of the proposed policy. But we would ultimately have to decide how to value the various interests affected. That valuation might in turn affect remedial measures, including efforts to facilitate alternative employment for displaced workers. symbolic meanings our culture attributes to things or the ones we ourselves bestow." Id at 30. Indeed, Nozick concedes that his earlier political claims in Robert Nozick, Anarchy, State, and Utopia (Basic Books, 1974), are inadequate precisely because they fail to recognize "the importance to us of joint and official serious symbolic statement and expression of our social ties and concern... ." Nozick, Nature of Rationality at 32 (cited in note 171). As he now says: 'The libertarian view looked solely at the purpose of government, not at its meaning; hence, it took an unduly narrow view of purpose, too." Robert Nozick, The Examined Life: Philosophical Meditations 288 (Simon & Schuster, 1989). conflicts. This sequence might leave affected workers with the sense that, in every case, the political community is subordinating their interests to those of others. When officials are next faced with a similar conflict, it could well be rational to opt for a policy that valued the interests of workers (at least if they are in the same affected sectors) over those of consumers. That might be so even if, in aggregate cost-benefit terms, consumer benefits would "outweigh" the harms to adversely affected workers. Many other legal issues, such as protection of endangered species, recycling requirements, affirmative action, "hate speech" codes, and others similarly implicate concerns for the expressive dimensions of legal judgments. Often legal debates are partly ° about the appropriate attitude to express via legal norms, and many people urge that a certain measure is desirable because it expresses the appropriate attitude toward the interests at stake. ' Note too that the stylized discussion treats "workers" as a relatively unitary group; but workers are consumers too, and many of them might be helped, on balance, by initiatives of the sort we are discussing. law wrongly treats something solely as a commodity, for example, the social understanding of what that good is may be adversely affected. That is, the good might come to be treated more generally as a commodity. It is appropriate to criticize the law on this ground. These expressive or symbolic dimensions of policy are central in many regulatory contexts. They are just as real and significant as other dimensions of policy. Part of what policy-making does is to define, interpret, and create collective understandings and values. Moreover, current decisions can structure the ways future problems will be characterized and can help determine what counts as a problem at all. Decisions today crystallize collective understandings in ways that shape the perceived meaning and appropriate resolution of future choices. Understandably, people often evaluate present choices with these considerations in mind. CBA approaches cannot adequately capture all the expressive dimensions of policy choices. They are designed to address other dimensions. CBA deals with the material gr quantitative dimensions, not the interpretive and expressive ones. CBA examines alternative end states; it compares, for example, how much it would cost to reach a state in which health was protected to a certain degree against a particular risk. It cannot take account of the meaning of the transition-the values the transition will be socially understood to express-from one end state to another. The meaning of the policy depends on interpretation of the background against which it is enacted. This process of interpretation must take place in ways other than through CBA. Reinventing the Regulatory State ments about those commitmentsY Where policies are relevant intrinsically for the importance of the values they express, CBA cannot incorporate this concern, unless measures of willingness to pay could somehow be designed to capture public judgments about intrinsic value. Sometimes what is at stake is ensuring various groups that their interests are valued in the political process, rather than consistently subordinated to other interests. The values of political legitimacy, stability, and fairness are not taken into account via CBA. The ambivalence of Executive Order 12866 with respect to CBA might well reflect an understanding of these expressive dimensions of regulation. The Order says that "qualitative" costs and benefits must be included: "Costs and benefits shall be understood to include both quantifiable measures (to the fullest extent that these can be usefully estimated) and qualitative measures of costs and benefits that are difficult to quantify, but nevertheless essential to consider." In addition, the Order's concern for the "equity" of policy alternatives might reflect concern for the expressive dimensions of policy choicesY This ambivalence seems to play out by retaining the form of CBA, but by trying to fold additional considerations into it. The problem is that certain central considerations are simply incompatible with the usual form of CBA. In the next Section, we suggest certain modifica " The mere fact that certain values are expressed through public action does not, of course, mean that those values must be endorsed. As with any other values at stake in public policy, whether expressive values ought to be endorsed in any context depends on public debate (and constitutional principles) about the legitimacy of those values. tions to Executive Order 12866 that would be a first step toward addressing the kinds of problems that we have emphasized here. CBA should not necessarily be abandoned in light of the problems we have identified. Even if these problems were thought to be quite serious, CBA could play a useful role in policy analysis. This is true from both a theoretical and a pragmatic perspective. Even in theory, CBA could still help discipline and systematize important aspects of the policy-making process. It forces more focused and precise thinking about the potential consequences of policy. Pragmatically, there is even more to be said for retaining some role for CBA. Perhaps this way of proceeding offers a less than full description of what is really at stake; but if the alternative is a totally intuitive, ad hoc process, even the rough tools of CBA might be preferable. Moreover, a completely open-textured and undisciplined regulatory process would be an invitation to allow interest-group power and sensationalist anecdotes, rather than deliberation, to determine regulatory priorities and approaches. Taken to an extreme, this view might suggest that we ought to act- "as if" CBA can take all relevant considerations into account, even though we recognize that this is wrong. First, as suggested above, CBA should be modified to allow disclosure of and publicity for disaggregated cost and benefit data. Second, as also suggested above, policymakers should view CBA as a tool to inform thoughtful decision making, not as some uniquely objective mode of analysis that dictates what must be done. "' Compare the discussion in Carnegie Commission, Risk and the Environment at 78 or breast cancer. Few people suppose that an analysis of endangered species cases, or of antidiscrimination policies, should turn exclusively on CBA. Of course no algorithm can specify a formula by which judgments should be made in different contexts. It may make sense to experiment with various approaches that are based on different contextual judgments; as we have seen, individuals' contingent valuations diverge across risks, and regulatory choices should incorporate the relevant contextual judgments so long as they are well informedY Where expert and lay assessments appear at odds, lay perspectives should be identified and explored to the extent feasible. If lay assessments rest on factual misinformation, or on cognitive distortions in the way inferences are drawn from the known facts, they need not be credited. But to the extent that they reflect different valuations of risk, such as concern for how equitably distributed a risk is, or whether the processes by which the risk is imposed and managed are fair, they are the kind of citizen preferences, backed up by legitimate reasons and values, that democracies should take seriously. involuntarily-run risks might be treated distinctively by receiving a specified weight in the assessment of relevant values. Some agencies would do well to try efforts of this kind. Much of the appeal of conventional CBA probably stems not from its formal superiority, but simply from the fact that it is both administrable and conventional. Compare in this regard the effort to replace Gross National Product with other, more finely tuned measures of social well-being. Many of those more finely tuned measures can be formalized and made operational.242 Executive Order 12866 appears to invite an approach of this kind with its reference to a range of factors not included within conventional CBA. To date, there appears to be only one formal effort to integrate judgments about risk into a formal analysis of policy alternatives. Two Swiss analysts have developed such an approach in order to assist in making decisions about the safety of transportation systems and ammunition storage depots. 3 The method allocates more money for risk reduction with respect to dangers that are poorly understood, hard to control, and faced involuntarily. American policymakers would do well to build on this basic idea. and T. Schneider, Risk Analysis: Can It Be Improved by Formal Models?, Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of the Society for Risk Analysis, Knoxville, Tenn (1984). Slovic suggests that the model be adapted to consider additional factors. are involved in the choice among competing regulatory alternatives. In a reinvented regulatory state, conventional CBA should assist the democratic process, but not displace it. Thus far we have focused on the contrast between expert and lay conceptions of value and rationality. Some applications of CBA do rely on expert attributions of value to risk. But some defenders of CBA might share our concern about technocratic conceptions of value; in response, they would insist that the economic tools of CBA are particularly well suited to taking lay valuations into account. They would argue that turning to economics enables ordinary lay understandings of risk to be incorporated into policy-making through economic assessments of the costs and benefits-to individuals-of various policy choices. There are two general techniques by which economists seek to make these assessments. After briefly discussing these two alternatives and their problems, we will also consider an alternative, not based on economics, that attempts to incorporate lay valuations directly into the policy-making process. ue of life" by assessing willingness to pay for risk reductions.' And to be sure, risks are traded on markets in the sense that "expenditures on seatbelts, airbags, airline safety, safety caps on medicine, preventive check-ups, suntan lotion, and a multitude of other factors represent market expenditures on risk reduction."249 The Bush Administration explicitly urged the willingness-to-pay criterion on the ground that "the amount that people are willing to pay for a good or service is the best measure of its value to them."' 0 This approach appears to be a prevalent one in the agencies." Thus the Food and Drug Administration enthusiastically embraced the willingness-to pay methodology. 2 In assessing the costs and benefits of food labelling regulations, for example, the FDA relied on studies establishing a range of between $1.5 million and $3 million for the value of a life saved." The FDA calculated the benefits range in large part by multiplying anticipated lives saved by these amounts. In another study the FDA used a figure of $3 million per life saved.' Other agencies, usually using willingness to pay, have placed a monetary value on lives at risk. The Federal Aviation Administration found a cost per life saved of about $1 million to be acceptable; 5 it usually uses a minimum value of $2.6 millionY 6 ' See Office of Management and Budget, Regulatory Program 1990.1991 at xx (cited in note 52). The Administrative Conference reached a similar conclusion, though more cautiously. See Recommendations of the Administrative Conference Regarding Administrative Practice and Procedure and Correction, Recommendation No 88-7, 53 Fed Reg 39585, 39586-87 (1988). ' Federal Aviation Administration, Emergency Locator Transmitters, 59 Fed Reg But there are several problems with willingness-to-pay approaches based on actual market transactions. First, behavior does not necessarily reveal preferences in the way this approach assumes. We cannot get a good sense of what people value simply from choices, since choices are a function of context and since inarticulate-poor predictors of future behavthey are ior-without an account of what lies behind themY Several scholars have shown that even the weakest axioms of revealed preference theory can fail.s For example, it is usually assumed that if someone prefers A to B in a situation of binary choice, he should also prefer A to B if some third alternative C is introduced. But this is often wrong. Someone may prefer A to B, but B to A and C, because the choice of A over B shows no global or acontextual judgment. For example, the choice of A (a mediumsized piece of cake) over B (a large piece of cake) may reflect a desire to be moderate, a desire that can also justify the choice of B over A and C (a huge piece of cake)Y9 Thus, we cannot rank order individual preferences on the basis of choices alone or without some account of what values underlie choices. ' See, for example, Amartya Sen, Internal Consistency of Choice, 61 Econometrica 495 (1993). The argument that rational choices need not exhibit transitivity, particularly when public policy-making is involved, is developed in Pildes and Anderson, 90 Colum L Rev at 2175 (cited in note 226). Pildes and Anderson further argue that, because rational choices in the policy-making context need not exhibit transitivity, Arrow's Theorem is largely irrelevant to the normative analysis of democratic institutions. Empirical confirmation of all this can be found in Elliott Aronson, The Social Animal 124-25 (W.M. Freeman, 7th ed 1995) (discussing an experiment in which the choice between A and B was materially affected by the introduction of a new, third, unattractive choice C). See, for example, Sen, 61 Econometrica 495 (cited in note 257). Id at 498-503; Aronson, The Social Animal at 124-25 (cited in note 257). they now have."' Ignorance of risk levels is also, of course, frequent. Finally, willingness-to-pay measures ignore the distinction between the valuations people express in private, market transactions and those that they express in democratic arenas. What people are prepared to pay as private consumers is often, and appropriately, different from what they think society (and ' Evidence of problems in taking particular decisions to reflect global valuations is provided by the sharp disparity between willingness to pay and willingness to accept, see Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law, 22 J Legal Stud 217, 22629 (1993). It is also shown by the substantial disparities in the relevant studies. See Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs at 69 (cited in note 125) (showing "implicit" valuations ranging from $100,000 to $15.6 million within the labor market); id at 66 (showing valuations outside the labor market ranging from $70,000 to $4 million); id at 52-54 (showing valuations ranging from $600,000 to $16.2 million). See also the discussion of context in Hill, Democratic Values and Technological Choices at 69-70 (cited in note 197). they, as members of society) ought to pay to avoid certain risks. Much empirical evidence confirms this point; for example, "[pleople were, in fact, found on average to bid more for an improvement for everyone in the United States than for just themselves. " '2 Judgments made in the context of democratic decision making are designed .to elicit different motivations and different considerations from those made in market transactions. Through exchange of different perspectives, collective decision making, and social-regarding reasoning, democratic arenas produce different valuations from those revealed in market arenas. 2. Contingent valuation as a surrogate for willingness to pay. Some economists view contingent valuation not as a different form of willingness to pay, but as fundamentally inconsistent with willingness to pay. The virtue of willingess to pay-indeed, its entire point, on this view-is that it focuses on actual behavior. Because contingent valuation does not, it is unreliable.2 67 Tolley, Kenkel, and Fabian, Valuing Health for Policy at 318 (cited in note 234). For detailed examination of the difference between individual and social perspectives on health problems, see the recent study of the external costs of smoking and drinking in Willard G. Manning, et al, The Costs of Poor Health Habits (Harvard, 1991); Willard G. Manning, et al, The Taxes of Sin: Do Smokers and Drinkers Pay Their Way, 261 JAMA 1604 (1989). Reinventing the Regulatory State Moreover, it enables people to behave strategically because they need not validate their preferences through actual choices. TABLE 6. Mortality Values by Cause of Death27'1 Category (per statistical life) Unforeseen instant death Asthma/bronchitis Heart disease Emphysema Lung cancer Value Estimates (millions) Medium Chicago. All rights reserved. Similarly, these survey techniques purport to show that people value days of illness-from coughing spells, headaches, nausea, sinus congestion, and so forth-in diverse amounts. 2 Nonetheless, we think that contingent valuation methods have serious limitations as a means of incorporating lay valuations into public policy. Most significantly, it is difficult to believe that people answering hypothetical questions can assign meaningful dollar values to various possible health or other risks. The more context sensitive the method attempts to become, the more its hypothetical nature becomes problematic, bordering on the fantastic. The leading practioners of contingent valuation purport to discover that people are willing to pay $90 to have a day of relief from angina if they have had it for only one day, but $288 for ten days of relief if they have had angina for twenty daysY It is hard to take these figures seriously. (Ask yourself how much you would be willing to pay to avoid a day of angina, or two days of coughing spells, or a week of nausea.) In economic terms, people have a difficult time assigning hypothetical dollar values to bundles of commodities they virtually never confront in everyday experience. Id at 99. Id at 89. The dollar figures are mean bid values, and relief means a "Mild day." 4 An additional familiar problem with willingness-to-pay measures, whether hypothetical or actual, is the empirical difference from willingness-to-accept measures and the conceptual uncertainty about which measure--offer price or asking price-should be deemed the more reliable indicator of value. To some extent, this effect is a product of distribution-of-wealth considerations already mentioned, but it stems from other forces as well. See generally Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler, The Endowment Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias, J Econ Persp 193, 194 (Winter 1991). In the field of health, willingness-to-accept valuations have tended to be "appreciably larger" than willingness-to-pay ones. Tolley, Kenkel, and Fabian, Valuing Health for Policy at 74 (cited in note 234). Compare Charny, 107 Harv L Rev at 2067 (cited in note 168) (arguing that enormous disparity likely exists between what potential AIDS victims appear through behavior to be willing to pay to eliminate the risk versus what they would Reinventing the Regulatory State tingent valuation methods would be to start asking people how much they think society ought to pay to eliminate various risks, rather than how much they as individuals would pay. This question creates different problems insofar as it makes it hard to consider budget constraints and opportunity costs, but it has advantages as well. A QUALY is a measure of health based on people's attitudes toward various conditions. It rejects the concept of monetary evaluation of health; instead, it focuses on how people value various health states. It seeks to generate a means of comparing various states of health through a single metric, so that comparisons and trade-offs can be made for public policy purposes. The measure attempts to take into account both quantitative benefits of health improvement, such as increase in life expectancy, and more qualitative improvements, such as quality-of-life benefits. demand ex ante for being subjected to the risk). Advocates of contingent valuation tend to assert that willingness-to-pay valuations are "more realistic" under most circumstances without explaining what "more realistic" means or offering convincing evidence in support. Id. Some studies, however, do suggest that in repeated experiments, offer and asking prices converge a fair amount, but still not completely, as subjects gain more familiarity with the valuation task. David S. Brookshire and Don L. Coursey, Measuring the Value of a Public Good: An Empirical Comparison of Elicitation Procedures, 77 Am Econ Rev 554 (1987). eral dimensions: mobility, physical activity, social activity, and the kinds of symptom effects involved. 6 The answers to these questions are combined into a single scale, ranked 0.0 (for death) to 1.0 (for optimum functioning). The result is an index of utility for health states measured on an interval (or cardinal) scale. By independently determining the cost of various treatments and their likely outcomes, it is possible to suggest a cost per QUALY of various public programs. Alternative programs can then be ranked in what is essentially a utility-based cost-effectiveness scale. 276 An important work in the development of these multidimensional measures is Robert M. Kaplan and James W. Bush, Health-Related Quality for Life Measurement of Evaluation Research and Policy Analysis, 1 Health Psych 61 (1982). For a general survey of QUALY approaches, see George W. Torrance, Measurement of Health State Utilities for Economic Appraisal: A Review, 5 J Health Econ 1 (1986). For a recent general discussion, see Tolley, Kenkel, and Fabian, Valuing Health for Policy at 118-36 (cited in note 234). to be more credible. Moreover, the divergence between the valuations people attach to various health states as individuals and as participants in collective decision making seems likely to be smaller than the divergence in willingness to pay would be. Indeed, individual rankings of QUALYs seems quite close to actual democratic decision making, but in some ways a possible improvement. There is no collective deliberative process, but individual deliberative thought might be enhanced by considering each health state carefully in a setting not characterized by the compression of issues, interest-group pressures, and time constraints typical of legislative settings. ments continue, it is possible that different methodological approaches will converge toward a range of similar values for various benefits of regulation. If so, that convergence would be useful, whatever the seeming problems in any particular approach. We are now in a position to offer some thoughts on Justice Breyer's provocative and influential proposal for an elite core of well-trained and experienced public servants, charged with the task of rationalizing risk regulation and establishing a sensible system of regulatory priorities."' This proposal incorporates a number of ideas. First, Justice Breyer proposes that a new career path be created that would enable a select group of government employees to rotate through executive, legislative, and administrative offices that address health and environmental issues." Second, these employees would be part of a small, centralized administrative group with an extremely broad agenda for rationalizing risk-regulation policy. Their mission would include creating regulatory priorities within as well as across agencies; comparing programs to determine how resources could best be allocated to reduce risks; and, most generally, "building an improved, coherent risk-regulating system, adaptable for use in several different risk-related programs.""' To realize these goals, Justice Breyer argues that this elite core would require interagency jurisdiction as well as substantial political independence and, perhaps paradoxically, substantial political power. But Justice Breyer's proposal places too much stress, we believe, on the technocratic side of risk regulation, and too little on the democratic side.' Of course Justice Breyer recognizes the centrality of questions of value to risk regulation; he appreciates the conflict between expert and lay perspectives on value; and he acknowledges that these conflicts often have no solution that science can fix.' But by centralizing so many aspects of risk regulation in a small cadre of experts, this approach provides, we think, insufficient space for a deliberative process among competing perspectives about risk and its control, and too little basis for incorporating reflective public understandings about qualitative differences among diverse risks. Dana, 74 BU L Rev at 381 (cited in note 283). For related points about the pitfalls of entirely technocratic approaches to risk regulation, see Donald T. Hornstein, Reclaiming Environmental Law: A Normative Critique of Comparative Risk Analysis, 92 Colum L Rev 562 (1992). much to do so. 9 Or consider, for example, the question whether to devote resources to the prevention of asthma in children, a growing problem, or instead to the prevention of stratospheric ozone depletion-or compare the use of taxpayer funds to protect the rainforest with the use of the same funds to clean up sites on the Superfund priorities list.2" The public is legitimately interested not only in quantities-in how many lives are saved-but also in a range of contextual factors that determine whether risks are acceptable or not. Concern for those factors cannot simply be "deemed" irrational."' Justice Breyer is aware of these contextual factors. 2 But both his presentation of the risk problem and his institutional reform are less attentive to them than they might be. Risk managers should build into their decisions a careful awareness of qualitative differences among different kinds of risks and should attempt to expose their evaluative judgments to public scrutiny to base and review." Any expert cadre ought allocational decisions not simply on aggregate lives saved, but also on evaluative considerations that require significant public input. Our more specific suggestions above are designed to find the right mix of expert and public perspectives on the risk-regulation processY 4 therefore I. Further Issues about Participatory Reforms We have spoken of enhancing public involvement in regulatory policy-making, largely in order to build trust; but this task requires considerable work. Thus far, the United States lacks much experience with participatory initiatives, and there are few developed institutional structures for providing effective participation. For these reasons, initial agency efforts in this area are likely to be fraught with difficulty. ' See Tolley, Kenkel, and Fabian, Valuing Health for Policy at 341 (cited in note level of trade-off between health and jobs associated with the operation of a copper smelter in Tacoma, Washington, EPA Administrator William Ruckelshaus held three public workshops in Tacoma during the summer of 1983. The record on these efforts was, at best, mixed. Some residents and editorial-page writers complained that the issue was too sophisticated for public input; Ruckelshaus initially complained that people demanded involvement until they actually got it. But there were some good results as well. EPA officials were educated about how to communicate technical information effectively and about the public's nontechnical concerns. Two years after the experience, Ruckelshaus concluded that residents had found common ground and that EPA had made "the beginnings of a tradition of public deliberation about hard issues."296 Other experiments have produced similar judgments. A particularly revealing effort has been that of the Public Agenda Foundation, a private entity that has sought to create techniques by which representative citizens are enabled to make informed judgments about regulatory policy. 8 Working in areas of considerable complexity and uncertainty, such as solid waste disposal and global warming, the Foundation created Citizen Review Panels in several cities. Each panel met for three hours. After filling out surveys designed to test their pre-deliberation views, the participants then watched fifteen-minute videos presenting balanced descriptions of the problems and advantages of alternative solutions. Participants then discussed the issues in jury-size groups of twelve, after which they were again surveyed. Several results emerged. First, laypeople will substantially change their views on many issues involving science and technology if they are exposed to a complete and balanced discussion-one that both acknowledges relevant uncertainties and presents a framework of options. Second, on many issues, lay understandings informed through the Citizen Review Panel process came "strikingly" to parallel those of experts. Third, citizen deliberation is hampered less by lack of exposure to the relevant scientific facts than by the unavailability of frameworks within which those facts can by interpreted. Finally, on some issues where lay and expert assessments continued to differ, experts made the mistake of attributing the resistance to lack of understanding. But public opposition on these matters is grounded not in misinformation or misunderstanding; it rests instead on seeing different values at stake. The University of Chicago Law Review failing to promote trust, DOE took actions over several years in Nevada, the proposed location, that undermined its credibility. Public opposition to the waste site soared as local residents came to view DOE, the NRC, and Congress as the least trusted of all public figures.0 3 DOE was fully aware of the problem. It sought to restore confidence by, in essence, rearranging its organization chart and promising to do a better job of risk management in the future.0 4 But it is in the social and psychological dynamic of trust that its loss cannot be restored so easily. More promising suggestions for reforming the siting process include ensuring that state and local governments have significant control over siting operations."' As the need for more significant institutional reform comes to be recognized, the centrality of public trust to effective policy must also be recognized. The procedural reforms of Executive Order 12866 are a first step in that direction.0 6 A final example comes from the debates over priority setting in the allocation of Medicaid funds in Oregon.0 7 This was an intriguing and ambitious effort to promote deliberative exchange between both public and expert judgments.0 ' The state gave the basic task to a Health Services Commission, an eleven-member panel appointed by the Governor that included doctors, social workers, consumers, and health and social program administrators (the commissioners served voluntarily, for eighteen months, each spending at least twenty hours per week).0 9 The Commission then elicited extraordinary public involvement in two stages, one designed to focus on individual values, the other on commu nent of health-care policy, a question that raises independent complexities. nity values."' For the latter, the Commission held forty-seven community meetings throughout the state, at which over one thousand people participated. The aim of these meetings was to encourage public deliberation over what kinds of values ought to be most important in health-care policy. For the individual valuations, the Commission conducted carefully designed telephone surveys of Oregon residents about how they would assess the quality of their own well-being under various conditions. This process was designed not to force people to pretend to assign monetary valuations to the benefits of health, but to rank order different conditions in terms of how much they interfered with quality of life. 31' Drawing on the community expressions of value, as well as internal deliberation and polling involving cumulative voting, the Commission created seventeen general categories of health care and prioritized them. 2 Thus, preventing death with full recovery ranked first, reproductive services ranked sixth, and nonfatal chronic conditions that could be treated once in a way that improved quality of life ranked eleventh. 3 These categories were the most important prioritization decisions. Within each category, pairs of conditions and treatments were defined. These pairs were then ranked in terms of their net benefits, based on the individual quality-of-life valuations and outcome-of-treatment information from fifty-four panels of health-care providers. " In the end, the Commission ranked 709 pairs of conditions and treatments, then presented this list to the Oregon legislature. The Commission also asserted that the first nine categories were essential to basic health care; the next four should be funded to the greatest extent possible; and the final four were valuable to individuals, but less cost-effective and less likely to produce substantial benefits. 5 The legislature responded by expanding the money for state Medicaid and funding the list through item 587; for the three groupings the Commission suggested, the legislature funded 98 percent, 82 percent, and 7 per 310 Michael J. Garland, Rationing in Public: Oregon's Priority.Setting Methodology, in Martin A. Strosberg, et al, eds, Rationing America's Medical Care: The Oregon Plan and Beyond 37, 45 (Brookings Institute, 1992). cent, respectively. 16 Evaluating the final result requires, in part, detailed analysis of the substantive outcomes. There has been some controversy on that question.3 17 But the basic mix of public participation and expert contribution that the innovative Oregon approach reflects seems to have generated considerable public support 18 and is a promising start. poses, our aim has been merely to suggest some important links between competing ways of valuing risk and the kinds of institutions best suited to make risk policy. President Clinton and Vice President Gore have been committed to the goal of "reinventing government."32 1 The new administration has issued many proposals for ensuring cost-effective, streamlined bureaucracy.32 2 Executive Order 12866 moves in this direction by putting a number of cost-effective regulatory strategies squarely within the set of principles governing agencies. In this way, it goes well beyond Presidents Reagan and Bush, who left such matters to the Office of Management and Budget. Indeed, some of the Clinton Order basically codifies general guidelines set out by OMB in previous administrations.3 2 3 The goal of reinventing government can be found in many 1. Each agency is under an obligation to test whether the problem that a regulation is designed to overcome is itself a product of an existing regulation.3"4 2. Each agency is obliged to identify alternatives to "direct" regulation, including provision of information and economic incentives.3" 3. Each agency is required to choose cost-effective meth326 ods. 5. Each agency must avoid inconsistent, incompatible, or duplicative regulations. 8 "1 The term comes from the title of the influential book, Osborne and Gaebler, Rein venting Government (cited in note 25). The University of Chicago Law Review 6. Each agency is required to draft simple and understandable regulations and thus to minimize uncertainty and litigation.3 2 9 To understand these aspects of the Order, and to obtain the necessary background, it is desirable to explore where commandand-control regulation has failed, and to see how information and economic incentives might be better.' ° 1. Inefficiency. Nor are inefficiencies limited to the area of economic regulation. The Food and Drug Administration has delayed the entry of beneficial foods and drugs onto the market, perhaps increasing risks to safety and health.33 5 NHTSA fuel-economy standards Reinventing the Regulatory State appear to have produced uncertain gains in light of the fact that market pressures were forcing manufacturers to produce smaller and more efficient cars and that, when those pressures abated, Congress and the agency relaxed the standards."6 In addition, some people argue that the standards may have led to significant losses in lives as a result of producing more dangerous, lighter vehicles."3 7 More generally, the United States spent no less than $632 billion for pollution control between 1972 and 1985. Some studies suggest that alternative strategies could have achieved the same gains at less than one-quarter of the cost. 8 A pervasive source of regulatory inefficiency in the United States is the use of rigid, highly bureaucratized "command-andcontrol" regulation, which dictates, at the national level, control strategies for hundreds, thousands, or millions of companies and individuals in an exceptionally diverse nation. Command-andcontrol regulation is a dominant part of American government in such areas as environmental protection and occupational safety and health regulation. In the environmental context, commandand-control approaches usually take the form of regulatory requirements of the "best available technology" ("BAT"), which are almost always imposed only on new pollution sources. BAT strategies are pervasive in federal law. Indeed, they are a defining characteristic of regulation of the air, the water, and conditions in the workplace. 9 One of the many problems with BAT strategies is that they ignore the enormous differences among plants and industries and among geographical areas. Some polluters can reduce emissions much more cheaply per unit of reduction than others; commandand-control approaches ignore the differential marginal costs of pollution reduction, thereby making the process of reduction much more costly. For example, large utilities can scrub their plants more cheaply, ton for ton, than smaller plants."4 In view of these differences, it is grossly inefficient to impose nationally uniform technological requirements. 3" Often it makes little The University of Chicago Law Review sense to impose the same technology on industries in diverse areas-regardless of whether they are polluted or clean, populated or empty, or expensive or cheap to clean up. 2 In general, governmental specification of the "means" of achieving desired ends is a good way of producing inefficiency. Instead of permitting industry and consumers to choose the "means"--and thus to impose a form of market discipline on that question-government often selects the means in advance. The governmentally prescribed means are often the inefficient ones, at least in many of the contexts in which those means are applied. industries to adopt costly technology and allow more lenient standards to be imposed on existing plants and industries. Through this route, BAT strategies actually penalize new products, thus discouraging investment and perpetuating old, dirty technology. The result is inefficiency in investment strategies, in innovation, and even in environmental protection. is effectively "decreased" by virtue of the sheer numbers of people who are liable as well. For each person contemplating possible courses of action, liability must be understood in the context of a situation in which many other people will be liable too. If hundreds of people are subject to suit, one can be sure that there will be endless litigation on the liability question. Thus it is that on average, seven years and at least $4 million in transaction costs are necessary before final cleanup even begins.3' As we have seen, studies of the costs and benefits of regulatory programs show what appears to be a patchwork pattern, including both too much and too little regulation. 5 This brief summary should be sufficient to suggest that, from the standpoint of efficiency, some of modern government is ill directed. Some programs are not beneficial at all. Others have unnecessary and costly side effects. We could obtain the same or higher benefits much more cheaply. Democratic failures are well documented.' 7 We have seen a number of democratic problems in the provision of information. Interestingly, the BAT approach is itself troubling from the standpoint of a well-functioning political process. That approach ensures that citizens and representatives will be focusing their attention not on what levels of reduction are appropriate, but instead on the largely incidental and nearly impenetrable ques See E. Donald Elliott, Superfund: EPA Success, National Debacle?, Nat Resources tion of what technologies are now available.' Because of its sheer complexity, this issue is not easily subject to democratic resolution. In addition, the issue that is the relevant one for democratic politics-which is the appropriate degree and nature of environmental protection-is one to which the BAT question is only incidental. In this respect, the BAT strategy is emblematic of a far more general problem in current regulation. Centralization at the national level diminishes opportunities for citizen participation. There are ways of increasing such opportunities, but the means are highly experimental. In its current form, national centralization tends to promote intense and unproductive struggles among well-organized factions. Education of citizens about the key issues-risk levels and risk comparisons-is at best episodic. Public attention tends to be focused on particular incidents, which are gripping and sensationalistic but often misleading. 3. A note on distributional considerations. We will now turn to information and economic incentives as remedies of choice. At the outset, however, it is important to emphasize two remedies have quite different distributional consequences. Informational remedies tend to favor the relatively well off. In the area of smoking, for example, greater disclosure of risk levels has apparently had less significant effects on the comparatively less educated poor, with smoking prevalence declining five times faster among the more educated than among the less educated."'0 By contrast, economic incentives will predictably have their most substantial effects on those who are less well off. In this way, incentives are sometimes thought to operate as a regressive tax. The point does not, however, count strongly against incentives, which can ensure that the costs of social activities are internalized. A cost-internalizing incentive system should not be regarded as a regressive tax, any more than the price system itself is a regressive tax. 5' The proper solution to high prices for important commodities, under the price system, is not to fix prices but instead to subsidize people who cannot afford them. So too, the proper solution to high prices, under an incentive-based system, is not to remove the incentives but to subsidize people who cannot afford important social goods. The fact that economic incentives may have especially harsh effects on the poor-by, for example, raising the costs of transportation or food-argues for efforts to minimize those effects, particularly by using the proceeds from the incentives themselves so as to help people who need help. Incentives will predictably leave the wealthy with more options than the poor. But the disproportionate effects of incentives on the poor might not be so unfortunate if the consequence is to reduce relevant harms, such as risks of cancer and heart disease. 'o J.P. Pierce, et al, Trends in Cigarette Smoking in the United States: Educational Differences are Increasing, 261 JAMA 56 (1989). Note, however, the recent finding that the percentage of white women who smoke has risen from 25 percent to 27 percent between 1987 and 1992, whereas the percentage of black women who smoke dropped from 22 percent to 6 percent in the same period. Health Report, Time 38 (Nov 14, 1994). Black women are of course poorer and less well educated as a group than white women. tion, the fact that informational remedies work best for the well off suggests that informational remedies should be supplemented by other approaches, educational or otherwise. In the area of smoking, for example, some argue that consumers now know enough to make informed choices and that additional informational efforts would be unwise. 52 But many people, including the young and the less well educated, are not fully aware of the risks. The public schools are a natural place to fill the gap. Thus, in one project involving more than thirty thousand children in grades four through seven from twenty states, a drop of 33 percent in the self-reported rate of smoking among seventh graders occurred (longer-term results are not yet known). 5 3 Other studies show a reduction of 5-10 percent in long-term smoking rates among students exposed to health education.' Based on these studies, some argue that school health education could save 169,110 lives over the next sixty years, for current fourth through seventh graders. 55 The numbers are of dourse speculative, but the numbers suggest the value of attending to the distributional effects of informational campaigns. In many areas, perhaps the first and most basic problem calling for governmental response is that people lack the necessary information. With respect to social risks, the first goal ought to be to ensure genuinely informed choices, rather than to dictate outcomes from Washington. The initial line of regulatory defense might therefore be educative rather than regulatory. Thus far, the United States has tended to pursue the opposite strategy: regulate first, educate only in exceptional cases. We might reverse our priorities. Executive Order 12866 appears to urge such a shift by endorsing information provision as a remedy of choice.355 Partly because of heuristics that produce errors, but more importantly because of a simple lack of information, many Americans are unaware of the risks that they face in day-to-day life. Problems of this sort are especially likely in light of the fact that ordinary people have a difficult time obtaining information about risk. Causation is especially complex here, and accurate inferences are difficult to draw. Often risks take many years to materialize. Individual susceptibility varies, and changing technology makes learning from the past a hazardous enterprise."' Disclosure by the government itself, or by others at the government's behest, can promote both efficiency and democracy; hence Executive Order 12866 focuses on the provision of information as a possible preferred remedy.35 But for information disclosure requirements to achieve these ends, it is not enough that disclosure be formally required. Officials should also attend to the content of what is to be disclosed and the form it is to take. " These points are well discussed in Susan Rose-Ackerman, Progressive Law and extent of danger may decrease total purchases of the product rather than help any particular manufacturer to obtain greater sales. This phenomenon has sometimes played a role in discouraging competition over safety among manufacturers of tobacco products. At least in principle, the phenomenon may occur frequently. Information asymmetries may produce a "lemons" problem, in which dangerous products drive safe ones out of the market.36 ' Imagine, for example, that producers know which products are safe, but that consumers cannot tell. Safe products may not be able to compete if they sell for no higher price than dangerous ones, if safe products are more expensive to produce, and if consumers are unable to tell the difference. In that case, the fact that sellers have information, while buyers do not, will ensure that "lemons -- here dangerous products-will dominate the market. Regulation designed to provide information is the proper remedy. that sense the market often works as an effective check on dangerous products. See John Morrall, A Review of the Record, Regulation 25, 29-34 (Nov/Dec 1986). '4 Some of this is undoubtedly a product of heuristics of various sorts, discussed in text accompanying notes 210-11. But more information could help overcome some of the relevant biases. tin."8 There are numerous other illustrations. Indeed, the effort to provide information counts as one of the most striking, if incipient, developments in modern regulatory law. Consider three especially notable initiatives. In 1986, Congress enacted an ambitious statute, the Emerto Know Act gency Planning and Community Right ("EPCRA). 71 Under this statute, firms and individuals must report to state and local government the quantities of potentially hazardous chemicals that have been stored or released into the environment. Users of such chemicals must report to their local fire departments about the location, types, and quantities of stored chemicals. They must also give information about potential adverse health effects. A detailed report suggests that EPCRA has had important beneficial effects, spurring innovative, cost-effective programs from the EPA and from state and local government. 2 Indeed, there is reason to believe that the public release of information about discharge of toxic chemicals has by itself spurred competition to reduce releases, quite independently of any government regulation. 73 The Food and Drug Administration has also adopted informational strategies. In its most ambitious set of proposals, 74 finalized in 1993,"7' FDA seeks (a) to compel nutritional labelling on nearly all processed foods, including information relating to cholesterol, saturated fat, calories from fat, and fiber; (b) to require compliance with government-specified serving sizes; (c) to compel companies to conform to government definitions of standardized terms, including "reduced," "fresh," "free," and "low"; and (d) to allow health claims only if they (1) are supported by scientific evidence and (2) communicate clear and complete information about such matters as fat and heart disease, fat and cancer, sodium and high blood pressure, and calcium and osteoporosis. 35 58 Fed Reg 44030 (1993), codified at 21 CFR §§ 101 et seq (1994). 3' W. Kip Viscusi, Product-Risk Labeling: A Federal Responsibility 72-74 (AEI, 1993). See Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle at 56 (cited in note 6). A careful and detailed study is Peter Menell, Ecoinformation (forthcoming 1995). Menell shows a range of problems with informational strategies, including interest-group pressures on the information that is compiled, and concludes that economic incentives are preferable since they carry better information via the price signal. We think that this conclusion is too simple, in part because use of the price mechanism as a true cost-internalizing device requires government itself to compile and use information. Order 12866. In implementing the Order's emphasis on risk communication, much work needs to be done on the topic. The appropriate approach can be broken down into three steps. First, policymakers should elicit the background beliefs that average citizens will actually bring to the relevant risk is sue. Perhaps those background beliefs are already understood. If they are not, interviews can be helpful, but structured questionnaires might be used where the former are not feasible. The process of eliciting views should be at least somewhat open ended; investigators should not force the process into predetermined channels. The process might start with questions like "tell me about radon" and seek elaboration of the responses. Studies of different risk problems suggest that after twelve interviews or so, few new concepts emerge in the answers."o Second, initial material should be designed to provide the relevant information in a way that responds to those background beliefs. To the extent that the elicitation process reveals gaps and errors in these beliefs, the material should address them. In addition, rather than providing bare information, the material should provide it in a form directed to taking action. Third, the initial material should be tested empirically with potential users. Iterations of this process yield the most effective forms of information disclosure. 331 Id. The permanent contamination figure is from written surveys; the other figures nent. When empirically tested, this EPA brochure performed significantly worse than the brochures prepared through the alternative method. When people were asked to recall simple facts, they did equally well with all the brochures. But when faced with tasks requiring inference, the new brochures "dramatically outperformed" the EPA material.' For example, when asked what a homeowner could do to reduce high radon levels in the house, 43 percent of EPA readers answered "don't know" and 9 percent said "there is no way to fix the problem." In contrast, 100 percent of the readers of the brochure designed on the basis of risk communication studies, and 96 percent of the readers of another, answered "hire a contractor to fix the problem."384 This approach stands in sharp contrast to that reflected in one of the most carefully prepared and broadly circulated manuals on risk information and its communication. This manual, produced for the Chemical Manufacturers Association, sought to provide advice to plant managers on the most effective means to make public comparisons between different kinds of risks. The chemical industry drew on literature concerning effective communication, but it did not test its manual empirically. When that was done, it turned out that the advice was flatly wrong. There was no correlation between actual public assessments of the risks and those the manual predicted.385 Informational remedies should also respond to various heuristics and anomalies that can affect how people "hear" warnings and advice. For example, it matters a great deal whether a health effect is framed as a loss or a gain. People are far more willing to forego gains than to accept losses; they are persistently "loss averse,"1 6 and loss aversion affects people's reaction to information about risk. Thus, real-world experiments show that pamphlets describing the positive consequences of breast selfexaminations (for example, women who undertake such examinations have a greater chance of finding a tumor at a treatable stage) are ineffective, whereas there are significant changes in behavior from pamphlets that stress the negative consequences of a refusal to undertake self-examinations (women who fail to perform such examinations have a decreased chance of finding a tumor at a treatable stage)." Similar results were found for efforts to inform people of the advantages of energy insulation: an emphasis on the gains from insulation produced far less change than an emphasis on the losses from noninsulation.' Vivid and personal information can also be more effective than statistical evidence. The same study of energy conservation showed that it was not helpful for auditors to point to the cracks around homeowners' doors and to recommend weatherstripping. But striking results followed from a simple statement to the effect that the cracks, added together, would equal a hole the size of a basketball, combined with the question: "And if you had a hole that size in your wall, wouldn't you want to patch it up? That's what weatherstripping does." 89 So, too, the "availability" heuristic, discussed above,3" means that certain events that can be easily recalled will seem more probable than they are in fact; regulators should respond to and take advantage of this heuristic in attempting to convey accurate information. ' Beth E. Meyerowitz and Shelly Chaiken, The Effect of Message Framing on Breast Self-Examination, Attitudes, Intentions, and Behavior, 52 J Personality & Soc Psych 500 (1987). geted at this negative (and by no means inevitable) image of condom use.394 Effective regulatory emphasis on information disclosure should learn from these risk-communication investigations. To provide meaningful information about risk, regulators should learn what people already know and assume, as well as what they need to know. Appropriate information must then be developed, tested, and refined until empirical investigation demonstrates that the intended information is, in fact, being conveyed. 95 The next step in information- and education-based regulatory strategies is to incorporate these insights. By economic incentives, we mean financial penalties imposed on harm-producing behavior, and financial rewards attached to harm-reducing behavior. Such penalties or rewards might supplement and sometimes even displace command-and-control regulation. The Clinton Order firmly and specifically endorses economic incentives; it favors performance standards over design standards and specifies "user fees or marketable permits" as remedies of choice. Economic incentives appear to be playing a role in the regulatory policy of the Clinton Administration.3 9 1. Efficiency. esting remarks on the relation between background beliefs and regulatory problems. Reinventing the Regulatory State sponse to the increased cost. Another good approach is for government to set the total quantity of a pollutant that will be permitted, then grant or sell a fixed number of tradable allowances or permits to discharge that substance. Government should generally impose fees on those who put pollutants into the atmosphere-instead of (for example) mandating a particular substance for use in motor vehicles. Consumption of the harm-producing good will decline. Producers will shift to less harmful methods of production. An idea of this kind might be made part and parcel of a system of "green taxes." With such a system, government might impose taxes rather than mandates on people who impose externalities on others-users of dirty automobiles, smokers, farmers who employ undesirable pesticides, coal-fired power plants, and users of other products that contribute to destruction of the ozone layer or to the greenhouse effect. Tax levies of various sorts are used by many nations already, though they have qualification is necessary here: Sometimes the apparent victim of the harmful conduct is in the best position to avoid the harm, and in such cases it is possible to say that the apparent victim should be charged with taking preventive or remedial measures. An example would be a case in which workers could cheaply prevent the costs of a chemical in the workplace by wearing masks or clothing that prevent the harm from occurring. Of course, there may be moral or other grounds for deciding not to place the responsibility to avoid harm on the cheapest cost avoider. been slow in coming to the United States."' These levies have had, or are projected to have, good results. Thus a higher tax on leaded gasoline in Great Britain increased the market share of unleaded gas from 4 percent to 30 percent within less than a year.4 2 It is estimated that a tripling of pesticide prices would cut pesticide use in half.40 3 It is also estimated that a fee of $110 per ton on carbon would decrease carbon dioxide emissions by 20 percent from previous 1988 levels by 2005.' An added advantage of such strategies is that they generate government revenues, thus reducing public deficits.4 5 Economic incentives could be applied in other areas as well. Workers' compensation plans, for example, operate to enhance workplace safety. According to a careful study, "If the safety incentives of workers' compensation were removed, fatality rates in the United States economy would increase by almost 30 percent. Over 1,200 more workers would die from job injuries every year in the absence of the safety incentives provided by workers' compensation."4 6 This contrasts with a mere 2-4 percent reduction in injuries from OSHA, an amount that links up well with the fact that annual workers' compensation premiums are more than one thousand times as large as total annual OSHA penalties.40 7 The tax system could be used to punish employers who provide dangerous workplaces. The answer is that it could have significant beneficial consequences."° The current system puts public attention in the 41 A study by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development found over ffty environmental charges among fourteen of its members. See Lester R. Brown, Christopher Flavin, and Sandra Postel, Saving the Planet: How to Shape an Environmentally Sustainable Global Economy 143 (Norton, 1991). (cited in note 348), and we draw on their discussion here. the contemporary model-are wrong places. Imagine, for example, that Congress and the citifocusing on zenry-following whether ethanol, or some other gasoline substitute, should be required in new cars. It is perfectly predictable that in answering this question, well-organized groups with significant stakes in the outcome will bring their influence to bear. It is also predictable that producers of the competing products may seek and actually obtain regulatory benefits, and for reasons bearing little or no relationship to environmental protection. time, the same the underlying substantive question-whether ethanol is actually an environmentally superior product-will have to be resolved on the basis of technological complexities not easily addressed by the public or its representatives. If this is the issue on which the political process focuses, there is likely to be a series of laws that represent not publicspirited deliberation with a measure of broad accountability, but instead trade-offs among well-organized private groups, or, in Madisonian terms, government by faction. By directing attention to means, this system creates strong incentives for interest groups to ensure that they are favored in the legislature or the bureaucracy. There are other democratic advantages as well. Economic incentives should simultaneously promote coordination and rationality in regulation by giving government an incentive to attend closely, and for the first time, to how other risks are treated. This should bring a salutary measure of structure and sense to risk regulation in general. As an important by-product, the new system should create a powerful incentive to obtain information about the actual effects of pollution and pollution control. If members of Congress are deciding on the level of risk reduction, they will not want to do so in a vacuum, especially in light of the significant costs of large reductions. Affected groups will therefore be encouraged to engage in research about real-world consequences. incentives-favored so firmly on economic grounds-have as one of their principal justifications a series of democracy-reinforcing, faction-limiting characteristics. 9 3. Pre-Clinton initiatives. notes. General Principles for Creation, Banking and Use of Emission Reduction Credits, 51 Fed Reg 43814 (1986). Through the "banking" policy, firms are permitted to store emission credits for their own future use.412 Companies may also engage in "netting," by which a firm modifies a source, but avoids otherwise-applicable emissions limits by reducing emissions from another source within the same plant. Existing sources may also place an imaginary "bubble" over their plants, allowing increased emissions levels for some emitting devices, so long as the total emissions level meets the aggregate requirements. See outline of emissions trading program in Tietenberg, Emissions Trading at 7-9 Estimated number of* internal transactions Estimated number of external transactions Activity Netting Estimated cost savings (millions) Probably large, but not easily measured Environmental quality impact Insignificant in individual cases; probably insignificant in aggregate Probably Insignificant Offsets Federally approved bubbles approved bubbles Banking Insignificant Insignificant Insignificant EPA has also permitted emissions trading for lead. Under this policy, a refinery that produced gasoline with lower-thanrequired lead levels could earn credits. These could be traded with other refineries or banked for future use.4 19 Until the program's termination in 1987, when the phasedown of lead ended, emissions credits for lead were widely traded. EPA concluded that there had been cost savings of about 20 percent over alternative systems, making total savings in the hundreds of millions of dollars.42 There have been initial administrative efforts as well with respect to water pollution and ozone depletion.42' The most dramatic program of economic incentives can be found in the 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act. The Act now explicitly creates an emissions trading system for the control of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions, major contributors to acid deposition. In these amendments, Congress has made an explicit decision about the aggregate emissions level for a pollutant.' The goal is to reduce sulfur dioxide emissions by ten million tons each year, with initial standards going into place in 1995 and much tighter standards coming into effect by 2000.' Whether the particular decision about the size of the reduction is the correct one may well be disputed. But there are large democratic benefits from ensuring that public attention is focused on that issue. Equally intriguing is a provision calling for auction sales of specified numbers of sulfur dioxide allowances.4"7 Here the market is permitted to set the price for polluting activity. For example, in the first auction of these rights, in 1993, the average price for the right to discharge one ton of sulfur dioxide in 1995 was $156; by 1994, the market price had risen to $159 per ton.4 28 For the most part, however, the Clean Air Act does not require polluters to pay for their "licenses." Instead, government is granting initial marketable pollution allowances to existing sources for free. This might be a short-term measure to protect reliance interests underlying existing uses, for political or more substantive reasons. As further experience with these approaches develops, perhaps Congress will take the next step of requiring dischargers to pay for their emissions by requiring polluters to purchase their allowances in the first place. Executive Order 12866 holds out promise that future legislative and administrative initiatives will pursue regulation through incentive-altering structures more fully. tions. For example, the analysis carefully documents the physical water-quality benefits to be expected without attempting to monetize these in order to "weigh" them against costs.' ° In one area where some basis for attaching dollar values to the relevant benefits plausibly exists (the value to urban households of clean water for various purposes), the analysis attempts to do so." But the analysis does not hide the uncertainty behind these estimates, and it consistently makes its underlying assumptions clear. A strong emphasis is placed throughout on more flexible regulatory strategies that pursue the most cost-effective approach to producing a given level of benefits. "' Thus, EPA projects that its proposals for nonpoint source controls will produce measurable water-quality improvements in 7.1 million lake acres and 156,200 river miles; or that these proposals have a "high or medium" likelihood of producing measurable improvement in 52 percent of impaired or threatened rivers and 63 percent of lakes. Id at ES-7. Similarly, the proposals for addressing combined sewer overflows are estimated to reduce the average number of overflows from fifty to eighty events per year to approximately three to four; this would reduce the number of water-quality violations for each system from one hundred to two hundred days per year to ten to twenty, and reduce by 35 to 65 percent the annual discharges of various chemicals and toxic substances. Id at 23-24. The University of Chicago Law Review This attention to more flexible, cost-effective regulatory strategies is evidenced in the Initiative's bottom-line summary of its cost consequences. The analysis projects that if the CWI were adopted as proposed, it would lead to additional incremental expenditures of $5 to $9.6 billion per year." But the analysis also claims that this is vastly less-amounting to savings of $29 to $33.8 billion-than would be generated under the regulatory approaches required by current law. 8 The important point is not that these numbers are to be believed (although even if discounted substantially, they still suggest roughly the magnitude of expected savings from more flexible regulatory strategies). More significantly, Executive Order 12866 is already bringing about systematic analysis of major new regulatory initiatives by encouraging new means to environmental ends. being based on a "stringent interpretation" of current law. Id. allowances." Auctions are also a promising approach, with the benefit of market rather than governmental setting of initial prices for the allowances." On the other hand, fees or taxes may sometimes be preferable. An advantage of taxes as a response to (say) pollution problems is that the government need not even calculate the socially optimal level of pollution, a complex question to be sure. Rather than compute the tax at a level designed to achieve a predetermined quantity (a difficult task, for reasons described above), government could simply tax polluters at a level equal to the harm done to others from the pollution generated. On a standard view, this would generally equal the lower of either the cleanup costs, or the amount of money society is willing to accept in exchange for living with the pollution. Under this approach, the polluters would internalize the social cost of polluting, and would have every incentive to pollute at the socially optimal level. Computing the social harm done from a given unit of pollution may well be easier in many contexts than computing the total socially optimal quantity. Moreover, this approach allows the market to respond to fluctuations in the socially optimal quantity, which may frequently arise from changes in technology, market substitutes, increased demand, and so forth. Rights, J Econ Perspectives 145 (Summer 1994). See text accompanying notes 257-65. See generally Peter S. Menell, Beyond the Throwaway Society: An Incentive Ap But mandatory recycling might affect social norms with respect to consumption, waste disposal, and environmental protection, in a way that has better long-term consequences, and that in any case responds better to the public's understanding of how best to conceive of social obligations in the area of solid waste disposal. The choice between curbside taxes and mandatory recycling cannot be resolved in the abstract. But insofar as economic incentives treat a public bad as a commodity, they might be objectionable on expressive grounds. It is rarely urged, for example, that the emissions trading model makes sense in the antidiscrimination area; a "discrimination license" would be inconsistent with the general effort to delegitimate racial prejudice."' A final problem is that a system of economic incentives can bring about distortions that must be addressed through governmental action. In the environmental area, emissions trading programs can lead to "hot spots," which occur when trades lead sources to concentrate pollution in some local area."2 There are important equitable issues here, connected to those treated above: the "hot spots" may have unfortunate distributional effects, burdening identifiable social groups."3 This is less of a problem to the extent that the pollutant has no local effects and is troubling only when mixed in a larger environment (which might be true, to a significant degree, of sulfur dioxide).'" But where local concentration effects are a problem, controls on trades or location of sources will have to be reintroduced. Indeed, the regulatory approach to trades in nitrogen oxides already manifests such an approach. Unlike with sulfur dioxides, trades in nitrogen oxides (which cause smog) must be approved by environmental officials in the states where the extra pollutants will be admitted; in addition, such trades are supposed to be "directionally correct," in that sellers must be upwind of buyers."5 The right solution varies from context to context, but it seems likely that appropriate structures and policies can be developed to address these concerns.' This Article has emphasized three principal points. The first involves regulatory institutions. The second involves regulatory ends. The third involves regulatory means. idea is only incipient in Executive Order 12866. Toward this end, OIRA (perhaps bolstered by the addition of employees trained in relevant fields in addition to economics and policy analysis) should generate recommendations about which risk priorities ought to be viewed as most pressing." As we have emphasized, the judgment about which risks are most pressing, and about which problems are most severe, does not depend solely on quantity or on numbers of lives saved. It depends a great deal on the context in which risks are imposed and on such factors as whether relevant risks are catastrophic, irreversible, involuntarily imposed, faced by future generations, or inequitably distributed. Instead, it requires a modified form of cost-benefit analysis, one that calls on agencies to incorporate ambiguous concerns for "equity" and "distributive impacts" into CBA. There is evident doubt about the prior use of cost-benefit techniques; attenuated endorsement of the basic method; and vague modifications that leave the final outcome, in terms of actual effects on agency policy, quite unpredictable. The University of Chicago Law Review level, risk control strategies for hundreds, thousands, or millions of companies in an exceptionally diverse nation. Such regulation is highly inefficient. Even more fundamentally, such strategies are deficient from the standpoint of a well-functioning democratic process. Often they ensure that citizens and representatives will be devoting their attention not to general questions of value-what levels of risk reduction and cost trade-offs are appropriate-but instead to the largely incidental and publicly inaccessible question of what technologies are now available. They focus on the question of regulatory "means," a focus that increases the power of well-organized private groups by allowing them to press the law in the service of their own parochial ends. into account The solution to this problem lies in strategies that respond to people's background assumptions and to their diverse valuations of diverse risks. Indeed, a principle of this kind-that risk evaluation should informed public valuations-should be placed at the center of modern efforts to reinvent the regulatory state. We have suggested that such efforts could promote economic goals, by reducing the billions of dollars unnecessarily spent on regulation and by ensuring that resources are devoted to the many serious problems that remain inadequately addressed. Such efforts could promote democratic goals as well, by reducing interest-group power, poor priority setting unreflective of public judgments, and the role of sensationalist anecdotes in regulatory policy. A reinvented government could simultaneously increase efficiency and improve the democratic character of the regulatory state. This task has technocratic dimensions, but it is far from only technocratic. It also requires government to respond to public understandings and valuations of risk, and to make a large place for those valuations to the extent that they reflect a distinct, and legitimate, conception of rational choice.