Yale Law Journal Company, Inc.

The Yale Law Journal, Vol. 104, No. 7 (May, 1995), pp. 1757-1804

 

The First Amendment in Cyberspace 
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein 
Source: 
Published by: 
Stable URL: 
Accessed: 29-10-2015 11:08 UTC

 
Yale Law Journal Company, Inc.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/797031

 

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Yale Law Journal Company, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Yale Law Journal.

 

 

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

The First Amendment in Cyberspace 

Cass R. Sunsteint 

I go on this great republican principle, that the people will have virtue 
and intelligence to select men of virtue and wisdom. Is there no virtue 
among us?  If  there be  not,  we  are in  a  wretched situation. No 
theoretical checks, no form of government, can render us secure. To 
suppose that any form of government will secure liberty or happiness 
without any virtue in the people, is  a  chimerical idea. If  there be 
sufficient  virtue  and  intelligence in  the  community, it  will  be 
exercised in the selection of these men; so that we do not depend on 
their virtue, or put confidence in our rulers, but in the people who are 
to choose them.' 

[T]he right of  electing the members of  the Government constitutes 
more particularly the essence of a free and responsible government. 
The value and efficacy of this right depends on the knowledge of the 
comparative merits and demerits of the candidates for public trust, and 
on  the  equal freedom, consequently, of  examining and discussing 
these merits and demerits of the candidates respectively.2 

"[T]elevision is just another appliance. It's a toaster with pictures."3 

t  Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department 
of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Elena Kagan, Larry Lessig, Geoffrey Stone, 
David Strauss, and Eugene Volokh for helpful comments, and to Sophie Clark for research assistance and 
valuable discussions. An overlapping but much shorter essay, The Future of the First Amendment, appears 
as an afterword to CASS R. SUNSTEIN, DEMOCRACY AND THE PROBLEM OF FREE SPEECH (2d ed. 1995). 

1.  James Madison, Remarks to the Virginia Convention (June 20,  1788), in 3 THE DEBATES IN THE 
SEVERAL STATE CONVENTIONS ON THE ADOPTION OF THE FEDERAL CONSTuMON 536-37  (photo. reprint 
1987) (Jonathan Elliot ed., 2d ed.  1836). 

2.  James Madison, Report on  the Virginia Resolutions, Feb. 7,  1777,  in  6  WRITINGS OF JAMES 

MADISON 341, 397 (Gaillard Hunt ed., 1906) In his report, Madison objects to the Sedition Act on First 
Amendment grounds. 

3.  Bernard D. Nossiter, Licenses To Coin Money: The FCC.'s  Big Giveaway Show, 240 NATION 402 

(1985) (quoting Mark Fowler, former FCC Chair). 

1757 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1758 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

I.  THE FUTURE 

Imagine you  had  a  device  that combined a  telephone, a  TV,  a 
camcorder, and a personal computer. No  matter where you went or 
what time it was, your child could see you and talk to you, you could 
watch a replay of your team's last game, you could browse the latest 
additions to the library, or you could find the best prices in town on 
groceries, furniture, clothes-whatever  you needed. 

Imagine further the dramatic changes in your life if: 
* The best schools, teachers, and courses were available to  all 
students,  without  regard to  geography, distance,  resources,  or 
disability; 

* The vast resources of art, literature, and science were available 
everywhere, not just  in  large institutions or big-city libraries and 
museums; 

* Services that improve America's health care system and respond 
to other important social needs were available on-line, without waiting 
in line, when and where you needed them; 

* You could live in many places without foregoing opportunities 
for useful and fulfilling employment, by  "telecommuting" to  your 
office through an electronic highway . . . 

* You could see the latest movies, play the hottest video games, 
or bank and shop from the comfort of  your home whenever you 
chose; 

* You could obtain government information directly or through 
local organizations like libraries, apply for and receive government 
benefits electronically, and get in  touch with government officials 
easily .... 

Thus wrote the Department of Commerce on September 15, 1993, when the 
federal government announced an "Agenda for Action" with respect to "the 
National  Information Infrastructure."5 The  statement may  seem  weirdly 
futuristic, but the nation is not at all far from what it prophesies, and in ways 
that have already altered social and legal relations and categories. 

Consider the  extraordinarily rapid development of  the  institution of 
electronic mail, which lies somewhere between ordinary conversation ("voice 
mail") and ordinary written communication ("snail mail" or "hard mail"), or 
which perhaps should be described as something else altogether. E-mail has its 
own characteristic norms and constraints. Those norms and constraints are an 
important part of the informal, unwritten law of cyberspace. The norms and 
constraints are a form of customary law, determining how and when people 

4.  Administration Policy Statement, 58 Fed. Reg. 49,026 (1993). 
5.  Id. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1759 

communicate with one another.6 Perhaps there will be a formal codification 
movement before too long; certainly the norms and constraints are codified in 
the sense that, without government assistance, they are easily accessible by 
people who want to know what they are.7 

The Commerce Department's claims about location have started to come 
true. What it meant to "live in California" became altogether different, after 
the invention of  the airplane, from what it  meant in  (say)  1910. With the 
advent of new communications technologies, the meaning of the statement, "I 
live  in California" has changed at least as dramatically. If people can have 
instant access to all libraries and all movies, and if they can communicate with 
a wide range of public officials, pharmacists, educators, doctors, and lawyers 
by  touching a  few  buttons, they  may  as  well  (for  most  purposes) live 
anywhere. 

In any case, the existence of  technological change promises to test the 
system of  free expression in dramatic ways. What should be expected with 
respect to the First Amendment? 

II.  THE PRESENT: MARKETS AND MADISON 

There are two free speech traditions in the United States, not simply one.8 
There have been two models of the First Amendment, corresponding to the 
two  free  speech  traditions. The  first emphasizes well-functioning speech 
markets. It can be traced to Justice Holmes' great Abrams dissent,9 where the 
notion of a "market in ideas" received its preeminent exposition. The market 
model  emerges  as  well  from  Miami  Herald  Publishing  Co.  v.  Tornillo,10 
invalidating a "right of reply" law as applied to candidates for elected office. 
It finds its most recent defining statement not in judicial decisions, but in an 
FCC opinion rejecting the fairness doctrine. 

The second tradition, and the second model, focuses on public deliberation. 
The  second  model can  be  traced from its  origins in  the  work of  James 
Madison,12 with his  attack on  the idea of  seditious libel,  to  Justice Louis 
Brandeis, with his suggestion that "the greatest menace to freedom is an inert 

6.  See  HOWARD  RHEINGOLD,  THE  VIRTUAL  COMMUNITY  38-64  (1993). The area thus fortifies the 
analysis  in ROBERT C. ELLICKSON, ORDER WITHOUT LAW (1991),  of  how  social  norms can develop  lawlike 
constraints in the absence of actual law. 

7.  LEXIS Counsel Connect has posted a statement of recommended online etiquette, which, following 
customary usage, it calls "netiquette." LEXIS Counsel Connect, Netiquette, Aug. 13, 1994, available online 
at LEXIS Counsel Connect, Discuss Menu, Browse: About the Discussion Groups Forum. 

8.  The distinction is elided in the best general treatment, HARRY KALVEN JR., A WORTHY TRADITION 

(1992). 

9.  Abrams v. United States, 250 U.S. 616, 624 (1919) (Holmes, J., dissenting). 
10.  418 U.S. 241 (1974). 
11.  Syracuse Peace Council v. Television Station WTVH, 2 F.C.C.R. 5043, 5054-55  (1987). 
12.  See CAss  R.  SUNSTEIN,  DEMOCRACY  AND  THE  PROBLEM  OF  FREE  SPEECH  at  xvi-xvii  (1993). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1760 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

people,""3 through the work of Alexander Meiklejohn, who associated the free 
speech principle not with laissez-faire economics, but with ideals of democratic 
deliberation.14 The  Madisonian tradition culminated in  New  York Times v. 
Sullivan15 and the  reaffirmation of  the  fairness doctrine in  the  Red Lion 
case,16 with  the  Supreme Court's suggestion that governmental efforts to 
encourage diverse views and attention to public issues are compatible with the 
free speech principle--even if they result in regulatory controls on the owners 
of speech sources. 

Under the marketplace metaphor, the First Amendment requires-at  least 
as  a  presumption-a  free  speech market, or  in  other words a  system of 
unrestricted economic markets in speech. Government must respect the forces 
of  supply and demand. At the very least, it may not regulate the content of 
speech so as to push the speech market in its preferred directions. Certainly it 
must be  neutral with  respect to  viewpoint. A  key  point for  marketplace 
advocates is that great distrust of government is especially appropriate when 
speech is  at  issue. Illicit motives are far too  likely to  underlie regulatory 
initiatives. For the marketplace model, Tornillo'7 is perhaps the central case. 
The FCC has at times come close to endorsing the market model, above all in 
its  decision abandoning the fairness doctrine.'8 When the FCC did this, it 
referred to the operation of the forces of  supply and demand, and suggested 
that those forces would produce an optimal mix of  entertainment options."9 
Hence former FCC Chair Mark Fowler described television as "just another 
appliance. It's  a  toaster with  pictures."20 Undoubtedly, the  rise  of  new 
communications technologies will be taken to fortify this claim.21 

Those who endorse the marketplace model do not claim that government 
may not do anything at all. Of course government may set up the basic rules 
of property and contract; it is these rules that make markets feasible. Without 
such rules, markets cannot exist  at all.22 Government is  also permitted to 

13.  Whitney v. California, 274 U.S. 357, 375 (1927) (Brandeis, J., concurring). 
14.  ALEXANDER MEIKLEJOHN, FREE SPEECH AND ITS RELATION TO SELF-GOVERNMENT (1948). 
15.  376 U.S. 254 (1964). 
16.  Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U.S. 367 (1969). 
17.  418 U.S. 241 (1978). 
18.  See Syracuse Peace Council v. Television Station WTVH, 2 F.C.C.R. 5043, 5055 (1987). 
19.  See id. 
20.  Nossiter, supra note 3, at 402. 
21.  See  Thomas G.  Krattenmaker &  L.A. Powe, Jr., Converging First Amendment Principles for 

Converging Communications Media, 104 YALE L.J. 1719 (1995). 

22.  Thus wrote the greatest critic of socialism in the 20th century: 

It is regrettable, though not difficult to explain, that in the past much less attention has 
been given to the positive requirements of a successful working of the competitive system than 
to  these  [previously discussed] negative points. The functioning of  a  competition not only 
requires adequate organization of  certain institutions like money, markets, and channels of 
information-some  of  which can never be adequately provided by private enterprise-but  it 
depends, above all, on the existence of  an appropriate legal system, a legal system designed 
both to preserve competition and to make it operate as beneficially as possible.... 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1761 

protect against market failures, especially by  preventing monopolies and 
monopolistic practices. Structural regulation is  acceptable so  long as it is  a 
content-neutral attempt to ensure competition. It is therefore important to note 
that advocates of marketplaces and democracy might work together in seeking 
to curtail monopoly. Of course, the prevention of monopoly is a precondition 
for well-functioning information markets. 

Government has a final authority, though this authority does not easily fall 
within the marketplace model itself. Most people who accept the marketplace 
model acknowledge that government is permitted to regulate the various well- 
defined  categories  of  controllable speech,  such  as  obscenity,  false  or 
misleading commercial speech, and libel.23 This acknowledgment will  have 
large and not yet  explored consequences for government controls on  new 
information technologies. Perhaps the government's power to control obscene, 
threatening, or libelous speech will justify special rules for cyberspace.24 But 
with these qualifications, the commitment to  free economic markets is  the 
basic constitutional creed. 

Many  people  think that there is  now  nothing distinctive about the 
electronic media or about modern communications technologies that justifies 
an  additional governmental role.25 If  such a  role  was  ever justified, they 
would  argue, it  was  because of  problems of  scarcity. When  only  three 
television networks exhausted the available options, a market failure may have 
called for regulation designed to ensure that significant numbers of  people 
were not left without their preferred programming.26 But this is  no longer a 
problem. With so dramatic a proliferation of stations, most people can obtain 
the  programming they  want, or  will  be  able to  soon.27 With cyberspace, 
people  will  be  able  to  make  or  to  participate in  their  own  preferred 
programming in their own preferred "locations" on the Internet. With new 
technologies, perhaps there are no  real problems calling for governmental 
controls, except for those designed to establish the basic framework. 

In  no  system that could be  rationally defended would the  state just  do  nothing. An 
effective competitive system needs an intelligently designed and continuously adjusted legal 
framework as much as any other. 

FRIEDRICH A. HAYEK, THE ROAD TO SERFDOM 38-39  (1944). 

23.  See Metromedia, Inc. v. San Diego, 453 U.S. 490 (1981); Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U.S. 

323 (1974); Miller v. California, 413 U.S.  15 (1973). 

24.  See infra part V.C.7. 
25.  See, e.g., Syracuse Peace Council v. Television Station WTVH, 2 F.C.C.R. 5043 (1987); THOMAS 
G.  KRATTENMAKER &  LUCAS A.  POWE, JR.,  REGULATING BROADCAST PROGRAMMING 277  (1994); 
Krattenmaker & Powe, supra note 21. 

26.  See BRUCE M. OWEN & STEVEN S. WILDMAN, VIDEO ECONOMICS 
27.  Of course, significant numbers of  Americans do not have cable television-now  about 38% of 
households that have television-and  many citizens are without access to the Internet. NRTC Executive: 
DirecTv a Big Hit in the Country, MULTICHANNEL NEWS, Dec. 15, 1994, at 32 [hereinafter DirecTv a Big 
Hit]; see infra text accompanying notes 145-51. 

(1992). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1762 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

The second model, receiving its most sustained attention in the writings 
of Alexander Meiklejohn,28 emphasizes that our constitutional system is one 
of  deliberative democracy. This system prizes both political (not economic) 
equality and a shared civic culture. It seeks to promote, as a central democratic 
goal, reflective and deliberative debate about possible courses of action. The 
Madisonian model sees the right of free expression as a key part of the system 
of public deliberation. 

On  this  view,  even  a  well-functioning information market29 is  not 
immune from government controls. Government is certainly not permitted to 
regulate speech however it wants; it may not restrict speech on the basis of 
viewpoint. But it  may regulate the electronic media or even cyberspace to 
promote, in a sufficiently neutral way, a well-functioning democratic regime. 
It may attempt to  promote attention to public issues. It may try to  ensure 
diversity of  view. It may promote political speech at the expense of  other 
forms of speech. In particular, educational and public-affairs programming, on 
the Madisonian view, has a special place. 

I  cannot attempt in  this space to  defend fully the proposition that the 
Madisonian conception is  superior to the marketplace alternative as a matter 
of constitutional law;30 a few brief notes will have to suffice. The argument 
for the Madisonian conception is partly historical; the American free speech 
tradition owes much of its origin and shape to a conception of democratic self- 
government. The marketplace conception is a creation of the twentieth century, 
not of  the eighteenth. As  a matter of history, it confuses modern notions of 
consumer sovereignty in the marketplace with democratic understandings of 
sovereignty, symbolized by the transfer of sovereignty from the King to "We 
the  People." The  American free  speech tradition finds its  origin in  that 
conception of sovereignty, which, in Madison's view, doomed the Sedition Act 
on constitutional grounds.31 

But the argument for Madisonianism does not rest only on history; it is 
partly evaluative as well. We are unlikely to be able to make sense of  our 
considered judgments about free speech problems without insisting that the free 
speech principle is centrally (though certainly not exclusively) connected with 
democratic goals,32 and without acknowledging that marketplace thinking is 
inadequately connected with  the  point and function of  a  system  of  free 
expression.  A  well-functioning democracy requires a  degree  of  citizen 
participation, which requires a degree of  information;33 and large disparities 

28.  See MEIKLEJOHN, supra note 14. 
29.  See the futuristic picture in Eugene Volokh, Cheap Speech and What It Will Do,  104 YALE L.J. 

1805 (1995), on the risks posed by such a system. 

30.  I try to do this in SUNSTEIN, supra note 12. 
31.  Id. at xvii. 
32.  See JOSEPH RAz,  ETHics  IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN, 136-38  (1994). 
33.  See supra text accompanying notes 1-2. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1763 

in  political (as opposed to  economic) equality are damaging to  democratic 
aspirations.34 To  the  extent  that  the  Madisonian view  prizes  education, 
democratic deliberation, and  political  equality, it  is  connected,  as  the 
marketplace conception  is  not,  with  the  highest  ideals  of  American 
constitutionalism. 

Some  people  think  that  the  distinction between  marketplace and 
Madisonian models  is  now  an  anachronism.35 Perhaps the  two  models 
conflicted at an earlier stage in history; but in one view, Madison has no place 
in  an  era  of  limitless broadcasting options and cyberspace. Perhaps new 
technologies now mean that Madisonian goals can best be satisfied in a system 
of  free markets. Now that so many channels, e-mail options, and discussion 
"places" are available, cannot everyone read or see what they wish? If people 
want to  spend their time on public issues, are there not countless available 
opportunities? Is this not especially true with the emergence of the Internet? 
Is it not hopelessly paternalistic, or anachronistic, for government to regulate 
for Madisonian reasons? 

I do not believe that these questions are rhetorical. We know enough to 
know that even in a period of limitless options, our communications system 
may fail to promote an educated citizenry and political equality. Madisonian 
goals may be severely compromised even under technologically extraordinary 
conditions. There is  no  logical  or  a  priori  connection between  a  well- 
functioning system of  free expression and limitless broadcasting or Internet 
options. We could well imagine a science fiction story in which a wide range 
of  options coexisted with little or  no  high-quality fare for children, with 
widespread political apathy or ignorance, and with social balkanization in 
which  most  people's  consumption choices  simply  reinforced their  own 
prejudices and platitudes, or even worse. 

Quite outside of  science fiction, it  is  foreseeable that free markets in 
communications will  be  a  mixed blessing. They  could  create a  kind of 
accelerating "race to the bottom," in which many or most people see  low- 
quality  programming involving  trumped-up scandals  or  sensationalistic 
anecdotes calling for little in terms of  quality or quantity of  attention. It is 
easily imaginable that well-functioning markets in communications will bring 
about a situation in which many of those interested in politics merely fortify 
their own unreflective judgments, and are exposed to little or nothing in the 
way of competing views,  Itis  eaiyimaginable  that the content of the most 

easily 

36 It 

34.  See the discussion of the fair value of political liberties in JOHN RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM 

356-63  (1993). 

35.  See generally KRATTENMAKER & POWE, supra note 25. 
36.  Note  in  this  regard The  Wall Street Journal's recently released Personal Journal, which  is 
available online. Each subscriber receives only the portion of the Journal that is "relevant" to him, which 
includes major headlines and news stories on the 10 corporations he has chosen to follow. See Michael 
Putzel, A  Personal Journal from Dow  Jones, BOSTON GLOBE, Feb. 6,  1995, at  19; Morning Edition: 
"Personal Journal" Delivers News Based on Need (NPR radio broadcast, Mar. 11, 1995). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1764 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

widely viewed programming will be affected by the desires of advertisers, in 
such a way as to produce shows that represent a bland, watered-down version 
of  conventional morality, and that do not engage serious issues in a serious 
way for fear of offending some group in the audience.37 

Consider, by way of summary of existing fare, the suggestion that 

TV  favors a  mentality in  which  certain things no  longer matter 
particularly: skills like the ability to enjoy a complex argument, for 
instance, or to perceive nuances, or to keep in mind large amounts of 
significant information, or to remember today what someone said last 
month, or to consider strong and carefully argued opinions in defiance 
of  what  is  conventionally called  "balance." Its  content  lurches 
between violence of  action, emotional hyperbole, and blandness of 
opinion....  Commercial TV...  has come to present society as a 
pagan circus of freaks, pseudo-heroes, and wild morons, struggles on 
the sand of a Colosseum without walls. It thus helps immeasurably to 
worsen the defects of American public education and of tabloid news 
38 
in print. 

* 

From  the  standpoint of  the  present,  it  is  easily  imaginable that  the 
the  personal  computer  carrying  out  communications 
television-or 
indeed  become  "just  another  appliance  ... 
a  toaster  with 
functions-will 
pictures," and that the educative or aspirational goals of the First Amendment 
will be lost or even forgotten. 

I shall say more about these points below.39 For now it is safe to say that 
the law of free speech will ultimately have to make some hard choices about 
the marketplace and democratic models. It is also safe to say that the changing 
nature of the information market will test the two models in new ways. In fact, 
the Supreme Court has recently offered an important discussion of the topic, 
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC.40 Turner is also the most sustained 
exploration of the relationship between conventional legal categories and the 
new information technologies. The decision contains a range of lessons for the 
future. 

My principal purpose here is to discuss the role of the First Amendment 
and  Madisonianism  in  cyberspace-or,  more  simply,  the  nature  of 
constitutional constraints on government regulation of electronic broadcasting, 
especially in the aftermath of Turner. In so doing, I will cover a good deal of 
ground, and a number of issues of law and policy, in a relatively short space. 
I  do,  however, offer  three relatively simple  goals  to  help  organize the 
discussion. Most  important, I  attempt to  make a  defense  of  Madisonian 

37.  See C. EDWIN BAKER, ADVERTISING AND A DEMOCRATIC PRESS 44-70  (1994). 
38.  Robert Hughes, Why Watch It, Anyway?, N.Y. REV. BooKS, Feb. 16, 1995, at 38. 
39.  See infra part V.B.2. 
40.  114 S. Ct. 2445 (1994). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1765 

conceptions of free speech, even in a period in which scarcity is no longer a 
serious problem. The defense stresses the risks of sensationalism, ignorance, 
failure  of  deliberation, and  balkanization-risks  that  are  in  some  ways 
heightened by  new  developments. In  the  process I  discuss  some  of  the 
questions that are likely to arise in the next generation of free speech law. 

I have two other goals as well. I attempt to identify an intriguing and new 
model of  the First Amendment and to ask whether that model-the  Turner 
model-is  well  adapted to  the  future of  the  speech market. A  relatively 
detailed and somewhat technical discussion of  Turner should prove useful, 
because the case raises the larger issues in a concrete setting. 

I also urge that, for the most part, the emerging technologies do not raise 
new questions about basic principle but instead produce new areas for applying 
or perhaps testing old principles. The existing analogies are often very good, 
and this means that the new law can begin by building fairly comfortably on 
the old. The principal problem with the old law is not so much that it is poorly 
adapted for current issues-though  in some cases it may be-but  that it does 
not depend on  a  clear sense of  the purpose or point of  the system of  free 
expression.  In  building  law  for  an  age  of  cyberspace,  government 
officials-within  the judiciary and elsewhere-should  be particularly careful 
not to treat doctrinal categories as ends in themselves. Much less should they 
act as  if  the First Amendment is  a purposeless abstraction unconnected to 
ascertainable social goals. Instead they should keep in  mind that the free 
speech principle has  a  point, or  a  set  of  points. Among its  points is  the 
commitment to democratic self-government. 

III.  TURNER: A  NEW DEPARTURE? 

The Turner case is by far the most important judicial discussion of new 
media technologies, and it  has  a  range of  implications for  the  future. I 
therefore begin with that case, turning to broader issues of law and policy in 
Part V. It  is  important, however, to  say  that Turner involved two  highly 
distinctive problems: (a) the peculiar "bottleneck" produced by  the current 
system  of  cable  television, in  which cable  owners can  control access  to 
programming; and (b) the possible risk to free television programming created 
by the rise of pay television. These problems turned out to be central to the 
outcome in the case. For this reason, Turner is quite different from imaginable 
future cases involving new information technologies, including the Internet, 
which includes no bottleneck problem. Significantly, the Internet is owned by 
no  one  and  controlled by  no  organization. But  at  least  potentially, the 
principles in Turner will extend quite broadly. This is especially true insofar 
as  the  Court adopted ingredients of  an  entirely new  model  of  the  First 
Amendment and insofar as  the Court set  out principles governing content 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1766 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

discrimination, viewer access, speaker access, and regulation of  owners of 
speech sources. 

A.  The Background 

In the last decade, it has become clear that cable television will  be in 
potential competition with free broadcasting. In 1992, motivated in large part 
by  concerns about this  form of  competition, Congress enacted the  Cable 
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act  (the Act).41 The Act 
contains a  range of  provisions designed to  protect broadcasting and local 
producers, and also at least nominally designed to protect certain consumers 
from practices by  the  cable industry. The relevant provisions include rate 
regulations for cable operators, a prohibition on exclusive franchise agreements 
between cable operators and municipalities, and restrictions on  affiliations 
between cable programmers and cable operators.42 

A major part of the Act was motivated by the fear that cable television's 
success  could  damage broadcast television.43 If  cable  flourishes, perhaps 
broadcasters will  fail?  The  scenario seems  at  least  plausible in  light  of 
important differences in relevant technologies. Broadcast television comes, of 
course, from transmitting antennae. It is available for free, though in its current 
form, it cannot provide more than a few stations. By contrast, cable systems 
make use of a physical connection between television sets and a transmission 
facility, and through this route cable operators can provide a large number of 
stations. Cable operators are of course in a position to decide which stations, 
and which station owners, will be available on cable television; cable operators 
could thus refuse to carry local broadcasters. To be sure, cable operators must 
respond to forces of supply and demand, and perhaps they would do poorly if 
they failed to  carry local broadcasters. But because they have "bottleneck 
control" over  the  stations that  they  will  carry, they  are  in  one  sense 
monopolists, or at least so Congress appears to have thought. 

For purposes of  policymaking, an important consideration is  that about 
forty percent of Americans lack a cable connection, and must therefore rely on 
broadcast stations.44 (This is  a  point of  general importance in  light of  the 
possibility that access to  communications technology will  in the future be 
unequally distributed.) In the Act, the potential conflict between cable and 
broadcast television  led  Congress to  set  out  two  crucial, hotly  disputed 
provisions. Both provisions required cable operators to  carry the signals of 

41.  47 U.S.C. ?? 534-535  (Supp. V  1993). 
42.  See the outline in Turner, 114 S. Ct. at 2452-53. 
43.  See  S.  REP. No.  92,  102d Cong., 1st Sess.  3-4  (1991), reprinted in  1992 U.S.C.C.A.N. 1133, 

1135-36. 

44.  114 S.  Ct. at 2451. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1767 

local broadcast television stations. These "must-carry" rules were the focus of 
the Turner case. 

The  first  provision,  section  4,  imposes  must-carry rules  for  "local 
commercial television stations."45 Under the Act, cable systems with more 
than twelve active channels and more than three hundred available channels 
must set aside as many as one-third of their channels for commercial broadcast 
stations requesting carriage.46 These stations are defined to  include all full- 
power television broadcasters except those that qualify as  "noncommercial 
educational" stations.47 

Section  5  adds a  different requirement.48 It  governs "noncommercial 
educational television stations," defined to include (a) stations that are owned 
and  operated  by  a  municipality  and  that  transmit  "predominantly 
noncommercial programs for educational purposes"49 or (b) stations that are 
licensed by the FCC as such stations and that are eligible to receive grants 
from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.50 Section 5  imposes separate 
must-carry rules on noncommercial educational stations. A cable system with 
more than thirty-six channels must carry each local public broadcast station 
requesting carriage;51 a  station having between thirteen and thirty-six must 
carry between one and three;52 and a station with twelve or fewer channels 
must carry at least one.53 

What was the purpose of the must-carry rules? This is a complex matter. 
A  skeptic, or perhaps a realist, might well  say that the rules were simply a 
product of  the  political power of  the  broadcasting industry. Perhaps the 
broadcasting industry was  trying to  protect its  economic interests at  the 
expense of cable. This is a quite reasonable suggestion, for it is unlikely that 
market arrangements would lead to a situation in which significant numbers 
of  Americans are entirely without access  to  television broadcasting. The 
scenario that Congress apparently feared-a  victory of cable television over the 
broadcasting industry, with the result that forty percent of Americans would 
lack  television  at  all-seems  wildly  unrealistic. Insofar as  Congress was 
responding to  the  interests of  local  broadcasters, it  may  well  have  been 
catering to interest-power rather than attempting to protect otherwise deprived 
consumers. 

Here there is  a large lesson for the future. New  regulations, ostensibly 
defended as public-interested or as helping viewers and consumers, will often 

45.  47 U.S.C. ? 534 (Supp. V  1993) 
46.  Id. ? 534(b)(1). 
47.  Id. ? 534(b)(1)(A)-(B). 
48.  Id. ? 535. 
49.  Id. ? 535(l)(1)(B). 
50.  Id. ? 535(l)(1)(A)(ii). 
51.  Id. ? 535(b)(1). 
52.  Id. ? 535(b)(3). 
53.  Id. ? 535(b)(2). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1768 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

be a product of private self-interest, and not good for the public at all. It is 
undoubtedly true that industries will often seek government help against the 
marketplace, invoking public-spirited justifications for self-interested ends.54 
Whether and to what extent this is a constitutional (as opposed to a political) 
problem may  be  disputed.55 But  it  points to  a  distinctive and legitimate 
concern about governmental regulation of the communications industry. 

The interest-group account therefore has considerable plausibility. On the 
other hand, some people might reasonably think that the must-carry rules were 
a good-faith effort to protect local broadcasters, not because of their political 
power, but because their speech is valuable. Their speech is valuable because 
it ensures that viewers will be able to see discussion of local political issues. 
Perhaps the must-carry rules-especially  section 5, but perhaps section 4  as 
well-had  powerful Madisonian justifications insofar as cable operators might 
choose  stations that failed to  offer adequate discussion of  issues of  public 
concern, especially to the local community. Other observers might invoke a 
different justification, also with Madisonian overtones. Perhaps the effort to 
protect broadcasters was  a  legitimate effort to  safeguard the broadcasting 
industry, not  because of  the  political power of  the broadcasters, and not 
because of the content of broadcast service, but because millions of Americans 
must rely on broadcasters for their programming. Perhaps Congress wanted to 
ensure universal viewer access to the television market. On this view, the key 
goal behind the must-carry rules was to ensure viewer access. 

Let us put these possibilities to one side and take up the constitutional 
issue. In Turner, the cable operators challenged sections 4 and 5 as inconsistent 
with the First Amendment. They did not make a distinction between section 
4  and section 5;  to  the cable companies, both provisions were illegitimate 
interferences with their right to choose such programming as they wished. For 
obvious  reasons,  the  government also  made  no  such  distinctions. The 
government wanted to defend both provisions, and a defense of section 5, by 
itself, would produce only a partial victory. The key aspects of the case lay in 
the operators' contention that both sections amounted to a form of  content 
regulation, and that even if they should be seen as content-neutral, they were 
unconstitutional because inadequately justified. 

B.  The Genesis of the Turner Model 

In its response, the Court created something very much like a new model 
for understanding the relationship between new technologies and the First 

54.  This is  a simple insight of public choice theory. See generally DANIEL A.  FARBER & PHILIP P. 

FRICKEY, LAW AND PUBLIC CHOICE (1991). 

55.  See Turner Broadcasting Sys.,  Inc. v. FCC, 819  F. Supp. 32,  65  (D.D.C.  1993) (Williams, J., 
dissenting)  (treating interest-group feature of  case  as  relevant to  constitutional issue),  vacated and 
remanded, 114 S. Ct. 2445 (1994). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1769 

Amendment. This model is a competitor to the marketplace and Madisonian 
alternatives. And while it is somewhat unruly, it is not difficult to describe. It 
comes from the five basic components of  the Court's response to the cable 
operators' challenge. 

First, the Court held that cable television would not be subject to the more 
lenient free speech limitations applied to broadcasters.56 On the Court's view, 
the key to the old broadcast cases was scarcity, and scarcity is not a problem 
for cable stations. To be  sure, there are possible "market dysfunctions" for 
cable television; as noted, cable operators may in a sense be a monopoly by 
virtue of  their "bottleneck control." But this structural fact did not, in the 
Court's view,  dictate a  more lenient approach in the cable context. In the 
Court's view, the key point in the past cases had to do with scarcity. 

This  is  an  especially  significant holding.57 It  suggests  that  new 
technologies will generally be subject to ordinary free speech standards, not to 
the more lenient standards applied to broadcasters. Scarcity is rarely a problem 
for new technologies. 

Second, the Court said that the Act  was content-neutral, and therefore 
subject to the more lenient standards governing content-neutral restrictions on 
speech. For the Court, the central point is that "the must-carry rules, on their 
face, impose burdens and confer benefits without reference to the content of 
speech."58 This is  because "the extent of  the interference does not depend 
upon the content of the cable operators' programming."59 In the Court's view, 
the regulations are certainly speaker-based, since we have to know who the 
speaker is  to know whether the regulations apply; but they are not content- 
based, since they do not punish or require speech of a particular content. 

This  holding is  also  quite important. It  means that Congress will  be 
permitted to regulate particular technologies in particular ways, so long as the 
regulation is not transparently a subterfuge for a legislative desire to promote 
particular points of view. It means that Congress can give special benefits to 
special sources, or impose special burdens on disfavored industries. 

Third, the Court said that there was insufficient reason to believe that a 
content-based "purpose" underlay the content-neutral must-carry law.60 Hence 
the content neutrality of the law could not be impeached by an investigation 
of  the  factors that led  to  its  enactment. The  Court explored the  relevant 

56.  Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 114 S. Ct. 2445, 2456-58  (1994). 
57.  It is  also quite vulnerable. All goods are scarce, in a sense, and hence the scarcity rationale has 
never been a secure one. See Ronald H. Coase, The Federal Communications Commission, 2 J.L. & ECON. 
1, 14, 20 (1959). Perhaps market failures of a certain sort justified special controls on local broadcasting. 
See OWEN & WILDMAN, supra note 26, at 275-76.  But if this is true, the question becomes whether there 
are market failures, and of  what sorts, rather than whether there is  "scarcity." Hence the Court's crisp 
distinction between scarce sources and nonscarce sources is quite crude. 

58.  114 S. Ct. at 2460. 
59.  Id. 
60.  Id. at 2461-62. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1770 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

legislative findings, which showed not only a (by hypothesis questionable61) 
congressional interest in encouraging the sorts of programming offered by local 
broadcasters, but also a distinctive and legitimate concern that cable operators 
have a strong financial interest in favoring their own affiliated programmers, 
and in doing so  at the expense of broadcast stations. The findings therefore 
suggested that the cable operators have an economic incentive not to carry 
local signals. 

This fact led to the important problem supporting the Act: Without the 
must-carry provision, Congress concluded, there would be  a  threat to  the 
continued availability of free local broadcast television.62 The elimination of 
broadcast television would in turn be undesirable not because broadcasters 
deserve protection as such-they  do not-but  because (a) broadcast television 
is free and (b) there is a substantial government interest in assuring access to 
free  programming, especially  for  people  who  cannot afford to  pay  for 
television. As  Congress had it,  the must-carry rules would ensure that the 
broadcast stations would stay in business. 

The  Court said  that this  purpose-the  protection of  access  to  free 
programming through the protection of broadcast stations-was  unrelated to 
the  content of  broadcast expression and was  therefore legitimate. It  was 
significant in this regard that for Congress to  seek to protect broadcasters, 
Congress did not have to favor any particular kind or speech or any particular 
point of  view.  To  be  sure, and importantly, Congress' description of  the 
purposes of the Act also referred to a content-based concern-to  the effect that 
broadcast programming is "an important source of local news[,] public-affairs 
programming and  other local  broadcast services critical to  an  informed 
electorate," and  also  to  the  judgment that  noncommercial television  in 
particular "provides educational and informational programming to the Nation's 
citizens."63 On the Court's view, however, these statements did not show that 
the law was content-based. The acknowledgment of certain virtues of broadcast 
programming did not mean that Congress enacted the legislation because it 
regarded  broadcast programming as  substantively preferable to  cable 
programming. 

Fourth, the Court said that strict judicial scrutiny was not required by the 
fact  that the  provisions (a)  compel speech by  cable  operators, (b)  favor 
broadcast programmers over cable programmers, and (c)  single out certain 
members of  the press for disfavored treatment.M The fact that speech was 
mandated was irrelevant because the mandate was content-neutral and because 

61.  It is  questionable because it is content-discriminatory. In the end, content discrimination of this 
sort might be legitimate, see infra text accompanying notes 77-82  (discussing Justice O'Connor's analysis), 
but there is of course a presumption against it. 

62.  114 S. Ct. at 2455. 
63.  Id. 
64.  Id. at 2464. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1771 

cable operators would not be forced to alter their own messages to respond to 
the broadcast signals. So too, the Court said that a speaker-based regulation 
would not face special judicial hostility so long as it was content-neutral. It 
was important in this regard that the regulation of this particular industry was 
based on the special characteristics of that industry-in  short, "the bottleneck 
monopoly power exercised by cable operators and the dangers this power poses 
to the viability of broadcast television."65 In such a case, the Court concluded, 
legislative selectivity would be acceptable. 

These conclusions are also of  special importance for the future. They 
reinforce the point that Congress may favor some industries over others. They 
also suggest that Congress may compel companies to give access to speakers, 
at least so  long as (a) the companies themselves are permitted to  offer the 
messages they favor and (b) the access rights are given out on  a  content- 
neutral basis. The Turner Court stressed the governmental goal of  ensuring 
access to free programming for viewers; but in upholding the Act, it also said 
that it was legitimate to require access for speakers, so long as the requirement 
of content neutrality was met. 

Finally, the  Court explored the question whether the must-carry rules 

would be acceptable as content-neutral regulations of speech. Content-neutral 
regulations may well  be  invalid if  they fail a kind of  balancing test.66 The 
Court concluded that "intermediate scrutiny" would be applied.67 The Court 
said  the  appropriate test,  drawing on  familiar cases,68 would  involve  an 
exploration whether the  regulation furthers an  important or  substantial 
government interest and whether the restriction on First Amendment freedoms 
is no greater than necessary to promote that government interest. The Court 
had no difficulty in finding three substantial interests: (a) preserving free local 
television, (b) promoting the widespread dissemination of information from a 
multiplicity of  sources, and (c) promoting fair competition in the market for 
television  programming.69 On  the  Court's view,  each  of  these  was  both 
important and legitimate. 

What is  of  particular interest is  the fact that interests (a)  and (b)  are 
connected with Madisonian aspirations. Thus in an especially significant step, 
the Court suggested that a content-neutral effort to promote diversity may well 
be justified. In its most straightforward endorsement of the Madisonian view, 
the Court said that "assuring that the public has access to a multiplicity of 
information sources is  a  governmental purpose of  the highest order, for it 

65.  Id. at 2468. 
66.  See, e.g., United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968) (requiring that speech regulation serve 

important government interest and be narrowly tailored to achieve that interest). 

67.  114 S. Ct. at 2469. 
68.  See, e.g., O'Brien, 391 U.S. at 377. 
69.  114 S. Ct. at 2469. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1772 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

promotes  values  central  to  the  First  Amendment."70 Hence  the  Court 
expressed special concern, in a perhaps self-conscious echo of Red Lion, over 
the  cable  operator's "gatekeeper[] control over  most  (if  not  all)  of  the 
television programming that is channeled into the subscriber's home."71 The 
Court also emphasized "[t]he potential for abuse of this private power over a 
central avenue of  communication. "72  It  stressed that the First Amendment 
"does not disable the government from taking steps to  ensure that private 
interests not  restrict, through physical control of  a  critical pathway of 
communication, the free flow of information and ideas."73 

On the other hand, the Court thought that it was impossible to decide the 
case without a better factual record than had been developed thus far.74 As 
it  stood, the record was insufficient to  show whether the must-carry rules 
would serve these legitimate interests. Would local broadcasters actually be 
jeopardized without the  must-carry rules? Here we  should return to  the 
possibility, of which the Court was surely aware, that the rules were really an 
effort to favor the broadcasting industry, not to help viewers. 

The  Court suggested that courts should maintain a  basic  posture of 
deference to Congress' predictive judgments.75 In its view, judges should not 
second-guess those judgments even if they distrust them. On the other hand, 
Congress' judgments would  face  a  form of  independent judicial review, 
designed to ensure that Congress had made "reasonable inferences based on 
substantial evidence."76 The Court therefore remanded the case to the lower 
court for factual findings on (a) the question whether cable operators would 
refuse significant numbers of broadcast stations without the must-carry rules 
and (b)  the question whether broadcast stations, if  denied carriage, would 
deteriorate to a substantial degree or fail altogether. 

Justice O'Connor's dissenting opinion, joined by three other Justices, also 
deserves some  discussion, since the opinion may have considerable future 
importance in view of the obvious internal fragmentation of the Court on these 
questions. Justice O'Connor insisted above all that the must-carry rules were 
based on content.77 To reach this conclusion, she investigated the Act and its 
history to show that the nominally neutral measures were in fact designed to 
promote  local  programming. In  her  view,  the  existence  of  content 
discrimination was  not  decisive  against the  must-carry rules. It  was  still 
necessary to see whether the government could bring forward a strong interest, 

70.  Id. at 2470. 
71.  Id. at 2466. 
72.  Id. 
73.  Id. 
74.  Id. at 2472. 
75.  Id. at 2471. This was Justice Stevens' major point; he would have affirmed rather than remanded 

for this reason. See id. at 2473. 

76.  Id. at 2471. 
77.  Id. at 2479. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1773 

and show that the regulation promoted that interest. But Justice O'Connor 
found that the government could not meet its burden. 

In Justice O'Connor's view, the interest in  "localism" was insufficient 
justification.78 In words that have considerable bearing on what government 
may do with any information superhighway: 

It is  for private speakers and listeners, not for the government, to 
decide what fraction of their news and entertainment ought to be of 
a  local  character and what fraction ought to  be  of  a  national (or 
international) one. And the same is true of the interest in diversity of 
viewpoints: While the government may subsidize speakers that it 
thinks provide novel points of view, it may not restrict other speakers 
on the theory that what they say is more conventional.79 

Justice O'Connor referred independently to the interests in public-affairs 
programming and educational programming, finding that these interests are 
"somewhat weightier" than the interest in localism. But in her view, "it is  a 
difficult question whether they are compelling enough to justify restricting 
other sorts of  speech."80 Because of  the difficulty of  that question, Justice 
O'Connor did not say whether "the Government could set some channels aside 
for educational or news programming."8 (This is of course a central issue for 
the future.) 

In  her  view,  the  Act  was  too  crudely tailored to  be  justified as  an 
educational or  public-affairs measure. The  Act  did  not  neutrally favor 
educational or public-affairs programming, since it burdened equally "CNN, 
C-Span, the Discovery Channel, the New Inspirational Network, and other 
channels with as much claim as PBS to being educational or related to public 
affairs."82 Whether or  not  a  neutral law  favoring educational and public- 
affairs programming could survive constitutional scrutiny, this Act could not, 
for it was insufficiently neutral. 

IV.  THE TURNER MODEL 

A.  Description 

I  have noted that there have been two free speech traditions and two 
principal models of  free  speech. The marketplace model eschews content 
regulation; it  is  animated by  the  notion  of  consumer sovereignty. The 
Madisonian model may permit and even welcome content regulation; it  is 

78.  Id.  at  2478. 
79.  Id. 
80.  Id. 
81.  Id.  at  2479. 
82.  Id. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1774 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

rooted in  an  understanding of  political sovereignty. There is  now  a  third 
model-the  Turner model-of  what government may  do.  An  interesting 
question, not fully resolved by Turner itself, has to do with the extent to which 
the Turner model will incorporate features of its predecessors. 

The  new  model  has  four  simple  components. Under  Turner, (a) 
government may regulate (not merely subsidize) new speech sources so as to 
ensure access for viewers who would otherwise be without free programming 
and (b) government may require owners of speech sources to provide access 
to speakers, at least if the owners are not conventional speakers too; but (c) 
government must do all this on a content-neutral basis (at least as a general 
rule); but (d) government may support its regulation not only by reference to 
the provision of "access to free television programming" but also by invoking 
such democratic goals as the need to ensure "an outlet for exchange on matters 
of local concern" and "access to a multiplicity of information sources."83 

Remarkably, every Justice on the Court appeared to accept (a), (b), and (c) 
and parts of (d) (with minor qualifications). Perhaps the most notable feature 
of the Court's opinion is its emphasis on the legitimacy and the importance of 
ensuring general public (viewer) access to free programming. In this way, the 
Court accepted at least a modest aspect of the Madisonian ideal, connected 
with both political equality and broad dissemination of  information. This 
general goal is likely to have continuing importance in governmental efforts 
to control the information superhighway so as to ensure viewer and listener 
access. The Turner Court has put its stamp of approval on that goal. Recall in 
particular that the government justified the must-carry rules on the theory that 
without those rules, ordinary broadcasters would be unable to  survive. The 
consequence  would  be  that  people  without  cable  would  be  without 
broadcasting at all. The Court enthusiastically accepted this claim. It said that 
"to preserve access  to  free television programming for the 40  percent of 
Americans without cable" was a legitimate interest.84 This holding suggests 
that the government may provide access not only through subsidies, but also 
through regulation. 

On the other hand, the Court's quite odd refusal85 to distinguish between 
sections 4 and 5 and its use of the presumption against content discrimination 
seem to support the marketplace model. Certainly the Court did not say that 
it would be receptive to content discrimination if the discrimination were an 
effort to promote attention to public affairs and exposure to diverse sources. 
The Court did not claim or in any way imply that educational and public- 
affairs programming could be required consistently with the First Amendment. 
On the contrary, it suggested that it would view any content discrimination, 

83.  Id. at 2469-70. 
84.  Id. at 2479. 
85.  See  infra  text  accompanying  notes  86-87. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1775 

including  content  discrimination having  these  goals,  with  considerable 
skepticism. The result is a large degree of confusion with respect to whether 
and how government may promote Madisonian aspirations. I will return to this 
point. 

B.  A Problem: Commerce vs. Public Affairs 

The  Court's major internal dispute involved the question whether the 
content neutrality of  the  must-carry rules was  impeached by  the  history 
suggesting  that  Congress  was  particularly enthusiastic  about  local 
programming. This is  an issue on which reasonable people may disagree; it 
turns largely on the extent to which statements in the legislative history will 
be  used  to  cast  light  on  legislative  goals.  But  the  issue  of  content 
discrimination seems, on  inspection, to  rest on  a  matter not discussed by 
anyone on the Court; it is principally that matter, not the legislative history, 
that raises special issues about content discrimination. 

More concretely: From the standpoint of traditional free speech argument, 
there is  an obvious problem with the analysis offered by the Turner Court. 
Section 4  and section 5  are quite different; they appear to  have different 
justifications. In any case, different carriage requirements in the two sections, 
targeted to  two  different kinds  of  broadcasting, plainly  reveal  content 
discrimination. The two sections explicitly define their correlative obligations 
in terms of the nature, or content, of the programming. This is proof of content 
discrimination. 

How should that discrimination be handled? Under the Madisonian view, 
there is all the difference in the world between section 4  and section 5. As I 
have noted, section 5 imposes certain carriage requirements for educational and 
public-affairs  stations,  whereas  section  4 
imposes  different  carriage 
requirements for commercial stations. For Madisonians, section 5 stands on far 
stronger ground, since  it  is  apparently an  effort to  ensure education and 
attention to  public  issues.  It  seems  to  serve  straightforward democratic 
functions. This does not mean that it is necessarily legitimate. Perhaps Justice 
O'Connor's response-to  the effect that section 5 does not adequately promote 
that goal-is  decisive as against a Madisonian defense of section 5. But section 
4 appears to stand on far weaker ground from the Madisonian standpoint. Thus 
Madisonians would distinguish between the two provisions and would be far 
more  hospitable  toward section  5.86 

In fact, the Court should have analyzed the two sections differently. The 
validity of  section 4  turned on whether the factual record could support the 

86.  See Monroe E. Price & Donald W. Hawthorne, Saving Public Television: The Remand of Turner 
Broadcasting  and  the Future  of  Cable  Regulation,  17 HASTINGS COMM. &  ENT. L.J. 65,  91-95  (1994),  for 
an  argument that on  remand, the  district court should uphold section  5  even  if  it  finds section 4 
unconstitutional. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1776 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

idea that the section was necessary to ensure the continued availability of free 
public television. On this score the Court's basic solution-a  remand-was 
quite reasonable, even if the statute was treated as content-based. On remand, 
the question would be whether content regulation of this sort was sufficiently 
justified as a means of saving free public television. 

The  analysis for section 5  should be  quite different. The provision of 
educational and public-affairs programming is entirely legitimate, certainly if 
there is no substantial intrusion on speakers who want to provide another kind 
of  programming.87 The  validity of  section 5  thus should have  turned on 
whether it was sufficiently tailored to the provision of educational and public- 
affairs programming. Perhaps Justice O'Connor was right in doubting whether 
adequate tailoring could be shown; in any case this is the issue to be decided. 
In short, both provisions are content-based, but this phrase should not be used 
as a talisman. The question was whether the content-based restrictions were 
sufficiently connected with legitimate goals. An approach of this kind would 
have been the most reasonable one to take. 

On the other hand, within the marketplace model, the very existence of 
two  separate sections is  problematic. Why should the government concern 
itself with whether stations are commercial or noncommercial? Marketplace 
advocates would find the Act objectionable simply by virtue of the fact that 
it distinguishes between commercial and noncommercial stations. To them, the 
fact that two different sections impose different carriage requirements shows 
that there is content discrimination in the Act. 

Under the two prevailing free speech models, then, it would make sense 
either to  treat section 5  along a  different track from section 4  (the better 
approach), or to question them both as content-discriminatory on their face. 
Both  of  these  approaches would have been  quite plausible. Remarkably, 
however, no Justice in Turner took either approach. Indeed, no Justice drew 
any distinction at all between section 4 and section 5, and no Justice urged that 
the  existence  of  two  different sections  showed  that  there  was  content 
discrimination. 

This is a genuine puzzle. Why did no Justice invoke Madisonian goals to 
treat section 5 more generously? Why did no Justice invoke content neutrality 
to complain about the existence of two separate sections? As we have seen, 
none of the parties raised the issue, and perhaps the question was not squarely 
presented, permitting the Court to  decide the case  on  a  narrower and less 
controversial ground. Under the approach of both the majority and the dissent, 
it may not have been necessary to answer the hard questions of whether and 
how government might promote educational and public-affairs programming. 

87.  Thus it could be imagined that a serious question would be raised if Congress said that a humor 

magazine had to educate too, or that speakers on a comedy show had to have serious bits as well. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1777 

But  why  did  no  Justice suggest that the  two  sections embodied content 
discrimination? This question is much harder to answer. 

Perhaps the Court had something like the following in mind. The two 
sections involve speakers rather than speech; they point to the nature of the 
station, not to the nature of the programming. Thus the Act may perhaps be 
understood as imposing a speaker-based restriction of the sort that the Court 
found legitimate insofar as the Act applied only to cable television. 

On reflection, however, this response seems implausible. The kind of 
speaker-based restriction reflected in the two sections has everything to do with 
content. The definition of section 5 stations is inextricably intertwined with the 
speech  offered by  such  stations. So  too  with the  definition of  section 4 
stations. The Court therefore appears to  have blundered in  failing to  find 
content discrimination in the existence of two separate sections. Perhaps the 
content discrimination could have been justified if the Court had attended to 
separate justifications for the two provisions, or at least the Court might have 
upheld section 5 if it could have met Justice O'Connor's concerns. I return to 
this point below. 

C.  A Paradox and a Provisional Solution: Madisonians and Marketeers vs. 

Turner? 

Now let us proceed to a larger matter. As I have noted, the Turner Court 
did not accept a Madisonian model of  free speech. The distinction between 
content-based and content-neutral restrictions was crucial to the opinion, and 
that distinction hardly emerges from a Madisonian model, which would carve 
up the free speech universe in a different way. But the Court certainly did not 
accept the marketplace model in its entirety. In addition to emphasizing the 
legitimacy of ensuring access to free programming-and of doing so through 
regulation rather than subsidy-the  Court stressed more or less  democratic 
justifications  for  the  must-carry rules,  including  broad  exposure  to 
programming on public issues, and to a multiplicity of sources of information. 
It might be argued both that Turner is insufficiently responsive to marketplace 
concerns and that Turner is a Madisonian failure insofar as the Turner model 
appears to  do  nothing about the problem of  low-quality programming and 
insufficient exposure to public debate. 

1.  The Paradox 

An especially distinctive feature of the Court's opinion is its ambivalence 
about the legitimacy of  governmental efforts to promote diversity. There is 
ambivalence on this score because while the Court invoked diversity as a goal, 
it  also  made its  skepticism about content-based regulation quite clear, and 
many imaginable efforts to promote diversity are content-based. Consider the 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1778 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

fairness doctrine as well as many European initiatives to promote diversity in 
the media.88 The Court found it  necessary to  insist that Congress was not 
trying, through the must-carry rules, to ensure exposure to local news sources. 
On the other hand, the Court suggested that a content-neutral effort to 
promote diversity may well be justified. Hence the Court offered a number of 
justifications for regulation of cable technology. As we have seen, the Court 
expressed concern over the cable operator's "gatekeeper[] control over most 
(if not all) of the television programming that is channeled into the subscriber's 
home."89 The  Court emphasized "[t]he potential for  abuse of  this  private 
power over a central avenue of communication."90 The Court stressed that the 
First Amendment "does not disable the government from taking steps to ensure 
that private interests not restrict, through physical control of a critical pathway 
of  communication, the free flow of  information and ideas."91 And thus the 
Court emphasized "the importance of local broadcasting units" in promoting 
attention to  public issues.92 In these ways, the Turner opinion contains an 
echo, albeit a faint one, of the highly Madisonian analysis in Red Lion. 

There is therefore an important paradox at the heart of the Turner model. 
The paradox emerges from (a) the presumptive invalidity of  content-based 
restrictions, accompanied by (b) the insistence by the Court on the legitimacy 
of  the goals of  providing access to a multiplicity of  sources and outlets for 
exchanges on issues of local concern. This is a paradox because if these goals 
are legitimate, content-based regulation designed to promote them might well 
be  thought legitimate too.  If  government may  engage  in  content-neutral 
restrictions designed self-consciously to provide access to many sources, why 
may it  not favor certain speech directly? The most natural way to provide 
certain kinds of programming is through content-based regulation.93 

2.  Substantive Doctrine and Institutional Constraints 

The question then arises: If diversity is a legitimate goal, why might the 
Turner model be superior to the Madisonian model? One possible view is that 
the Turner model is not superior, but that it should be regarded instead as a 
cautious and incompletely theorized step94 that appropriately leaves gaps for 

88.  See SUNSTEIN, supra note 12, at 77-81  (noting that several European high courts have found that 
governments were not merely permitted to promote diversity in the media, but were constitutionally obliged 
to do so); see also ELI NOAM, TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

IN EUROPE (1992). 

89.  Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 114 S. Ct. 2445, 2466 (1994). 
90.  Id. 
91.  Id. 
92.  Id. at 2469. 
93.  Cf. Metro Broadcasting v. FCC, 497 U.S. 547 (1990) (upholding affirmative action for minority 
owners on  theory that this  indirect, content-neutral approach would  provide broadcasting of  certain 
content-even  though nondiscriminatory alternative, pursuing that very same goal directly, would probably 
be unconstitutional). 

94.  We might even  see the outcome as an incompletely theorized agreement, a distinctive kind of 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1779 

future refinement. Perhaps the Turner model will have to be elaborated, as it 
clearly can be, to make clear that well-tailored efforts to promote diversity and 
broader democratic goals are legitimate even if they are content-based. 

For reasons to be  suggested, this would indeed be a sensible step. But 
there is another point. Despite appearances, there is good reason for the Turner 
Court's skepticism toward content-based regulation, and the reason operates by 
reference to institutional considerations involving the distinctive characteristics 
of judge-made doctrine. Those considerations have everything to do with the 
potential superiority of  (not  entirely accurate) rules  of  law  over  highly 
individuated, case-by-case judgments. This defense of Turner says not that the 
case  reflects the best  understanding of  the substantive content of  the free 
speech principle, but that it may be the best way for the Supreme Court to 
police that principle in light of its institutional limits. 

In brief: In light of the nature of the current electronic media, in which 
scarcity is  a  decreasing problem, a  presumptive requirement of  content 
neutrality may  well  be  the  best  way  for judges  to  police  objectionable 
governmental purposes, especially in the form of viewpoint discrimination.95 
If government favors speech of certain kinds through content regulation, there 
is always a risk that it is actually trying to favor certain views. For example, 
a  regulatory requirement of  discussion of  abortion, or  race relations, or 
feminism would raise serious fears to the effect that government is seeking to 
promote certain positions. Through insisting on content neutrality-again, at 
least  as  a  presumption-courts  can  minimize the  risk  of  impermissibly 
motivated legislation, and they can do so while limiting the institutional burden 
faced by judges making more individualized judgments. The presumption in 
favor  of  content neutrality has  the  fortunate consequence of  making it 
unnecessary for  courts to  answer hard case-by-case questions about the 
legitimacy of diverse initiatives, many of which will, predictably, be based on 
illegitimate motivations. 

We might thus offer a  cautious defense of  the Turner model over the 
Madisonian model. The defense would depend on the view that the Turner 
model may well best combine the virtues of (a) judicial administrability (a real 
problem  for  Madisonians96), (b)  appreciation of  the  risk  of  viewpoint 
discrimination (a real problem for Madisonians too), and (c) an understanding 
of the hazards of relying on markets alone (addressed by Turner insofar as the 
Court allows Congress considerable room to maneuver). For this reason, the 

judicial judgment. See  Cass  R.  Sunstein, Incompletely Theorized Agreements, 108  HARV.  L.  REV. 
(forthcoming May 1995). 

95.  See  the  valuable analysis  in  Elena  Kagan, Private Speech,  Public  Purpose: The  Role  of 
Governmental Motive in First Amendment Doctrine (unpublished manuscript, on file with author), on which 
I draw for this and the preceding paragraph. 

96.  See Krattenmaker & Powe, supra note 21. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1780 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

Turner model  may  well  be  better, at  least  in  broad outline,  than  the 
Madisonian and marketplace alternatives. 

3.  Countervailing Considerations 

There are important countervailing considerations. As indicated above,97 
the application of  the Turner model to technologies other than cable raises 
serious problems, for  cable  presents the  special  question of  "bottleneck 
control." Many of  the other new technologies raise questions not involving 
anything like  "bottleneck control," which was  central to  the resolution in 
Turner. In  general, regulation of  the  Internet raises no  such problem. In 
Turner, moreover, the principal access issue was the right to hear; in other 
cases, the central issue, also one of  access, will  involve the right to  speak. 
Sometimes the principal question will be whether certain speakers can have 
access to certain audiences. In other contexts, regulatory efforts may involve 
educational goals more straightforwardly, as in guarantees of free media time 
to  candidates or  in  provisions to  ensure public-affairs programming or 
programming for children. 

As  I  have argued, moreover, speech should not be treated as  a  simple 
commodity, especially in a period dominated by attention to sensationalistic 
scandals and low-quality fare.98 In  light  of  the  cultural consequences of 
broadcasting-through, for example, its effects on democratic processes and 
children's education-we  should not think of  electronic media as "just .. 
appliance[s]," or  as  "toaster[s] with pictures."99 At  least part of  the First 
Amendment inquiry should turn on the relationship between what broadcasters 
provide and what a  well-functioning democracy requires. If  we  have any 
sympathy for Brandeis' judgment-shared by Madison19-that "the greatest 
menace  to  freedom is  an  inert people," we  will  acknowledge that the 
marketplace model may not perform an adequate educative role, and that a 
system of free markets may well disserve democratic ideals. 

Of  course there are hard issues  about which bodies are authorized to 
decide what programming ought to be  offered.101 But the Turner model is 
vulnerable insofar as it brackets the deeper issues and addresses Madisonian 
concerns with the useful but crude doctrinal categories "content-based" and 
"content-neutral." Those categories are crude because they are not tightly 

97.  See the introduction to Part III supra. 
98.  There is  of  course a  large and insufficiently analyzed problem: defining the relevant market. 
Perhaps those interested in Madisonian goals should focus on the entirety of the free speech market, seeing 
magazines, broadcasting, and even books as aspects of a single market, to be taken as a whole. I cannot 
address this issue here. 

99.  See Nossiter, supra note 3. 
100.  See supra text accompanying note 1. 
101.  See KRATTENMAKER  & POWE, supra note 25 (stressing this problem). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1781 

connected with any plausible conception of  the basic point or points of  a 
system of free speech. 

Some  qualifications of  the  Turner model,  pointing  in  Madisonian 
directions, are  therefore desirable. The  majority does  not  foreclose  such 
qualifications, and Justice O'Connor's dissenting opinion actually makes some 
space for arguments of this sort. I will suggest some important qualifications 
that are nonetheless consistent with the general spirit of Turner itself. 

V.  SPEECH, EMERGING MEDIA, AND CYBERSPACE 

A.  New Possibilities and New Problems: Referenda in Cyberspace and 

Related Issues 

It  should  be  unnecessary to  emphasize that  the  explosion  of  new 
technologies opens up extraordinary new possibilities. As the Department of 
Commerce's predictions suggest, ordinary people might ultimately participate 
in  a  communications network in which hundreds of  millions of  people, or 
more, can communicate with each other and indeed with all sorts of  service 
providers-libraries, doctors, accountants, lawyers, legislators, shopkeepers, 
pharmacies, grocery stores, museums, Internal Revenue Service employees, 
restaurants, and more. If you need an answer to a medical question, you may 
be able to push a few buttons and receive a reliable answer. If you want to 
order food for delivery, you would be able to do so in a matter of seconds. If 
you have a question about sports or music or clothing, or about the eighteenth 
century, you  could get  an instant answer. People can now purchase many 
goods on their credit cards without leaving home. It may soon be possible to 
receive a  college  education without leaving home.102 As  I  have suggested, 
the very notions of "location" and "home" will change in extraordinary ways. 
Many of the relevant changes have already occurred. Consider the fact that 
in 1989, there were about 47.5 million cable television subscribers, accounting 
for 52.5% of television households-whereas by 1995, there were 59 million 
subscribers, accounting for 61.8% of  television households.103 Consider the 
following chart:'04 

102.  See In 2050,  Computers May Be  Collegian's "Campus", CHI. TRIB., Nov. 7,  1994, at 4.  It is 
revealing that many of  the footnotes in this Essay come from newspapers and weekly news magazines. 
With respect to communications technologies, development is occurring so rapidly that other sources are 
often obsolete upon publication. 

103.  See DirecTv a Big Hit, supra note 27. 
104.  Id. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1782 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

Year 

Millions of 
TV 
Households 

Millions 
of  Homes 
Passed 
by Cable 

Homes 
Passed 
as a % 
of TV 
Homes 

Millions of 
Cable 
Households 

Cable 
Subscribers 
as a % of 
Homes 
Passed 

Cable 
Penetration 
of TV 
Households 
(%) 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

92.1105 

90.4 

92.1 

93.1 

93.1 

94.2 

95.4 

80.0 

84.4 

87.2 

88.9 

90.1 

91.3 

92.5 

88.5 

91.6 

93.7 

96.5 

96.8 

96.9 

97.0 

47.5 

50.5 

52.6 

54.3 

56.2 

57.2 

59.0 

59.4 

59.8 

60.3 

61.1 

62.4 

62.7 

63.8 

52.5 

54.8 

56.5 

59.0 

60.4 

60.7 

61.8 

TABLE 1. 

The number of  subscribers to  major online services is  also  increasing 
rapidly,  with  6.3  million  American  subscribers.10 Consider  also  the 
following chart:107 

Technology 

Number of Users 

Internet 

30-40  million 

CompuServe 

America  Online 

Prodigy 

The  WELL 

Women's  Wire 

2,700,000 

2,300,000 

2,000,000 

11,000 

1300 

TABLE 2. 

The forerunners of the "information superhighway" are thus increasingly 
available to large numbers of people. In this Section, I discuss some large and 
general questions about communications in  a  democracy; I  turn to  more 
specific policy issues in Sections B and C. 

105.  Revised downward based on  1990 census. 
106.  On-Line Computer Services Had Another Boom Year, Survey Says, L.A. TIMES, Jan. 14,  1995, 

at D2. 

107.  This chart was compiled on the basis of data in John Flinn, The Line on On-Line Services, S.F. 
EXAMINER, Mar. 1,  1995, at Bi,  and Philip Elmer-DeWitt, Welcome to Cyberspace, TIME, Spring 1995 
(Special Issue), at 9. In some countries the number of Internet users has grown more than 1000% in the 
past three years. Id. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1783 

1.  Economics and Democracy 

Technological developments enjoyed by so many people bring with them 
extraordinary promise  and  opportunities from  the  standpoints of  both 
Madisonianism and  the  marketplace. From nearly108 any  point  of  view, 
nostalgia for preexisting speech markets makes little sense. 

The economic point is obvious, for the costs of transacting-of  obtaining 
information and  entering  into  mutually beneficial  deals-will  decrease 
enormously, and hence it will be much easier for consumers to get what they 
want, whatever it  is  that they want. To say the least, a  shopping trip-for 
groceries, books, medicines, housing, trial transcripts, clothing-will  be much 
simpler than it now is; it may well be significantly simpler now than it was 
when  this  Essay  was  first written.'09 In  these  ways  the  new  information 
technologies are a great boon. 

At the same time, and equally important, there are potential democratic 
gains, since communication among citizens and between citizens and their 
representatives will be far easier. Citizens may be able to express their views 
to public officials and to receive answers more effectively. To state a view or 
ask a question on the issue of  the day, no town meeting need be arranged. 
High-quality, substantive discussions may  well  be  possible  among large 
numbers of people; town meetings that are genuinely deliberative may become 
commonplace. Voting may occur through the Internet. This is one of the most 
intriguing features of cyberspace.110 It will be possible to obtain a great deal 
of information about candidates and their positions. 

In fact much of this has already occurred. The practice of journalism has 
changed in  the  sense that reporters communicate regularly with readers.1"1 
Before the  1994 elections, public library computers delivered considerable 
information about the candidates via the World Wide Web of the Internet.112 
The Web also allows people to  see photographs of  candidates and to  have 
access to dozens of pages of information about them and their positions. The 
Web may be used nationally for these purposes as early as 1996. A number of 
elected officials-in  the White House, the Senate, and the House-now  have 
e-mail addresses and communicate with their constituents in cyberspace. 

In Minnesota, five candidates for governor and three candidates for the 
senate  participated in  debates on  electronic mail.113 In  1993,  President 

108.  The qualification is necessary because of threats posed by the new technologies to the possibility 
of  commonly  shared experience and to  exposure to  positions contrary to  one's  own.  See  infra text 
accompanying notes 121-28. 

109.  See Barrett Seaman, The Future Is Already Here, TIME, Spring 1995 (Special Issue), at 30-33. 
110.  See generally RHEINGOLD, supra note 6. 
111.  See David S. Jackson, Extra! Readers Talk Back!, TIME, Spring 1995 (Special Issue), at 60. 
112.  Peter H. Lewis, Voters and Candidates Meet on Information Superhighway, N.Y. TIMES, Nov. 

6,  1994, at 30. 
113.  Id. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1784 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

Clinton established connections with millions of  e-mail users, putting his 
address into their system and inviting them to give reactions on public issues. 
Candidates generally are obtaining and publicizing e-mail addresses.114 Thus 
presidential candidate Lamar Alexander launched his campaign with a forum 
via  America Online, in which he spoke to all those who chose to join the 
forum.11' The Madisonian framework was  based partly on  the  assumption 
that  large-scale  substantive  discussions  would  not  be  practicable.116 
Technology may well render that assumption anachronistic. 

The result may be  of  particular benefit for people of  moderate or low 
income. People without substantial means may nonetheless make their views 
heard. So too relatively poor candidates may be able to communicate more 
cheaply.117 In this  way  the new  communications technologies may relieve 
some  of  the  pressure for  campaign finance restrictions by  promoting the 
Madisonian goal of political equality.118 In the midst of economic inequality, 
perhaps technological advances can make political equality a more realistic 
goal. 119 

Moreover, education about public issues will be much simpler and cheaper. 
The government, and relevant interest groups, will be able to state their cases 
far more easily. And after touching a few buttons, people will be able to have 
access  to  substantial information about policy  dilemmas-possible  wars, 
environmental risks and regulations, legal developments, trials, medical reform, 
and a good deal more. Consider as simply one example, the astonishing service 
LEXIS Counsel Connect. With this  service a  lawyer can  have  access  to 
essentially all proposed laws. A lawyer can also join substantive "discussion 
groups," dealing with, for example, the Simpson trial, recent tax developments, 
risk  regulation, securities arbitration, affirmative action, LEXIS  Counsel 
Connect, cyberspace, the First Amendment in cyberspace, and much more. The 
proliferation of law-related discussion groups on law-related topics is one tiny 
illustration of  a remarkable cultural development. Thus the Usenet includes 
more than 10,000 discussion groups, dealing with particle physics, ring-tailed 
lemurs, and Rush Limbaugh, among countless others.120 

114.  See Howard Fineman with Stephen A. Tuttle, The Brave New World of Cybertribes, NEWSWEEK, 

Feb. 27,  1995, at 30-33. 
115.  See id. at 30. 
116.  See THE FEDERALIST No. 70 (Alexander Hamilton). 
117.  See Lewis, supra note 112. 
118.  Thus Madison listed "establishing a political equality among all" as the first means of combatting 
the "evil" of  parties. See James Madison, Parties, NAT'L GAZETTE, Jan. 23,  1792, reprinted in  14 THE 
PAPERS OF JAMES MADISON 197-98 (Robert A. Rutland et al. eds., 1983). On the risks of government by 
referendum, see DAVID B. MAGLEBY, DIREcT LEGISLATION (1984). 

119.  See the discussion of Vice President Gore's proposals in RHEINGOLD, 

supra note 6, at 304, which 

calls for avoiding "information haves" and "have-nots." 

120.  Elmer-DeWitt, supra note 107, at 4, 9-10.  A special advantage of the Internet is its grassroots, 
"bottom-up" quality. In contrast to the mass media, in which a large broadcaster speaks to millions, the 
Internet allows individual citizens to  spread news or commentary to one person, or to  hundreds, or to 
thousands, or  to  millions. The  problem of  access to  the  media is  in  this  respect greatly reduced. A 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1785 

2.  Dangers 

At least from the standpoint of the founding era, and from the standpoint 
of democratic theory, the new technology also carries with it significant risks. 
There are two major problems. The first is  an absence of  deliberation. The 
second is an increase in social balkanization. 

a.  Absence of Deliberation 

The  Madisonian view  of  course  places  a  high  premium on  public 
deliberation, and  it  disfavors  immediate  and  inadequately considered 
governmental reactions to  pressures from the  citizenry. 121  The  American 
polity is a republic, not a direct democracy, and for legitimate reasons; direct 
democracy is unlikely to provide successful governance, for it is too likely to 
be free from deliberation and unduly subject to short-time reactions and sheer 
manipulation. From the inception of the American system a large point of the 
system of  republicanism has been to  "refine and enlarge the public view" 
through the system of representation.122 

This process of refinement and enlargement is endangered by decreased 
costs of communication. As I have noted, discussions in cyberspace may well 
be  both  substantive and deliberative; electronic mail  and the  Internet in 
particular  hold  out  considerable  promise  on 
score.123  But 
communications between citizens and their representatives may also be reactive 
to  short-term impulses,  and  may  consist  of  simple  referenda results 
insufficiently filtered by reflection and discussion. 

this 

In the current period, there is thus a serious risk that low-cost or costless 
communication will increase government's responsiveness to myopic or poorly 
considered public outcries, or to sensationalistic or sentimental anecdotes that 
are a poor basis for governance. Although the apparent presence of  diverse 
public voices is often celebrated, electoral campaigns and treatment of public 
issues already suffer from myopia and sensationalism,124 and in a way that 
compromises founding ideals.  On  this  count it  is  hardly clear that new 
technologies will  improve matters. They may even make things worse. The 
phenomenon of "talk radio" has achieved considerable attention in this regard. 
It is surely desirable to provide forums in which citizens can speak With one 

decentralized system has the distinct virtue of promoting Jeffersonian aspirations to citizenship. 

121.  See THE FEDERALIST No. 10 (James Madison); see also JOSEPH M. BESSETTE, THE MILD VOICE 

OF REASON (1994). 

RHEINGOLD, supra note 6. 

122.  THE FEDERALIST No.  10 (James Madison). 
123.  See  supra  text  accompanying note  120  (discussing LEXIS  Counsel  Connect); see  also 

124.  See generally SHANTO IYENGAR, Is ANYONE RESPONSIBLE? (1992); SHANTO IYENGAR & DONALD 
R.  KINDER, NEWS THAT MATTERS  (1987); PHYLLIS KANISS, MAKING LOCAL NEWS (1989).  See  also 
STEPHEN BREYER, BREAKING THE VICIOUS CIRCLE 33-51  (1993). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1786 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

another, especially on  public issues. But it  is  not desirable if  government 
officials are reacting to immediate reactions to misleading or sensationalistic 
presentations of issues. 

Ross  Perot's  conception of  an  "electronic town  meeting" is  hardly 
consistent with founding aspirations, at least if the meeting has the power to 
make decisions all by itself. Democracy by soundbite is hardly a perfect ideal. 
New  technologies  may  make  democracy by  soundbite far  more  likely. 
Everything depends on how those technologies are deployed in communicating 
to public officials. 

We can make these points more vivid with a thought experiment. Imagine 
that through the new technologies, the communications options were truly 
limitless. Each person could design his own communications universe. Each 
person could see those things that he wanted to see, and only those things. 
Insulation from unwelcome material would be costless. Choice of particular 
subjects and points of view would be costless too. Would such a system be a 
communications utopia? Would it fulfill First Amendment aspirations?125 

The answer is by no means simple. Of course a system of this kind would 
have advantages. It might well overcome some of the problems produced by 
extremes of  wealth and poverty, at least insofar as poor people could both 
speak and hear far more cheaply. But the aspiration to an informed citizenry 
may not be well served. Under the hypothesized system, perhaps most people 
would be rarely or poorly informed. Perhaps their consumption choices would 
disserve democratic ideals.126 If the system of free expression is designed to 
ensure against an "inert people," we cannot know, a priori, whether a system 
of well-functioning free markets would be desirable. 

b.  Balkanization and Self-Insulation 

The hypothesized system would have another problem: It would allow 
people to screen out ideas, facts, or accounts of facts that they find disturbing. 
In the current system, people are often confronted with ideas and facts that 
they find uncongenial. This is  an important democratic good; it  promotes 
education and discussion. A well-functioning system of free expression is one 
in which people are exposed to ideas that compete with their own, so that they 
can test their own views and understand other perspectives even when they 
disagree. This process can produce a capacity for empathy and understanding, 
so  that other people are not dehumanized even across sharp differences in 
judgment and perspective. Important forms of commonality and respect might 
emerge simply by virtue of presenting the perspectives of others from others' 
points of view. 

125.  For a description of the possibility of such a system, see Volokh, supra note 29. 
126.  On the issue of choice, see infra part V.B.2. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1787 

A  system of  individually designed communications options could, by 
contrast, result in  a  high degree of  balkanization, in  which people are not 
presented with new or contrary perspectives. Such a nation could not easily 
satisfy democratic and deliberative goals. In such a  nation, communication 
among people with different perspectives might be far more difficult than it 
now is; mutual intelligibility may become difficult or even impossible. In such 
a  nation,  there  may  be  little  commonality among  people  with  diverse 
commitments, as one group caricatures another or understands it by means of 
simple slogans that debase reality and eliminate mutual understanding. 

These suggestions are far from hypothetical. They capture a significant part 
of  the reality of  current communications in  America. They create serious 
political risks. 

3.  A Caution About Responses 

It is far from clear how government can or should overcome these various 
problems. Certainly government should not be  permitted to  censor citizen 
efforts to  communicate with representatives, even  if  such communications 
carry risks to deliberative ideals. It does seem clear, however, that government 
should be cautious about spurring on its own the use of new technologies to 
promote immediate, massive public reactions to popular issues. Government 
by  referendum is  at  best  a  mixed  blessing,  with  possible  unfortunate 
consequences wherever it is tried.127 The electronic media should not be used 
to create a form of government by referendum. Regulatory efforts to facilitate 
communication need not be transformed into an effort to abandon republican 
goals. 

Rather than spurring referenda in cyberspace, or referenda by soundbite, 
government should seek to promote deliberation and reflection as part of the 
process of eliciting popular opinion. 28 Any such efforts might well be made 
part of  a  general strategy for turning new communications technologies to 
constitutional ends. As we have seen, electronic mail has considerable promise 
on this score. 

B.  Some Policy Dilemmas 

A large question for both constitutional law and public policy has yet to 
receive a  full  democratic or a judicial answer: To what extent, if  any, do 
Madisonian ideals have  a  place  in  the  world of  new  technologies, or  in 
cyberspace? Some people think that the absence of  scarcity eliminates the 

127.  See generally MAGLEBY, supra note 118. 
128.  See  the discussion of  the deliberative opinion poll  in  JAMES S.  FISHKIN, DEMOCRACY AND 

DELIBERATION 1-2,  84 (1991). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1788 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

argument for governmental regulation, at least if  it is  designed to promote 
attention to public issues, to increase diversity, or to raise the quality of public 
debate.'29 If  outlets are unlimited, why  is  regulation of  any value? In the 
future, people will be able to listen to whatever they want, perhaps to speak 
to whomever they choose. Ought this not to be a constitutional ideal? 

The question is meant to answer itself, but perhaps enough has been said 
to show that it hardly does that. Recall first that structural regulation, assigning 
property rights and making agreements possible, is  a precondition for well- 
functioning markets. Laissez-faire is a hopeless misdescription of free markets. 
A  large government role,  with coercive features, is  required to  maintain 
markets. Part of  the  role  also  requires steps  to  prevent monopoly  and 
monopolistic practices. 

Moreover, Madisonian goals need not be thought anachronistic in a period 
of  infinite outlets. In  a  system of  infinite outlets, the  goal  of  consumer 
sovereignty may well be adequately promoted. That goal has a distinguished 
place in both law and public policy. But it should not be identified with the 
Constitution's free  speech  guarantee. The  Constitution does  not  require 
consumer sovereignty; for the most part, the decision whether to qualify or 
replace that goal with Madisonian aspirations should be made democratically 
rather than judicially. A  democratic citizenry armed with  a  constitutional 
guarantee of free speech need not see consumer sovereignty as its fundamental 
aspiration.130 Certainly it may choose consumer sovereignty if  it  likes. But 
it  may  seek  instead to  ensure high-quality fare for children, even  if  this 
approach departs from consumer satisfaction. It may seek more generally to 
promote educational and public-affairs programming. 

The choice between these alternatives should be made through the political 
branches rather than as a matter of constitutional law. In this Section, I try to 
support this basic conclusion, and to do so in a way that is attuned to many of 
the pathologies of "command-and-control" regulation. The goal for the future 
is to incorporate Madisonian aspirations in a regulatory framework that is alert 
to the difficulty of anticipating future tastes and developments, that sees that 
incentives are better than commands, and that attempts to  structure future 
change rather than to dictate its content. 

129.  See KRAnIENMAKER &  POWE, supra note 25. 
130.  It  is  revealing in  this regard that many European nations do  not identify their free  speech 
principle with consumer sovereignty. See  SUNSTEIN, supra note  12, at 77-81.  The experience of  the 
Bundesverfassungsgericht (German Constitutional Court) is  of  special interest, for the Court has self- 
consciously decided that democratic aspirations require the government to regulate the broadcast media to 
create a  forum for speakers with a  broad range of  interests and opinions. See  DAVID P. CURRIE, THE 
CONSTTUTION OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY 227-33  (1994);  CASs  R. SUNSTEIN, supra note 
12, at 77-79  (discussing recent Bundesverfassungsgericht cases). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1789 

1.  Advertising 

It  is  commonly  thought  that  viewers  and  listeners  purchase  a 
communications product, and that their purchase decisions should be respected; 
but this picture is not altogether right. The decisions of viewers and listeners 
are different from most consumption decisions, in the sense that viewers and 
listeners often pay nothing for programming, and often they are, in a sense, the 
product that is being sold. For much commercial programming, a key source 
of revenues is advertisers, and programmers deliver viewers to advertisers in 
return for money. For this reason the broadcasting market is not a conventional 
one in which people purchase their preferred products. People's viewing and 
listening time is bought and sold. 

There  is  an  important consequence for  the  substantive content  of 
broadcasting: What is provided in a communications market is not the same 
as what viewers would like to  see. Advertisers have some power over the 
content  of  communication, for  they  may  withdraw their  support from 
disfavored programming. They may withdraw their support not simply because 
the  programming does  not  attract viewers,  but  also  because  (a)  the 
programming is  critical of  the  particular advertisers, (b)  it  is  critical of 
commerce is general, (c) it stirs up a controversial reaction from some part of 
the  audience, or  (d)  it  is  "depressing" or creates "an unfavorable buying 
atmosphere." There is  a great deal of  evidence that advertiser control does 
affect  the  content of  programming."3' Controversial programs have  been 
punished; presentations of  contested issues,  such  as  abortion, have  been 
affected by advertisers' goals.132 

In  an  era  of  numerous options,  the  influence of  advertising over 
programming content should be less troublesome, since controversial points of 
view should find an outlet. Certainly there is no such problem on the Internet. 
But there will nonetheless continue to be a structural problem in broadcasting 
markets, since viewers' demand for programs will not be fully responsible for 
the programs that are actually provided. Many imaginable proposals could help 
counter this problem. Such proposals should not be found unconstitutional even 
if consumer sovereignty is the overriding policy goal.'33 

2.  "Choice" and Culture 

If we put the questions raised by advertisers to one side, we might urge 
that there is a decisive argument in favor of the marketplace model and against 
Madisonianism. The  marketplace ideal  values  "choice,"  whereas  the 

131.  See the extensive discussion in BAKER, supra note 37, at 44-70;  see also SUNSTEIN, supra note 

12, at 62-66. 

132.  See BAKER, supra note 37, at 55-65. 
133.  See id. at 83-117. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1790 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

Madisonian alternative can be seen to reflect a form of dangerous paternalism, 
or disrespect for people's diverse judgments about entertainment options.'34 
Perhaps Madisonianism is  illiberal insofar as it does not respect the widely 
divergent conceptions of the good that are reflected in consumption choices. 
The argument is certainly plausible. In most arenas, consumers are allowed 
to  choose  as  they  wish,  and  governmental interference requires special 
justification. But in this context, at least, the argument from choice is quite 
unconvincing, for it wrongly takes people's consumption choices as definitive 
or exhaustive of "choice." In fact the notion of "choice" is a complex one that 
admits of  no  such simple understanding.'35 In a democratic society, people 
make choices as citizens too. They make choices in democratic arenas as well 
as in stores and before their computers. What those choices are depends on the 
context in which they are made. 

For this reason, the insistence on respect for "choice," as a defense of the 
marketplace model, sets  up the legal problem in  a  question-begging way. 
People do make choices as consumers, and these choices should perhaps be 
respected. But those choices are heavily geared to the particular setting in 
which they are made-programming consumption. They do not represent some 
acontextual entity  called  "choice." In  fact  there is  no  such  acontextual 
entity. 

The question is not whether or not to respect "choice," but what sorts of 
choices  to  respect. More  particularly, the  question is  whether to  allow 
democratic choices to make inroads on consumption choices. In a free society, 
consumption choices should usually be respected. But the Constitution does not 
require this result, and in  some settings democratic judgments contrary to 
consumption choices  are  legitimate.  For  example,  a  requirement that 
broadcasters provide free media time for candidates might well receive broad 
public support, even if viewers would, at the relevant time, opt for commercial 
programming."37 There  should  be  no  constitutional barrier to  such  a 
requirement. 

The central point is that in their capacity as citizens assessing the speech 
market, people may well  make choices, or offer considered judgments, that 
diverge from their choices  as  consumers.138 Acting  through their elected 
representatives, the public may well seek to promote (for example) educational 

134.  See, e.g., Syracuse Peace Council v. Television Station WTVH, 2 F.C.C.R. 5043, 5052 (1987); 

KRATrENMAKER &  POWE, supra note 25. 

135.  See ELIZABETH ANDERSON, VALUE IN ETHICS AND ECONOMICS 190-216  (1993). 
136.  See Richard H. Pildes & Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 U. CHI. L.  REV. 

1, 78-79  (1995); Amartya Sen, Internal Consistency of Choice, 61 ECONOMETRICA 495 (1993). 

137.  Of course it  is possible that any regulatory requirements would be futile, since people might 
simply change the channel, or cease watching at all. This may be a good objection, as a matter of policy, 
to any particular initiative. The important point is that it is an objection of policy, not of constitutional law. 
138.  See HOWARD MARGOLIS, SELFISHNESS, ALTRUISM, AND RATIONALITY (1987); Cass R. Sunstein, 

Preferences and Politics, 20  PHIL. &  PUB. AFF. 3  (1991). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1791 

programming, attention to  public issues,  and diverse views.  Perhaps the 
public-or  a majority acting in its democratic capacity-believes  that education 
and discussion of public issues are both individual and collective goods. Any 
system of expression has cultural consequences; it helps create and sustain a 
certain kind of  culture. Perhaps the public wants to  ensure a  culture of  a 
certain sort,  notwithstanding consumption choices.139 Perhaps it  seeks  to 
protect children and adolescents, and sees regulation of broadcasting as a way 
of accomplishing that goal. Perhaps people believe that their own consumption 
choices are less than ideal, and that for justice-regarding or altruistic reasons, 
or because of their basic commitments and judgments, regulations should force 
broadcasters or cable operators to improve on existing low-quality fare. 

Perhaps people seek and hence choose to ensure something like a political 
community, not in the sense of  a place where everyone believes the same 
thing, but in the sense of a polity in which people are generally aware of the 
issues that are important to the future of the polity. Perhaps people think that 
the broadcasting media should have a degree of continuity with the educational 
system, in the sense that broad dissemination of knowledge and exposure to 
different views  are part of  what citizens in  a  democratic polity  deserve. 
Perhaps people believe that many citizens do not value certain high-quality 
programming partly because they have not been exposed to it, and perhaps 
experiments are designed to see if tastes for such programming can be fueled 
through exposure.140 

Would measures stimulated by such thoughts be objectionable, illegitimate, 
or even unconstitutional? Would they interfere in an impermissible way with 
something called "choice"? I do not believe so. Surely any such efforts should 
be policed by courts, so  as to ensure that government is  not discriminating 
against or in favor of certain viewpoints. The mere fact that the democratic 
majority seeks to overcome consumption choices is not legitimating by itself; 
the  democratic judgment may  be  unacceptable if  it  involves  viewpoint 
discrimination or content discrimination suggestive of  viewpoint bias. But 
rightly conceived, our constitutional heritage does not disable the public, acting 
through the constitutional channels, from improving the operation of the speech 
market in  the  ways  that I  have- suggested. Whether it  should do  so  is  a 
question to be answered democratically rather than judicially. 

139.  Compare the discussion of the right to free speech in RAZ, supra note 32, at 131-54. 

If I were to choose between living in a society which enjoys freedom of expression, but not 
having the right myself, or enjoying the right in a society which does not have it, I would have 
no hesitation in judging that my own personal interest is better served by the first option. 

Id. at 39. 

140.  Cf. JON ELSTER, SOUR GRAPES (1983) (discussing adaptive preferences); Sushil Bikhchandani 
et al., A  Theory of Fads Fashion, Custom and Culture Change as Informational Cascades, 100 J. POL. 
ECON. 992 (1992) (theorizing that because decisions based upon limited information are fragile, relatively 
unimportant new information may radically shift social equilibria). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1792 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

3.  Analogies 

An important issue for the future involves the use of old analogies in novel 
settings. The  new  technologies will  greatly increase the  opportunities for 
intrusive, fraudulent, harassing, threatening, libelous, or obscene speech.141 
With a few brief touches of a finger, a speaker is now be able to communicate 
to thousands or even millions of people-or  to pinpoint a message, perhaps a 
commercial, harassing, threatening invasive message, to a particular person. A 
libelous  message,  or  grotesque invasions of  privacy, can  be  sent  almost 
costlessly. Perhaps reputations and lives  will  be  easily  ruined or  at  least 
damaged. There are difficult questions about the extent to which an owner of 
a computer service might be held liable for what appears on that service.142 

At this stage, it remains unclear whether the conventional legal standards 
should be altered to meet such problems. For the most part, those standards 
generally seem an adequate start and must simply be adapted to new settings. 
For purposes of assessing cyberspace, there are often apt analogies on which 
to draw. In fact the legal culture has no way to think about the new problems 
except via analogies. The analogies are built into our very language: e-mail, 
electronic bulletin boards, cyberspace, cyberspaces,'43 and much more.1" 

Thus, for example, ordinary mail provides a  promising foundation on 
which to build the assessment of legal issues associated with electronic mail. 
It is far from clear that the standards for libelous or fraudulent communication 
must shift with the new  technologies. To be  sure, there will  be  new  and 
somewhat vexing occasions for evaluating the old standards. Judges may not 
understand the novel  situations, especially those involving the Internet. In 
particular, the  low  cost  of  sending and receiving electronic mail,  and of 
sending it  to  thousands or  millions  of  people,  may  produce some  new 
developments and put high pressure on old categories. Certainly it is likely that 
new and unanticipated problems will arise and a degree of judicial caution is 
therefore desirable in invoking the First Amendment. But it is by no means 
clear that the basic principles will themselves have to be much changed. 

4.  Access 

I have noted that the government has said that "universal access" is one 
of  its  goals  for the information superhighway. The question of  access has 

141.  See, e.g., Anne Wells Branscomb, Anonymity, Autonomy, and Accountability: Challenges to the 
First Amendment in Cyberspaces, 104 YALE L.J.  1639 (1995); Lawrence Lessig, The Path of Cyberlaw, 
104 YALE L.J. 1743 (1995); Volokh, supra note 29. 

142.  See infra note 169, discussing S. 314, the proposed Communications Decency Act of  1995. 
143.  See Branscomb, supra note 141. 
144.  See Lessig, supra note 141, at 1744; see also Cass R. Sunstein, On Analogical Reasoning, 106 
HARV. L. REv. 741 (1993); Cass R. Sunstein, Political Conflict and Legal Judgment, 1996 THE TANNER 
LECTuREs IN HUMAN VALUES (forthcoming). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1793 

several  dimensions. To  some  extent  it  is  designed to  ensure access  to 
broadcasting options for viewers and listeners-the  central problem in Turner. 
Here a particular concern is that poor people should not be deprived of access 
to  a  valuable  good.  Currently the  expense  of  Internet connections  is 
prohibitively  high  for  many  families.  This  may  entail  a  form  of 
disenfranchisement and to  some extent the problem is  to ensure access for 
certain speakers who want to reach part of the viewing or listening public. In 
cyberspace, of course, people are both listeners and speakers. 

Perhaps the goal of universal viewer or listener access should be viewed 
with skepticism. The government does not guarantee universal access to cars, 
or housing, or food, or even health care. It may seem puzzling to suggest that 
universal access to information technologies is an important social goal. But 
the suggestion can be shown to be less puzzling than it appears. Suppose, for 
example, that a certain network becomes a principal means by which people 
communicate  with  their  elected  representatives; suppose  that  such 
communications become a principal part of public deliberation and in that way 
ancillary to the right to vote. Suppose too that companies engage in a form of 
"electronic redlining," in which they bypass poorer areas, both rural and in the 
inner city.145 We  know  that a  poll  tax  is  unconstitutional because of  its 
harmful effects  on  political  equality.16 On  a  broadly similar principle, 
universal access to the network might be thought desirable. To be sure, such 
access would be most unlikely to be constitutionally mandated, since the right 
to vote is technically not involved. But universal access could be seen to be 
part of the goal of political equality. More generally, universal access might 
be  necessary if  the network is  to  serve its intended function of  promoting 
broad discussion between citizens and representatives. It is notable that at least 
seven million Americans, most of whom are poor, lack telephones, and hence 
are without basic access.147 

The point might be generalized. For any particular speaker, part of  the 
advantage of  having access to  a  certain means of  communication is  that 
everyone, or almost everyone, or a wide range of people, can be reached. The 
Postal Service, for example, is justified in part on the ground that a national 
system of mail is necessary or at least helpful for those who send mail; we can 
be assured that any letter can reach everyone. The claim is controversial. But 
perhaps a  requirement of  universal access  can  be  justified  not  as  an 
inefficient"48 effort to  subsidize people who would be  without service, but 
on the quite different ground that universal service is a way of promoting the 

145.  Suneel Ratan, A New Divide Between Haves and Have-Nots?, TIME,  Spring 1995 (Special Issue), 

146.  See Harper v. Virginia Bd. of Elections, 383 U.S. 663, 666 (1966). 
147.  See Ratan, supra note 145, at 26. 
148.  It is likely to be inefficient when compared with subsidies for people who are unable to afford 

at 25, 26. 

access. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1794 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

communicative interests of those who already have service. The interests of the 
latter group may well be promoted by ensuring that they can reach everyone, 
or nearly everyone. 

Arguments of  this  kind  have  been  used  throughout the  history  of 
telecommunications regulation. For most of the twentieth century, there have 
been cross-subsidies, as local companies with local monopolies have charged 
high  prices  to  certain customers (usually businesses)  with  which  they 
subsidized less profitable services. Perhaps a similar model would make sense 
for modern technologies. The issue is  already receiving considerable public 
attention.149 

There are, however, significant inefficiencies in  this  model  of  cross- 
subsidization,150 and a system of open-ended competition may well be better 
than one based on universal access. It may be that open-ended competition will 
provide universal access in any case, or something very close to it. Or it may 
be that open-ended competition, combined with selective subsidies, would be 
better than the regulatory approach. This question cannot easily be answered 
in the abstract. Certainly debate over universal access should not be resolved 
by constitutional fiat. This is an area for public debate and a large degree of 
experimentation. 

5.  Incentives Rather than Command-and-Control 

In  general, any  regulatory controls should take the  form of  flexible 
incentives rather than rigid commands. Command-and-control systems are 
usually ineffective in achieving their own goals; they tend to promote interest- 
group  power,  in  which  well-organized private groups  are  able  to  use 
governmental authority to redistribute wealth or opportunities in their favor; 
they also tend to be inefficient.151 

I  cannot discuss this  issue  in  detail here, but the  explosion  of  new 
technologies reinforces the point. It is predictable that owners of some services 
will  attempt to  obtain governmental aid to disadvantage actual or potential 
competitors.152 Especially in  an  era of  rapid and only  partly foreseeable 
technological change, the government's basic duty is to provide a framework 
for competitive development,153 rather than specification of  end-states. Any 

149.  See Vice President Gore's suggestions, outlined in RHEINGOLD, 
150.  See STEPHEN BREYER, REGULATION AND ITS REFORM (1982). 
151.  See generally Bruce A.  Ackerman & Richard B.  Stewart, Reforming Environmental Law, 13 
COLUM. J. ENvTL. L.  171 (1988). A  vigorous popular treatment is  PHILIP K. HOWARD, THE DEATH OF 
COMMON SENSE (1994). FRIEDRICH A. HAYEK, THE CONSTITUTION OF LIBERTY (1960), can well be read 
as a sustained attack on command-and-control regulation, and what Hayek says bears directly on efforts 
to regulate emerging technologies. 

supra note 6, at 11. 

152.  See, e.g., The Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. ?? 534-535  (Supp. V  1993); supra text accompanying notes 

153.  This is a Hayekian point connected with the difficulty of foreseeing the future. See HAYEK, supra 

54-55. 

note 151. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1795 

such specifications will likely prove counterproductive in light of developments 
that cannot now be predicted. 

This is not to say that government regulation has no place, or even that 
government should restrict itself  to  the  task of  ensuring well-functioning 
markets. But even good Madisonians should insist that rigid dictates ought to 
be  avoided. Regulation will  do far better if  it takes the form of  incentives 
rather than mandates. Consider, as possible forerunners of future approaches, 
the FCC's use of auction systems accompanied by the grant of "points" toward 
licensing'54  for  preferred licensees.  Consider too  the  use  of  government 
subsidies to  public broadcasting or to certain high-quality programs, or the 
transfer of  resources from  commercial broadcasters for  the  benefit  of 
noncommercial, educational, or public-affairs programming. Initiatives of this 
sort would not mandate particular results but instead would create pressures to 
improve the speech market. 

C.  Law 

The  ultimate shape of  constitutional constraints on  regulation of  the 
electronic media cannot be foreseen. Too many new possibilities will come 
into view. Too many distinctions will become relevant. Consider, for example, 
the fact that for many dozens of  years, there has been a  clear difference 
between  two  different  kinds  of  communication. The  first  is  ordinary 
broadcasting or publishing, in which an owner makes available a certain range 
of  communications; offers that range of  communications as  an indivisible 
package  for  hundreds, thousands, or  millions  of  subscribers; and  sells 
advertising time for commercial interests. The second involves the mail, in 
which one person typically sends a message to another, or in which one person 
might send a message to a group of people; in any case mail involves highly 
differentiated, rather than indivisible, communication, in the sense that no 
single "package" is  made available to wide ranges of  people. Moreover, no 
advertisers need be  involved. Many of  the complexities in free speech law 
have arisen from this distinction, though the implications of the distinction are 
of course sharply contested. 

New technologies may weaken or even undo the distinction between these 
two categories. In the long-term future, the "mail" analogy may become the 
more apposite one, as it becomes simpler and cheaper for a person to send 
communications to any particular person, or to a large group of  people, on 
such terms as  he  chooses. Communications may decreasingly come  in  an 
indivisible package, and increasingly take the particular form that the particular 
actors choose. Perhaps in the future, "broadcasting" will increasingly have this 

154.  Consider the FCC's quite promising auction system, in which points are granted to minority and 
women applicants. See John McMillan, Selling Spectrum Rights, J. ECON. PERSP., Summer 1994, at 145. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1796 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

characteristic. Often the purchaser of the relevant information will pay for it 
without  the  intermediation of  advertisers.'55 In  such  a  future,  the 
constitutional issues will take on different dimensions. A key question will be 
the extent to which the owner or manager of the "mail" may be held liable for 
injuries that occur as a result of use of some service. It will be plausible to say 
that just as the United States and Federal Express are not liable for harms 
caused by packages they carry, so too the owner of an electronic service ought 
not to pay damages for harms that owners cannot reasonably be expected to 
prevent or control. But it is far too soon to offer particular judgments on the 
issues that will arise. 

It is nonetheless possible to describe certain categories of regulation and 
to set out some general guidelines about how they might be approached. I have 
suggested that existing law  provides principles and analogies on  which it 
makes  sense  to  draw. An  exploration of  new  problems confirms this 
suggestion.  It  shows  that  current  categories  can  be  invoked  fairly 
straightforwardly to make sense of likely future dilemmas. 

A large lesson may emerge from the discussion. Often participants in legal 
disputes, and especially in constitutional disputes, disagree sharply with respect 
to high-level, abstract issues; the debate between Madisonians and marketplace 
advocates is  an  obvious  illustration. But  sometimes such  disputants can 
converge, or narrow their disagreement a great deal, by grappling with highly 
particular problems. In other words, debate over abstractions may conceal a 
potential for productive discussion and even agreement over particulars.156 
Perhaps this is a strategy through which we might make much progress in the 
next generation of free speech law. 

1.  Requiring  Competition 

Many actual and imaginable legislative efforts are designed to  ensure 
competition in the new communications markets. There is  no constitutional 
problem with such efforts.'57 The only qualification is that some such efforts 
might be  seen as subterfuge for content regulation, disguised by a claimed 
need to  promote monopoly; but this should be  a  relatively rare event. If 
government is genuinely attempting to prevent monopolistic practices, and to 
offer a  structure in which competition can take place, there is  no basis for 
constitutional complaint. Here First Amendment theorists of widely divergent 
views might be brought into agreement. 

155.  It is now impossible to know exactly what sorts of communications packages will be provided. 
156.  See Sunstein, supra note 94. 
157.  See  also  KRATTENMAKER &  POWE, supra  note  25  (favoring legal  efforts  to  encourage 

competition). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1797 

2.  Subsidizing New Media 

It is predictable that government might seek to assist certain technologies 
that offer great promise for the future. Some such efforts may in fact be a 
result of  interest-group pressure. But in  general, there is  no  constitutional 
obstacle to government efforts to subsidize preferred communications sources. 
Perhaps government believes that some technological innovations are especially 
likely to do well, or that they could receive particularly valuable benefits from 
national assistance. At  least so  long as  there is  no  reason to  believe  that 
government is  favoring speech of  a certain content, efforts of  this kind are 
unobjectionable as a matter of law.158 They may be objectionable as a matter 
of policy, since government may make bad judgments reflecting confusion or 
factional influence; but that is a different issue. 

3.  Subsidizing Particular Programming or Particular Broadcasters 

In her dissenting opinion in Turner, Justice O'Connor suggested that the 
appropriate response to  government desire for  programming of  a  certain 
content is not regulation but instead subsidization.159 This idea fits well with 
the  basic  model  for  campaign finance regulation, set  out  in  Buckley v. 
It  also  fits  with  the  idea,  found  in  Rust  v.  Sullivan,161 
that  the 
Valeo.'60 
government is unconstrained in its power to subsidize such speech as it prefers. 
Hence there should be no constitutional objection to government efforts to fund 
public broadcasting, to pay for high-quality fare for children, or to  support 
programming that deals with public affairs.'62 Perhaps government might do 
this for certain uses of the Internet. 

To be sure, it is doubtful that Rust would be taken to its logical extreme. 
Could the government fund the Democratic Convention but not the Republican 
Convention? Could the government announce that it would fund only those 
public-affairs programs that spoke approvingly of current government policy? 
If we take the First Amendment to ban viewpoint discrimination, funding of 
this  kind should be  held to  be  improperly motivated. On the other hand, 
government subsidies of educational and public-affairs programming need not 

158.  This follows from Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S.  173 (1991). 
159.  Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 114 S. Ct. 2445, 2478 (1994) (O'Connor, J., dissenting). 
160.  424 U.S.  1 (1976) 
161.  500 U.S.  173 (1991). 
162.  There is  a  question of  policy  in  the background, made highly visible  by  controversy over 
government funding of  the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and the National Endowment for the 
Humanities. In principle, such funding is justified in light of  the "public good" features of  the relevant 
products and in light of the possibility that the funded sources can increase opportunities for preference 
formation by providing greater exposure to high-quality material. See ANDERSON, supra note 135, at 149. 
But the ultimate value of funding depends on a range of more practical and empirical issues that cannot 
be decided a priori, including the actual products that result, the opportunities to provide private funding 
instead, and the alternative use of government money. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1798 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

raise  serious  risks  of  viewpoint  discrimination. It  therefore  seems 
unexceptionable for government, short of viewpoint discrimination, to subsidize 
those broadcasters whose programming it prefers, even if any such preference 
embodies  content  discrimination. So  too,  government might  promote 
"conversations" or fora on e-mail that involve issues of public importance, or 
that attempt to promote educational goals for children or even adults.163 

4.  Leaving Admittedly "Open" Channels Available to Others Who Would 

Not Otherwise Get Carriage 

Suppose  that  a  particular communications carrier has  room  for  five 
hundred channels; suppose that four hundred channels are filled, but that one 
hundred are left open. Would it be legitimate for government to say that the 
one hundred must be filled by stations that would otherwise be unable be pay 
for carriage? Let us  suppose that the stations would be  chosen through a 
content-neutral system, such as a lottery. From the First Amendment point of 
view, this approach seems acceptable. The government would be attempting 
to  ensure access for speakers who would otherwise be  unable to reach the 
audience. It is possible that as a matter of policy, government should have to 
provide some payment to the carrier in return for the access requirement. But 
there does not seem to be a First Amendment problem. 

5.  Requiring Carriers To Be Common Carriers for a Certain Number of 
Stations, Filling Vacancies with a Lottery System or Timesharing 

In  her  dissenting opinion in  Turner, Justice O'Connor suggested the 
possibility that carriers could be required to set aside certain channels to be 
filled by a random method.64 The advantage of this approach is that it would 
promote access  for  people  who  would otherwise be  denied carriage, but 
without involving  government in  decisions about preferred content. This 
approach should raise no First Amendment difficulties. 

6.  Imposing Structural Regulation Designed Not To Prevent a 

Conventional Market Failure, But To Ensure Universal or Near- 
Universal Consumer Access to Networks 

The  protection of  broadcasters in  Turner was  specifically designed to 
ensure continued viewer access  to  free programming. Notably, the  Court 
permitted government to  achieve this  goal  through regulation rather than 

163.  See supra text accompanying notes 112-15 (discussing role of new technologies in connection 

with elections). 

164.  Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 114 S. Ct. 2445, 2480 (O'Connor, J., dissenting). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1799 

through subsidy. Of course subsidy is the simpler and ordinarily more efficient 
route. If government wants to make sure that all consumers have access to 
communications networks, why should government not be required to pay to 
allow such access, on a kind of  analogue to the food stamp program? The 
ordinary response to a problem of  access is  not to fix prices but instead to 
subsidize people who would otherwise be without access. The Turner Court 
apparently believed that it is constitutionally acceptable for the government to 
ensure that industry (and subscribers), rather than taxpayers, provide the 
funding for those who would otherwise lack access. 

The precise implications of this holding remain to be seen. It is impossible 
to  foresee the range of  structural regulations that might be proposed in an 
effort to ensure that all or almost all citizens have access to free programming 
or to some communications network, including any parts of the "informational 
superhighway." Some such regulations might in fact be based on other, more 
invidious motives, such as favoritism toward a particular set of  suppliers; as 
we  have seen, this may well  be  true of  the measure in  Turner itself. The 
Turner decision  means  that  courts  should  review  with  some  care  any 
governmental claim that regulation is actually based on an effort to promote 
free access. But the key point here is that if the claim can be made out on the 
facts, structural regulation should be found acceptable. 

7.  Protecting Against Obscene, Libelous, Violent, Commercial, or 

Harassing Broadcasting or Messages 

New technologies have greatly expanded the opportunity to communicate 
obscene, libelous, violent, or harassing messages-perhaps to general groups 
via stations on (for example) cable television, perhaps to particular people via 
electronic mail.'65 Invasions of  privacy are far more likely. The  Internet 
poses  special problems on these counts. As  a general rule, any restrictions 
should be  treated like those governing ordinary speech, with ordinary mail 
providing the best analogy. If restrictions are narrowly tailored, and supported 
by a sufficiently strong record, they should be upheld. 

Consider in this regard the highly publicized case involving "cyberporn" 

at the University of  Michigan.166 A  student is  alleged to have distributed a 
fictional story involving a fellow student, explicitly named, who was, in the 
story, raped, tortured, and finally killed. The  first question raised here is 
whether state or federal law provides a cause of action for conduct of this sort. 
Perhaps the story amounts to a threat, or a form of libel, or perhaps the most 
plausible state law claim would be based on intentional infliction of emotional 

165.  See Branscomb, supra note 141. 
166.  See Stephen Levy, TechnoMania, NEWSWEEK, Feb. 27,  1995, at 24, 29; Peter H. Lewis, Writer 

Arrested After Sending Violent Fiction over Internet, N.Y  TIMES, Feb. 11, 1995, at A10. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1800 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

distress. The next question is  whether, if  a state law claim is  available, the 
award of damages would violate the First Amendment. At first glance it seems 
that the question should be resolved in the same way as any case in which a 
writer uses a real person's name in fiction of this sort. And it certainly does 
not seem clear that the First Amendment should prohibit states from awarding 
damages for conduct of this kind, so long as no political issue is involved.167 
Perhaps the ease of massive distribution of such materials, which can be sent 
to much of the world with the touch of a button, argues in favor of loosening 
the constitutional constraints on compensatory damages. 

What of a regulatory regime designed to prevent invasion of privacy, libel, 
unwanted commercial messages, and obscenity,168 harassment, or infliction 
of  emotional distress? Some such regulatory regime will ultimately make a 
great deal of sense. The principal obstacles are that the regulations should be 
both clear and narrow. It is easy to imagine a broad or vague regulation, one 
that would seize upon the sexually explicit or violent nature of communication 
to justify regulation that is far broader than necessary. Moreover, it is possible 
to imagine a situation in which liability was extended to any owner or operator 
who could have no knowledge of  the particular materials being sent.169 The 
underlying question, having to do with efficient risk allocation, involves the 
extent to  which a  carrier might be  expected to  find and to  stop unlawful 
messages; that question depends upon the relevant technology. 

Consider more particularly possible efforts to control the distribution of 
sexually explicit materials on the Internet. Insofar as the government seeks to 
ban materials that are technically obscene, and imposes civil  or  criminal 
liability on  someone with specific intent to  distribute such materials, there 
should be  no  constitutional problem. By  hypothesis, these  materials lack 
constitutional protection, and materials lacking constitutional protection can be 
banned in cyberspace as everywhere else. On the other hand, many actual and 
imaginable bills would extend beyond the technically obscene, to include (for 
example) materials that are "indecent," or "lewd," or  "filthy."170 Terms of 
this sort create a serious risk of unconstitutional vagueness or overbreadth.171 
At least at first glance, they appear unconstitutional for that reason. 

167.  See Hustler v. Falwell, 485 U.S. 46, 51-52  (1988). 
168.  See  S.  314,  104th Cong.,  1st Sess.  ?  2(a)  (1995),  which would have extended liability to 

telecommunications providers of obscene materials. 

169.  In January 1995, for example, Senator Jim Exon (D-Neb.) introduced S. 314, the Communications 
Decency Act of  1995, in the U.S. Senate. In an effort to control digital pornography, it originally would 
have made all  telecommunications providers doing business in  the United States (from the telephone 
companies, all the way down to offices that use local area networks) liable for the content of anything sent 
over their networks. As it emerged from committee, S. 314 exempted carriers from liability. Id.; see also 
Peter H. Lewis, Despite a New Plan for  Cooling It Off, Cybersex Stays Hot, N.Y. TIMES, Mar. 26,  1995, 
at 1, 34 (discussing S. 314 and its potential unconstitutionality) 

170.  See, e.g., S. 314,  104th Cong., 1st Sess. (1995). 
171.  Sable Communications of  California, Inc. v. FCC, 492  U.S.  115,  126-31  (1989); Action for 
Children's Television v. FCC, 11 F.3d 170 (D.C. Cir. 1993); Action for Children's Television v. FCC, 932 
F.2d 1504 (D.C. Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 112 S. Ct. 1281 (1992). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1801 

The best justification for expansive terms of this kind would be to protect 
children  from  harmful materials. It  is  true  that  the  Internet contains 
pornography accessible to children, some of it coming from adults explicitly 
seeking sexual relations with children. There is in fact material on the Internet 
containing requests to  children for their home addresses.'72 Solicitations to 
engage in unlawful activity are unprotected by the First Amendment, whether 
they  occur on  the  Internet or  anywhere else.  For this  reason, regulation 
designed to prevent these sorts of requests should not be held unconstitutional. 

But when government goes beyond solicitation, and bans "indecent" or 
"filthy" material in general, the question is quite different. Here a central issue 
is whether the government has chosen the least restrictive means of preventing 
the relevant harms to children. In a case involving "dial-a-porn," for example, 
the  Court struck down a  ban on  "indecent" materials on  the  ground that 
children could be protected in other ways.173 On the Madisonian view, this 
outcome  is  questionable, since  "dial-a-porn" ranks  low  on  the  First 
Amendment hierarchy. But under existing law, it seems clear that in order to 
support an extension beyond obscenity, Congress would have to show that less 
restrictive alternatives would be  ineffectual. The question then becomes a 
factual one: What sorts of  technological options exist by  which parents or 
others can provide the relevant protection? To answer this question, it would 
be necessary to explore the possibility of creating "locks" within the Internet, 
for use by  parents, or perhaps for use by  those who write certain sorts of 
materials. 174 

Different questions would be raised by the imposition of civil or criminal 
liability not on  the distributors having specific intent to  distribute, but on 
carriers who have no knowledge of the specific materials at issue, and could 
not obtain such knowledge without considerable difficulty and expense. It 
might be  thought that the carrier should be treated like a  publisher, and a 
publisher can of course be held liable for obscene or libelous materials even 
if the publisher has no specific knowledge of the offending material. But in 
light of the relatively low costs of search in the world of magazine and book 
publishing, it is reasonable to think that a publisher should be charged with 
having control over the content of its publications. Perhaps the same cannot be 
said for the owner of an electronic mail service. Here the proper analogy might 
instead be  the carriage of  mail, in  which owners of  services are not held 
criminally or civilly liable for obscene or libelous materials. The underlying 
theory is that it would be unreasonable to expect such owners to inspect all the 
materials they transport, and the imposition of criminal liability, at least, would 
have an unacceptably harmful effect upon a desirable service involving the 

172.  James  Coates,  Access  to Answers,  CHI. TRIB., Mar. 27,  1995,  ?  4,  at  1, 4. 
173.  Sable  Communications,  492  U.S.  at  128-31. 
174.  See  Jerry Berman  & Daniel  J. Weitzner, Abundance  and  User  Control:  Renewing  the Democratic 

Heart of the First Amendment in the Age of Interactive Media, 104 YALE L.J. 1619, 1632-34  (1995). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1802 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

distribution of a great deal of protected speech. If carriers were held liable for 
distributing unprotected speech, there would inevitably be an adverse effect on 
the dissemination of protected speech too. In other words, the problem with 
carrier liability, in this context, is that it would interfere with protected as well 
as unprotected speech. 

How do these points bear on the First Amendment issue with respect to 
the Internet? Some of the services that provide access to the Internet should 
not themselves be treated as speakers; they are providers of speech, but their 
own speech is not at issue. This point is closely related to the debate in Turner 
about the  speech status of  cable carriers. But whether or not a  carrier or 
provider is a speaker, a harmful effect on speech would raise First Amendment 
issues. We can  see  this point with an analogy. Certainly it  would not be 
constitutional to say that truck owners will be criminally liable for carrying 
newspapers containing articles critical of the President. Such a measure would 
be unconstitutional in its purposes and in its effects, even if the truck owners 
are not speakers. From this we can see that a criminal penalty on carriers of 
material that is  independently protected by the First Amendment should be 
unconstitutional. Thus a criminal penalty could not be imposed for providing 
"filthy" speech, at least if "filthy" speech is otherwise protected. 

But a penalty imposed on otherwise unprotected materials raises a different 
question. Suppose that the government imposes criminal liability on carriers 
or providers of admittedly obscene material on the Internet. The adverse effect 
on unprotected speech should not by itself be found to offend the Constitution, 
even if there would be a harmful economic effect, and even unfairness, for the 
provider of the service. Instead the constitutional question should turn on the 
extent  of  the  adverse effects  on  the  dissemination of  materials that are 
protected by  the  Constitution. If,  for example, the  imposition of  criminal 
liability for the distribution of unprotected speech had serious harmful effects 
for the distribution of protected speech, the First Amendment issue would be 
quite severe. But that question cannot be answered in the abstract; it depends 
on what the relevant record shows with respect to any such adverse effects. 
To answer that question, we  need to know whether carrier liability, for 
unprotected speech, has a  significant adverse effect on protected speech as 
well. We need to know, in short, whether the proper analogy is to a publisher 
or instead to a carrier of  mail. It is  therefore important to know whether a 
carrier could, at relatively low expense, filter out constitutionally unprotected 
material, or whether, on the contrary, the imposition of criminal liability for 
unprotected material would drive legitimate carriers out of business, or force 
them to try to undertake impossible or unrealistically expensive "searches." 
The  answer to  this  question will  depend in  large part on  the  state  of 
technology. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

Sunstein 

1803 

8.  Imposing Content-Based Regulation Designed To Ensure Public- 

Affairs and Educational Programming 

It can readily be imagined that Congress might seek to promote education 
via regulation or subsidy of  new media. It might try to ensure attention to 
public affairs. Suppose, for example, that Congress sets aside a  number of 
channels for public-affairs and educational programming, on the theory that the 
marketplace provides too much commercial programming. This notion has in 
fact been under active consideration in Congress. Thus a recent bill would 
have required all telecommunications carriers to provide access at preferential 
rates to educational and health care institutions, state and local governments, 
public  broadcast stations, libraries and  other public  entities,  community 
newspapers, and broadcasters in the smallest markets.175 

Turner certainly does not stand for the proposition that such efforts are 
constitutional. By hypothesis, any such regulation would be content-based. It 
would therefore meet with a high level of judicial skepticism. On the other 
hand,  Turner does  not  authoritatively suggest  that  such  efforts  are 
unconstitutional. The Court did not itself say whether it would accept content 
discrimination designed to promote Madisonian goals. Certainly the opinion 
suggests that the government's burden would be a significant one. But it does 
not resolve the question. 

It is notable that Justice O'Connor's opinion appears quite sensible on this 
point,  and  she  leaves  the  issue  open.176 As  I  have  noted, her  principal 
argument is that the "must-carry" rules are too crude. Certainly crudely tailored 
measures give  reason to believe that interest-group pressures, rather than a 
legitimate effort to improve educational and public-affairs programming, are 
at work. But if the relevant measures actually promote Madisonian goals, they 
should be upheld. There is of course reason to fear that any such measures 
have less  legitimate purposes and functions, and hence a degree of judicial 
skepticism is  appropriate. But narrow measures, actually promoting those 
purposes, are constitutionally legitimate. 

VI.  MADISON IN CYBERSPACE? 

Do Madisonian ideals have an enduring role in American thought about 
freedom of speech? The Supreme Court has not said for certain; its signals are 
quite  mixed;  and the  existence of  new  technologies makes the  question 
different and far more complex than it once was. It is conceivable that in a 
world of newly emerging and countless options, the market will prove literally 

175.  S.  1822, 103d Cong., 2d Sess. ?  103(a) (1994) (Communications Act of  1994). 
176.  Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 114 S. Ct. 2445, 2478 (O'Connor, J., dissenting). 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1804 

The Yale Law Journal 

[Vol. 104: 1757 

unstoppable, as novel possibilities outstrip even well-motivated government 
controls. 

If  so,  this  result  should  not  be  entirely lamented. It  would  be  an 
understatement to  say that a  world in  which consumers can choose  from 
limitless choices has many advantages, not least from the Madisonian point of 
view. If choices are limitless, people interested in politics can see and listen 
to politics; perhaps they can even participate in politics, and in ways that were 
impossible just a decade ago. But that world would be far from perfect. It may 
increase social  balkanization. It  may not promote deliberation, but foster 
instead a series of referenda in cyberspace that betray constitutional goals. 

My central point here has been that the system of free expression is not 
an aimless abstraction. Far from being an outgrowth of neoclassical economics, 
the First Amendment has independent and identifiable purposes. Free speech 
doctrine, with its proliferating tests, distinctions, and subparts, should not lose 
touch with those purposes. Rooted in  a  remarkable conception of  political 
sovereignty, the goals of the First Amendment are closely connected with the 
founding commitment to a particular kind of polity: a deliberative democracy 
among informed citizens who are political equals. It follows that instead of 
allowing new technologies to use democratic processes for their own purposes, 
constitutional law should be concerned with harnessing those technologies for 
democratic ends-including  the founding aspirations to public deliberation, 
citizenship, political equality, and even a certain kind of  virtue. If the new 
technologies offer risks on these scores, they hold out enormous promise as 
well. I have argued here that whether that promise will be realized depends in 
significant part on judgments of law, including judgments about the point of 
the First Amendment. 

This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

