Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles Part of the Law Commons
Cass R. Sunstein, "The Idea of a Useable Past," 95 Columbia Law Review 601 (1995).
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.
* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor ofJurisprudence, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Akhil Amar, Elena Kagan, Larry Lessig, David Strauss, G. Edward White, Gordon Wood, and especially Richard Ross for helpful comments on a previous draft.
1. See Peter Novick, That Noble Dream: The "Objectivity Question" and the American Historical Profession 1-17 (1988).
2. SeeJoyce Appleby et al., Telling the Truth About History (1994) Gordon S. Wood, The Losable Past, The New Republic, Nov. 7, 1994, at 46 (book review). On similar issues in philosophy, involving the consequences of critiques of metaphysical realism, see Hilary Putnam, Renewing Philosophy 180-200 (1992).
3. By this term I mean to refer not only to judges and lawyers involved in constitutional law, but also to academic lawyers involved in constitutional argument.
4. Martin Flaherty seems not to be an exception, especially insofar as he challenges historical writing for being untrue to the facts or selective about them. See Martin S. Flaherty, History "Lite" in Modern American Constitutionalism, 95 Colum. L. Rev. 523, 552-53 (1995).
political convictions.5 One of my prime pur-
congenial to the lawyer's political One of my prime purposes here is to respond to historians who think of the historically-inclined constitutional lawyer in these terms. What I want to suggest is that the historian and the constitutional lawyer have legitimately different roles. The constitutional lawyer interested in history need not be a politically motivated scavenger of real historical work, but a different sort of creature altogether, with a special and not dishonorable function.
In short, the constitutional lawyer thinking about constitutional history has a particular purpose and a recognizable project, and what a constitutional lawyer finds from history may, for legitimate reasons relating to that purpose and that role, be quite different from what a historian finds there. This does not reduce the constitutional lawyer to a mere advocate. But it does mean that the function of the constitutional lawyer, even if historically inclined, is properly and unembarrassingly distinctive.
Nothing in what I have said, or will say, denies that the constitutional lawyer owes certain duties of fidelity to the past. The constitutional lawyer should not claim that the history supports a particular view when it does not. The history can falsify much of what the constitutional lawyer might seek to say, at least if the constitutional lawyer genuinely cares about history. History imposes constraints on the lawyer as well as the historian.
If they are reflective, however, many constitutional lawyers will happily acknowledge that they see their task not as uncovering the "facts," and not as simply describing what happened, but instead as interpretive in something like Ronald Dworkin's sense of that term. On this view, constitutional lawyers, unlike ordinary historians, should attempt to make the best constructive sense out of historical events associated with the Constitution. They do owe a duty of "fit" to the materials they cannot disregard the actual events, which therefore discipline their accounts. But they also try to conceive of the materials in a way that makes political or moral sense, rather than nonsense, out of them to current generations.
Everyone can see that the political or moral commitments of the consitutional lawyer are an omnipresent part of the constitutional lawyer's constitutional history.8 Why is this? Is it an embarrassment, or does
5. See Flaherty, supra note 4 Daniel T. Rodgers, Republicanism: The Career of a Concept, 79J. Am. Hist. 11, 33 (1992) G. Edward White, Reflections on the "Republican Revival": Interdisciplinary Scholarship in the Legal Academy, 6 Yale J.L. & Human. 1 (1994).
6. See Ronald Dworkin, Law's Empire 49-55 (1986) (describing interpretive nature of law). Dworkin is not. however, speaking of the use of history, and on Dworkin's view of constitutional law, the history behind a provision appears to be barely relevant. I do not mean to endorse Dworkin's view of constitutional interpretation see Cass R. Sunstein, Incompletely Theorized Agreements, Harv. L. Rev. (forthcoming 1995) Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict ch. 3 (1994) (unpublished manuscript, on file with author).
7. See Flaherty, supra note 4, at 580-81.
8. As emphasized in White, supra note 5.
it reveal something disturbing or untoward? I do not think so. Political or moral commitments play a role because of the interpretive nature of the lawyer's enterprise, which involves showing how the history might be put to present use. I think that this interpretive enterprise is typified, for example, in Bruce Ackerman's work, though Ackerman often writes as if he were simply describing the facts.9 I also think that this interpretive enterprise is far from mere advocacy. The distinction requires more elaborate treatment than I can offer here. For the moment, let me simply suggest that the true advocate begins with a preestablished conclusion, is interested only in persuasion, and allows his political convictions to dominate everything that he says, whereas the historically-inclined constitutional lawyer is interested in truth, and owes duties of objectivity and fairness to the materials that he invokes.'
With this in mind we come to the idea of a useable past. This idea points to the goal of finding elements in history that can be brought fruitfully to bear on current problems. The search for a useable past is a defining feature of the constitutional lawyer's approach to constitutional history. It may or may not be a part of the historian's approach to constitutional history, depending on the particular historian's conception of the historian's role. The historian may not be concerned with a useable past at all, at least not in any simple sense. Perhaps the historian wants to reveal the closest thing to a full picture of the past, or to stress the worst aspects of a culture's legal tradition certainly there is nothing wrong with these projects. But constitutional history as set out by the constitutional lawyer, as a participant in the constitutional culture, usually tries to put things in a favorable or appealing light without, however, distorting what actually can be found.
Is the constitutional lawyer's approach-as I am describing it herecynical, or dishonest, or debased, or reflective of a form of "history lite"? The question cannot be answered in the abstract. Sometimes the charge of cynicism, dishonesty, debasement, or "liteness" is entirely warranted. For example, it is familiar to find a constitutional lawyer reading history at a very high level of abstraction ("the Framers were committed to freedom of speech") and concluding that some concrete outcome follows for us ("laws regulating obscenity are unconstitutional"). This use of history is not honorable. It is a bad version of formalism-the pretense that concrete cases can be resolved by reference to general propositions, when in fact some supplemental value judgments are required.
9. See 1 Bruce Ackerman, We the People (1991).
10. On how the notion of objectivity might be maintained despite the inevitability of a
11. See Akhil R. Amar, Of Sovereignty and Federalism, 96 Yale LJ. 1425 (1987).
12. An honorable species of formalism is defended in Frederick Schauer, Playing By the Rules 229-33 (1991) this species of formalism calls for adherence to the literal text of legal materials.
13. See Robert H. Bork, Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment Problems, 47 Ind. LJ. 1 (1971) see also Robert H. Bork, The Tempting of America (1990) [hereinafter Bork, The Tempting of America].
14. Bork, The Tempting of America, supra note 13, at 139.
15. See John H. Ely, Democracy and Distrust 77-101 (1980).
16. In this regard Flaherty rightly points to the importance of consulting the primary sources, and of understanding the best and most recent work by historians. See Flaherty, supra note 4, at 553-56.
17. See David A. Strauss, Common Law Constitutional Interpretation (1994) (unpublished manuscript, on file with Columbia Law Review). Of course there remains the question of deciding at what level of generality the history is to be read. If read at a high level, the history could authorize any decision at all if read at a very low level, the result would probably be useless for current problems. It follows that some kind of intermediate course will make best sense, though I can hardly discuss this complex issuethe issue of "how to read" the past for constitutional purposes-in this space. Doubts about the possibility of the historical enterprise-how can we know what long-dead people really meant? how can we possibly reconstruct their world?-seem to me overstated in principle but whether or not they are overstated, such doubts are hard for the constitutional lawyer to entertain. For better or for worse, the lawyer participates in a culture in which historical arguments are important, and it is therefore unhelpful to throw up one's hands.
constitutional historians may not be so useful for constitutional lawyers. Slavery was of course accepted in the Founding period the Framers' conception of free speech was almost certainly much narrower than anyone would find reasonable today the Framers' conception of equality would permit forms of discrimination that the Supreme Court would unanimously condemn. It is undoubtedly worthwhile for people to explore old and sometimes unacceptable understandings for purposes of grasping our own constitutional past.
What I am suggesting is that the constitutional lawyer, thinking about the future course of constitutional law, has a special project in mind, and that there is nothing wrong with that project.' The historian is trying to reimagine the past, necessarily from a present-day standpoint, but subject to the discipline provided by the sources and by the interpretive conventions in the relevant communities of historians. By contrast the constitutional lavyer is trying to contribute to the legal culture's repertoire of arguments and political/legal narratives that place a (stylized) past and present into a trajectory leading to a desired future. On this view, the historically-minded lawyer need not be thought to be doing a second-rate or debased version of what the professional historians do well, but is working in a quite different tradition with overlapping but distinct criteria.
My own interest in constitutional history'9 has largely stemmed from an effort to re-evaluate two understandings common in the last generation: that the Framers were principally or exclusively concerned with the protection of preexisting private rights (the so-called Lockean account20 ), or that they sought instead to set out the terms for interestgroup struggle (the so-called pluralist account ). These understandings are quite inadequate.2 The Framers were republicans, and they were republicans in the distinctive sense that they prized civic virtue and sought to promote deliberation in government-deliberation oriented toward right answers about the collective good. We cannot understand our constitutional heritage without resort to these points.
Republicanism, .thus understood, does not stand opposed to liberalism, and indeed the opposition between republicanism and liberalism
18. I am very grateful to Richard Ross for helpful discussion of the thoughts in this paragraph.
19. See Cass R. Sunstein, The Partial Constitution 17-39, 123-61 (1993) Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Republican Revival, 97 Yale LJ. 1539 (1988) Cass R. Sunstein, Interest Groups in American Public Law, 38 Stan. L. Rev. 29 (1985). Historical claims also play a central role in Lawrence Lessig & Cass R. Sunstein, The President and the Administration, 94 Colum. L. Rev. 1 (1994).
20. See Louis Hartz, The Liberal Tradition in America 3-20 (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich 1991) (1955).
21. See Robert A. Dahl, A Preface to Democratic Theory 4-32 (1963).
22. The best demonstrations are Gordon S. Wood, The Creation of the American Republic: 1776-1787 (1969) Gordon S. Wood, The Radicalism of the American Revolution (1992).
23. Liberalism and republicanism are opposed, for example, in White, supra note 5, and Rodgers, supra note 5. Rodgers in particular identifies liberalism with an "inability to imagine politics as anything other than interest group pluralism," and as committed to "procedural neutrality." These understandings of liberalism, found in much historical work, are extremely odd, and based at most on certain strands in liberalism. Those strands should hardly be identified with the liberal tradition itself. Mill, Rawls, and Raz, for example, thoroughly reject these ideas, and reject them because of their understanding of what liberalism entails. See John Smart Mill, Considerations on Representative Government (Gateway Editions 1962) (1861) John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1971) Joseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom (1986).
To say this is not to deny that some republicans emphasized some goals that some liberals tend to view skeptically. Some liberals, for example, emphasize the likely role of self-interest in politics, whereas some republicans stress pre-modern ideas involving corruption in government and the concept of "virtue." See White, supra note 5, at 7. But these differences of emphasis should not be taken to suggest that the liberal and republican traditions are at war or even distinguishable. Better antonyms to republicanism are interest-group pluralism and conceptions of politics that see protection of private rights as the sole purpose of constitutional structure.
24. See, e.g., Joshua Cohen, Deliberation and Democratic Legitimacy, in The Good Polity 17, 18-26 (Alan Hamlin & Philip Pettit eds., 1990) Jfirgen Habermas, Three Normative Models of Democracy, 1 Constellations 10 (1994).
25. As to constitutional theory, compare James E. Fleming, Constructing the Substantive Constitution, 72 Tex. L. Rev. 211 (1993), with Cass R. Sunstein, Liberal Constitutionalism and Liberal Justice, 72 Tex. L. Rev. 305 (1993).
26. See generally Akhil R. Amar, The Bill of Rights as a Constitution, 100 Yale Lj. 1131 (1991).
27. See The Federalist Concordance 343 (1988). By contrast, the term "rights" occurs 149 times. Id. at 475.
