American Society for Political and Legal Philosophy
NYU Press

 
ON LEGAL THEORY AND LEGAL PRACTICE
Authors(s): CASS R. SUNSTEIN
Source: Nomos, Vol. 37, THEORY AND PRACTICE (1995), pp. 267-287
Published by: American Society for Political and Legal Philosophy
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/24219531
Accessed: 24-03-2016 10:48 UTC

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

 

 

http://about.jstor.org/terms

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

American Society for Political and Legal Philosophy, NYU Press are collaborating with JSTOR
to digitize, preserve and extend access to Nomos

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 9

 ON LEGAL THEORY

 AND LEGAL PRACTICE

 CASS R. SUNSTEIN

 Law is a normative enterprise; it is inevitably philosophical.
 For this reason, the distinction between legal theory and legal
 practice is at most one of degree. Certainly it can be shown that
 much legal practice takes theoretical issues for granted, but this
 does not mean that it is not pervaded by theoretical claims. On
 the other hand, there are real hazards for lawyers who use
 political philosophy to inform legal practice, especially when the
 philosophy is designed for a first-best world, or when it rests on
 assumptions that do not hold for us. Moreover, legal practice
 might seek to bracket philosophical questions, in order to facili
 tate change over time, to allow an incompletely theorized
 agreement on particular outcomes among people who disagree
 on first principles, and to avoid various forms of hubris.

 These will be my basic claims in this essay. In part 1, I briefly

 support the view that even mundane claims about the content
 of law have large-scale theoretical components. In part 2, I
 discuss some of the problems that arise when lawyers rely on
 what philosophers think. In part 3, I explain why a system of
 legal practice might limit its philosophical ambitions, in the
 process contrasting an antitheoretical, highly practical judge—
 Justice John Marshall Harlan—with Ronald Dworkin's Her
 cules. An important point here is that people who diverge
 sharply on large principles might well be able to agree on spe

 267

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 268 CASS R. SUNSTEIN

 cific cases. This point helps explain why in a heterogeneous
 society, a normative practice, including law, might seek to
 bracket philosophical questions, and do so successfully.

 I. How Law Is Philosophical

 All descriptive claims about the content of law depend in some
 important way on ideas about the right, the good, or both.
 When we read Supreme Court opinions or appellate briefs, or
 if we listen to how lawyers discuss their cases, we find many
 claims about liberty, rights, equality, and justice. For example,
 the Constitution says that no state shall deprive any person of
 the equal protection of the laws. What does this mean? How do
 we even go about knowing what it means? Suppose that a state
 discriminates against homosexuals, fails to provide welfare ben
 efits, creates an affirmative action program, or stops people
 under eighteen from voting. Has there been a constitutional vi
 olation?

 Begin with the text. Very rapidly it becomes clear that the
 word "equal" has multiple meanings. The term could be a pro
 hibition on irrational differentiation; it could guarantee mini
 mally decent conditions for all; it could forbid caste systems; it
 could require a legitimate public purpose for all laws; it could
 forbid large disparities in wealth. Because of the multiplicity
 of textually plausible readings, we will be forced to resort to
 something supplemental to text in order to bring it to bear on
 disputed cases. Unless we can get help elsewhere, it will be
 necessary to make some substantive judgment about the appro
 priate conception of equal protection under the Constitution.

 We might then try another route. We might ask some ques
 tions about the understanding of the people who wrote the
 provision. Suppose that they intended to prohibit all discrimina
 tion against blacks but to do nothing else. (Let us put to one side
 the many complexities in the notion of an "intention" or an
 "understanding" of a collective decision-making body.) Then it
 becomes necessary to ask whether this intention is binding. How
 will we resolve this question? Without circularity we cannot say
 that the intention is binding because the framers intended it to
 be binding. Before long, we will have to say something about

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 269

 democracy, majoritarianism, rights, and much else. Here too,
 large-scale theoretical claims seem unavoidable.

 We might turn then to the judicial precedents, at least if we

 have some. The first question is: On what principle of equality
 are those precedents based? But this question will not be easy to
 answer. Suppose, for example, that the Court has forbidden
 school segregation. How does this precedent bear on affirmative
 action or substandard welfare benefits? To decide, we will have

 to choose how to characterize the precedents, and to do that, we
 will have to say something substantive about the appropriate
 equality principle. Precedents are not brute facts. And if the
 precedents are genuinely helpful, we have to ask whether they
 should be binding. And to answer that question, we will have to
 discuss the need for stability in law, the possibility of mistake,
 the potential for democratic correction, and so forth.

 I think that this example shows the extent to which people
 engaging in the practice of law must make theoretical claims.
 The line between legal practice and legal theory is blurry. The
 point is not limited to the sometimes exotic area of constitu
 tional law. Suppose, for example, that someone claims that he
 need not comply with his contractual obligation to sell one thou
 sand barrels of widgets for one hundred dollars, because the
 price of widgets has risen so unexpectedly in the past week as a
 result of a strike in the widget factory. A legal system must
 answer this question by reference to something—and that
 something must be a conception of autonomy, or utility, or
 efficiency, or welfare, or something else. Even mundane areas
 of the law of contracts are thus pervaded by theoretical claims
 about the reasons for social obligations. The familiar notion of
 "party autonomy" hardly makes such claims unnecessary; it is
 merely a resort to a certain kind of theoretical claim.

 Much the same is true of tort law, which has to decide on

 appropriate spheres of human action. Judgments about causa
 tion are of course rooted in theories of moral responsibility.
 Nor can judges say whether there is an act or an omission—a
 relevant distinction in many areas of the law—without positing
 a morally privileged state of affairs. To do that, we will have to
 discuss theoretical questions. Similar things can be said about
 criminal law, which is pervaded by issues of intention, fault,

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 270 CASS R. SUNSTEIN

 and responsibility; these issues cannot be approached without
 theoretical claims.

 It is sometimes thought that those engaged in law may often
 bracket such claims and that they must speculate on abstract
 matters only on issues at the frontiers of the law, when existing
 legal materials are not decisive. Such "frontiers" cases, it is said,
 are rare. But even the easiest cases present theoretical issues.
 Jones is said to have violated the law fixing a speed limit of fifty
 miles per hour. Perhaps Jones was trying to get to the hospital;
 perhaps he was late for work; perhaps his mind wandered. In
 any of these cases, should the judge convict Jones? If the answer
 is yes, it is for reasons that have to do with, among other things,
 the appropriate role of judges in a democracy, and this is a
 substantive view that should be defended even if now uncontro

 versial. Easy cases can claim to be easy only on the basis of

 reasons.

 These ideas do not need to be belabored. Much of the change

 in legal education in the last decades has stemmed from work
 by economists, philosophers, and others who have shown that
 many of the conventional legal categories—even conventional
 conceptions of how to describe "the facts"—turn out to depend
 on philosophical claims, and often on controversial ones. In this
 sense, legal practice has inescapable theoretical dimensions.

 It may well be unfortunate if those who practice law are not

 self-conscious about this fact. Sometimes the claims that under

 lie law are taken as self-evident—as in the view that an abortion

 is an act rather than an omission, or that the meaning of a text
 is determined by investigating the views of its drafters, or that
 emotion and reason are at opposite poles, or that democracy
 and majoritarianism are the same thing, or that there is sharp
 distinction between "words" and "conduct." Such claims depend
 on complex theoretical judgments that ought to be brought into
 the open and evaluated as such.

 II. How Lawyers Misuse Philosophy

 and Philosophers

 None of this necessarily means that lawyers should turn to
 philosophy or to great philosophers for the answers to their

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 271

 questions. There are several characteristic risks with efforts of
 this sort. First, lawyers may misunderstand philosophers (as
 they sometimes misunderstand economists). Here as elsewhere,
 a little knowledge may be a dangerous thing. Second, and more
 interestingly, lawyers may fail to understand the difficulties in
 bringing philosophical arguments to bear on concrete legal dis
 putes. The application may seem mechanical, but it usually
 requires an act of translation, and one that involves a large
 element of construction. Suppose that we seek to be good Lock
 eans, and that we want to know how to deal with the question
 whether government should forbid private race discrimination.
 When a private employer refuses to hire blacks, the employer
 has not committed any act of conventional force or fraud. Does
 this mean that Locke is opposed to the Civil Rights Act of 1964?
 It should be obvious that there is no purely factual answer to
 this question. Instead, lawyers will be forced not to try to un
 cover some fact, but to offer the best constructive interpretation
 of Locke, recognizing that the relevant interpretation is neither
 pure discovery nor pure invention. The Lockean who approves
 or disapproves of Civil Rights Acts is hardly the historical
 Locke. Even when a philosopher makes explicit claims about a
 topic, the application can be far from clear. The Lockean pro
 viso about the need to leave "enough and as good for others"
 cannot realistically be said to decide questions about welfare en
 titlements.

 There is a third problem, having to do with the need for
 legal solutions to operate in a world with distinctive limitations.
 Let us suppose, for example, that philosophers have persua
 sively shown that wealth maximization is a philosophically inde
 fensible ideal, and that a just state should be concerned instead
 with utility, with human flourishing, or with protection of a
 category of basic rights. It might be clear, for example, that the
 maximization of wealth is too crudely connected to anything
 that human beings do or should really care about. Have we
 therefore shown that lawyers should reject the pursuit of wealth
 maximization through the law of contract and tort? Not neces
 sarily. It may be that wealth maximization is the approach to
 contract and tort law that best combines the virtues of substan

 tive plausibility and real-world administrability. Even if wealth

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 272 CASS R. SUNSTEIN

 maximization is not in the end a good approach to justice, it
 might be shown that greater social wealth is at least roughly
 connected with the achievement of important human values.
 And if those other values cannot easily be promoted by common
 law courts—consider utility—perhaps wealth maximization is
 not so bad after all.1 In any case the philosophical defects with
 wealth maximization, even if they run deep, may not be decisive
 for law.

 The example is not exotic. Some philosophers think that a

 free speech principle that places a special premium on political
 discussion is extremely attractive.2 But perhaps this approach
 would be too readily subject to abuse in the real world. Perhaps
 any institutional judgments about the category of what counts
 as "the political" would be too biased and unreliable to be ac
 ceptable. For good institutional reasons, we might adopt a free
 speech principle of a philosophically inadequate sort, simply
 because that inadequate approach is the only one that we can
 safely administer.

 To take another example: Some philosophers believe that
 emotions have important cognitive dimensions, or that they are
 a form of cognition, and indeed it seems clear that various
 emotions—grief, hate, love—are based on judgments of value.3
 But a democratic society might still decide that emotions are so
 likely to be partisan or parochial, or to go wrong in some pre
 dictable way, that they should be excluded from certain areas of
 law. The exclusion might be based not on a philosophical mis
 take about the distinction between reason and emotion, but

 instead on an awareness of institutional limits faced by human
 beings in certain situations.

 One hnal example: Suppose that we wanted to ensure that
 confessions are made under circumstances in which they are
 truly voluntary. Suppose that we can generate a philosophically
 adequate account of voluntariness, and that with respect to that
 account, some confessions that come after the Miranda warnings
 are involuntary, while some confessions that are given without
 those warnings turn out to be voluntary. The Miranda rules, in
 short, turn out to be both overprotective and underprotective
 with reference to the best philosophical understanding of vol
 untariness. Do we have a sufficient reason to abandon Miranda?

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 273

 Surely not. The Miranda approach may be the best means of
 combining real-world administrability with substantive plausibil
 ity. If so, it may be more than good enough despite its philo
 sophical inadequacy. The phenomenon of philosophically inad
 equate but nonetheless justified legal strategies seems to be a
 pervasive part of a well-functioning system of law.

 This leads to a final point, having to do with the complex
 connection between theories of the good or the right on the one
 hand and concrete legal disputes on the other. Perhaps the
 point emerges most simply by thinking about works of literature
 that seem to have political components. Dickens and James are
 obvious examples. It would be obtuse to ask whether Dickens
 favors worker ownership of plants, or whether James believes
 that any real revolution must occur quickly or instead in short
 steps. The problem is not that the works of Dickens and James
 do not bear on these issues. It is that Dickens and James may
 greatly deepen understanding of capitalism or of the revolu
 tionary sensibility without at the same time telling us about what
 sorts of legal reforms and approaches make sense.

 Some of these same things may also be true of Hobbes,
 Locke, Rousseau, or Rawls and Raz. The relationship between
 any philosophical account of (say) justice and liberty need not
 lead to any particular specification of outcomes in disputed
 cases in law. We may believe, with Raz, that human values are
 not commensurable4 without having endorsed a position about
 prostitution and surrogacy, about the appropriate remedy for
 natural resource damages, or about the relationship between
 specific performance and monetary damages in tort cases. Of
 course, views about commensurability may influence these de
 bates. But the philosophical claims cannot be decisive, because
 there is much else of which real-world institutions must take

 account. We may think, with Rawls, that the difference principle
 is required by good thinking about justice, without believing
 that the Constitution mandates that principle, or even that the
 United States Congress should pursue that principle in light of
 the multiple constraints that it faces. In this way philosophical
 commitments may inform understandings about law without
 leading to particular judgments about legal disputes.

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 274

 CASS R. SUNSTEIN

 III. Philosophy vs. Law? Of Harlan

 and Hercules

 Legal positivists sometimes think that law has nothing to do with
 philosophy, at least in the quiet narrow sense that the legal
 enterprise can often operate without offering any philosophical
 or theoretical claims at all.5 In this way, positivists believe that
 legal practice and legal theory can be sharply distinguished. As
 against the positivists, Ronald Dworkin famously argues that
 there is an inevitable evaluative or normative dimension to state

 ments about what the law is.6 Often, at least, one cannot say
 "what the law is" without also saying something about "what the
 law should be." That is, when lawyers disagree about what the
 law is with respect to some question—can the government ban
 hate speech? cross-burning?—they are disagreeing about "the
 best constructive interpretation of the community's legal prac
 tice."7 Thus Dworkin argues that interpretation in law consists
 of different efforts to make a governing text "the best it can
 be." This is Dworkin's conception of law as integrity.

 Hercules, Dworkin's inhnitely patient and resourceful judge,
 approaches the law in this way. Here we have an interesting
 view of the relationship between legal theory and legal practice.
 Is Hercules a theorist or a practioner? The answer is that he is
 neither and both. Hercules is a practitioner insofar as he takes
 legal practice—in the form of the existing legal materials—very
 seriously indeed. People's legal rights may well be different
 from the rights that would be yielded by the best abstract the
 ory. Dworkin thus places a large emphasis on "ht" with existing
 materials as a criterion for correctness of legal outcomes. The
 lawyerly virtue of integrity is connected with achievement of
 principled consistency among similar and dissimilar cases; prin
 cipled consistency may generate outcomes that diverge from
 what justice requires if it is understood as an independent ideal.
 Thus justice and integrity are not the same thing. On the other
 hand, Hercules is a theorist too. To know what the law is, the

 judge has to cast the existing materials in their best light, and to
 do this, the judge must often (and perhaps always) take a stand
 on some large theoretical questions.

 We might compare Hercules' conception of the judicial role

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 275

 with the search for reflective equilibrium in politics and ethics.8
 Much of practical reasoning, in law and elsewhere, entails an
 effort to produce general theories by close engagement with
 considered judgments about particular cases. Those judgments
 may serve as provisional "fixed points" for inquiry, in the sense
 that we have a high degree of confidence in them and cannot
 readily imagine that they could be shaken. In searching for
 reflective equilibrium, what we think tentatively to be the gen
 eral theory is adjusted to conform to what we think to be our
 considered views about particular cases. The particular views
 are adjusted to conform to the general theory and vice versa.

 There is a close relationship between the search for reflective
 equilibrium and Hercules' approach to law. Hercules also at
 tempts to go back and forth between particular judgments—
 reflected in judicial holdings—and the various theories that
 account for them. The general theory is adjusted to conform to
 the holdings. This search for an equilibrium between "fit" and
 "justification" might be understood to be the practical lawyer's
 analogue to this conception of the philosopher's project.

 Here we have a distinctive picture of the relationship be
 tween practice and theory in law. The picture helps show how
 the lawyer's task is both similar to and importantly different
 from that of the philosopher. It is also true that a statement
 describing the law is not a statement about some "plain fact";
 when it comes to interpretation, there is often a large evaluative
 dimension to positions about what the law is.9 Often the dis
 agreement really rests on what approach makes for the best
 system of law—which is not the same as saying that it rests on
 an independent judgment about the best theory.

 Many lawyers, however, wonder whether Dworkin fully de
 scribes how lawyers think, and their puzzlement says something
 important about the relationship between theory and practice in
 law. A serious problem has to do with the practice of analogical
 reasoning, which lies at the heart of how lawyers (and many
 ordinary people) proceed. In Dworkin's hands, theories are
 produced in the large, on the basis of fairly abstract moral
 theory (so long as the judge respects the duty to fit the cases).
 These theories are then brought to bear on particular problems.
 Consider, for example, Dworkin's description of how judges

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 276 CASS R. SUNSTEIN

 should think about free speech law.10 Dworkin begins with a
 noninstrumental, "constitutive" conception of free speech, in
 accordance with which speech is protected because of the need
 to respect the moral autonomy of the citizenry. On Dworkin's
 view, moral autonomy is insulted whenever government at
 tempts to prevent people from hearing things that they hnd
 persuasive.11 Dworkin brings this idea to bear on the area of
 libel; he concludes that the Constitution imposes hrm barriers
 against liability for public or private libel. Or consider the area
 of race discrimination. On Dworkin's account, the judge must
 ask: Does the legal prohibition on race discrimination reflect a
 category of suspect classifications stemming from a general
 right to be treated as equals; or a right against the use of certain
 banned categories; or a right not to be subject to prejudice?
 Dworkin concludes that the third theory is best and that affir
 mative action is therefore constitutional.12

 Dworkin emphasizes that in answering such questions, law
 yers will not be pure philosophers. They do not simply develop
 the best theory from the standpoint of principle; they must
 offer their answers in a way that is attuned to the need for "fit"
 and to the courts' proper role. But this concession may be
 insufficient. In deciding whether, for example, a restriction on
 private libel offends the first amendment, lawyers usually do
 not ask which interpretation makes the amendment the best it
 can be. They do not begin or end with a high-level conception
 of the values promoted by the amendment. These are broad
 and abstract questions. They are too hard, large, and open
 ended for legal actors to handle. They call for responses that
 are, in one sense, too deeply theorized.

 We might think here about Justice John Marshall Harlan, a
 very different judge from Hercules. I cannot discuss Harlan's
 opinions in detail here, but let me offer a few observations.
 Harlan was an extraordinarily skilled but in many ways a highly
 conventional common lawyer.13 Harlan's approach to law was at
 most intermittently theoretical. He avoided large claims. He was
 a great analogizer. He was closely attuned to connections among
 cases without attempting high-level theories about the right or
 the good. And here, I think, we can find a conception of legal
 practice that at least attempts to be divorced from legal theory.

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 277

 That is, Harlan's writings show the possibility of a form of what
 we might call low-level normative practice, diverging from full
 scale normative theory.

 Harlan was an especially distinguished judge, but his ap
 proach to law is far from unfamiliar. In thinking about free
 speech issues, lawyers engaged in ordinary practice do not gen
 erate large-scale theories about the meaning of (for example)
 free expression in a democracy. Instead, they ask what particu
 lar sorts of practices clearly seem to violate the first amendment,
 or the principle of free expression, as these are understood
 through our practice. Then they ask whether a restriction on
 (for example) private libel is relevantly similar or relevantly
 different. The same is true of much judicial work in private law;
 it is also true of statutory construction, at least in difficult cases,
 where the issue is whether the case at hand resembles the cases

 at which the statute is unambiguously aimed. Of course, the
 description of relevant similarities and differences will have
 evaluative dimensions, and these should be made explicit. But
 lawyers and judges will not engage in anything like general
 moral theorizing. If a distinction between legal practice and
 legal theory is to be sustained, I think that this is the place to
 start. Everyday legal thinking proceeds without taking high
 level stands on questions of the right or the good.

 Is this project possible or worthwhile? From the standpoint
 of Dworkin's Hercules, we might respond in the following way.
 A judge who operates in this apparently conventional way might
 end up being Herculean, too. At least he had better have that
 aspiration in mind. When our modest judge—Harlan rather
 than Hercules—uses analogical reasoning to say that case A is
 like case B, he has to rely on a principle. If he is reasoning well,
 he will have before him a range of other cases, C through Z, in
 which the principle is tested against others and refined. At least
 if he is a distinguished judge, he will experience a kind of
 "conceptual ascent," in which the more or less isolated and low
 level principle is finally made part of a general theory, or of
 reflective equilibrium. On this view, Harlan should be seen as
 someone who engages in a truncated form of what Hercules
 seeks to do, with the truncation starting at just the point when
 things start to become interesting or difficult. Little can be said

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 278 CASS R. SUNSTEIN

 for something as modest and cautious as that. It might there
 fore be concluded that legal practice is simply a form of legal
 theory without the requisite self-consciousness or ambition.

 There is some truth in this response. Any claim that one case
 is like another does depend on the implicit or explicit invocation
 of a principle. We cannot tell whether a ban on private libel is
 like a ban on commercial speech, or like a ban on attempted
 bribery, without a principle enabling us to know what is similar
 to what. The principle should of course be identified. Once we
 know what it is, we might want to test the principle by seeing
 how it coheres with all of the existing legal materials (or with a
 theory independent of those materials). Thus far, then, Harlan
 does not seem to be a worthy competitor to Hercules, but
 merely a somewhat lazy imitator.

 But this view is incomplete. We can identify a number of
 distinct advantages to what I am describing as a form of practice
 that is in important respects independent of theory. Each of
 these advantages is especially important for people engaged in
 legal reasoning.

 First, this form of reasoning may be the best approach that is
 available for people of limited time and capacities. The search
 for reflective equilibrium, or for vertical and horizontal coher
 ence, may be simply too difficult for participants in law (or for
 others engaging in practical reasoning in an attempt to think
 through difficult problems). Often there are too many real
 world constraints to work out a fully general theory. And when
 compared with the search for reflective equilibrium, analogical
 reasoning has the advantage, for ordinary lawyers and judges,
 of humility and modesty. To engage in analogical reasoning,
 one need not take a stand on large, contested issues of social
 life, some of which can be resolved only on a sectarian basis. For
 this reason, we might think that practical reasoning in law of the
 sort I am now describing can claim to avoid the risk of hubris.
 Second, reasoning by analogy may have the large advantage
 of allowing a convergence on particular outcomes by people
 unable to reach anything like an accord on general principles.
 Sometimes it is exceedingly difficult to get people to agree on
 the general principles that account for their judgments. But

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 279

 sometimes it is possible to get them to agree on particular solu
 tions or on low-level principles.14 An incompletely theorized
 agreement15 is often possible on the view that case A is rele
 vantly similar to case B—even if those who join the agreement
 could not decide as between utilitarianism or Kantianism, or

 come to closure on the appropriate role of religion in society.
 This is especially important in a legal system, for people must
 be able to converge on particular judgments even if they dis
 agree on matters of high principle. It might even be said that
 allowing this form of convergence is one of the most crucial
 tasks for a system of adjudication in a liberal democracy.

 There are many examples inside and outside the law. Con
 sider the enormous difficulties that would arise if any heteroge
 neous faculty attempted to set out the appropriate general prin
 ciples by which to decide issues of faculty diversity. It is certainly
 possible that no such principles could command consensus, or
 indeed, that the effort to reach consensus would produce acri
 monious and only mildly productive debate. But even such a
 faculty might well be able to agree on a wide range of particular
 appointments cases, with its agreement on outcomes supported
 by diverse (and incompletely debated) justifications. This exam
 ple may serve as a metaphor for how legal arguments—and
 perhaps day-to-day normative practice—really work. People
 who could not reach agreement on high-level principles, or
 theorize about their judgments without collapsing into sectari
 anism, might nonetheless be able to engage in productive, low
 level debates, and precisely because particular judgments can be
 supported by a range of diverse principles on which no stand
 need be taken. This is what happens with most disputes in both
 public and private law.

 Third, analogical reasoning may be especially desirable in
 contexts in which we seek moral evolution over time. If the legal
 culture really did attain reflective equilibrium, it might become
 too rigid and calcified; we would know what we thought about
 everything, whether particular or general. By contrast, Harlan's
 method has the important advantage of allowing a large degree
 of openness to new facts and perspectives. It enables disagree
 ment and uncertainty to turn into consensus. This is a large

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 280 CASS R. SUNSTEIN

 advantage of a form of day-to-day normative practice that is
 distinct from abstract and general normative theory.

 Fourth, analogical reasoning in law operates with precedents
 that have the status of fixed points. This is so even for people
 who disagree with those precedents as a matter of principle. In
 searching for reflective equilibrium, by contrast, everything is
 révisable. (Here, there is a contrast as well between Dworkin's
 approach and the search for reflective equilibrium; because
 Hercules places a high premium on fit, it seems clear that he
 must take cases as given even if he would not agree with them
 in principle, though Dworkin is not entirely clear on this point.)
 The fact that precedents are fixed points helps to bring about
 an incompletely theorized convergence as well, by constraining
 the areas of reasonable disagreement. In this way, analogical
 reasoning introduces stability and predictability, which are im
 portant virtues for law.

 There is a larger point here. Lawyers could not try to reach
 reflective equilibrium without severely compromising the sys
 tem of precedent. The judgments at work in the search for
 reflective equilibrium are subject to critical scrutiny, and any
 of them might be discarded. The point helps explain Rawls's
 suggestion that "for the purposes of this book, the views of the
 reader and the author are the only ones that count. The opin
 ions of others are used only to clear our own heads."16

 In a legal system, precedents are far more than an effort "to
 clear our own heads." If a judge or a lawyer is to attempt to
 reach reflective equilibrium, precedents will have at most the
 status of considered judgments about particular cases, and these
 might be revised when they run into conflict with something
 else that he believes and that is general or particular. In the
 legal system, precedents have a much firmer status. To be sure,
 precedents are not immune to revision, but the principle of
 stare decisis ensures that they operate as relatively fixed points.
 I conclude that the search for reflective equilibrium is a mis
 leading description of law, and in some ways an unattractive
 prescription, for participants in a legal system aspiring to stabil
 ity should not be so immodest as to reject judgments reached by
 others whenever those judgments could not be made part of
 reflective equilibrium for those particular participants. Of

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 281

 course, it is only a mixed blessing to have fixed points that may
 be wrong as a matter of principle. For this reason, observers of
 or participants in the legal system may be pushed in the direc
 tion of theoretical challenges to current legal materials. These
 challenges should hardly be disparaged; sometimes they pre
 vail, and rightly so. But legal practice often operates with a kind
 of consensus on theoretical issues, a consensus in which people
 who diverge on large-scale issues can agree on how to approach
 particular controversies.

 Now let us return to Hercules, who does not seek to achieve

 reflective equilibrium of the ordinary sort, acknowledging as he
 does that the existing legal materials must usually be accepted
 even if they seem wrong. Does Harlan have some advantages
 over Hercules? I think that he does. Insofar as Harlan avoids

 resort to large-scale theory, he not only avoids unrealistic expec
 tations for people engaged in law, but also promotes a system in
 which people who disagree on a great deal can converge on the
 particular judgments of which a system of adjudication must
 consist. This too is at best a mixed blessing. It may perpetuate
 errors. It may tolerate inequality and unfair treatment. But a
 blessing that is mixed is a blessing nonetheless.

 One additional note: Dworkin's conception of law contains
 an interesting account of what it means for law to be legitimate.
 Hercules can produce vertical and horizontal consistency
 among judgments of principle; Harlan can offer nothing so
 bold. A legal system that is incompletely theorized will not yield
 anything like coherence, and perhaps this is a decisive defect.

 A complete response would require more detail than I can

 offer here, but a few remarks are in order. Full theorization

 consists of much more than a legal system of numerous, hetero
 geneous, hierarchically arranged courts can be expected to of
 fer. Because of the need for predictability and stability in law,
 judges must reason from cases with which they disagree, and
 the resulting judgments are unlikely to be fully theorized. If
 this is so, a system of legal practice may well be able to claim the
 requisite legitimacy if it is democratic (broadly speaking) and if
 individual judges seek to produce the limited but important
 sorts of consistency that Harlan can yield. If this is correct, a
 system in which judges reason by analogy, and do not seek

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 282 CASS R. SUNSTEIN

 reflective equilibrium, might itself be justified as part of the
 reflective equilibrium reached by informed observers who take
 institutional issues into account.

 IV. A Final Challenge for Legal Practioners

 There is a final challenge to what I am describing as Justice
 Harlan's method, and this challenge bears directly on the rela
 tionship between theory and practice in law. The challenge
 would emphasize that Harlan's method, and especially his em
 phasis on incompletely theorized particulars, is necessary only
 because of our failure to develop general principles, which
 ought to be evaluated in their own right. The method of anal
 ogy, for example, is based on the question: Is case A relevantly
 similar to case B, or not? Is a ban on homosexual sodomy like a
 ban on the use of contraceptives in marriage, or like a ban on
 incest? We have seen that to answer such questions, one needs a
 theory of relevant similarities and differences. By itself, analogi
 cal reasoning supplies no such theory. It is thus dependent on
 an apparatus that it is unable to produce.

 In short, everything is a little bit similar to, or different from,
 everything else. Perhaps better: everything is similar in infinite
 ways to everything else, and also different from everything else
 in the same number of ways. Without a set of criteria to engage
 in analogical reasoning, one has no idea what is analogous to
 what.

 The first and most modest response to this idea is that judg
 ments in particular cases may be an important part of the devel
 opment of governing principles, which are often low-level. For
 example, it will be very hard to develop criteria or general
 theory without looking at the wide range of cases that raise free
 speech issues. This is certainly so for judges in a system of
 adjudication, and even more in a legislature during a period of
 enthusiasm for general rules. Specification of the general theory
 will be an extraordinarily difficult task. Often it cannot be de
 scribed, except at an uninformatively high and crude level of
 abstraction, in advance.

 Thus far I have suggested that Harlan's approach is helpful
 even if the criticism is fundamentally right: we do need princi

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 283

 pies to decide cases; but this is not an objection to reasoning
 from particular cases, which helps us to decide what our (low
 level) principles are. But this humble point may establish only
 that analogies help us discover principles, which are in an ulti
 mate sense freestanding. In Kant's formulation, examples may
 be like walkers for children, helping people who are ethically
 immature to begin to orient themselves like adults.17 Thus "ca
 suistry is most suitable to the capacity of the undeveloped and
 so is the most appropriate way to sharpen the reason of young
 people in general."18 Convictions about particular cases—the
 stuff of practice—are like a ladder that can be discarded once
 we have climbed to the top.

 I think that this metaphor is misleading, because it suggests
 that the relevant convictions are dispensable in a way that they
 are not; particular judgments are not a ladder to be tossed
 away, but an important basis for our general principles. And as
 many have emphasized, some faculty is necessary to bring gen
 eral rules to bear on particular cases; often the application is far
 from mechanical. But a fuller response to this criticism will have
 to go deeper. I must be tentative about the point here, but
 the fuller defense would start with the claim that particular
 judgments about particular cases have a kind of priority in
 deciding what the law is or should be. My speculative suggestion
 is that correct answers in law might consist precisely of those
 particular judgments and these low-level principles, once these
 have been made (maximally) to cohere. The claim may extend
 beyond law to ethics and politics as well.19

 The claim may be right even if we acknowledge, as we
 should, that the effort to develop broader levels of abstraction
 is often a check against partiality and error in particular cases.
 In ethics as in law, judgments about particulars should be provi
 sional in the sense that sometimes they must be revised precisely
 because they cannot be squared with other judgments that are
 particular and general; but in certain endeavors, those particu
 lar judgments may deserve a kind of priority. They may deserve
 priority because they are more fully and carefully attuned to
 the multiple considerations likely to be at stake, and because
 general rules may be so broad and abstract as to ignore perti
 nent features of good judgment. Of course, nothing in this view

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 284 CASS R. SUNSTEIN

 amounts to a denial of the need for general principles and
 rules, to counteract bias, to minimize costs of decision, and to

 bring about the various virtues associated with the rule of law.
 Often, at least, general principles do seem inadequate to the
 matter at hand. Too many factors will be relevant, and too
 many variations will be possible, to allow a general formulation
 adequately to capture the range of right results in the cases.
 Sometimes any general theory will be too rigid and too inflexi
 ble. Part of the reason is that the relevant goods are diverse and
 plural, and most general theories are poorly attuned to this fact.
 In the law of free speech, for example, the Supreme Court has
 not offered a theory to account for its judgments. It has not
 explained what speech counts as "high value" and what speech
 falls in a lower tier. It is tempting to say that this is a major
 failure in constitutional law, and that the Court would do much

 better to tell us in plain terms what "test" it is using. But perhaps
 any test, described at a high level of generality, will be subject to
 decisive counterexamples, and will therefore be inadequate to
 the task.

 Perhaps this is true partly because of the diversity of goods
 served by free speech—autonomy, development of the capaci
 ties, political liberty—and because diverse goods are unlikely to
 be well-captured by a highly general theory. Perhaps this is not
 true for the first amendment; it is possible that (1) if we thought
 well enough, we would come up with a perfect general theory,
 or—a quite different point—that (2) the advantages of an inad
 equately precise test might outweigh the disadvantages of hav
 ing no general theory at all. All I mean to suggest is that some
 times analogical reasoning might, in principle, be preferred to a
 general theory, simply because no such theory can adequately
 account for particular convictions, and because those convic
 tions, responsive as they are to the full range of interests legiti
 mately at stake, deserve priority in thinking about good out
 comes in law.

 This claim may be wrong; certainly I have not defended it
 adequately here. But if it is right, it may have large and incom
 pletely explored implications for the relationship among nor
 mative theory, operating through general theories, and what I

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 285

 am calling normative practice, operating modestly with low
 level convictions.

 Conclusion

 The practice of law is theory-laden. In their day-to-day work,
 many lawyers and judges are actually making theoretical claims.
 In some ways, it is most unfortunate that this point is not recog
 nized more often. The absence of self-consciousness about the

 theoretical claims may conceal those claims from view and make
 it harder to see that they represent a choice among plausible
 alternatives. The attack on legal formalism is above all an insis
 tence that legal work that purports to be mechanical is actually
 based on controversial substantive claims. Those claims ought
 to be brought out into the open and evaluated.

 But there are some advantages to the divorce of legal practice
 from legal theory. Analogical reasoning might be taken as a
 model for a process of thinking that is appropriately nonsectar
 ian and that tries to avoid large-scale claims about the right or
 the good. This approach is especially promising in light of the
 fact that it accomplishes a central task of a legal system and
 perhaps of normative practice generally: It enables people to
 converge on particular outcomes even though they disagree
 sharply on first principles. We might go further: Judgments
 about particular cases might deserve a kind of priority, or at
 least a distinguished place, in our thinking about law or even
 justice. It is unclear whether it is possible to have a form of
 legal practice that is agnostic on or largely independent of legal
 theory. But if this is possible, I contend that something of the
 sort suggested here is the place to start.

 NOTES

 1. As contended in Richard A. Posner, Problems of Jurisprudence

 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1990).

 2. Alexander Meiklejohn, Free Speech and Its Relations to Self-Gov

 ernment (New York: Macmillan 1948).

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 286 CASS R. SUNSTEIN

 3. See Ronald de Souza, The Rationality of Emotion (Cambridge:
 Cambridge University Press, 1989); Martha Nussbaum, The Therapy of
 Desire (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994).

 4. See Joseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom (Oxford: Oxford Uni

 versity Press, 1986), ch. 13.

 5. I draw in this section on Cass R. Sunstein, "On Analogical

 ReasoningHarvard Law Review 106:741.1 discuss these issues further
 in "Political Conflicts and Legal Agreements," forthcoming in the 1995
 Tanner Lectures in Human Values, ed. S. McMullin.

 6. See Ronald Dworkin, Law's Empire (Cambridge: Harvard Uni

 versity Press, 1986).
 7. Ibid., 224.

 8. See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Cambridge: Harvard Uni

 versity Press, 1971), 19-22, 46-51, and "The Independence of Moral
 Theory," Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association
 75 (1974-75): 5.

 9. This issue is discussed in chapter 4 of Cass R. Sunstein, The

 Partial Constitution (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993).

 10. See Dworkin's discussion of free speech, in "The Coming Bat

 tles Over Free Speech," New York Review of Books, (11 June 1992): 55,
 where the governing theory is also developed at an exceedingly high
 level of generality and where analogical reasoning plays no role. In
 fact, many of Dworkin's particular discussions are based on a form of
 deduction, in which he develops a general theory and evaluates partic
 ular cases by reference to that theory.

 11. The idea first appears in T. M. Scanlon, "A Theory of Freedom
 of Expression," Philosophy and Public Affairs 1 (1972); 204. Scanlon
 significantly revised his theory in "Freedom of Expression and Catego
 ries of Expression," University of Pittsburgh Law Review 40 (1979): 519.

 12. Law's Empire, 393—97.
 13. See Bruce Ackerman, "The Common Law Constitutionalism of

 John Marshall Harlan," New York Law School L. Rev. 5: 1 (1992).

 14. See the discussion in Albert Jonson and Stephen Toulmin, The
 Abuse of Casuistry Berkeley: University of California Press (1988), 16
 20. See also my "Political Conflicts and Legal Agreements," supra
 note 5.

 15. Cf. John Rawls, "The Idea of an Overlapping Consensus," Ox

 ford Journal of Legal Studies 7 (1987): 1.

 16. Rawls, A Theory of Justice, 50. I do not claim that the only

 function of this statement is to point to revisability. In the relevant
 section, Rawls is discussing the analogy between the sense of grammar

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Legal Theory and Legal Practice 287

 and the sense of justice, and suggesting that a knowledge of one
 person's sense of either would be a good beginning.

 17. See the instructive discussion is Onora O'Neill, "The Power

 of Example," in her Constructions of Reason (Cambridge: Cambridge
 University Press, 1989).

 18. Ibid., 168.

 19. Compare John Rawls, Political Liberalism (New York: Columbia
 University Press, 1993), who suggests that in the search for reflective
 equilibrium, judgments at all level of generality are provisional and
 that no level has priority.

 I do not deal here with the fact that analogies may sometimes be a

 result of patterns that reach deep into cognitive processes, and that
 there is no identifiable "principle" to make one thing analogous to
 another but instead patterns that are constitutive of human reasoning.
 The cognitive role of judgments of analogy would take me far beyond
 the present discussion.

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 10:48:17 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

