 The dubious status of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms A Constitutional Anomaly in the Czech Republic? Cass R. Sunstein On May 1, 1995, Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus, the remarkable leader of the Czech Republic, visited the University of Chicago. His visit became the occasion for an intriguing discussion of the status of constitutional rights in the Czech Republic. The bare facts are these. In 1991, the Federal Assembly of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic passed the Constitutional Act Instituting the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms. This Charter was written with considerable help from Western Europeans and Americans. It contains an ample set of rights and freedoms, including freedom of speech and religion, protection against abuse of police authority, protection against discrimination, and much more in the way of civil rights and liberties. The Charter also includes a set of social and economic guarantees. Consider the following examples: Article 28: Employees are entitled to fair remuneration for work and to satisfactory working conditions. Article 29: Women, adolescents, and handicapped persons are entitled to increased protection of their health at work and to special working conditions. Adolescents and handicapped persons are entitled to special protection in labor relations and to assistance in vocational training. Article 31: Citizens are entitled under public insurance to free medical care and to medical aid under conditions set by law. Article 30: Citizens are entitled to material security in old age and during incapacitation for work, as well as in the case of loss of their provider. Everybody who suffers from material need is entitled to such assistance as is essentialfor securing his or her basic living conditions. Article 35: Everybody has the right to live in afavorable living environment. Article 32: Parents who are raising children are entitled to assistance from the state. Constitution of the Czech Republic, there is no bill of rights in that republic-no protection of free speech, freedom of religion, fairness in the criminal justice system, or anything else. It therefore seems easy to conclude that the Charter has been made part of the Czech Constitution. Charter and its many parts? Do the social and economic guarantees have the same status as political and civil rights? Might uncertainty about the guarantees create similar uncertainty for the rights? These are very important questions. But they are not easy questions to answer.