 Thank you all. It's a pleasure to be here for many reasons, one of which is that I see in the room people I have known at extremely diverse stages of my life, from students who were students in my very first classes at the University of Chicago to teachers I had when I was a student. But I won't identify them; it might embarrass them and make them feel less young than in fact they are. So thank you for having me. First: No approach to interpretation is self-justifying. Any system of interpretation needs ajustification. In that sense, personal judgments are unavoidable.2 To this proposition, originalism is not at all an exception. It needs a defense of some sort. Those who find originalism attractive must mount a defense in terms of some account of the right or the good. References to legitimacy and political authority don't supply that defense; they are question-begging. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, The University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. A second goal of American constitutionalism involves democratic concerns. On this view, constitutionalism attempts to furnish the preconditions for democratic self-government. In its best form, our system of constitutionalism has the rule of law and democratic self-government at its foundations.4 Three: There are two forms of originalism, hard and soft. Hard originalism, which is the more famous, is unacceptable. For the hard originalist, we are trying to do something like go back in a time machine and ask the Framers very specific questions about how we ought to resolve very particular problems. The hard originalist view is the dominant theme of Judge Bork's book.' Justices Scalia and Thomas sometimes speak as if they are hard originalists.6 Hard originalism is an unacceptable project because it is inconsistent with too much that is both settled and worthy in many areas, including free speech, religious liberty, racial discrimination, and sex discrimination. The problem with hard originalism-putting the epistemological problems to one sideis not that it is indeterminate, but that it would result in an unacceptably narrow set of liberties for the United States in the Twentieth Century.7 There have been heroic efforts to show that the Framers' conception of religious liberty, race equality, sex equality, and free speech is acceptably ample.8 These heroic efforts are, I believe, notjust heroic but also a bit comic. We ought not to be fooled. It is not the case that the Framers' views justify the set of results that even those most suspicious of rights-based constitutionalism would find minimally necessary. The fact that hard originalism is inconsistent with a minimal approach to free speech, religious liberty, and race and sex equality is important because any system of interpretation depends on a justification (recall thesis one). That justification must, broadly speaking, have a connection to whether such a system would make the world better or worse. Abstract words like political legitimacy and political theory won't do the job. This is why hard originalism is very hard to defend in principle. Fifth: It would be very good to converge, if we could, on soft originalism. Soft originalism does have a problem, however: its incompleteness as a theory of interpretation. Soft originalism 9. See Robert H. Bork, NeutralPrincipes and SomeFirst Amendment Probems, 47 IND. LJ. 1, politics can be decisive of present rights). needs supplementation. At its best, our practice in the United States has two supplementary devices, neither of which should be foreign to nor incompatible with Federalist Society aspirations. One supplementary device is Burkean; the other is Madisonian. From the standpoint of the rule of law, the problem with soft originalism is that the soft originalist identifies constitutional aspirations at a level of imprecision. How is it that we can have a system committed to the rule of law in the face of that fact? We don't have to look terribly far. As Burke saw, the great legal achievement of the English system is the common law.15 And our system of constitutional law is in significant part a process of caseby-case development. The origin of constitutional doctrine is not principally in the understandings of the founders, but rather in rules developed by the Supreme Court over generations and generations. Our rules come from case-by-case development, Burkean style. That is where the rule of law under our constitutional system has its vindication, not by particular understandings of the Founders. 4 What about democracy? A measure of judicial restraint is highly desirable. What I would like to suggest is that we have had too little of it and that the source ofjudicial restraint ought not to be principally or at all in hard originalism, but ought to be instead in more self-consciously democratic or, to be a little more precise, Madisonian considerations. This is a suggestion that the supplement to soft originalism ought to be an account of democracy, or republicanism-one that sees the judicial role as passive and restrained, except in cases where Madisonian considerations themselves argue for a judicial role. Let me suggest that the Burkean and Madisonian supplements to soft originalism are far more promising than hard originalism, which is really a misguided surrogate for the constitutional values of the rule of law and democratic self-government. Soft originalism, thus supplemented, brings out the underlying judgments more clearly and more honestly-and, most important, it does not rely on question-begging or (I think) impenetrable claims about legitimate authority.