 Lecture interesting that one could notice I have some stories for you to begin. I spend summers on the east end of Long Island (near the recent fire) because my in-laws are there. the things There are many Hamptons. One thing that is noticeable in the last few years is the change from the East Hampton dump to the East Hampton Recycling Center. When in late August I went there to throw out and separate my garbage, what I saw was extremely fancy cars-BMW's and Mercedes; there was one Rolls Royce-people with informal but extremely expensive clothes patiently separating their garbage, making sure the green glass was different from the white glass and that the newspapers were all sorted, spending a lot of time at the East Hampton Recycling Center. And they looked happy. The second story comes from my old boss, Thurgood Marshall, * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This is a lightly edited version of a lecture delivered at Quinnipiac College School of Law in October 1995. Some of the issues are discussed in more detail in Social Norms and Social Rules, COLUM. L. REv. (forthcoming 1996, May). The third story has to do with teenage smoking, something which the President is very interested in reducing. The newspapers have suggested that there has been a large increase in teenage smoking, which isn't quite true. Among whites, teenage smoking now is about the same as it has been for the past fifteen years. Think of what might have happened, what would you expect would have happened in this period among African American teenagers? Well, here is the appropriate data. In 1965, thirty percent of African American teenagers smoked appropriate cigarettes. In 1987, the number had dropped to twenty percent. In 1993, the number was four point four percent. This is recognized by the Center for Disease Control as a terrific public health success story for which the Center of Disease Control has no explanation. I have a hunch about what explains it. And it's connected with a poster that appeared adjacent to a highway-in a billboard in Harlem, New York, a poster that was part of a private educational campaign by the African American community designed to reduce teenage smoking. The poster has a picture of the Marlboro man looking like a skeleton offering a cigarette to an African American child and saying, "First they had us pick it; now they want us to smoke it." Something very important has happened in that community with respect to teenage smoking. is an intuition that these numbers should be the same. It turns out that the economists have this equivalence as an axiom. But the equivalence doesn't hold. When people are asked how much would they be willing to pay to allow the extinction of a spotted owl, they will give a number. They're asked how much would they have to be paid, they give a higher number. In fact, much of the time they give an answer like, "I don't answer questions like that," or, "There is no number high enough," or, "What sort of a person do you think I am?" This is an anomaly. It's causing some havoc in the economics community. depend on something like or close to big government. living longer and better as a result. So too, the water is much cleaner. In many ways America is the envy of the industrialized world because it has clean water compared to what it would have had without our regulatory efforts. In the area of voting rights and discrimination too, things are a lot better than they were as a result of governmental initiative. extinct-are just a product of social norms that affect us every day and make us do things that are surprising or might be surprising. Many puzzles in behavior are less puzzling if we attend to the pervasive role of social norms. Second: Often people live with norms that they simultaneously don't like but can't change on their own. To change a norm with respect to, for example, what a teacher ought to wear to class or to give a lecture is something an individual can't do anything about. My proposition is there are social norms all over the place that we live with, are governed by, but of which we don't approve if we reflect. Collective action is necessary to do something about them. something about prevailing norms, and to do that it would be good to use law. good about being seen doing this sort of thing; and therefore they undertook a choice that would have been completely astonishing ten years before. change them we need some help. We can't do it on our own. amounts. If the other person says, "I don't accept," neither gets to keep a penny. In experimental settings what would you expect would happen? How much would the first person propose and what would the second person accept? The economists predicted the following: The first person acting in a self-interested way will say, "I'll offer you a penny." And the second person will say, "Great." The first person acts in the self-interested way; the second person acts in a self-interested way; both people are better off. But this is not what happens. People almost never offer a penny, and when they do it's not accepted. There's a very high percentage of fifty/fifty, sixty/forty, seventy/thirty splits. This is because there is a powerful social norm saying that if you accept a penny you're showing your willingness to be subjected to contempt or dishonor. And if you offer that little, then you're showing a willingness to treat someone else in a contemptuous way. And there are extremely powerful social norms against that. People feel ashamed in both contexts. conduct. own. They require governmental or collective help of some kind. Now, there is a very intriguing class of laws which exist which are almost never enforced, but which accomplish an enormous amount of good-that have a kind of symbolic function just by virtue of the fact that they are there. These include laws forbidding littering, laws requiring seat belts to be buckled, laws encouraging or requiring recycling, and laws requiring people to clean up after their pets. These are laws that have contributed an enormous amount to environmental improvement. And the way they do that is signaling something that has a powerful effect on people's norms. And in these cases government can relatively cheaply use the law to attempt what the majority wants, that is norm change. nity operate powerfully against people's efforts to educate or better themselves by going to school or taking school seriously. Many of the hardest problems that people face is running up against social norms that make their efforts to better themselves by their own lights seem a source of shame. It's parallel to the condom story and the seat belt story; but maybe more poignant because it involves people's basic life prospects. There are things that government can do and that can be done collectively to make it so that education isn't stigmatizing but the opposite. There are places in the world where women who try to become literate are ostracized. And by acting on social norms the law might well be able to do something about it. wise to shoot a hundred people. Would you shoot the terrorist? Would you shoot the person the terrorist tells you to shoot if the terrorist would otherwise shoot a hundred people? Most react to that by saying, "I don't know. I don't know if I could. I don't know if I would." Most people hesitate. It's partly because of the expressive function of action and what one is expressing about oneself by shooting an innocent person. Law too often has an expressive function in the sense that it signals national or social commitments, partly in order to make for change with respect to (say) endangered species, recycling, smoking, sex equality. The expressive function of law doesn't have directly to do with consequences but instead with the norms that are being signalled and promoted.