 In this Article, I will discuss two different things. First, I will explore strategies that might synthesize some of the virtues of the common law with the potential virtues of modem regulation to produce outcomes that would save both lives and money. Second, I will address problems of the rhetoric of victimization in this setting and maybe in other settings, too. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, The University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. tort system is an inadequate solution in situations in which the people who are not parties, but who are affected, are numerous, hurt just a little bit, and poorly organized. No modem nation runs a system of air pollution on the common law model, and that is good. A common law model would make no sense for air pollution. This is an unremarked success story-the fact that the Environmental Protection Agency, although usually at excessive cost, has often reduced risk with respect to air and water. There is a political science story behind the fact that the success story is unremarked. It has to do with an odd coalition supporting silence on the part of critics of regulation and enthusiasts for regulation, neither of whom has a terribly great stake in describing success stories. Nonetheless, well over 100 million Americans once lived in areas that were dirty in terms of national health standards with respect to air. Now the number is much, much smaller and it continues to decrease. With respect to all of the conventional air pollutants, both ambient air quality levels and emission levels have gone way, way down-a terrific success story.' Nonetheless, there are two big problems in the system of regulation, both of them stemming from the fact that we have cho sen a system of Soviet style centralized command and control.' The first problem is one of poor priority setting. There is no systemic mechanism to ensure that we are going after real problems and not tiny problems. In fact, there tends to be a pollutant-of-the-month syndrome by which USA Today spurs regulatory initiatives, to which Congress and agencies react without getting a systematic sense of where that particular pollutant fits in our system.6 Command and control produces not only poor priority setting, but also a second problem-what Justice Breyer has described as mismatch:7 a poor fit between the problem that calls for regulation and the solution that government chooses. I will now discuss some nonsolutions and then some solutions. Three things, which I think are not terribly sound as solutions, are quite popular with the current Congress. These things in decreasing order of senselessness are moratoria," procedural barriers, and cost-benefit requirements." Moratoria on regulation are just too crude. They prevent things that might make a great deal of sense. "Super mandates" in the form of exhaustive paperwork requirements are a way of stultifying agencies in cases in which they might be doing good things. They are a way of ensuring the perpetuation of the status quo. 9. See Cindy Skrzycki, Slowing the Flow of Federal Rules; New Conservative Climate Chills Agencies'Activism, WASH. POST, Feb. 18, 1996, at Al (reporting that the Regulatory Transition Act would impose a one-year moratorium on federal regulations). that the Republicans have proposed does, allow private contracting in the sense of private initiatives that develop alternative means of satisfying regulatory goals-that do so as well but much cheaper." This proposal represents a potentially wonderful step that should maintain the current environmental benefits at a lower cost than the current programs.'" The Democrats ought not be opposing it. What I am suggesting is an effort to integrate the virtues of the common law-its flexible, decentralized, and market-oriented character-in a way that responds to the vices of the common law: the lack of information, the fact that externalities are inflicted, and the fact that decisions are made by unelected judges rather than by people who actually are accountable to the public. These changes would include informational strategies and economic incentives. This is the puzzle: when does the fact that the legal system 11. See Larry Wheeler, Dire Consequences Forecast in Rewriting Clean Water Act, GANNETt NVS SERV., May 10, 1995 (reporting that the Federal Water Pollution Act will shift power over water pollution regulation to localities). recognizes a right stigmatize someone as a victim? My hypothesis is that it does so when the relevant right seems not to deserve to qualify as such. That is the question we ought to be addressing; it is a substantive question. My concern is that the use of the term "victimology" bypasses the substantive question of which rights ought to be recognized. It does so through a kind of rhetorical flourish that is, I fear, starting to become a substitute for thought. I am proud to say that the Federalist Society was founded in part at the University of Chicago, and one of its best characteristics has been an attack on liberal shibboleths by looking at real consequences and specific problems and by asking what law actually does, not by throwing around rhetoric as liberal thought often did in the 1960s and '70s. My concern is that it would be unfortunate if the term victimology became a new question-begging shibboleth-one that was not an invitation to concrete thought about real problems, but that operated to truncate thought in the form of an accusation.