University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1995 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Eighteenth Century Presidency in a Twenty-First Century World, An 
Eighteenth Century Presidency in a Twenty-First Century World, An 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Eighteenth Century Presidency in a Twenty-First Century World, An," 48 Arkansas Law 
Review 1 (1995). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

An  Eighteenth  Century  Presidency  in a
Twenty-First  Century  World

Cass  R. Sunstein*

In the  United  States, the  President  is controlled  by the
Constitution,  and  in  all  respects  subordinate  to  it.  Insofar
as  it  deals  with presidential  power,  however,  the  American
Constitution has proved  to be a highly malleable  document.
With very few  exceptions,'  the  constitutional  provisions  re-
lating  to  the  President  have  not been  changed  at  all  since
they  were  ratified  in  1787.  But  in  the  late  twentieth  cen-
tury,  those  provisions  do  not  mean  what  they  meant  in
1787.  The  Constitution  is  a  legal  document,  and  it  is  en-
forced  judicially;  but  its  meaning  was  hardly  fixed  when  it
was  ratified.  In particular,  the  contemporary  President  has
far  broader  powers  than  the  original  Constitution  contem-
plated.  It is remarkable  but true that large-scale  changes  in
the  authority  of  the  President  have  been  brought  about
without changes  in the  constitutional  text, but nevertheless
without  significant  illegality.

This  is  a  paradox.  Is  it  not  clear  that  constitutional
changes, if not textual, are  illegal?  The paradox  has consid-
erable  relevance  to  our  current  thinking  about  the  presi-
dency  in  particular  and  about  constitutionalism  in  general.
Perhaps  the  framers  of  the  American  Constitution  feared
legislative  power  most  of  all;2  but  from  well-known  events
in the  twentieth  century,  it  is  possible  to conclude  that  it  is
presidential  power  that  holds out  the  greatest  risks to  both
liberty and  democracy.  The  President is by far the  most vis-
ible  leader  in the nation;  he is often the  only person  in gov-
ernment  with  a  national  constituency.  Moreover,  he  is

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  University  of  Chicago  Law

School  and  Department  of Political  Science.

1.  The  major exceptions  have to  do  with how  the President  is elected  and  with
the diminished  authority  of the  Electoral  College.  These  provisions  are  closely  con-
nected  with some  of the changes  discussed below,  because  greater  democratic legiti-
macy  helps  account  for  greater  authority.

2.  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  22  (Alexander  Hamilton).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  1 1995

2 

ARKANSAS  LAW REVIEW 

[Vol. 48:1

typically  in  charge  of the  armed  forces,  and  his  distinctive
visibility  can lead to a kind of "cult"  that threatens  constitu-
tionalism  and  legality  itself.  On  the  other  hand,  a  strong
President  has a distinctive  democratic  pedigree,  and he  is in
a  unique  position  to  accomplish  enormous  good.  An  un-
derstanding  of  this  fact  has  spurred  large-scale  changes  in
our  conception  of  the  presidency,  especially  in  the  New
Deal  period.3

There  is  some  dispute  about  whether  the  task  of  pro-
ducing  a  strong  President  without  endangering  liberty  has
been  successfully  accomplished  in the  United  States.  Some
people  think  that the  American  President is  much too  pow-
erful; 4 others  think that America  has  a weak  president  who
is  circumscribed  by congressional  "micromanagement"  and
unable  to  accomplish  the  tasks  for  which  he  is  elected.
This  debate  raises  complex  questions  that  I cannot  discuss
here.  My  purpose  here  is  far  narrower.  I  intend  to  show
how the modern  presidency is quite  different from  the foun-
ders'  presidency,  and  then  to  make  some  observations
about  how  all this  has  come  about.

I  do  not  contend  that the  enormous  changes  in the  na-
ture of the  presidency  are  illegitimate.  In fact  my purposes
are  mostly  descriptive.  But  I  do  think  that  for those  com-
mitted to  the project  of constitutionalism,  it  is important  to
maintain  a  degree  of  continuity  between  the  twenty-first
century  president  and  that  of the  late  eighteenth-century.  I
offer  a  few  notations  on  that  surprisingly  difficult  project.
A  general  proviso:  I  will  be  covering  a  fair  amount  of
territory  in  a  short  space,  and  most  of  the  issues  will  not
receive  the  detailed  attention they  deserve.  My  hope  is that
a  brief and  broad-gauged  approach  will  provide  a vivid  pic-
ture  of  the  changes  that  have  occurred,  and  of  how  those
changes  might  be  defended.

This  essay  is  in  three  parts.  Part  I  briefly  describes
some  of  the  contrasts  between  the  president  of  the  late

3.  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Constitutionalism After  the New  Deal, 101  HARV.  L.

REV.  421  (1987).

4.  See  ARTHUR  SCHLESINGER,  JR.,  THE  IMPERIAL  PRESIDENCY  (1973).
5.  See  TERRY  EASTLAND,  ENERGY  IN  THE  EXECUTIVE:  THE  CASE  FOR  THE

STRONG  PRESIDENCY  (1992).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  2 1995

1995]  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  PRESIDENCY 

3

twentieth  century  and  the  president  of  the  late  eighteenth
century.  Part  II  outlines  theories  of  constitutional  change
in  the  particular  context  of the  expanded  presidency.  Part
III  offers  some  conclusions.

I.  THE  PRESIDENT,  THEN  AND  NOW

A. 

In General

It  cannot  be  disputed  that  the  original  understanding
of the  presidency  called for much less  presidential  authority
than  is  taken  for granted  today.6  To  be sure the  prominent
founder  Alexander  Hamilton,  sought  a  powerful  presi-
dency.7  Moreover,  the  new  Constitution  created  an  execu-
tive  where  the  Articles  of  Confederation  did  not;  the
creation  of  a  novel  executive  branch  was  one  of  the  most
important  innovations  in the  Constitution.  But  the  original
American  President  was  exceptionally  weak  by  contempo-
rary  standards.

In  domestic  affairs,  the  President  had  relatively  little
law-making  or even  law-executing  power, in part because  of
the  limited  authority  of  the  national  government,  in  part
because  of  the  general  understanding  that  the  President
would  have relatively  little discretion  in the  lawmaking pro-
cess  or in  law-implementation.  In  international  affairs,  the
President's  power  was  much  narrower  than  it  is  now-in
part  because  of the  limited  role  of the  United  States  in  the
world,  in  part  because  the  President's  principal  unilateral
power  was  to  repel  sudden  attacks  on  the  United  States.

It  seems  sensible  to  speculate  that  the  increases  in
presidential  authority  have  come  in  part  because  of  the
greater  democratic  legitimacy  of the  President  given by  na-
tional  elections  and  by  constant  media  focus  on  the  Presi-
dent's plans  and proposals.  Nothing of this  kind could  havb
been  anticipated  at the  time  of the  founding.  This was  true
in  part  because  of  the  filtering  effect  of  the  Electoral  Col-
lege,  which  has  withered  since  the  founding  period.  To  say
the  least, George  Washington  was  a visible  person.  But the

6.  See  THEODORE  Lowi,  THE  PERSONAL  PRESIDENT:  POWER 

INVESTED,

PROMISE  UNFULFILLED  (1985).

7.  See  THE  FEDERALIST  Nos.  70,  71,  72  (Alexander  Hamilton).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  3 1995

ARKANSAS  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  48:1

enormously  high  visibility  of  the  President  has  helped  to
create  a  massively  different  institution  from  what  was
anticipated.

B.  Particulars

We  can  put  constitutional  changes  in  the  power  of the
President  in  several  categories.  First, some  changes  offend
no  constitutional  provision,  but  involve  alterations  from
what  the  framers  had  expected  or  had  hoped  to  achieve.
Second,  some  changes  do  not  clearly  offend  the  constitu-
tional  text,  but  do  violate  the  framers'  understanding  of
what  the  text  meant.  Third,  some  changes  offend  the  con-
stitutional  text.  I will  try  to  distinguish  among  these  differ-
ent  kinds  of  changes  below.

Consider  the  following  particulars,  showing  the  con-
trast  between  the  eighteenth  and twentieth-century  Ameri-
can  presidencies.

1.  In  the  founding  period,  the  President was  supposed
to  have  sharply  limited  authority  in  domestic  affairs,  partly
because  the federal  government  as  a whole  had sharply lim-
ited  authority  in  the  domestic  arena.  Basic  regulation  of
the  economy  was to  come  from state government,  and espe-
cially from  state courts,  which elaborated  upon the  common
law  of  tort,  contract,  and  property.8  To  be  sure,  the  Presi-
dent  did  have  authority  to  make  rules  in  some  important
areas. 9  But  by  modern  standards,  this  authority  was  quite
narrow.  It did  not involve  much  control  over  the  domestic
economy. 10

By  contrast,  the  modern  President  is  a  principal  na-
tional  lawmaker.  The  content  of  federal  law  has  a  great
deal  to  do  with  the  President's  program  and agenda.  Much
of  this  shift  has  occurred  simply  because  of  an  unantici-
pated  shift  in  power  from  the  states  to  the  federal  govern-
ment.  The  decline  of  limits  on  the  power  of  the  national

8.  See Lowi,  supra note 6;  STEPHEN  R.  SKOWONEK,  BUILDING  A  NEW  AMERI-
CAN  STATE:  THE  EXPANSION  OF  NATIONAL  ADMINISTRATIVE  CAPACITIES,  1877-
1920  (1982).

9.  See 1 KENNETH  CULP  DAVIS  &  RICHARD  J. PIERCE,  ADMINISTRATIVE  LAW

TREATISE  (3d  ed.  1994).

10.  See  LowI,  supra note  6. 

i

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  4 1995

1995]  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  PRESIDENCY 

5

government  has  helped  to  increase  the  authority  of  the
President.1 
In  implementing  national  law,  the  executive
branch,  therefore,  issues  an  extraordinary  range  of  regula-
tions  affecting  the  national  economy.

It is  a simple  truth that the national  government  has far
more  authority  than  the  framers  of  the  Constitution  origi-
nally  envisaged.  It  is  equally  if  less  simply  true  that  as  an
inevitable  result  of  this  shift,  the  President  himself  has  as-
sumed  an  array  of  duties  and  powers  not  within  the  con-
templation  of the  Constitution's  authors.

The  President's  assumption  of  these  powers  is  not  in
violation of the  constitutional text  (except  to the  extent  that
the  current  authority  of  the  national  government  is  itself
unconstitutional).  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  presidential
powers  are,  along  this  dimension,  quite  different  from  what
was  anticipated.

2.  In issuing  regulations  and indeed in  all of his official
acts,  the  President  needs  congressional  (or  constitutional)
authorization.  He  cannot  exceed  any  limits  that  Congress
has  laid  down. 12  He  must  "take  Care  that  the  Laws  be
faithfully  Executed.' 1 3  But  often  Congress  offers  very
vague  guidance.  The  President  has  a  great  deal  of  discre-
tion.  Perhaps  this  discretion  violates  the  Constitution,  as  a
violation  of  the  grant  of  legislative  power  to  Congress. 4
Perhaps  this  is  an  impermissible  delegation  of  legislative
authority.  But  the  twentieth  century  has  witnessed  a  judi-
cial  refusal  to  enforce  the  nondelegation  doctrine,' 5  which
required  clear standards  from  the  legislature.  The  downfall
of the nondelegation  doctrine  has  meant  that the  President
can exercise  tremendous  policymaking discretion  in the  do-
mestic  sphere.  This  sphere  includes  regulation  of the  envi-
safety  and  health,
ronment,  energy,  occupational 
communications,  and  much  else  besides.

I  do not suggest  that the  nondelegation  doctrine  was  a
clear  constitutional  imperative  in  the  founding  period,  or

11.  See  GEOFFREY  R.  STONE  ET  AL.,  CONSTITUTIONAL  LAW  (2d ed.  1991).
i2. See  Youngstown  Sheet  & Tbbe  Co.  v. Sawyer,  343  U.S.  579  (1959).
-13.  U.S.  CONST.  art.  II,  § 3.
14.  U.S.  CONST.  art.  I,  §  1.
15.  See  Schechter  Poultry  v.  United  States,  295  U.S.  495  (1935).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  5 1995

ARKANSAS  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  48:1

that  in  the  original  understanding,  Congress  was  banned
from  granting  broad  discretion  to  the  President.16  It is  fre-
quently  observed,  and  lamented,  that  the  nondelegation
doctrine  has  not  been  used  to  invalidate  a  federal  statute
since  1935.17  It is  less  frequently  observed,  but  no  less  im-
portant,  that  the  doctrine  was  not  used  to invalidate  a fed-
eral  statute  until  that  same  year.  The  nondelegation
doctrine  enjoyed  only  one  good year-a  point  that  compli-
cates  the  view  that  broad  grants  of  policymaking  authority
are  in  violation  of  the  original  design.

There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  the  post-New
Deal  grant  of  discretionary  authority  to  the  President  has
altered  the  President's  original  constitutional  role  and
greatly  expanded  his  authority  over  the  domestic  sphere.
We  might  be  skeptical  of the  idea  that  courts  should  invali-
date  the  grant  of discretionary  authority  to  the  President, 8
while  also  agreeing  that  such grants  give  the  President what
is,  in  effect,  legislative,  or  at  least  discretionary,  power  far
beyond  what  was  contemplated  by 
the  original
Constitution.

3.  The  framers  of the  Constitution  probably  wanted  to
allow  Congress  to  limit  the  President's  authority  over  the
many  high-level  officials  who  implement  the  laws  enacted
by  Congress.1 9  If Congress  saw fit,  it probably  had  the  con-
stitutional  authority  to  insulate  some  high-level  officials
from  presidential  supervision  or  discharge.  This  principle
might  seem  to  be  a  dry  and  technical  matter,  but  it  has
enormous  importance.  If the  Secretary  of the  Treasury  can
be  controlled  by  the  Congress, but not  by the President,  the
allocation  of  national  powers  is  much  changed.

It is  now generally  agreed,  however,  that  the  President
has broad  power  over almost  all  high-level  officials  who im-

16.  See  KENNETH  CULP  DAVIS  &  RICHARD  J.  PIERCE,  ADMINISTRATIVE  LAW

TREATISE  (3d  ed.  1994).

OF  THE  UNITED  STATES  (1979).

17.  See  THEODORE  J.  Lowi, THE  END  OF LIBERALISM:  THE  SECOND  REPUBLIC

18.  See  Mistretta  v.  United  States,  448  U.S. 361  (1988)(Scalia,  J.,  dissenting).
19.  This  controversial  claim  is  defended  in  Lawrence  Lessig  &  Cass  R.  Sun-
stein,  The  Preside:,t and  the Administration, 94  COLUM.  L.  REV.  1  (1994).  A  re-
sponse  can  be  found  in  Steven  G.  Calabresi  &  Saikrishna  B.  Prakash,  The
President's Power to  Execute the  Laws,  104  YALE  L.J.  541  (1994).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  6 1995

1995]  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  PRESIDENCY 

7

plement  the  law. 20  To  be  sure,  Congress  has  the  constitu-
tional  authority  to  create  "independent"  agencies. 21  It  is
unclear,  however,  how  "independent" 
the  independent
agencies  really  are,  as  a  matter  of  law  or  practice.  The
Supreme  Court  has  never  told  us,  and  in  practice,  the  in-
dependent  agencies  are  not  so  independent  of  the  Presi-
dent.22  In  any  case,  the  heads  of  the  Cabinet,  and  of most
executive  agencies,  can  be  discharged  by  the  President
whenever  the  President  chooses.  In  practice,  this  means
that  the  President  has  enormous  authority  to  control  their
activities.

Moreover,  Congress  has  no  power to  discharge  admin-
istrative  officials  on  its own  and  little power  to  prevent  the
President  from  acting  however  he  wishes.  (Of course  both
the  President  and  all  implementing  officials  must  obey  the
instructions  laid down by  Congress.)  The result  is that most
administration  of  the  laws-an  extremely  large  and impor-
tant  category-is subject  to  the will  of the President.  When
the  President  changes,  the  administration  changes  as  well,
at  least  as  a  matter  of  technical  law  and  largely,  too,  as  a
matter  of practice.

An  especially  interesting  illustration  of  this  phenome-
non  is  the  new  process  of  White  House  supervision  of
agency  rulemaking.  This  process  received  its  most  striking
endorsement  during  the  presidency  of  Ronald  Reagan.23
President  Clinton  has  made  a  similar  claim  of  authority.24
In  fact,  President  Clinton  has  gone  somewhat  farther  than
President  Reagan,  and  in  two  different  ways.  First,  he  has
asserted  at  least a  measure  of control  over  the  so-called  in-
dependent  agencies;  second,  he  has  apparently  claimed  the
authority  to  block  regulations.  At least  as  a technical  mat-
ter, the  process  of White  House  supervision  means  that  the

20.  The  key  decision is  Myers  v. United  States,  272  U.S.  52  (1926).
21.  Humphrey's  Executor  v.  United  States,  295  U.S. 602  (1935).
22.  See  Lessig  & Sunstein,  supra note  19.
23.  Exec.  Order  No.  12,291,  3  C.F.R.  127  (1981),  reprinted in 5  U.S.C.  § 601
(1988);  Exec.  Order  No.  12,498,  3  C.F.R.  323  (1985),  reprinted in  5  U.S.C.  § 601
(1988).

24.  See  Exec. Order  No.  12,866,  3  C.F.R. 638  (1993),  reprinted in 5 U.S.C. § 601

(1993).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  7 1995

ARKANSAS  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  48:1

President  will  have  firm  control  over  the  rulemaking
process.

The  assumption  of  broad  presidential  power  over  the
executive  agencies 
is  not  itself  unconstitutional.  That
power  is  probably  contemplated  by  Congress  itself when  it
delegates  authority  to  an  executive  agency,  and  there  is
nothing  troublesome  about  presidential  control  of  agents
whom  Congress  has  subjected  to  presidential  control.  But
our current  understanding  of the  constitutional  landscape  is
not  the  founding  understanding.  Existing  limits  on  Con-
gress'  power  to  structure  what  we  call  "the  executive
branch"--7however 
indistinct  they  may  appear  in  hard
cases-are  far  more  severe  than  the  limits  at  the  founding
period.

4.  It  is  generally  understood  that  the  President  will
submit  to  Congress  both  (a)  a  proposed  budget  and  (b)  a
great  deal  of  proposed  legislation.  As  a  result,  the  Presi-
dent now has a formidable  role in the  enactment  of national
legislation.  The  Constitution  contains  no  explicit  provision
on  the  budget,  and  it  does  not  clearly  sort  out  the  Presi-
dent's  role  with  respect  to  congressional  consideration  of
legislation.  To  be  sure,  the  Constitution  does  grant  the
President  the  power  to  "recommend  to  [Congress']  consid-
eration such measures  as he shall judge necessary  and  expe-
dient. '26  But  it  was  not  originally  believed 
that  the
President  would  submit  a  budget  to  Congress,  or  that  he
would  have  a  great  deal  of  authority  over  the  expenditure
of national  funds;  nor  was  it  understood  that  the  President
would  play  a  dominant  role  in  the  national  legislative
process.

Indeed,  it  is  unclear  exactly  how  much  authority  the
President  was  supposed  to  have  over  the  initiation  of legis-
lation.  Despite  the  Constitution's  provision  on  this  point,
President  Washington  suggested  that  " '[m]otives  of  deli-
cacy  ...  have  uniformly  restrained  the  P[resident]  from  in-
troducing  any  topick  [sic]  which  relates  to  Legislative
matters  to  members  of  either  house  of  Congress,  lest  it

25.  See  Lessig  & Sunstein,  supra note  19.
26.  U.S.  CONST.  art.  II,  § 3.

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  8 1995

1995]  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  PRESIDENCY 

9

should  be  suspected  that  he  wished  to  influence  the  ques-
tion  before  it.'  "27  Hence,  Washington  "would  not  permit
congressional  committees  to  solicit  his  opinion,  but  inti-
mated  his willingness  to express his views,  when asked,  to a
friend. 28

Washington's  own  approach  does  seem  extreme;  as  I
have  noted,  the  Constitution  itself  authorizes  a  broader
role.29  But  in  the  founding  period,  it  was  hardly  believed
that  the President  would  have  the  current  powers  of  initia-
tive,  granting  him  considerable  power  over  the  content  of
national  law.  The  President's  modern  power  of  initiative,
with  respect  to  the  budget  and  lawmaking,  is  quite  funda-
mental  to the  nature  of  our  government.  Of  course,  much
legislation  is  initiated  by  people  other  than  the  President.
But  it is  plausible  to  think that no  one  has  as  much  author-
ity  as  the  President  himself.  This  is  not  a  violation  of the
Constitution.  It  is,  however,  a  wholly  unanticipated  in-
crease  in  presidential  power.

5. The President's  power  to veto  legislation  has turned
out to allow him a  surprisingly  large  role  in determining  the
content  of national  legislation.  The  founders  of the  Consti-
tution  deliberately  and  explicitly  gave  the  President  the
veto  power.30  But  they did  not contemplate  its current  im-
portance,  and  they  might  well  have  been  alarmed  if  they
had  been  forewarned.

In granting  the  President  the power  to veto  legislation,
the  framers'  principal  goal  was  to  allow  the  President  to
veto  laws  on  constitutional,  rather  than  policy,  grounds.3'
Their  special  goal  was  to  permit  him  to  prevent  Congress
from  intruding  on  the  President's  constitutional  powers.
This  goal  was  narrow  indeed.  The  framers  did  not  antici-
pate  a  situation  in  which  the  power  to  veto  would  entail  a
significant  role  over  the  development  of policy  in  lawmak-
ing.  It is  not entirely  clear  that the  framers  sought  to allow

27.  LEONARD  D.  WHITE,  THE  FEDERALISTS:  A  STUDY  IN  ADMINISTRATIVE
HISTORY  55  (1948)(quoting  George  Washington,  Letter  (Feb.  1792),  in  31  THE
WRITINGS  OF  GEORGE  WASHINGTON  493  (John  C.  Fitzpatrick  ed.,  1931-44)).

Id.

28. 
29.  U.S.  CONST.  art. II,  § 3.
30.  See  U.S.  CONST.  art.  1, § 7,  cl. 3.
31.  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  51  (James  Madison).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  9 1995

ARKANSAS  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  48:1

the  President  to  veto  legislation  solely  on  the  ground  that
he  disagreed  with  the  policy  judgments  embodied  in  it
(though  probably  the  best reading  of the  history is  that the
founders  believed  that  the  President  could  veto  legislation
on  policy  grounds 32).  But  they  thought  that  this  power
would  be  exercised  rarely  and  only  in  the  most  extreme
cases.

The  founders  certainly  did  not  anticipate  the  current
situation,  in which  the  veto power  is  a  well-understood  part
of all  lawmaking,  and  implies  a large  and  continuous  presi-
dential  role  in  lawmaking  itself.  In  short:  the  President's
legal  and  political  authority  is  greatly  augmented  by  Con-
gress'  knowledge  that  the  President  can  veto  legislation  of
which  he  disapproves.  The  deterrent  effect  of  the  veto
should  not  be understated.  The current  veto power  is prob-
ably best viewed as constitutionally  acceptable,  but as  none-
theless  producing  a  situation  that  the  founders  did  not
expect  and  would  not  have  welcomed.

6. With  the  emergence  of the  United  States as  a world
power,  the  President's  foreign  affairs  authority  has  become
far more  capacious  than  was originally  anticipated.  For the
most part  this is  because  the powers  originally  conferred on
the President have  turned out-in light of the  unanticipated
position of the  United  States  in  the  world-to  mean  much
more  than  anyone  would  have  thought.  The  constitution-
ally granted  authorities have  led to a  great  deal of unilateral
authority,  simply  because  the  United  States is  so  central  an
actor  on  the  world  scene.  The  posture  of  the  President
means  a great  deal even  if the  President  acts  clearly  within
the  scope  of  his  constitutionally-granted  power.  Indeed,
mere  words  from  the  President,  at  a  press  conference  or
during  an  interview,  can  have  enormous  consequences  for
the  international  community.

In addition,  however, the  President has been  permitted
to  initiate  military  activity  in  circumstances  in  which  the
original  understanding  would  have  required  congressional
authorization.  On  the  founding  view,  a  congressional  dec-

32.  See  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  73  (Alexander  Hamilton).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  10 1995

1995]  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  PRESIDENCY 
laration  of war  was  a  precondition  for  war.33  The  only  ex-
ception was  that  the President could  act on his own  in order
to repel  a sudden  attack  on  the  United  States.34  But  in the
twentieth  century,  a  large  amount  of  presidential  warmak-
ing  has  been  allowed  without  congressional  declaration  of
war.35

11

We  should  distinguish  among  three  categories  here.
First,  some  of  these  exercises  of  authority  may  have  been
unconstitutional.  Some  of them  may  have  required  a  con-
gressional  declaration  as  a precondition  for national  action.
Second,  some  may  have  been  permissible  because  they  in-
volved  military  action  short  of  "war."  Third,  some  may
have  been  permissible  because  the  category  of  "sudden  at-
tack"  must be understood  capaciously  under  current  condi-
tions.  I  cannot  desegregate  these  various  possibilities  here.
Instead  I  offer  a  simple  point:  in  any  of  these  cases,  the
President's  power  goes  far  beyond  what  was  expected.

INTERPRETATION,  AMENDMENT,  OTHERS
II. 
From  all these  points  we  might  reaffirm  the  old  truism
that  the  Constitution-at  least  in  the  area  of  presidential
authority-is no  mere  lawyer's document.  The  original  un-
derstanding  has  not  controlled  the  future.  The  Constitu-
tion's meaning  is  not  fixed.  It  is in  large  part  a  function  of
historical  practices  and needs, and of shared  understandings
over time.36  Often the  power of the  President is understood
to be  quite  different from what  it was, say,  twenty-five years
earlier.

But  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  conclude  that  the  Presi-
dent's  constitutional  power  is  simply  a  matter  of  what
seems  to  him appropriate  or necessary,  and  not  a matter  of
law  at  all.  Often  the  President  loses  in  the  Supreme  Court,
and  in  nearly  every  important  case,  he  has  graciously  ac-
cepted  his  defeat.  To  take  just  a  few  examples  from  the
twentieth century:  President  Nixon was  forced to hand over

33.  See  GEOFFREY  R.  STONE  ET  AL.,  CONSTITUTIONAL  LAW  (2d  ed.  1991).
34. 
35. 
36.  Youngstown  Sheet & Tube Co. v.  Sawyer,  343  U.S.  579  (1959)  (Frankfurter,

Id.
Id.

J.,  concurring).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  11 1995

ARKANSAS  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  48:1

his  own  tape-recorded  conversations  during  the  Watergate
controversy;  President  Truman  was  prevented  from  seizing
the  steel  mills  during  the  Korean  War;  President  Eisen-
hower  was  banned  from  stopping  communists  from  travel-
ling abroad.37 These  defeats  are  important  in  themselves,
but they  are  even  more  important  for the  general  tone  that
they  set.  Every American  President  knows  that his  actions
are  subject to judicial review,  and this  is a large  deterrent  to
illegal  conduct.

For  purposes  of judicial  review,  the  President's  most
important  constitutional  duty  is  "to  Take  Care  that  the
Laws be  faithfully  executed. ' 38  This provision  subordinates
the  President  to the  law.  It also  requires  him  to  adhere  to
the  law,  both  constitutional  and  statutory.

I  have  suggested  that  the  changing  understandings  of
the  President's  power  have  occurred  without  either  textual
change  or  flagrant  presidential  violations  of  constitutional
requirements. 
I  have  also  suggested  that  this  presents  a
genuine  paradox.  We  have  a  president  who  is  much
stronger  than  the  framers  of  the  Constitution  anticipated;
but,  at  least  in  general,  the  current  presidency  is  not
thought, and should not be thought, unconstitutional.  How,
then, have  the  President's  powers  changed?  There  are  sev-
eral  possibilities.

A.  Flexible  Provisions  and  Silences

Many  of  the  changes  have  occurred  because  the  rele-
vant  constitutional  provisions  are  both  spare  and  ambigu-
ous,  and  they  allow  adaptation  to  changing  circumstances.
For  example,  the  grant  of  "executive  power"  to  the  Presi-
dent  leaves  much  uncertainty.  To  many  modern  readers,
the  term  connotes  all  or  much  law-implementation. 39  It
may  have  carried  a  narrower  meaning  in  the  founding  pe-
riod.  Or consider  the  authority  of the  President  in the  area
of foreign affairs.  The relevant provisions  are highly ambig-

37.  See United  States  v. Nixon,  418 U.S.  683  (1974);  Youngstown  Sheet & Tube

Co.  v.  Sawyer,  343  U.S.  579  (1959);  Kent  v.  Duiles,  357  U.S.  116  (1958).

38.  U.S.  CONST.  art.  II.,  § 3.
39.  See  Steven  G.  Calabresi  & Kevin  H.  Rhodes,  The  Structural Constitution:

Unitary Executive, Plural Judiciary, 105  HARV.  L.  REV.  1153  (1992).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  12 1995

1995]  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  PRESIDENCY 

13

uous,  certainly  on  their  face.  It is  hardly  crystal  clear  what
powers  accompany  the  authority  to  be  "Commander-in-
Chief of  the  armed  forces."

The  Constitution  also contains  important  silences.  The
Constitution  does not  say  whether  the  veto  power  compre-
hends  policy  disagreements.  It  does  not  describe  the  pre-
cise  relation  between  the  President  and  the  administration.
It  does  not  discuss  whether  the  President  may  submit  a
budget.  Constitutional  change  has occurred  in part  because
of constitutional  ambiguities  and  silences.  It seems  obvious
that a constitution  that  is not rigid,  and that  leaves  gaps  and
uncertainties,  will  allow  for  adaptation  without  amendment
or  illegality.

B.  Emergencies

Many  constitutions  contain  emergency  provisions,  al-
lowing  the government  to  have  special powers  under condi-
tions  of  emergency.  Most  notably, 
the  American
Constitution  contains  no  emergency  provisions  (although
the  President  is  allowed  to  suspend  the  writ  of  habeas
corpus  during  war 0 ).  It might  seem  natural  to think  that  in
spite  of the absence  of explicit  emergency  powers, many  in-
creases in presidential  authority have  occurred  as a result of
emergencies.  Certainly  it  is  true  that  some  such  increases
occurred  in  the  New  Deal  period,  as  a  result  of what  some
people  believed  to  be  the  emergency  conditions  of  the
Great  Depression.  And  some  of  the  most  dramatic  exer-
cises  or vindications  of presidential  authority  involved  what
many  thought  to  involve  emergency. 4'

In  general,  however,  changing  powers  of  the  presi-
dency  are  not  a product  of emergencies.  It would  be  a mis-
take  to  think  that  authorities  have  been  conferred  on  the
President  because  of an  implicit  "emergency  provision"  al-
lowing  American  officials  to  do  what  is  necessary  in  dire
circumstances.  Indeed,  the President  has rarely  been  found
to  have  special  authority  to  act  during  emergencies.  A  do-
mestic  crisis-widespread  unemployment,  social  unrest-

40.  U.S.  CONST.  art. I,  § 9.
41.  See  Dames  & Moore  v. Regan,  453  U.S.  654  (1981).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  13 1995

ARKANSAS  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  48:1

does  not  give  the  President  any  new  power.42  There  is  no
judicial  understanding  that  the  President  has  greater  au-
thority  if  he  can  point  to  an  emergency  situation,  or  claim
that  unusual  presidential  action  is  crucial.

Of  course  Congress  might  well  decide  to  confer  statu-
tory  authority  on  the  President  in  order  to  enable  him  to
respond to a  crisis.  Of course  Congress has  made  this  deci-
sion  in emergencies.  In  the  New  Deal  period, for example,
Congress  gave  the  President  a range  of new  authorities  be-
cause  of  the  perceived  need  for  special  responses  to  the
Great  Depression.  But the  President  has  not  been  allowed
to  act  on  his  own.  An  emergency  does  not  give  the  Presi-
dent  any  unilateral  powers.

C.  Common  Law  Constitutionalism

Some  academic  observers43  believe  that in  the  United
States,  interpretation  of  the  Constitution  depends  less  on
constitutional  text and history and  more on particular,  case-
specific  judicial  decisions.  This  process  of  case-by-case  de-
velopment  allows  the  meaning  of  the  document  to  change
over  time.  Indeed,  constitutional  law  in  America  (and  in
many  other nations  as  well)  has  many  features  of the  com-
mon  law  process.  In  that process,  no  one  sets  down  broad
legal  rules  in  advance.  The  meaning  of  the  Constitution  is
Instead,  the  rules
not  a  product  of  antecedent  rules. 
emerge  narrowly  as  judges  decide  individual  cases.  Gov-
erning  principles  come  from  the  process of case-by-case  ad-
in
judication,  and  sometimes 
advance.  It does  seem clear that much  of constitutional law
in  the  United  States comes  not  from  the  constitutional  text
itself,  but  from  judge-made  constitutional  law,  interpreting
constitutional  provisions.  For  this  reason,  the  meaning  of
the  document  is  not  rigidly  fixed  when  the  document  is
written  and  ratified.

they  Cannot  be  known 

42.  See  Schechter  Poultry  Corp.  v.  United  States,  295  U.S.  495  (1935);  New

York  Times  v.  United  States,  403  U.S. 713  (1971).

43.  See  Harry  H.  Wellington,  Common  Law  Rules  and Constitutional Double
Standards, 83  YALE  L.J.  221  (1973);  David  Strauss,  Common  Law  Constitutional
Interpretation  (August  1, 1994)(unpublished  manuscript,  on  file  with  the University
of  Chicago  Law  School).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  14 1995

1995]  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  PRESIDENCY 

15

for  example, 

Something  of  this  kind  is  certainly  true  for  the  powers
of  the  President,  and  the  system  of common  law  constitu-
tionalism  helps  explain  the  shifting understandings  of presi-
dential  power.  Consider, 
the  complex
question  whether  Congress  or  the  President  may  discharge
high-level  public  officials  (the Secretary  of  State, the  Attor-
ney  General,  the  Secretary  of the  Interior).  The  text of the
Constitution  does  not  speak  clearly  on  this  issue;  instead,
the  governing  constitutional  principles  have  been  worked
out  in the  process  of case-by-case  adjudication.  In Myers v.
United States,44  the  Court  said  that  high-level  executive  of-
ficers  must  be  subject  to  the  plenary  control  of  the  Presi-
dent.  In  Humphrey's Executor v.  United States,45  the  Court
qualified  this  rule,  saying  that  officials  exercising  quasi-leg-
islative  and  quasi-executive  functions  may  be  immunized
from  the President.  In Bowsher v.  Synar,46  the  Court distin-
guished  between  a congressional  role  in  removal  of law-im-
plementing  officials,  which  would  be  impermissible,  and
independence,  which  would  be  acceptable.  And  in  Morri-
son v.  Olson,4 7  the  Court  said  that  purely  executive  officers
may  sometimes  be  made  independent  of  the  President.
This  elaborate  body  of doctrine,  reflecting  changing  under-
standings  over  time,  is  a classic  illustration  of  how  the  pro-
cess  of  case-by-case  adjudication,  unburdened  by  general
rules  given  in  advance,  can  allow  presidential  authority  to
shift.

It  might  be  added  that  a  good  deal  of presidential  au-
thority  turns  not  on  judicial  decisions  at  all,  but  on  tradi-
tional  practices  and  shared  understandings  between  the
President  and  Congress.  Common  law  constitutionalism
occurs  outside  the  judiciary.  The  development  of  these
practices  and understandings  resembles  the process  of com-
mon  law  development.  It is  recognized  that  a  certain  prac-
tice  "works";  Congress  and  the  President  endorse  the
practice;  and  the  practice  therefore  operates  as  a  guide  for
the  future.  Of course  no such practices  should be permitted

44.  272  U.S.  52  (1926).
45.  295  U.S.  602  (1935).
46.  478  U.S.  714  (1986).
47.  487  U.S.  654  (1988).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  15 1995

ARKANSAS  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  48:1

to  violate  the  Constitution  where  that  document  speaks
with  clarity.

D.  Translation

Some people,  most notably  Lawrence  Lessig,48 have  ar-
gued  that  when  circumstances  have  changed,  the  Supreme
Court  must  "translate"  the  original  constitutional  text  or
history  in order  to adapt  it  to  the  new conditions.  Suppose,
for example,  that the founders  of the  Constitution  originally
sought  to allow  the  President  to make  war  on his  own  only
for  defensive  purposes-to  repel  sudden  attacks  on  the
United  States.  Suppose,  too,  that  in  modern  conditions,
threats  to Canada  and Mexico  are  extremely  threatening  to
the  United  States  because  of  the  strategic  importance  of
these  nations  to the American  capacity for self-defense.  Or
suppose  (as  many people  believe)  that under  current  condi-
tions,  the  line  between  "offensive"  and  "defensive"  use  of
the  military  becomes  extremely  thin.  New  circumstances
have  made  that  original  line  far  more  ambiguous  than  it
was  at  the  founding.

Consider  another  example. 49  Perhaps  the  original  doc-
ument gave  the President  less than  complete  authority  over
those  who  administer  the  laws.  Perhaps  the  founders  be-
lieved  that  Congress  could  insulate  some  administration
from  the  President, on the  theory  that  insulated  administra-
tion  would  not,  under  the  assumptions  of the  founding  pe-
riod,  endanger  any  important  constitutional  commitments.
It  may  be  that  insulated  administration  does  endanger  im-
portant  constitutional  commitments  once  the  founding  as-
sumptions  have  been  altered.  Now  that  administration  of
the  laws  involves  large-scale  domestic  policymaking,  it  may
be  intolerable-from  the  perspective of  original constitu-
tional commitments-to allow  administrators  to operate  in-
dependently  of  the  President,  at  least  outside  of  certain
confined  areas.  To  maintain  fidelity  to constitutional  com-

48.  See  Lawrence  Lessig,  Fidelity in  Translation, 71  TEX.  L. REV.  1165  (1993);
Lawrence  Lessig,  Understanding Changed Readings: Fidelity in  Theory,  47  STAN.  L.
REV.  (forthcoming  March  1995).

49.  See  Lessig  & Sunstein,  supra note  19.

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  16 1995

1995]  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  PRESIDENCY 

17

mitments,  we  must  understand  the  document  to  give  the
President  power  that he  did  not  have  at  the  founding.

If this  is  true,  perhaps  it  is  generally  true  that  original
constitutional  provisions,  translated into  a new context, give
the  President  new  and  broader  authority.  If,  to  return  to
the  first  example,  we  want  to  adhere  to  the  original  consti-
tutional  goal-to  allow  the  President  to  act  unilaterally
when  necessary-perhaps  the  President  may  act  unilater-
ally  not  simply  to  repel  sudden  attacks  on  the  United
States,  but  in  any  case  in  which  American  interests  are  at
serious  risk.  Perhaps  this  view  accounts  for  many  of  the
changes  I  have  described.

The  "translation"  argument  raises  many  complexities.
The  notion  of  "translation"  is  no  more  than  a  metaphor,
and  the  task  of  interpreting  a  provision  in  new  circum-
stances  is  hardly identical  to  the  task  of rendering  words  in
another  language.  There  are  considerable  complexities  in
deciding  what  it  is  that  is  being  translated.  What  is  being
translated  is  not a  brute fact,  but  itself the  product  of inter-
pretation,  in  the  form  of  a  constructive  account  of  some
sort, one that has important  evaluation  dimensions.  But the
general  idea of translation has  appeared  in several Supreme
Court  opinions  as  a way  of making  sense  of the  practice  of
interpretation  in  changed  circumstances.5 0 
In  many  ways
the  metaphor  is  useful.

E.  Several  Constitutional  Regimes?

Some  people,  most  notably  Bruce  Ackerman,  think

America  has  had  more  than  one  constitutional  regime-
that  at  crucial  moments  in  our history,  the  people  have  in-
augurated  large-scale  changes  in  the  Constitution.5 1  The
Civil  War,  for  example,  is  said  to  have  inaugurated  a  Sec-
ond American  Republic, with new understandings  of the al-
location  of  power  between  the  nation  and  the  states,  and
with  new  understandings  of  the  allocation  of  power  be-
tween  the  nation  and  the  states,  and  with  new  understand-

50.  See,  e.g.,  Tennessee  v.  Garner,  471  U.S.  1  (1985);  Weems  v.  United  States,

217  U.S.  349  (1910).

51.  See  1 BRUCE  ACKERMAN,  WE  THE  PEOPLE:  FOUNDATIONS  (1991).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  17 1995

ARKANSAS  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  48:1

ings  of individual  rights.  Some people  think  that President
Roosevelt's  New  Deal-responding  to  the  Great  Depres-
sion-also  produced  constitutional  change.  In  his  influen-
tial book,  We  the People: Foundations,52  Ackerman  argues
that  the  United  States  has had  three  constitutional  regimes,
not  simply  one.  In  Ackerman's  view,  the  New  Deal  was  a
constitutional  moment,  inaugurating  a  new  constitutional
regime.

If  America  has  had  more  than  one  constitutional  re-
gime,  we  might  think  about  presidential  power  in  a  some-
what  different  way.  During  the  Civil  War  period,  the
presidency  became  somewhat  different  from  what  it  had
been  before.5 3  In  the  New  Deal  period,  there  were  addi-
tional  changes,  many  of  them  discussed  above.  The  na-
tional  government  appeared  to  acquire  significant  new
constitutional  authority.  The President  was a principal  ben-
eficiary  of  this  shift,  especially  insofar  as  the  Supreme
Court refused  to enforce  the  nondelegation  doctrine, which,
as  noted,  required  any  legislative  delegations  of  power  to
the  executive  to  be narrow  and  clear.  Some  people  there-
fore  conclude  that  the  New  Deal  effectively  amended  the
Constitution,  giving  the  President  a  range  of  new  powers.
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  after  the  New  Deal,  the
Constitution  meant  something  different  from  what  it  had
meant previously.  There  can be no doubt  that changing  un-
derstandings  of  presidential  power  were  an  important  part
of  this  change.  We  may  doubt,  however,  whether  the  no-
tion  of constitutional  amendment  is the  most helpful  way to
conceive  of  things.  In  the  United  States,  we  identify  the
constitution  with  a  written  text.  It  is  customarily  thought
that  Constitutional  amendments  cannot  occur  without
changes  in  constitutional  text.  The  absence  of  a  textual
change  seems  devastating  to  the  view  that  the  New  Deal
amended  the  Constitution.  To  say that  an unwritten  change
qualifies  as  a constitutional  amendment  does  too  much  vio-
lence  to  our  common  understandings  of  what  a  Constitu-
tion  is.

52.  1 id.
53.  lid.

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  18 1995

1995]  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  PRESIDENCY 

19

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  right  to  point  to  the  creative
features  of the New Deal  period,  and also  to insist  that our
conception  of  constitutional  meaning  was  different  after
Roosevelt  from  what  it  had  been  before.  We  can  fruitfully
think of the  New  Deal  developments-if  they  are  to  be le-
gitimated-as  an  effort  to  maintain  fidelity  with  constitu-
tional commitments  through  new interpretations  as  a result
of  changes  over  time.  The  commerce  power,  for example,
plausibly  means  something  quite  different  in  the  context  of
a  highly  interdependent  economy  from  what  it  means  in  a
period  in  which  interstate  consequences  are  far  less  likely.
Permissible  delegations  of  legislative  power  to  the  Presi-
dent  may  also  shift  when  rapid  changes  in  national  policy
became  more  necessary  in  light  of  the  extent  of  national
regulatory  power  and  the  need  to  keep  up  with  changing
developments  of  fact  and  policy.54  Moreover,  we  can  take
the  Supreme  Court's  new  constitutional  interpretations
post-New  Deal  as precedents,  establishing  the  legitimacy  of
the  New Deal  entitled  to a  high degree  of respect from  sub-
sequent  generations.

Discussions  of "constitutional  amendment"  are  helpful
insofar  as  they  draw attention  to the  creative  aspects  of the
New  Deal  shift.  But  the  notion  of  amendment  seems  too
exotic  and  adventurous  when more modest  explanations  do
equally  good  explanatory  work.

III.  Conclusions

In  this  essay,  I  have  outlined  some  aspects  of the  ex-
traordinary  changes  in the constitutional  power  of the  Pres-
ident.  I  have  also  offered  some  diverse  explanations  of  the
changing  nature  of  that  constitutional  power.  There  is  no
question  that  the  current  President  is  quite  different  from
the  founders'  President.  In  some  ways,  it  is  hard  for those
committed  to the project  of constitutionalism  to explain  the
discontinuities,  which  complicate  the  idea  that  the  written
constitution  has  a  high degree  of stability over time.  One  of
the  distinguishing  features  of the  American  Constitution  is

54.  See  the  criticisms  of Ackerman  in  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  New  Deals,  THE  NEW

REPUBLIC,  Jan.  20,  1992,  at  32.

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  19 1995

ARKANSAS  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  48:1

its  flexibility.  The changed  nature  of the  presidency is  a tes-
timonial  to  this  fact.

What  best  accounts  for  the  changes?  I have  suggested
that  emergencies  are  not  the  source  of  constitutional
change,  and  that  it  is  too  exotic  to  think  that  the  Constitu-
tion  was  amended  by  the  New  Deal.  The  most  promising
explanations  stress  the  flexibility  of  the  original  text,  the
process  of common  law adjudication,  and the need to main-
tain  fidelity  with  original  commitments  over  changed  cir-
cumstances.  If  these  are  the  best  explanations,  it  seems
clear  that  a  distinctive  feature  of  the  constitutional  provi-
sions  governing  the  President  is  that  they  allow  a  large  de-
gree  of  adaptation  over  time.  Moreover,  it  emerges  that
one  of  the  virtues  of  the  American  constitutional  experi-
ence  is  the  process  of  case-by-case  adjudication,  giving
meaning  of constitutional  provisions  through  close  encoun-
ter  with  particular  cases.

The discussion  suggests  some broad  outlines  for  consti-
tutional  interpretation  as  well.  More  "offensive"  presiden-
tial  authority  with  respect  to  military  action  is  probably  a
good  way  of  maintaining  faith  with  the  constitutional
framework,  in  light  of  the  problematic  nature  of  the  of-
fense-defense  distinction  under  modern  conditions.  Gen-
eral  presidential  control  of  the  administration 
is  also
appropriate  in  light of the  now-enormous  authority  of what
has become  known  as the  executive  branch.5  It would  be  a
mistake  to  reinvigorate  the  nondelegation  doctrine,  except,
perhaps,  for  extreme  cases;  the  purposes  of  the  doctrine
should  be  served  through  other  means. 6  These  general
propositions  leave  many  particular  questions,  but  they
might  be  taken  to  suggest  some  directions  for  the  future.

What  lessons  can be  drawn  from the  American  experi-
ence  with  constitutional  constraints  on  presidential  power?
The  question  is  of  special  importance  not  only  for  Ameri-
cans,  but  for all  others concerned  with the  nature  of written
constitutions,  including  those  in Eastern  Europe  and  South

55.  See  Lessig  &  Sunstein,  supra  note  19,  for  the  argument  and 

for

56.  See  Richard  B.  Stewart,  Beyond Delegation Doctrine, 36  AM.  U.  L.  REV.

qualifications.

323  (1987).

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  20 1995

1995]  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  PRESIDENCY 

21

Africa.  Perhaps  two lessons  are  of special  importance.  The
first  involves  the limited effects  of constitutional text,  at least
over time.  Constitutional meaning  depends  in large  part on
shared  understandings  and practices.  Most  of these  will  not
be in the  Constitution itself.  Although  the  Constitution  is a
legal document,  there will  be  a  great  deal of opportunity  to
adapt  constitutional  meaning  to  changes  in  both  under-
standing  and  practice  over  time.  Words  are  outrun  by  cir-
cumstances.  They may be  rendered  ambiguous  by the  sheer
passage  of  time.  New  problems  will  emerge,  and  constitu-
tional  text  may  well  fail  to  solve  them,  or  even  to  address
them.

A  second  (and  somewhat  conflicting)  lesson  involves
the importance of a culture of constitutionalism in maintain-
ing  a  constitutional  order.  Judicial  review  is  an  important,
but  by  no  means  the  only,  contributor  to  the  creation  of
such  a  culture.  Without  the  courts,  presidential  illegality
would  be  less  frequently  discouraged,  and  less  frequently
countered.  But  much  of  the  relevant  culture  comes  from
shared  understandings  within  the  executive  and  legislative
branches.  This  culture is  needed  to ensure against  the  most
egregious  abuses  of  legal  authority,  from  the  President  as
well  as  from  others.

In America,  judicial  review,  and the  constitutional  cul-
ture  more  broadly,  have  been  important  as  a  check  after-
the-fact  and, perhaps  even more,  as  a before-the-fact  deter-
rent  to presidential  illegality.  A culture of constitutionalism
and  the  rule  of law,  spurred  by judicial  review,  has  helped
deter  presidential  lawlessness  in cases  in which  the need  for
action  seemed  great  to  the  President,  and  the  legal  techni-
calities  seemed  like  an  irritating  irrelevance.  In  such  con-
siderations,  I  suggest,  lies  the  solution  to a  remarkable  and
insufficiently  analyzed  paradox  of American  constitutional-
ism:  a  dramatically  changed  and  strengthened  presidency,
brought  about  without  constitutional  amendment  and
nonetheless  without  significant  illegalities.

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  21 1995

HeinOnline  -- 48 Ark. L. Rev.  22 1995

