University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1995 

Government, The Lecture 
Government, The Lecture 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Theodore I. Koskoff Lecture Series: Social Norms and Big 
Theodore I. Koskoff Lecture Series: Social Norms and Big 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Theodore I. Koskoff Lecture Series: Social Norms and Big Government, The Lecture," 15 
Quinnipiac Law Review 147 (1995). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Volume  15
Number 2
Summer  1995

Lecture

THE  THEODORE  I.  KOSKOFF  LECTURE  SERIES:
SOCIAL  NORMS  AND  BIG  GOVERNMENT

By  Cass R.  Sunstein"

interesting 

that  one  could  notice 

I  have  some  stories  for you  to  begin.  I  spend  summers  on  the  east
end  of Long  Island  (near  the  recent  fire)  because  my  in-laws  are  there.
the
things 
There  are  many 
Hamptons.  One  thing  that  is  noticeable  in  the  last  few  years  is  the
change  from  the  East  Hampton  dump  to  the  East  Hampton  Recycling
Center. When  in  late  August  I  went  there  to  throw  out  and  separate  my
garbage,  what  I  saw  was  extremely  fancy  cars-BMW's  and  Mercedes;
there  was  one  Rolls  Royce-people  with  informal  but  extremely  ex-
pensive  clothes  patiently  separating  their  garbage,  making  sure  the
green  glass  was  different  from  the  white  glass  and  that  the  newspapers
were  all  sorted,  spending  a  lot  of  time  at  the  East  Hampton  Recycling
Center.  And they  looked  happy.

in 

The  second  story  comes  from  my  old  boss,  Thurgood  Marshall,

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  Law  School  and  Depart-
ment  of  Political  Science,  University  of Chicago.  This  is  a  lightly  edited  version  of  a  lecture
delivered  at Quinnipiac  College  School  of Law  in  October  1995.  Some  of the  issues are  discussed
in  more  detail  in  Social Norms and Social Rules, COLUM.  L.  REv.  (forthcoming  1996,  May).

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 147 1995-1996

[Vol.  15:147

who  is  famous  for  arguing  the  Miranda case  and  for  being  a  staunch
defender  of  the  outcome  in  Miranda. Once  he  thought  Miranda was
maybe  going  to  be  overruled  by  the  Burger  Court,  he  came  to  us  and
said,  "You  know,  it  would  be  bad,  but  Miranda isn't  a  big  deal."  He
said,  "If  the  police  are  going  to  beat  people  up  they  are  going  to  beat
people  up.  Miranda isn't  crucial.  I'll  tell  you  how  that  stops."  And  he
told  a  story  about  a  chief  of police  getting  together  twenty-five  of his
officers  and  saying,  "If  anyone  here  beats  anybody  up,  they're  fired."
Then  he  said  with  a  big  guffaw,  "That's  how  you  stop  police  miscon-
duct."

The  third  story  has  to  do  with  teenage  smoking,  something  which
the  President  is  very  interested  in  reducing.  The  newspapers  have  sug-
gested  that  there  has  been  a  large  increase  in  teenage  smoking,  which
isn't  quite true.  Among  whites,  teenage  smoking  now  is  about  the  same
as  it has  been  for  the  past  fifteen  years.  Think  of what  might have  hap-
pened,  what  would  you  expect  would  have  happened  in  this  period
among  African  American  teenagers?  Well,  here  is the  appropriate  data.
In  1965,  thirty  percent  of  African  American  teenagers  smoked  appro-
priate  cigarettes.  In  1987,  the  number  had  dropped  to  twenty  percent.
In  1993,  the number  was  four  point four  percent.  This  is recognized  by
the  Center  for  Disease  Control  as  a  terrific  public  health  success  story
for  which  the  Center  of  Disease  Control  has  no  explanation.  I  have  a
hunch  about  what  explains  it.  And  it's  connected  with  a  poster  that
appeared  adjacent  to  a  highway-in  a  billboard  in  Harlem,  New  York,
a  poster that  was  part  of a  private  educational  campaign  by the  African
American  community  designed  to  reduce  teenage  smoking.  The  poster
has  a  picture  of  the  Marlboro  man  looking  like  a  skeleton  offering  a
cigarette  to  an  African  American  child  and  saying,  "First  they  had  us
pick  it;  now  they  want  us  to  smoke  it."  Something  very  important  has
happened  in  that  community  with  respect  to  teenage  smoking.

Only  one  more  story,  this  has  to  do  with  economists.  Economists
are  interested  in  figuring  out  how  much  environmental  amenities  are
worth.  One  way  they  try  to  figure  that  out  is  they  ask  people  how
much  they  are  willing  to  pay  for  environmental  amenities.  You  might
be  asked  how  much  you  would  be  willing  to  pay  to  save  a  pond.  Or
how  much  would  you  be  willing  to  pay to  save  the spotted  owl,  or how
much  would  you  be  willing  to  pay  to  reduce  a  risk  from  .005%  of you
getting  cancer  to  .0005%  of  getting  cancer.  Economists  believe  that  if
you  ask  someone  how  much  would  you  be  willing  to  spend  for  goods
you  should  give  the  same  amount  as  if  you're  asked  how  much  would
you  have  to  be  paid  to  have  a  reduction  in  the  equivalent  thing.  There

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 148 1995-1996

19951

KOSKOFF  LECTURE  SERIES

is  an  intuition  that  these  numbers  should  be  the  same.  It  turns  out  that
the  economists  have  this  equivalence  as  an  axiom.  But  the  equivalence
doesn't  hold.  When  people  are  asked  how  much  would  they  be  willing
to pay to  allow  the  extinction  of a  spotted  owl,  they  will  give  a  num-
ber.  They're  asked  how  much  would  they  have to  be paid, they  give  a
higher  number.  In  fact,  much  of  the  time  they  give  an  answer  like,  "I
don't  answer  questions  like  that,"  or,  "There 
is  no  number  high
enough,"  or,  "What  sort  of  a  person  do  you  think  I  am?"  This  is  an
anomaly.  It's causing  some  havoc  in  the  economics  community.

There's  a  unifying  theme  in  the  stories  I've  told,  and  that  has  to
do  with  the  pervasive  effect  of  social  norms  on  behavior.  And  I'm
going to  be  discussing  the relationship  between  social  norms and  law  in
the  effort  to  make  a  partial  defense  of  my  not-currently-trendy  thesis,
that is  a defense  of big  government.

A  defense  of big  government  would  have  to  have  a  lot  of compo-
nents.  And  I'm  going  to  trace  right  now,  very  quickly,  three  of  the
components  that  I'm not  going to  spend  much  time  on. One  component
in  the  defense  of big  government  would  start  by  reading  the  Contract
of America and  noting  that  sharp  distinctions  are  drawn  between  mar-
kets  on  the  one  hand  and  government  on  the  other.  My  suggestion
would  be  there  is  no  distinction  between  markets  and  government.
Markets  depend  for  their  existence  on  government.  We  cannot  have
markets  without  government.  In  fact,  we  cannot  have  markets  without
taxing  and  spending.  Markets  depend  for  their  existence  on  police,
property  law,  contract  law,  tort  law-an  extensive  state  apparatus  that
can't  get  in  motion  without  some  taxing  and  some  spending.  The  dis-
tinction-which  is  so  dominant  in  popular  debate  right  now-between
markets  and  government  is built  on a  conceptual  error, that  is  the  prop-
osition that  we  could  have  markets  without government.

That's  not  a  criticism  of  markets.  It's  an  observation  that  markets

depend  on  something  like  or close  to  big  government.

A  full  defense  of big  government  would  add  to  this point  a  list of
the  terrific  success  stories  that  we've  had  as  a  result  of  government
regulation  in  the  last  thirty  years.  In  the  environmental  area,  air  is
much  cleaner  than  it  was  twenty-five  years  ago,  where  in  Chicago  you
couldn't  open  the  windows  without getting  noticeable  pollution  in  your
face.  It used  to  be  the  case  that  a  hundred  fifty  million  Americans  lived
in  areas  that  didn't  meet  federal  air  quality  standards.  Now  only  fifty
million  Americans  don't  live  in  places  that don't  meet  federal  air quali-
ty  standards.  That's  not  great,  but  it's  a  wonderful  improvement.  The
air  is  much  cleaner  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been,  and  people  are

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 149 1995-1996

[Vol.  15:147

living  longer  and  better  as  a  result.  So  too,  the  water  is  much  cleaner.
In  many  ways  America  is  the  envy  of  the  industrialized  world  because
it  has  clean  water  compared  to  what  it  would  have  had  without  our
regulatory  efforts.  In  the  area  of  voting  rights  and  discrimination  too,
things  are  a lot better  than  they  were  as  a result  of governmental  initia-
tive.

Thus  the  picture  of  massive  government  failure  is  way  off  the
mark.  There  are  many  failures,  but  the  overall  picture  is  complex,  not
simple.

The  full  case  for  big  government  would  depend  as  well  on  the  old
ideal  of equality  of opportunity.  My  suggestion  would  be  that  equality
of  opportunity  is  not  at  odds  with  liberty;  it  is  part  and  parcel  of  it.
And  equality  of  opportunity  cannot  exist  without  a  large  government
trying  to  provide  decent  life  prospects  to  people  who  now  do  not  have
decent  life  prospects.  And  the  Contract of America  is  missing  that
extremely  old  American  ideal.  It  used  to  be  that  equality  of result  was
opposed  to  equality  of opportunity;  but  equality  of  opportunity  was  in
the  1970s  an  important  conservative  theme  which justified  governmen-
tal  initiatives.  It seems  to  have dropped  out.

What  I'm  going  to  emphasize,  as  I've  said,  is  social  norms-in
particular,  the  possibly  harmful  effects  of  social  norms  on  human  liber-
ty  and  well-being.  My  suggestion  is  that  governmental  action  designed
to  make for  good  social  norms  is  an  important  and  underexplored  ave-
nue for  law.  This  is  a  realm  in  which  a  lot of good  things  can  be  done;
but it's  something  on  which  lawyers  and  politicians  have  spent  far  too
little  of  their  time.  Four  hundred  thousand  people  die  each  year  as  a
result  of smoking;  three  hundred  thousand  people  die  as a  result  of diet
and  failure  to  exercise;  a  hundred  thousand  people  die  from  cars  and
guns;  and  in  all of  these  cases  social  norms  are  an  important  contribu-
tor  to  the  problem.  If  we  could  do  something  about  the  norms,  we
could  do  something  enormously  important.  This  issue  has  gotten  a  lot
of attention  in  the  area  of teenage  pregnancy,  and  here  a  culprit  is  so-
cial  norms  that  it  would  be  very  good  to  change.  Think now  about  the
sharply  diminishing  rate  of smoking  among  young  African  Americans
and  think  of  how  that  might  be  a  model  for  strategies  that  would
lengthen  and  improve  lives.

I'm  just  going  to  tell  you  now  the  claims  I'm  going  to  make  and
then  spend  the  rest  of the  talk  trying  to  elaborate  on  them  a  bit.  First:
A  lot  of anomalies  in  individual  behavior-such  as  the  difference  be-
tween  how  much  people  would  be  willing  to  pay  to  preserve  a  species
and  how  much  people  would  have  to  be  paid  to  allow  a  species  to  go

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 150 1995-1996

1995]

KOSKOFF  LECTURE SERIES

extinct-are just  a product  of social  norms  that  affect  us  every  day  and
make  us  do  things  that  are  surprising  or  might  be  surprising.  Many
puzzles  in  behavior  are  less  puzzling  if  we  attend  to  the  pervasive  role
of social  norms.  Second:  Often  people  live  with  norms  that  they  simul-
taneously  don't  like  but  can't  change  on  their  own.  To  change  a  norm
with  respect  to,  for  example,  what  a  teacher  ought  to  wear  to  class  or
to  give  a  lecture  is  something  an  individual  can't  do  anything  about.
My  proposition is  there  are  social  norms  all  over  the  place  that we  live
with,  are  governed  by,  but  of  which  we  don't  approve  if  we  reflect.
Collective  action  is  necessary  to  do  something  about  them.

Third:  I  suggest  that  social  states  are  often  far  more  fragile  than
they  seem,  and,  in  fact,  change  is  far  more  likely  than  it  seems,  partly
because  what  people  want,  and  by people  I  mean  to  include  all of us, is
a  function  of  what  other  people  want  and  of  what  we  perceive  other
people  to  want.  When  we  start  to  perceive  other  people's  perceptions
as  different  from  what  we  thought,  things  can  change  very  fast.  Some-
thing  like  this  has  happened,  I believe,  in  the United  States  with  respect
to  affirmative  action.  Whatever  we  think  of the  merits  of the  attack  on
affirmative  action,  there  has  been  real  fragility  in  the  proaffirmative
action  policy.  One  of  the  reasons  is,  there  was  widespread  social  dis-
content  about  affirmative  action  that  wasn't  expressed  because  people
perceived  it  as  illegitimate  to  criticize  affirmative  action.  Once  the
criticism  started  being  expressed  and  legitimated,  people's  perceptions
of  what  other  people  thought  shifted  very  fast  and  there  was  a  social
movement.

How  was  communism  maintained  for  so  long?  How  did  it  fall  so
fast  and  so  safely  in  most  Eastern  European  countries?  One  of  the
reasons  is  that  there  were  social  norms  in  place  under  communism  that
suggested  we  all  had  to  join  the  Party  and  celebrate  it,  even  though
hardly  anyone  celebrated  it.  Once  the  social  norms  with  respect  to  ap-
proval  of communism  started  to  shift  there  was  a  bandwagon  effect  or
a  cascade,  and  things  changed  really  rapidly.  The  same  thing  happened
in  South  Africa  with  respect  to  apartheid.

Fourth:  I'm  going  to  suggest  that  sometimes  social  norms  are  an
obstacle  to  human  liberty  or  autonomy  and  sometimes  social  norms
help  maintain  something  like  a  caste  system  on  the  basis  of  race  and
sex.  We  don't  have  in  the  United  States  a  true  caste  system,  but  our
system  has  features  of  racial  and  gender  caste  in  the  sense  that  there
are  signals  given  by  one's  skin  color  or  one's gender  that one  can't  do
much  about  and  that  is  associated  in  many  places  with  certain  pre-
scribed  social  roles.  To  work  against  them  it  would  be  good  to  do

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 151 1995-1996

[Vol.  15:147

something  about  prevailing  norms,  and  to  do  that  it  would  be  good  to
use  law.

Now  let  me  offer  three  concepts:  Social  norms,  social  roles,  and
social  meanings.  First,  what I've  referred  to,  is  social  norms.  By  this I
mean  to refer  to  social  attitudes  of disapproval  and  approval,  embodied
in  the  notion  that  "it  isn't  done."  With  respect  to  lots  of behavior  there
is  a  reaction,  "it  isn't  done."  Even  though  it  sometimes  is  done,  the
term  "it  isn't  done"  is  a  reflection  of evaluation  and  disapproval.  Now
norms  cover  a  very  wide  range-what  sorts  of  words  one  uses,  what
counts  as  good  manners,  how  one  deals  with  one's  elders  or  people
who  are  younger,  and  so  forth.  Norms  are  pervasive  and  invisible  only
because  they're  so  deeply  internalized  that  they  don't  come  out  to  the
surface  much.  There  are  social  norms  with  respect  to  such  things  as
smoking,  discriminating,  using  condoms,  buckling  seat  belts  and  recy-
cling.  These  norms  are  often  fragile.  One's  choices  about  what  to  do,
whether  to  smoke,  whether  to  discriminate,  whether  to  buckle  a  seat
belt,  whether  to  be  courteous-these  things  are  a  function,  for  each
individual,  not  just  of  the  value  of  the  relevant  thing  but  also  of  the
reputational  value  of doing  or  having  that  thing,  that  is,  smoking,  hav-
ing  a  Hispanic  in  one's  restaurant  or  buckling  one's  belt.  It's  also  a
function  of  one's  self-conception  if  one  does  these  sorts  of  things.
There  are  many  people,  I  assert,  who  don't  buckle  their  seat  belt  and
who  do  smoke  as  a  result  of social  norms  and  the  opposite  too.  Often
one  will  or  will  not  buckle  because  of the  group  of  people  with  whom
one  finds  oneself.  One  will  or  will  not  smoke  for  just  that  reason;  the
reputational  effect  plays a  very  large  role  in  individual  choices.

It's  also  the  case  that  one's  self-conception  plays  a  large  role.
There  is  a  mystery  in  the  fact  that  Stephen  Hawking's  book,  "A  Brief
Moment  in  Time,"  was  a  best  seller.  This  was  a  book  that was  bought
by  people of  whom  it is  said  hardly  any  read  the  book.  Why  did  people
buy it?  My  speculation  is  that  some  of the  purchases  had  to  do  with  the
reputational  value  of  having  the  book  and  with  one's  feeling  about
one's  self-conception  from  owning  the  book.

Choices  are  pervasively  a  product  not just  of the  intrinsic  value  of
the  underlying  thing  but  also  of  reputational  effects  and  effects  on
one's  self-conception.  The  reputational  effects  and  the  effects  on  one's
self-conception  are  partly  a  function  of social  norms.  Prevailing  norms
will  have  a  lot  to  do  with  reputation  and  probably  a  good  deal  with
self-conception.  This  is  why  I  think  the  people  recycling 
in  East
Hampton  were  so  happy.  It's  not  as  if  there  was  intrinsic  joy  in  sepa-
rating  the  various  things;  but they  felt  good  about  themselves,  they  felt

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 152 1995-1996

1995]

KOSKOFF  LECTURE  SERIES

good  about  being  seen  doing  this  sort  of  thing;  and  therefore  they
undertook  a  choice  that  would  have  been  completely  astonishing  ten
years before.

I  have  an  economist  colleague  who  has  a  dog  and  in  Chicago
there  is  a  norm,  there's  a  law  too,  that  you  clean  up  after  your  dog.
And  he  said,  "You  know,  at  night  I  walk  my  dog,  and  when  he  does
what he  does  I  clean  up  even  if it's  dark."  He  said,  "I  don't know  why
I  do  that.  I  hate  the  act,  it  subjects  me  to  a  certain  amount  of  danger,
and  yet  I  do  it."  He  said,  "I  would  have  thought  it  would  have  been
about  reputation,  but  it's  dark,  no  one  can  see  me."  I  think  the  reason
he  does  it  is  that  he's  internalized  the  norm  so  he  thinks  it's  a  wrong
thing to  do  to  leave  that  material  there  for the  next morning.  And  that's
why  in  many  areas  of  the  country  something  is  true  now  that  would
also  have  been  astonishing  years  ago,  that  is,  no  dog  poop  on  the  side-
walks.

That's  the  first  concept,  the  idea  of  social  norms.  The  second
concept  involves  the  notion  of  social  roles-something  that  also  has  a
great  deal  to  do  with  law  but  hasn't  been  explored  much  by  people
thinking  about  law.  Each  of us  occupies  an  astonishingly  wide  range  of
social  roles:  child,  parent,  sibling,  student,  teacher,  voter,  consumer,
eater  in  a  restaurant.  Each  of  those  roles  is  surrounded  by  a  complex
network  of  social  norms,  so  much  so  that  if  one  acted  in  one  role  the
way  one  acts  without  thinking  in  another  role  it  would  seem  very  bi-
zarre.  If one  treated,  for  example,  one's  employer  the  way  one  treats  a
friend,  in  most  American  work  places  that  would  be  perceived  as  quite
strange.  If a  teacher  treated  a  student  the  way  a  teacher  treats  a  doctor,
wouldn't  you  think  that  teacher  is  very  confused?  Or  if  you  treated
your lawyer  in  the  same  way  you  treat  your  waiter,  your  lawyer  would
think  this  is  odd.  Or  if  your  waiter  treated  you  the  way  your  friends
treat  you;  that  would  be  very  unusual,  except  in  California,  I  guess.  In
any  case,  each  social  role  is  pervaded  by  social  norms  that  people
know  about,  adhere  to,  rarely  step  out  of,  even  though  some  of  us
some  of the  time  wish  our  social  roles  were  a  bit  different.  And  here
too  changes  in  social  roles  are  just  about  impossible  at  the  individual
level.

The  feminist  movement  has  everything  to  do  with  the  effort  to
change  social  norms  associated  with  the  social  role  of  being  a  woman.
When  homosexuals  "flaunt  it,"  there  might  be  a  self-conscious  effort  to
change  the  social  role  of  being  a  homosexual,  that  is  to  be  closeted.
The  point  here  is  that  social  roles  are  pervasive  and  also  we  are,  with
respect  to  them,  acted  on  as  much  as  we  are  acting.  If we're  going  to

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 153 1995-1996

[Vol.  15:147

change  them  we  need  some  help.  We  can't  do it on  our own.

The  third  and  last  concept  let's  call  social  meaning.  And  here  I'm
drawing  on  some  work  by  anthropologists  and  also  some  recent  work
in  law  on  exactly  this  idea.  By  social  meaning  I mean  the  attitudes  and
commitments  that  are  communicated  by  words  or  actions.  Words  or
actions  communicate  something  independent  of  the  words  that  are
actually  being  used.  For example,  the  use of the  term  "Miss"  or "Mrs."
now  means  something  very  different  from  what  it  meant  forty  years
ago.  There  is  something  very  specific  signaled  if one  of your  instruc-
tors  calls  women  students  Miss  or  Mrs.  The  social  meaning  being
communicated  might  well  be  independent  of  the  intentions  of  the
speaker.  With  respect  to  a  wide  range  of terms,  social  meanings  attach
over  which  the  speaker  has  no control.  If a  teacher  calls  a  student by  a
first  name  or  if a  student calls  a  teacher  by  a  first name,  something  is
being  signaled  that  the  individual  agent  doesn't  have  much  control
over.  If a teacher  wears  blue jeans  to  class  at  many  law  schools,  some-
thing  very  particular  is  connoted.  If  someone  buckles  a  seat  belt  in
some  parts  of the  world,  or  if a  woman  refuses  to  cook  dinner  in  many
parts  of  the  world,  or  if  a  man  or  woman  insists  on  the  use  of a  con-
dom  in  many  places,  there  is  a  particular  social  meaning  to  the  act
which  agents  don't have  control  over  and  might  be  unfortunate.  There
was  an  article  in  the  New  York  Times  a  few  weeks  ago  in  which  some
young  men  were  saying  they  don't  use  condoms  with  their  girlfriends
because  their  girlfriends  would  take  that  as  a  confession  that  they're
promiscuous.  Now  that's  a  problem.  They  may  not  need  to  be  blamed
for  it.  But  it's  true  the  social  meaning  of  condom  use  is  a  confession
or,  in  some  circles,  an  accusation.  Social  norms,  social  meanings,  and
social  roles  matter.  If  people  see  one  another  cooperating  by  giving
time  or  money,  working  pro  bono,  donating  to  charity,  writing  tenure
letters,  then  they  tend  to  cooperate,  too.  But  if  they  don't  see  one  an-
other  cooperating,  rates  of  noncooperation  skyrocket.  This  is  true  in
both  experimental  and  real  world  settings.  Whether  people  cooperate  to
solve  a  shared  problem  is  a  function  of the  perceived  behavior  of other
people.  This  may  not  seem  a  puzzle;  but  for  certain  theories  of rational
behavior  it  is  indeed  a  puzzle.  Cooperation  is  closely  enmeshed  with
social  norms.

Economists  have  invented  a  game.  It's  called  the  Ultimatum
Game.  This  is  a  game  in  which  two  people  are  given  a bunch  of mon-
ey  to  play  a game.  The  game  has  one  act  in  it, that is  one person  of the
two  says  to  the  other person,  "I  will give  you  X  amount  of this  pot."  If
the  second  person  says,  "I  accept,"  they  both  get  to  keep  the  relevant

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 154 1995-1996

1995]

KOSKOFF LECTURE  SERIES

amounts.  If the  other  person  says,  "I  don't  accept,"  neither  gets  to  keep
a  penny.  In  experimental  settings  what  would  you  expect  would  hap-
pen?  How  much  would  the  first  person  propose  and  what  would  the
second  person  accept?  The  economists  predicted  the  following:  The
first  person  acting  in  a  self-interested  way  will  say,  "I'll  offer  you  a
penny."  And  the  second  person  will  say,  "Great."  The  first person  acts
in  the  self-interested  way;  the  second  person  acts  in  a  self-interested
way;  both  people  are  better  off.  But  this  is  not  what  happens.  People
almost  never  offer  a  penny,  and  when  they  do  it's  not  accepted.
There's  a  very  high  percentage  of  fifty/fifty,  sixty/forty,  seventy/thirty
splits.  This  is  because  there  is  a  powerful  social  norm  saying  that  if
you  accept  a  penny  you're  showing  your  willingness  to  be  subjected  to
contempt  or dishonor.  And  if you  offer  that little,  then  you're  showing
a  willingness  to  treat  someone  else  in  a  contemptuous  way.  And  there
are  extremely  powerful  social  norms  against  that.  People  feel  ashamed
in  both  contexts.

This  example  aligns  my  argument  with  some  of the  arguments  in
modem  politics  about  deploying  shame  as  a  policy  instrument.  Shame
is  certainly  not  an  intrinsic  good,  but  shame  is  important  and  reduces
conduct  that  inflicts  harm  on  other  people.  This  little  story  tends  to
show  that  what  seems  like  anomalies  often  are  a  function  of  deeply
internalized  social  norms,  which  when  they  disappear,  make  people's
lives  go much  less  well.

I  am  also  concerned  about  the  use  of  words  like  "choices"  or
"preferences"  to  foreclose  discussion  of  what  government  ought  to  be
doing.  Often  it  is  said  that  people  choose  some  acts,  and  it  is  asked,
what  business  is  it  of  Big  Brother  to  alter  the  choice?  At  least  as  a
general  rule,  what  business  is  it  of  government  to  interfere  with  their
preferences?  And  in  very  tempting  arguments,  the  words  "their  choic-
es"  or  "their  preferences"  opt  as  conversation  stoppers.  I  hope  what
I've  said  already  suggests  that  this  argument  goes  by  much  too  fast,  if
our  preferences  and  choices  are  artifacts  of  norms  and  roles  and  mean-
ings  that  we  haven't  voluntarily  assumed  and  that  we  may  not  like  but
we  can't  change  on  our  own.  If the  meaning  of our choice  not to  go  in
a  car  which  we  know  is  going  to  go  extremely  fast  is  cowardice,  then
we  might  go  in  that  car  or  even  drive  in  that  way.  That's  enmeshed
with  social  norms  over  which  people  have  very  little  control.  And  to
attribute  that  to  them--to  say  that  that's  their  choice  or  their  prefer-
ence-is  too  quick.  In  the  New  York  Times  article  I  mentioned  about
condom  use,  young  men  were  saying  they  didn't use  condoms  because
they  did  not  want  their  girlfriends  to  think  they  were  sleeping  around.

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 155 1995-1996

QLR

[Vol.  15:147

They  weren't  happy  with  that  situation.  They  weren't  sleeping  around.
They  wanted  the  social  meaning  of  condom  use  to  be  different  from
what  it  was.  To  say  we  should  respect  their  choice  would  be  a  much
too  simple  answer.

Incidentally,  I'm  told  by  my  sister-in-law  who  works  on  AIDS
education  in  Bali,  that  there's  been  a  remarkable  change  in  Bali  in  the
last  seven  years, so  that  young  Balinese  men consider  their condom  use
a  very  macho  thing.  Now,  she's  not  sure  how  this  social  norm  has
gotten  in  place,  but  she  says  it's  wonderful.  If  in  Bali  there  is  going  to
be  some  protection,  so  to  speak,  against  what's  happened  in  many
countries  like  Bali,  this  is  a  way.

Now  let's  turn  to  government.  How  might  government  do  some-
thing  about  problematic  norms  or  meanings  and  roles?  Let's  have  an
ascending  order  of  intrusiveness.  The  most  lenient  thing  government
can  do  is just  provide  information.  Changing  social  norms  with  respect
to  smoking  has  a  great  deal  to  do  with  additional  information.  When
we  undertake  behavior  that  is  dangerous  and  perceived  as  such,  there
are  often  strong  social  norms  against  it.  It's  very  interesting  to  see  in
religious  communities  the  extent  to  which  there  are  norms  about  diet
and  behavior  that  are  permeated  with  beliefs  about  safety;  but  the  mor-
al  issues  associated  with  the  diet  have  outrun  the  safety  belief  so  that
it's  believed  it is  morally  wrong  to  perform  some  acts.  The  moral judg-
ment  has  become  more  deeply  ingrained  than  the  health  judgment.  In
any  case,  with  respect  to  a  great  number  of  things,  simple  provision  of
information  does  the  trick.

Government  might  try  to  go  beyond  information  and  try  to  per-
suade.  This  is  what's  happened  in  the  area  of  smoking  and  drug  use
and  safe  sex.  The  efforts  of persuasion  may  be  futile,  but it's  a  possible
approach.

There  might  also  be  an  effort  to  change  social  norms  with  a  tax.
Consider  a  tax  on  cigarettes  or  alcohol  or  other  dangerous  behavior.
And  that  might  change  the  relevant  norm.

Or  the  government  might  try,  most  simply,  coercion  by  banning

conduct.

Now  what  I'm going  to  do  is  to  go  through  several  categories  of
cases  in  which  governmental  action  designed  to  change  norms  and
roles  and  meanings  might  well  be  justified.  To  make  the  justification
full  in  any  individual  case,  one  would  have  to  say  more  than  I'm  going
to  say.  I'm just going  to  go  through  a set  of cases.

The  simplest  is  the  set  of  cases  I  have  described.  That  is,  cases
involving  norms  that  people  want  to  change  but  can't  change  on  their

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 156 1995-1996

1995]

KOSKOFF  LECTURE  SERIES

own.  They  require  governmental  or  collective  help of some  kind.  Now,
there  is  a  very  intriguing  class  of  laws  which  exist  which  are  almost
never  enforced,  but  which  accomplish  an  enormous  amount  of
good-that  have  a  kind  of symbolic  function  just  by  virtue  of  the  fact
that they  are there.  These  include  laws  forbidding  littering,  laws  requir-
ing  seat  belts  to  be  buckled,  laws  encouraging  or  requiring  recycling,
and  laws  requiring  people  to  clean  up  after  their  pets.  These  are  laws
that  have  contributed  an  enormous  amount  to  environmental  improve-
ment. And  the  way  they  do  that  is  signaling  something  that  has  a pow-
erful  effect  on  people's  norms.  And  in  these  cases  government  can
relatively  cheaply  use  the  law  to  attempt  what  the  majority  wants,  that
is  norm  change.

The  second  kind  of case  has to  do with  the difference  between  the
social  role  of consumer  and  the  social  role  of  citizen.  Both  of us  occu-
py  these  two  roles.  We  buy  things  and  watch  things  and  we  vote  and
we  make  public  policy  recommendations.  Here  is  the  key  proposition.
In  our  capacity  as  consumers  we  may  live  within  norms  which  we
simultaneously,  in  our  capacity  as  citizens,  deplore.  The  Civil  Rights
Act  of  1964  is  under  some  attack  now  in  some  prominent  circles.  An
interesting  fact  is  that  that  act  was  supported  by  restaurants  that  were
discriminators.  Restaurants  that acknowledged  their  own  discriminatory
behavior  favored  the  law.  How  could  that  be?  What  they  said  was,  "If
we  open  our  doors  to  African  Americans,  what  will  happen  is  that
we'll  be  in  social  trouble  because  the  norm  is we're  not  supposed  to  do
that.  But we  just  want  to  make  profits.  If you  give us  this  law,  we  can
make  more  profits  and  we  won't  confront  the  old  norm."  These  are
cases  in  which  people,  in  their  capacity  as  citizens,  urge  results  that
differ  from  their  own  private  consumption  behavior.  Many  Americans
favor  more  educational  programming  for  children  on  television,  or
more  public  affairs  programming  on  television  for  themselves.  Would
they  watch  it?  Would  they  ask  their  children  to  watch  it?  Maybe  not.
Is  it  illegitimate  for  people  in  their  capacity  as  citizens  to  urge  and  get
results  that  diverge  from  what  happens  from  consumption  choices?  I
don't  think  so.  And  words  like  "choices"  tend to  cloud  the  issue.

In  many  parts  of  the  world,  and  in  some  parts  of America,  to  be
well  educated  is  inconsistent  with  social  norms.  Probably  most  of  the
people  in  this  room  have  encountered  some  places  where  if you  say
you're  in  law  school,  people  don't say,  "Great."  They  might  say  a wide
range  of things.  But one  thing  some  people  might  say  is,  "Who  do  you
think you  are,"  something  like  that.  Now,  there  are  many  places  in  the
world  and  some  places  in  America  where  norms  in  a relevant  commu-

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 157 1995-1996

158

[Vol.  15:147

nity  operate  powerfully  against  people's  efforts  to  educate  or  better
themselves  by  going  to  school  or  taking  school  seriously.  Many  of the
hardest  problems  that  people  face  is  running  up  against  social  norms
that  make  their  efforts  to  better  themselves  by  their  own  lights  seem  a
source  of  shame.  It's  parallel  to  the  condom  story  and  the  seat  belt
story;  but  maybe  more  poignant  because  it  involves  people's  basic  life
prospects.  There  are  things  that  government  can  do  and  that  can  be
done  collectively  to  make  it  so  that  education  isn't  stigmatizing  but  the
opposite.  There  are  places  in  the  world  where  women  who  try  to  be-
come  literate  are  ostracized.  And  by  acting  on  social  norms  the  law
might  well  be  able  to  do  something  about  it.

I  have  referred  to  the  issue  of caste.  And  by  the  issue  of  caste  I
mean just  the  fact  that  even  in  a free  society  like ours  there  are  statuses
that  people  have.  For  example,  the  experiences  of  African  Americans
vis-a-vis  the  police  are  systematically  different  from  the  experiences  of
white  people  vis-a-vis  the  police.  That's  one  sense  in  which  we  have
something  like  a  caste  system  in  the  United  States.  There  are  similar
things  with  respect  to  sex  roles  where  there are  many  places  where  if a
woman  says,  "I'm  not  making  dinner  tonight.  I'm  going  out  to  a  meet-
ing,"  the  signal  that's  given  is  fundamentally  different  from  the  similar
signal  for  a  man.

Now,  the  antidiscrimination  laws  are,  in  some  circles,  under  attack
as  liberty  denying.  But  we  might  think  that  the  liberty  issue  is  much
more  complicated  than  that,  in  the  face  of  social  norms  that  are  con-
nected  with  caste-like  features  of existing  social  practices.  And  if what
the  law  can  do  is  alter  the  norm,  liberty  might  be  promoted  rather  than
undermined.  There  are  many  norms  that  undermine  human  well-being;
for  example,  norms  that  make  it  seem  very  good  for  a  teenage  boy  to
have  gotten  a woman  pregnant;  norms  that  make  it  seem  very  good  for
a teenage  girl  to  have  a  child,  notwithstanding  her  inability  to  take  care
of  it;  norms  that  make  being  on  welfare  seem  highly  desirable  and
being  in  work  at  a  low-paying  job  seem  a  social  stigma.  There  are
norms that  encourage  hazardous  behavior  that  is  undermining  of human
well-being.  There  are  things  that  law  might  be  able  to  do  about  this.  It
might be  counterproductive;  it  might be futile;  but  this  is an  unexplored
area  where  law  could  do  a  lot  of good.

My  last  point  has  to  do  with  what  we  might  call  the  expressive
function  of law.  With  respect  to  our own  behavior,  often  what  we  do  is
connected  with  the  message  the  action  expresses  as  much  as  with  the
consequences.  There  are  famous  philosophical  puzzles  about  whether
you  would  shoot  an  innocent  person  when  a  terrorist  threatens  other-

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 158 1995-1996

19951

KOSKOFF  LECTURE SERIES

wise  to  shoot  a  hundred  people.  Would  you  shoot  the  terrorist?  Would
you  shoot  the  person  the  terrorist  tells  you  to  shoot  if  the  terrorist
would  otherwise  shoot  a  hundred  people?  Most  react  to  that  by  saying,
"I  don't know.  I  don't  know  if I could.  I  don't know  if I  would."  Most
people  hesitate.  It's  partly  because  of the  expressive  function  of action
and  what  one  is  expressing  about  oneself  by  shooting  an  innocent
person.  Law  too  often  has  an  expressive  function  in  the  sense  that  it
signals  national  or  social  commitments,  partly  in  order  to  make  for
change  with  respect  to  (say)  endangered  species,  recycling,  smoking,
sex  equality.  The  expressive  function of law  doesn't  have  directly  to  do
with  consequences  but  instead  with  the  norms  that  are  being  signalled
and promoted.

At  this  stage  it's  probably  worth  mentioning  that  the  term  "politi-
cal  correctness"  is  very  interesting  along  this  dimension  because  the
term  "political  correctness,"  as  it's  deployed,  operates  to  make  people
seem  pitiful  and  weak  if  they  believe,  for  example,  that  sexual  harass-
ment  is  a  bad  thing.  And  it's  a  brilliant  term  because  of  its  shifting
effect  on  social  norms.  It makes  it so  that  what  was  otherwise  forward-
looking  and  bold  seems  shameful  and  stepping  with  the  crowd.

It  is  time  to  conclude.  It is  often  said  that  the  government  should
respect  people's  preferences  and  choices.  I've  suggested  that  that's  too
simple,  because  preferences  and  choices  are  often  an  artifact  of roles,
norms  and  meanings.  All  of  these  things,  that  is,  roles,  norms  and
meanings,  can  be  obstacles  to  human  liberty  or  autonomy  or  well-be-
ing.  Of course  governmental  efforts  to  change  them  might  be  futile  or
it  might be  counterproductive.  But, it  might not. It would  be  a  shame  if
the  antigovernment  rhetoric  of the  last  decade  foreclosed  efforts to  seek
change  by  repeating  a  mantra  about  the  need  to  respect  choice.

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 159 1995-1996

HeinOnline  -- 15 QLR 160 1995-1996

