University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1995 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Rights and Their Critics Propter Honoris Respectum 
Rights and Their Critics Propter Honoris Respectum 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Rights and Their Critics Propter Honoris Respectum," 70 Notre Dame Law Review 727 
(1995). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Frowttr  lonoris  R  pitum

Rights  and Their  Critics

Cass R  Sunstein

The  Bill  of  Rights  has  now  been  part  of  the  United  States
Constitution  for  more  than  two  hundred  years.  In  the  recent  past,
that  short  document  has  inspired  reform  movements  throughout
the  world-not  merely  in  the  Soviet  Union,  Hungary,  Romania,
Poland,  and  East  Germany,  but  in  such  places  as  South  Africa,
China,  and  Taiwan  as  well.  It is  therefore  nothing  short  of remark-
able  that  the  international  interest  in  the  Bill  of Rights  has  come
at  a  time  when  the  very  concept  of rights,  or  of a  polity  pervaded
by  rights,  is  under  attack  in  the  United  States.

The  attack  on  rights  has  sometimes  been  highly  influential.  It
underlies  a  prominent  new journal,  The  Responsive  Community, and
it  cuts  across  ideological  lines.'  Justice  Clarence  Thomas  has  deliv-
ered  a  passionate  and  widely  reported  plea  for  responsibilities
instead  of  rights.'  In  so  saying,  Justice  Thomas  echoed  a  general

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of Jurisprudence  and  Co-Director
of  the  Center  on  Constitutionalism  in  Eastern  Europe,  University  of  Chicago  Law  School
and  Department  of  Political  Science.  Some  parts  of  this  essay  originally  appeared  in  Cass
R.  Sunstein,  Rightalk, NEW  REPUBLIC,  Sept.  2,  1991,  at  33  (reviewing  MARY  ANN  GLENDON,
RIGHTS  TALK:  THE  IMPOVERISHMENT  OF  POLITICAL  DISCOURSE  (1991)).

1  See,  e.g.,  AM1TAI  ETZIONI,  THE  SPIRIT  OF  COMMUNrI:  RIGHTS,  RESPONSIBILITIES,  AND
THE  COMMUNITARIAN  AGENDA  (1993);  MARY  ANN  GLENDON,  RIGHTS  TALK:  THE  IMPOVERISH-
MENT  OF  POLITICAL  DISCOURSE  (1991);  PHILIP  K.  HOwARD,  THE  DEATH  OF  COMMON
SENSE:  How  LAW  Is  SUFFOCATING  AMERICA  (1994);  DUNCAN  KENNEDY,  SEXY  DRESSING  ETC.
(1993);  Mark  Tushnet,  An  Essay  on  Rights,  62  TEX.  L.  REV.  1363  (1984).  Various  challeng-
es  to  rights  can  be  found  in  the  journal  founded  by  Professor  Etzioni,  THE  RESPONSIVE
COMMUNITY.  See,  e.g.,  The  Responsive  Communitarian Platform: Rights  and Responsibilities, RE-
SPONSIVE  COMMUNITY,  Winter  1991/92,  at  4,  18-20  (listing  57  signatories  to  the  platform).
Something  with  parallel  concern,  I  believe,  underlies  RICHARD  D.  PARKER,  "HERE,  THE
PEOPLE  RULE":  A  CONSTITUTIONAL  POPULIST  MANIFESTO  (1994),  and  also  CHRISTINA  HOFF
SOMMERS,  WHO  STOLE  FEMINISM?  HOW  WOMEN  HAVE  BETRAYED  WOMEN  (1994).  A  helpful
recent  discussion  can  be  found  in  Linda  C.  McClain,  Rights  and  Irresponsibility, 43  DUKE
LJ.  989  (1994).

2  Justice  Clarence  Thomas,  The  Rights  Revolution  and  America's  Urban  Poor  Vic-

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 727 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

claim  about  the  pathologies  of  legal  practices  during  the  Warren
Court  era.  More  generally,  it is  urged  that  a  culture  of  rights  en-
courages  a  form  of selfishness  and  an  unwillingness  to  compromise
that  are  incompatible  with  citizenship.'  Along  related  but  distinct
lines,  academic  critics  have  suggested  that  aggressive  judicial  review
or  perhaps  judicial  review  itself,  protecting  identified  rights,  is  by
its  nature  incompatible  with  democracy.4

These  various  claims  have  received  hospitable  receptions  in
prominent  places.  Many  of  the  Supreme  Court's  recent  decisions
embrace  the  idea  that  the  creation  of  rights  can  be  destructive  to
democratic  governance.5  The  attack  on  "substantive  due  process"
reflects  this  claim  quite  vividly.'  In  recent  deliberations,  Congress
and  the  executive  branch  have  been  increasingly  attentive  to  the
view  that  government,  instead  of  recognizing  rights,  should  en-
courage  people  to  exercise  greater  responsibility.7  On  this  view,
those  who  are  disadvantaged  should  take  their  welfare  into  their
own  hands  and  should  not  expect  assistance  from  government
operating  in  response  to  claims  of right.  Moreover,  it  is  said,  those
who  are  advantaged  should  respond  not  to  rights  laid  down  by  the
state,  but  to  their  own  sense  of responsibility  to  people  in  need.  If
the  1960s  and  the  early  1970s  were  an  era  of rights,  it seems  likely
that  the  1990s  will  be  a  period  in  which  responsibilities  move
increasingly  to  the  fore.

tims  or  Beneficiaries?,  Address  Before  the  Federalist  Society  and  the  Manhattan  Institute
(May  16,  1994), 
in  60  VITAL  SPEECHES  OF  THE  DAY  514,  514-17  (1994);  see  also,  e.g.,  Neil
A.  Lewis,  Justice Thomas  Assails  Victim  Mentality,  N.Y.  TIMES,  May  17,  1994,  at  A14.

3  See,  e.g.,  GLENDON,  supra  note  1,  at  1-17;  CHRISTOPHER  LASCH,  THE  REVOLT  OF

THE  MASSES  (1995).

4  See,  from  diferent  angles,  ROBERT  H.  BORK,  THE  TEMPTING  OF  AMERICA:  THE  PO-
LITICAL  SEDUCTION  OF  THE  LAW  (1990);  Mary  Becker,  Conservative Free  Speech  and  the  Un-
easy  Case for Judicial Review,  64  U.  COLO.  L.  REv.  975  (1993);  Jeremy  Waldron,  Freeman's
Defense  of Judicial Review,  13  LAW  &  PHIL.  27  (1994);  Jeremy  Waldron,  A  Right-Based  Cri-
tique  of  Constitutional Rights,  13  OXFORD  J.  LEGAL  STUD.  18  (1993).

5  See,  e.g.,  Bowers  v.  Hardwick,  478  U.S.  186  (1986);  Cleburne  v.  Cleburne  Living

Ctr.,  473  U.S.  432  (1985).

6  See,  e.g.,  Bowers  v.  Hardwick,  478  U.S.  at  194-95  ("There  should  be,  therefore,
great  resistance  to  expand  the  substantive  reach  of th[e  Due  Process]  Clauses,  particularly
if  it requires  redefining  the  category  of  rights  deemed  to  be  fundamental.  Otherwise,  the
Judiciary  necessarily  takes  to  itself  further  authority  to  govern  the  country  without  express
constitutional  authority.").

7 

See,  e.g.,  R.  SHEP  MELNICK,  BETWEEN  THE  LINES: 

INTERPRETING  WELFARE  RIGHTS
274-83  (1994);  President  Bill  Clinton,  Address  Before  the  National  Baptist  Convention
(Sept.  9,  1994)  (describing  a  "crisis  of  values"  and  a  "lack  of  individual  responsibility");
Dan  Quayle,  The  Poverty  of Values,  Address  Before  the  Commonwealth  Club  of  Califor-
nia  (Sept.  8,  1994)  ("[O]ur  public  policy  today,  unfortunately,  reflects  a  philosophy  of
rights  and  entitlements  rather  than  responsibility.").

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 728 1994-1995

19951

RIGHTS AND  THEIR CRITICS

Many  critics  of  rights  observe  that  American  political  debate,
especially  since  the  New  Deal,  has  come  to  center  on  a  bewilder-
ing  and  proliferating  array  of  "rights"-that  it  has  yielded  to  a
kind  of  "rights  revolution"  involving  the  courts,  Congress,  and  the
President.'  These  rights,  many  of  them  quite  novel,  include  a
wide  range  of  safeguards  for  criminal  defendants;  prevention
against  the  abuse  and  neglect  of  children;  guarantees  to  improve
the  treatment  of  the  mentally  and  physically  disabled;9  protection
of  consumers  from  sharp  practices;  and  a  remarkable  array  of
efforts  to  safeguard  the  environment."  To  be  sure,  some  people
think  that  the  growing  list  of  rights  is  an  important  or  precious
social  achievement,  supplementing  a  catalog  of  protected  interests
started  but  hardly  finished  in  the  founding  period.  But  many
others  disagree.  They  believe  that  America's  transformation  into
"the  land  of rights"  has  had  harmful,  even  disastrous  consequenc-
es.

12

My  goal  in  this  Essay  is  to  disaggregate  and  to  evaluate  the
claims  now  brought  against  rights.  I  suggest  that  much  of  the
attack  is  based  on  confusion  and  on  a  failure  to  make  necessary
distinctions.  The  attack  is  best  aimed  at  particular  rights,  not  at
rights  as  such.  In  its  usual  form,  it  depends  on  a  misunderstand-
ing  of what  rights  are  and  of what  they  do.  It  rests  on  empirical
claims  that  are  hard  to  support.  It offers  a  cultural  diagnosis  that
is  only  part  of  a  complex  picture,  for  there  has  been  no  general
shift  to  rights  from  responsibilities.

In  the  end,  I  claim  that  the  critique  of rights  has  no  merit  as
such,  and  that  the  plausible  claims  that  it contains  should  be  stat-
ed  far  more  cautiously  and  narrowly.  When  so  stated,  the  claims
can  be  discussed  as  part  of a  debate  over which  rights  it  is  best  to
have,  rather  than  as  a  debate  over  whether  rights  are  pernicious
merely  by virtue  of being rights.

This  Essay  comes  in  three  parts.  Part  I  tries  to  separate  the
various  components  of  the  attack  on  rights.  Part  II  identifies  some

8 

See  GLENDON,  supra  note  1,  at  4-7;  HOWARD,  supra  note  1,  at  116-33;  Thomas,

supra note  2.

9 
10 

See,  e.g.,  MELNICK,  supra note  7,  at  41-51.
See,  e.g.,  CAS  R.  SUNSTEIN,  AFrER  THE  RIGHTS  REVOLUTION:  RECONCEVING  THE

REGULATORY  STATE  11-46  (1990).

11  See  the  various  views  catalogued  in  MELNICK,  supra  note  7.  This  way  of  viewing
things  builds  on  President  Roosevelt's  plea  for  a  second  bill  of  rights.  See  infra  note  84
and  accompanying  text.

12  See  GLENDON,  supra note  1,  at  1-17;  see  also  Thomas,  supra  note  2.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 729 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

truths  in  this  attack,  but  shows  that  most  of  these  truths  are  par-
tial.  Part  III  deals  with  an  increasingly  important  question-the
relationship  between  rights  and  responsibilities.

I.  THE  CHARGES

Numerous  charges  have  been  made  against  rights,  and  it  will
be  useful  to  begin  by  separating  distinct  claims  that  tend  to  be
run  together.  We  might  disaggregate  the  charges  into  six  different
categories.

A.  The  Social Foundations of Rights

Some  people  suggest,  as  part  of  their  critique  of  rights,  that
rights  are  essentially  social  and  collective  in  character  and  that  the
rhetoric  of  rights  obscures  this  point.1 3  For  example,  rights  come
from  the  state  in  the  sense  that  they  depend  for  their  existence
on  collective  institutions. 4  Without  the  law  of  property,  set  out by
the  collectivity,  property  rights  cannot  be  secure.  Without  the  law
of contract,  saying  that  agreements  are  enforceable  under  certain
conditions,  contracts  could  not  exist  in  the  way  that  we  under-
stand  them.  In  the  critics'  view,  many  claims  based  on  rights,  and
especially  claims  for  individual  rights,  tend  to  disguise  the  social
character  of  rights  and  in  particular  the  need  for  collective  and
communal  support. 5  The  result,  it  is  said,  is  confusion  and  an
inability  to  draw  lines  between  rights  that  are  desirable  from  the
social  point  of view  and  rights  that  are  not.

B.  The Rigidity  of Rights

Other  critics  charge  that  rights  have  a  strident  and  absolutist
character,  and  that  for  this  reason  they  impoverish  political  dis-
course. 6  Rights  do  not  admit  of  compromise.  They  do  not  allow
room  for  competing  considerations.  For  this  reason,  they  impair
and  even  foreclose  deliberation  over  complex  issues  not  realistical-

13  See,  e.g.,  KENNEDY,  supra note  1,  at  83-88.  The  point  emerges  from  legal  realist
work.  See  Morris  R.  Cohen,  Property  and Sovereignty,  13  CORNELL  L.Q.  8  (1927);  Robert  L.
Hale,  Coercion and Distribution in  a  Supposedly  Noncoercive State,  38  POL.  Sc.  Q. 470  (1923).
See  a  related  discussion,  from  a  different  angle,  in  JOSEPH  RAz,  THE  MORALITY  OF  FREE-
DOM  165-255  (1986).

14  The  point  is  made  well,  though  hardly  as  part  of  a  critique  of  rights,  in  JULES  L.

COLEMAN,  RISKS  AND  WRONGS  61  (1992).

15  See,  e.g.,  KENNEDY,  supra note  1,  at  83-88.
16  See,  e.g.,  GLENDON,  supra note  1,  at  45-46.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 730 1994-1995

19951

RIGHTS AND  THEIR  CRITICS

ly  soluble  by  simple  formulas.  Rights  thus  have  many  of  the  de-
fects  of  rules.t7  A  person  claiming  a  right-for  example,  a  handi-
capped  person  claiming  that  all  buildings  should  be  accessible  to
people  who  use  wheelchairs-may  not  be willing  to  allow a  process
of  balancing  in  which  we judge,  for  example,  whether  accessibility
for  wheelchairs  really  makes  sense  in  light  of  the  relevant  costs
and  benefits.  A  characteristic  problem  with  rules  is  that  they  do
not  permit  people  to  make  individual  judgments  about  whether
following  the  rules  really  is  reasonable  in  particular  cases. 9  Rights
have  the  identical  problem.

Rooted  in  nineteenth-century  ideas  of  absolute  sovereignty
over  property,  rights  are  said  to  be  ill-adapted  to  what  we  usually
need,  that  is,  a  careful  discussion  of trade-offs  and  competing  con-
cerns.  If rights  are  (in Ronald  Dworkin's  suggestive  and  influential
phrase,  criticized  below)  "trumps,"20  they  are  for that  very  reason
harmful  to  the  difficult  process  of  accommodating  different  goals
and  considerations  in  resolving  such  thorny  problems  as  abortion,
the  environment,  and  plant closings.

C. 

Indeterminacy

In  one  of  his  greatest  aphorisms,  Justice  Holmes  wrote  that
"[g]eneral  propositions  do  not  decide  concrete  cases."2'  Rights,. of
course,  take  the  form  of general  propositions.  For  this  reason  they
are  said  to  be  indeterminate  and  thus  unhelpful.22

If we  know  that  there  is  a  right  to  private  property,  we  do  not
know  whether  an  occupational  safety  and  health  law  or  a  law  re-
quiring  beach  access  is  permissible.  In  fact,  we  know  relatively
little.  Standing  by  itself,  the  constitutional  protection  against  gov-
emnment  "takings"  tells  us  very  little  about how  to  handle  particu-
lar  problems.  This  is  true  of rights  generally.  To  say  that  there  is  a
right  to  equal  protection  of  the  law  is  not  to  say,  for  example,
that  affirmative  action  programs  are  acceptable,  mandatory,  or
prohibited.  In  fact,  the  right  to  equal  protection  of  the  law  re-

17  See,  e.g.,  HOWARD,  supra  note  1, at  116-33.
18  See  id. at  113-18.
19  See  EUGENE  BARDACH1  & ROBERT  A.  KAGAN,  GOING  BY  THE  BOOK: THE  PROBLEM  OF

REGULATORY  UNREASONABLENESS  (1982).

political  trumps  held  by  individuals.").

20  RONALD  DWORKIN,  TAING  RIGHTS  SERIOUSLY  xi  (1977) 

("Individual  rights  are

21  Lochner  v.  New  York,  198  U.S.  45,  76  (1904)  (Holmes,  J.,  dissenting).
22  See,  e.g.,  Tushnet,  supra  note  1,  at  1371-76.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 731 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

quires  a  great  deal  of  supplemental  work  to  decide  cases.  The
right  must  be  specified  in  order  to  have  concrete  meaning.  The
specification  will  depend  on  premises  not  contained  within  the
announcement  of  the  right  itself.3  Rights  purport  to  solve  prob-
lems,  but  when  stated  abstractly-it  is  claimed-they  are  at  most
the  beginning  of a  discussion.

Perhaps  the  area  of  free  speech  is  the  most  vivid  illustration.
Everyone  agrees  that  such  a  right  exists;  but without  supplemental
work,  we  cannot  know  how  to  handle  the  hard  questions  raised  by
commercial  speech,  libel,  obscenity,  or  campaign  finance  restric-
tions.  A  serious  problem  with  modern  free  speech  discussions  is
that  the  term  "free  speech"  tends  to  be  used  as  if it  handled  the
hard  questions  by  itself.24

D.  Excessive Individualism

A  different  objection  is  that  rights  are  unduly  individualistic
and  associated  with  highly  undesirable  characteristics,  including
selfishness  and  indifference  to  others.25  Rights  miss  the  "dimen-
sion  of  sociality;"" 
they  posit  selfish,  isolated  individuals  who  as-
sert  what  is  theirs,  rather  than  participating  in  communal  life.
Rights,  it  is  said,  neglect  the  moral  and  social  dimensions  of  im-
portant  problems.

The  important  and  contested  right  of  privacy,  for  example,  is
said  to  have  emerged  as  an  unduly  individual  right,  rooted  in  the
"property  paradigm"  and  loosened  from  connections  to  others.
Critics  urge  that  this  conception  of  the  issues  involved  in  the
so-called  privacy  cases  misses  crucial  aspects  of  the  relevant  prob-
lems-abortion,  family  living  arrangements,  and  the  asserted  right
to  die.  Such  issues  do  not  involve  simple  privacy;  they  call  up  a
range  of  issues  about  networks  of  relationships,  between  individu-
als  and  the  state,  between  individuals  and  families,  between  indi-
viduals  and  localities.  Perhaps  the  abortion  issue  is  especially  prob-
lematic  when  conceived  in  terms  of  a  "right  to  privacy."  Many
people,  on  both  sides  of  the  abortion  controversy,  are  uncomfort-
able  with  the  "privacy"  rhetoric.  Inattentive  to  the  unborn  or  to

23  See  Henry  Richardson,  Specifying  Norms  as a  Way  to  Resolve  Concrete Ethical Problems,

19  PHIL.  &  PUB.  AFF.  306  (1990).

24  This  is  a  problem  in  NADINE  STROSSEN,  DEFENDING  PORNOGRAPHY:  FREE  SPEECH,

SEX,  AND  THE  FIGHT  FOR  WOMEN'S  RIGHTS  (1995).

25  See  GLENDON,  supra  note  1,  at  75,  178;  Tushnet,  supra note  1.
26  See  GLENDON,  supra note  1, at  109-44.
27  See  id.  at  20-25,  48-50.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 732 1994-1995

1995]

RIGHTS  AND  THEIR CRITICS

the  situation  of  mothers,  American  law  has  been  said  to  have,
perversely,  left  the  pregnant  woman  genuinely  alone,  without  peo-
ple  "willing to  help  her  either  to  have  the  abortion  she  desired,  or
to  keep  and  raise  the  child  who  was  eventually  born."'

Similarly,  American  law  is  said  to  be  unequipped  even  to
describe  the  harms  faced  by  a  community  destroyed  by  the  closing
of  a  plant  employing  most  of  its  members.  These  harms  include
the  loss  of a  rich  neighborhood  life-"roots,  relationships,  solidari-
ty,  sense  of  place,  and  shared  memory  . .
."'  On  the  critics'
view,  the  individualistic  character  of  recent  formulations  has  left
Americans  with  a  crucial  linguistic  and  conceptual  deficiency.
Rights  talk  is  a  principal  culprit.  Since  rights  are  claimed  by  indi-
viduals,  it  is  said,  rights  promote  and  encourage  a  community
whose  members  think  of  social  problems  in  the  most  narrow,
self-interested  terms.

.

E.  Protection of Existing Distributions and Practices

To  some  critics,  a  key  problem  with  rights  is  that  they  tend  to
be  used  for what  the  critics  see  as  pernicious  ends.  Partly  because
rights  are  indeterminate  in  the  abstract,  they  can  be  used  as  an
excessively  conservative  and  antidemocratic  force,  protecting  exist-  -
ing  distributions  from  scrutiny  and  change."'  Some  people  think
that  the  historical  function  of  rights  has  been  to  insulate  current
practice  from  legitimate  democratic  oversight.  Thus  the  Fifth
Amendment  was  invoked  to  protect  slavery  before  the  Civil  War;31
thus  the  Fourteenth  Amendment  was  used  to  attack  social  welfare
legislation 
thus  the  First
Amendment  is  used  to  invalidate  campaign  finance  legislation3
today.4

in  the  early  part  of  this  century;, 2 

On  this  view,  rights  are  too  readily  invoked  in  the  service  of
goals  that  are  unworthy  or  that  at  least should  be  subject  to  dem-
ocratic  rather  than judicial  resolution.  A  key  problem with  rights  is

28  Id. at  58.
29  Id.  at  30;  see  also Joseph  W.  Singer,  The  Reliance  Interest  in  Property, 40  STAN.  L.

REV.  611  (1988).

30  See  KENNEDY,  supra note  1;  Tushnet,  supra note  1,  at  1371-82;  cf J.M.  Balkin,  What

Is a  Postmodern  Constitutionalism?, 90  MICH.  L.  REV.  1966  (1992).
31  See  Scott  v.  Sandford,  60  U.S.  (19  How.)  393  (1857).
32  See  Lochner  v.  New  York,  198  U.S.  45  (1905).
33  See  Buckley  v.  Valeo,  424  U.S.  1  (1976).
34  For  a  broadside  attack  on judicial  invocation  of  rights,  see  generally  Becker,  supra

note  4.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 733 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

that  they  are  brought  in  the  service  of  existing  distributions  of
authority  and  power.

F.  Rights  Versus  Responsibilities

A  final  and  especially  prominent  objection  is  that  the  empha-
sis  on  rights  tends  to  crowd  out  the  issue  of  responsibility.  In
American  law  and  in  American  public  discourse,  some  critics  com-
plain,  it  is  too  rare  to  find  the  idea  that  people  owe  duties  to
each  other,  or  that  civic  virtue  is  to  be  cultivated,  prized,  and
lived.  Rights,  and  especially  new  protections  of  rights  since  the
1960s,  are  said  to  be  a  major  problem  here.

In  a  simple  formulation:  People  who  insist  on  their  rights  too
infrequently  explore  what  it is  right  to  do.  Or  they  become  depen-
dent  on  the  official  institutions  charged  with  safeguarding  rights,
rather  than  doing  things  for  themselves.  The  controversy  over
whether  rights  turn  women  or blacks  into  a  "dependent  class"  is  in
part  about  this  issue. 5  People  who  insist  that  their  status  as  vic-
tims  entitles  them  to  enforce  their  legal  rights  may  not  conceive
of themselves  in  ways  that  engender  equality  and  equal  citizenship.
Thus  Justice  Thomas  has  objected  to  the  "judicial  revolution
in  individual  rights,"  and  has  challenged  as  harmful  "the  idea  that
our  society  had  failed  to  safeguard  the  interests  of  minorities,  the
poor  and  other  groups;  and,  as  a  consequence,  was,  in  fact,  pri-
marily  at  fault  for  their  plight."36  Justice  Thomas  particularly  la-
mented  the  fact  that  "[ m ]any  began  questioning  whether  the  poor
and  minorities  could  be  blamed  for  the  crimes  they  commit-
ted."37  In  his  view,  "[o]ur  legal  institutions  and  popular  culture
began  identifying  those  accused  of wrong  doing  as  victims  of  up-
bringing  and  circumstance."'  This  was  unfortunate,  for  "[i]n  the
long  run,  a  society  that  abandons  personal  responsibility  will  lose
its  moral  sense.  And  it  is  the  urban  poor  whose  lives  are  being
destroyed  the  most  by  this  loss  of  moral  sense." 9  According  to
Justice  Thomas:

The  very  same  ideas  that  prompted  the judicial  revolution

35  See,  e.g.,  KATHERINE  ROIPHE,  THE  MORNING  AFrER:  FEAR,  SEX  AND  FEMINISM  ON

COLLEGE  CAMPUSES  (1993);  SOMMERS,  supra  note  1.

36  Thomas,  supra  note  2,  at  516.
37 
38 
39 

Id.
Id.
Id.  at  517.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 734 1994-1995

1995]

RIGHTS AND  THEIR  CRITICS

...and  that  circumscribed  the  authority  of local  communities
to  set  standards  for  decorum  and  civility  on  the  streets  or  in
the  public  schools  also  made  it far  more  difficult  for  the  crimi-
nal  justice  system  to  hold  people  responsible  for  the  conse-
quences  of their  harmful  acts."

When  black  people  insist  on  rights  and  "demand  ...from  [their]
oppressors  []  more  lenient  standards  of conduct,"  they  produce  a
state  of dependency  worse  than  slavery."

Professor  Mary  Ann  Glendon,  an  especially  prominent  and
evenhanded  critic  of  rights,  is  similarly  concerned  about  the  ef-
fects  of  rights  on  responsibilities.4 2  Thus  Glendon  devotes  a  good
deal  of  space  to  the  "duty  to  rescue,"  a  duty  not  recognized  by
American  law.43  If a  person  ignores  someone  who  is  drowning,  he
will  not be  held  accountable,  even  if rescue  could  occur  with  little
effort.  Glendon  deplores  this  result,  arguing  at  a  minimum  for  a
statement,  in  law,  that  such  a  duty  exists.  On  Glendon's  view,  it is
important  to  attend  to  responsibility  as  well  as  rights.  American
law  does  this  far  too  infrequently.

though  with  some  ambivalence, 

Along  similar  lines,  Glendon  challenges  the  view  (on  which
insistent4 )  that  the
the  current  Supreme  Court  is  increasingly 
Constitution  imposes  no  affirmative  duties  on  government.  She
suggests, 
that  police  officers
should  be  obliged  to  protect  people  from  serious  threats  and  that
social  workers  should  have  a  duty  to  protect  children  from  domes-
tic  violence  when  they  are  on  notice  that  such  violence  will  occur.
Above  all,  Glendon  fears  that judicial  decisions  that  fail  to  recog-
nize  these  duties  have  harmed  public  discourse  and  social  under-
standings.  The  important point  is  the  general  one:  Critics  of rights
argue  that  the  emphasis  on  rights  diminishes  individual  commit-
ments  to  duty  and  responsibility.

II.  CONCEPTS  AND  PARTIAL  TRUTHS

In  this  section,  I  attempt  to  clarify  some  of  the  conceptual
issues  at  stake  in  the  critique  of  rights.  I  suggest  as  well  that  the

40  Id.  at  516.
41 
Id.  at  517.
42  GLENDON,  supra note  1,  at  76-108.
43  Id.  at  78-89.
44  See  DeShaney  v.  Winnebago  County  Dep't  of  Social  Servs.,  489  U.S.  189,  196
(1989)  (The  Due  Process  Clause  "confers  no  affirmative  right  to  governmental  aid,  even
where  such  aid  may  be  necessary  to  secure  life.").

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 735 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

critique  embodies  some 
(and  important)
truths,  but  that  it  does  not  by  any  means  support  a  general  chal-
lenge  to  rights.45  The  critics  of rights  have,  in  short,  misconceived
their  target.

limited  and  partial 

A.  Definitional Issues

Begin  with  a definition  of rights.  This  is  a  regrettably  complex
issue,  and  I  will  have  to  deal  with  it  briefly  and  tentatively  here."
Sometimes  the  term  "rights"  is  intended  to  refer  to  important
human  interests,  or  (what is  not the  same  thing)  to  those  interests
that  operate  as  "trumps"  in  the  sense  that  they  cannot  be  compro-
mised  by  reference  to  collective  policies  or  goals.  If  we  identify
rights  with  important  human  interests,  the  critique  of  rights  loses
its  force.  Who  could  object  to  social  protection  of  important  hu-
man  interests?

The  conception  of  rights  as  interests  that  operate  as  "trumps"
against  the  collectivity  raises  more  difficulty,  largely  because  it  is
not  clear  that  this  conception  is  really  helpful.  The  first  problem
is  that  almost  every  right  is  defeasible  at  some  point,  and  defeasi-
ble just  because  the  collective  interest  is  very  strong.  In  American
law,  no  right  is  absolute.  If, for  example,  the  rest  of  the  human
race  will  be  eliminated  because  of  the  protection  of  a  right,  the
right  will  certainly  be  redefined  or legitimately  infringed,  probably
under  some  version  of  the  "compelling  interest"  test.  The  real
question  then  becomes  when  rights  are  defeasible  because  of  col-
lective  justifications-under  what  conditions  and  for what  reasons.
The  formula  of "trumps"  is  misleading  for  this  reason.  We  need  to
know  what  sorts  of  reasons  are  admissible  and  how  weighty  they
must  be;  these  are  the  key  questions  in  the  exploration  of rights.
Rights  characteristically  limit  the  kinds  of arguments  that  can
be  used  by  way  of justification,  and  they  characteristically  require
justifications  of  special  weight.47  Above  all,  rights  exclude  certain

45  For  similar  assessments,  see  McClain,  supra note  1,  at  990-94.
46  For  an  especially  instructive  discussion  of  the  definition  of  rights,  see  RAZ,  supra

note  13,  at  165-92.

47  See  Richard  H.  Pildes,  Avoiding  Reasons:  Exclusionary Reasons  in  Constitutional Law,
45  HASrINGS  LJ.  711  (1994);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Incommensurability  and  Valuation in  Law, 92
MICH.  L.  REV.  779  (1994).  Note  that  it  is  important  to  inquire  into  two  different  dimen-
sions-legitimacy  and  weight.  Some  grounds  for  infringing  on  rights  are  inadmissible  even
if  they  are  weighty.  Thus,  racial  prejudice  is  not  a  legitimate  reason  for  racial  discrimina-
tion,  and  offense  at  the  content  of  ideas  is  not  a  legitimate  reason  for  infringing  on  free
speech.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 736 1994-1995

1995l

RIGHTS AND  THEIR  CRITICS

otherwise  admissible  reasons  for  action. 8  But  ideas  of  this  kind
do  not  support  the  "trumps"  metaphor  and  indeed  lead  in  quite
different  directions.

the  understanding  of  rights  as 

The  second  problem  is  that.  many  conceptual  puzzles  are
interests  operating
raised  by 
"against"  the  collectivity.  Often  rights  are  something  that  the
collectivity  recognizes  and  protects  in  order  to  protect  its interests.
If  this  is  so,  there  is  no  easy  opposition  between  rights  and  the
collectivity.  In  fact  many  rights  are  best  understood  as  a  solution
to  a  collective  action  problem  and  especially  to  a prisoner's  dilem-
ma  faced  by  people  lacking  legal  entitlements;  property  rights
themselves  have  this  character. 9  Rights  are  collectively  conferred
and  designed  to  promote  collective  interests.  They  are  protected
by  social  institutions  for social  reasons.  In  such  cases,  rights  may  in
a  sense  operate  against  the  collectivity  once  they  are  conferred;
government  may  not  take  property just  because  it wants  to  do  so.
But  even  in  such  cases,  rights  are  guaranteed  in  the  first  instance
both  by  and  for  the  collectivity  (which  of  course  has  no  existence
apart  from  the  individuals  who  compose  it).

In  any  case,  many  people  who  are  insistent  on  rights  do  not
see  rights  as  opposing  the  collectivity,  at  least  not  in  any  simple
sense.  Rights  often  have  the  purpose  of  creating  a  certain  kind  of
society.  Consider  here Joseph  Raz's  suggestion:

If  I  were  to  choose  between  living  in  a  society  which  enjoys
freedom  of  expression,  but  not  having  the  right  myself,  or
enjoying  the  right  in  a  society  which  does  not  have  it,  I  would
have  no  hesitation  in judging  that  my  own  personal  interest  is
better  served  by  the  first  option."

The  point  suggests  that  many  rights  deserve  to  exist  because  of
their  collective  consequences.

This  idea  can  be  embraced  by  people  from  diverse  perspec-
tives;  I  offer  some  truncated  remarks.  Utilitarians  would  be  likely
to  make  a  large  space  for  rights,  because  the  protection  of identi-
fied  interests  as  rights  can  promote  utility.  There  is  no  tension
between  utilitarianism  and  rights,  though  the  utilitarian  account  of
rights  is  distinctive  and  controversial.5  Economic  analysts  of  law

48  See  the  discussion  of  exclusionary  reasons  in  JOSEPH  RAz,  PRACTICAL  REASON  AND

NORMS  35-48  (2d  ed.  1992).

49  See  COLEMAN,  supra note  14,  at  3.
50  JOSEPH  RAZ,  Rights  and  Individual  Well-Being,  in  ETHICS  IN  THE  PUBLIC  DOMAIN:

ESSAYS  IN  THE  MORALrIY  OF  LAW  AND  POLITICS  29,  39  (1994).

51  SeeJONATHAN  RILEY,  LIBERAL  UTILITARIANISM  150-80  (1988);  see  also RAZ,  supra note

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 737 1994-1995

738

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

are  hardly  critical  of rights.  On  the  contrary,  they  take  rights  to  be
crucial  instruments  for  promoting  economic  goals. 2  Those  who
emphasize  the  need  to  base  social  and  legal  practices  on  a  con-
ception  of  the  human  good,  or  of  human  flourishing,  will  also
make  room  for  rights  insofar  as  rights  can  be  shown  to  be  a  meth-
od  of  promoting  human  flourishing.  Under  this  view,  a  concep-
tion  of  the  good  is  prior  to  a  conception  of  the  right;  but  rights
are  a  crucial  part  of  the  good,  or  a  crucial  way  of  achieving  the
good,  for  purposes  of both  theory  and  practice.

Some  people  associate  rights  with  "nature."54  The  natural
rights  tradition  is,  to  say  the  least,  a  complex  one,  and  I  cannot
sort  out  its  various  claims  here.  But  some  of  those  who  point  to
"nature"  should  probably  be  understood  to  say  that  certain  dis-
tinctly  human  characteristics  and  capacities  call  for  or  fit  with  a
certain  category  of  rights.  If  social  and  legal  practices  must  be
based  on  the  natural  capacities  of human  beings,  we  might  be  led
to  embrace  a  set  of  rights  that  promote  those  capacities.5  Per-
haps  people  who  espouse  this view  will  see  natural  rights  as  worthy
of  respect  whatever  the  particular  community  may  think.  That
claim  may  be  correct,  but  it  does  not  oppose  rights  in  any  simple
sense  to  the  collectivity.  Many  of  the  rights  sought  by  the  natural
law  tradition  have  everything  to  do  with  sociality  and  its  precondi-
tions.-5

Of  course  deontological  writers  offer  a  very  different  concep-
tion  of  rights,  seeing  them  not  as  instruments  for  maximizing
utility  or wealth,  or  as  a  way  of  promoting  the  best  conception  of
the  human  good,  but  as  reflecting  respect  for  individuals  as  per-
sons.57  Here  we  may  indeed  have  an  opposition  between  the  in-
dividual  and  the  community.  Under  this  conception  of  rights,  it
remains  necessary  to justify  any  particular  understanding  of rights,
and  thus  to  offer  reasons  for  their  existence.  But  perhaps  those

50,  at  32  (criticizing  the  utilitarian  account  of  rights);  Amartya  Sen,  Rights  and Agency,  11
PHIL.  &  PUB.  A. 

3  (1982).

52  See,  e.g.,  RICHARD  A.  POSNER,  ECONOMIC  ANALYSIS  OF  LAw  1-15  (4th  ed.  1992).
53  See,  e.g.,  AMARiYA  SEN,  INEQUALITY  REEXAMINED  44-58  (1992);  Martha  Nussbaum,
Aristotelian Social Democracy,  in  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  GOOD  228-240  (R.  Bruce  Douglass  et
al.  eds.,  1984).

54  See,  e.g.,  JOHN  FINNIS,  NATURAL  LAW  AND  NATURAL  RIGHTS  (1988).
55  This  conception  of  rights  emerges  from  id.
56 
57 

See  id.
See,  e.g.,  DWORKIN,  supra  note  20,  at  212.  An  important  claim  for  duties  rather
than  rights  emerges  from  ONORA  O'NEILL,  CONSTRUCTIONS  OF  REASON:  EXPLORATIONS  OF
KANT'S  PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY  (1989).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 738 1994-1995

1995]

RIGHTS AND  THEIR  CRITICS

reasons  need  not  refer  to  collective  goals.  On  the  other  hand,
some  (broadly  speaking)  deontological  writers  do  insist  on  the
collective  goals  that  underlie  rights,  suggesting  that  rights  have
their  origin  in  such  goals."8

Let  us  put  these  conceptual  difficulties  to  one  side  and  define
rights  in  a  way  that  should  be  congenial  to  both  supporters  and
critics  of rights:  Rights  are  legally  enforceable  instruments  for  the
protection  of  their  claimants.  Rights  are  thus  practical  instruments
that  can  be  invoked  in  courts  of  law  by  individuals  or  groups
against  both  private  parties  and  the  state.  (To  say  that  rights  oper-
ate  against  society  is  not  to  say  that  their justification  is  not  social.
Rights  operating, against  society  may  have  social  justification;  con-
sider  the  right  to  free  speech  or  the  right  to  private  property.)
This  is  a  highly  pragmatic  conception  of  rights,  one  that  tries  to
put  philosophical  issues  to  one  side  and  to  identify  instead  the
actual  functions  of  rights  in  the  world.  I  think  that  it  is  this  un-
derstanding  of rights,  and  not the  contested  theoretical  issues,  that
underlies  the  critique  of rights.

B.  Republicanism, Liberalism, and Rights

Now  shift  to  the  place  of rights  in American  constitutionalism.
A  good  deal  of  work  in  constitutional  law  has  dealt  with  the  role
of  "republican"  thought  in  the  American  tradition."  The  republi-
can  ideal  prizes  a  deliberative  conception  of  democracy-one  in
which  popular  sovereignty  entails  not  simple  majoritarianism,  but
an  effort  to  ensure  a  form  of  reason-giving  in  the  public  sphiere. °
Efforts  to  revive  the  republican  tradition  have  been  designed  in
part  to  oppose  the  view  that  the  protection  of  antecedently  given
"rights"  is  the  sole  purpose  of  the  American  constitutional  tradi-
tion.  On  the  contrary,  the  notion  that  rights  are  antecedently
given  leads  to  real  confusion.  Many  rights  are  protected  as  such
because 
they  are  a  precondition  for  democratic  deliberation,"

58  For  a  particularly  illuminating  discussion,  see  RAZ,  supra note  13,  at  165-80.
59 

See,  e.g.,  Frank  I.  Michelman,  The  Supreme  Court,  1985  Term-Foreword:  Traces  of
Self-Government,  100  HARV.  L.  REV.  4  (1986);  Cass  R. Sunstein,  Interest  Groups  in  American
Public  Law,  38  STAN.  L.  REV.  29  (1985);  Symposium,  The  Republican  Civic  Tradition,  97
YALE  L.J.  1493  (1988).

60  See  CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN,  THE  PARTIAL  CONSTITUTroN  17-21  (1993).
61  Many  but  not  all  rights  are  necessary  for  democratic  deliberation.  See James  E.

Fleming,  Constructing the Substantive  Constitution, 72  TEX.  L.  REV.  211  (1993).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 739 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

and  in  any  case  the  American  constitutional  order  seeks  delibera-
tion  about  ordinary  issues  not implicating  rights  at  all.

Some  people  think  that  liberalism  and  republicanism  are  at
odds'  and  that  rights  have  a  natural  place  in  liberalism  but  an
awkward  one  in  republican  thought.  But  there  is  no  opposition
between  the  liberal  tradition  and  the  republican  tradition  as  these
have  operated  in  the  United  States;  and  republicanism  is  hardly
hostile  to  rights.  To  be  sure,  we  could  generate  conceptions  of
republicanism  that  are  opposed  to  liberalism,  and  vice  versa.  A
conception  of republicanism  that  distrusts  rights  altogether,  or  that
sees  duty  to  the  community  as  an  overriding  obligation  of  all  citi-
zens,63  or  that  seeks  to  impose  a  unitary  conception  of  the  good,
would  indeed  be  antiliberal.  Moreover,  a  conception  of liberalism
that  sees  politics  as  an  effort  to  aggregate  private  preferences
would  indeed  be  antirepublican,  since  it  would  place  no  premium
on  deliberation  or  civic  virtue.  But  the  aspiration  to  deliberative
democracy  can  certainly  be  understood  in  such  a  way  as  to  be
both  liberal  and  republican.  The  liberal  tradition  is  committed  to
the  justification  of  government  outcomes  by  reference 
to  rea-
sons64  and  also  to  a  form  of government  by  discussion.'

Some  critics  of  the  "republican  revival"  think  that  republican-
ism  and  rights  are  at  odds.  On  this  view,  republicanism  is  "omi-
nous"  insofar  as  it  prizes  democratic  deliberation  and  downgrades
private  rights.'  But  this  is  a  misreading  of  the  republican  tradi-
tion.  The  Framers  of  the  Constitution  were  certainly  republicans,
and  they  certainly  believed  in  rights.  Modern  forms  of  republican-
ism  are  enthusiastic  about  rights.  If  deliberation  and  citizenship
are  desirable,  rights  of  free  speech,  for  example,  seem  indispens-
able,  and  we  may  be  led  to  guarantee  rights  of  religious  liberty,67
rights  of  private  property,  and  rights  in  the  criminal  justice  sys-

62  See,  e.g.,  Morton  J.  Horwitz,  Republicanism and  Liberalism  in  American  Constitutional

Thought,  29  WM.  &  MARY  L.  REV.  57  (1987).

63  See  Sunstein,  supra  note  59,  at  40  n.51  (discussing  Benjamin  Rush's  proposal  for
is  public

to  himself,  but  that  he 

teaching  each  citizen  "that  he  does  not  belong 
property").

64  See  the  discussion  of  public  reason  in  JOHN  RAWLS,  POLrIcAL  LIBERALISM  216-20

65  See  SAMUEL  H.  BEER,  To  MAKE  A  NATION:  THE  REDISCOVERY  OF  AMERICAN  FEDER-

(1993).

AuSM  (1993).

66  See  Martin  H.  Redish  &  Gary  Lippman,  Freedom  of Expression  and  the  Civic  Republi-

can Revival  in  Constitutional Theory:  The  Ominous Implications, 79  CAL.  L.  REV.  267  (1991).
Precommitment  and 

the  Paradox  of  Democracy, 

67  See  Stephen  Holmes, 

in

CONSTITUTIONALISM  AND  DEMOCRACY  195  (Jon  Elster  &  Rune  Slagstad  eds.,  1988).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 740 1994-1995

1995)

RIGHTS  AND  THEIR  CRITICS

tem-and  also  to  protect  the  rule  of law,  a  constraint  on  govern-
ment  power  that  seems  a  precondition  for  citizenship.s

Of course  a  commitment  to  republicanism-a  vagu6  and  gen-
eral  creed  capable  of many  diverse  specifications-does  not  lead  to
any  particular  constellation  of  rights.  But  republicans  are  likely  to
make  much  use  of rights  to  promote  their  own  deepest  ideals.

C.  Truths and Partial Truths

From  the  previous  discussion  we  can  see  a  wide  range  of
strands  in  the  challenge  to  rights.  The  challenge  is  highly  eclectic.
Moreover,  there  are  some  truths  in  many  of  these  points,  and  it
will  be  useful  to  explore  those  truths.

Of  course  rights  do  depend  for  their  existence  on  collective
institutions.  As  we  know  them,  rights  require  public  protection
and  support.69  Protection  of  the  individual-of  property  or  per-
son-cannot  easily  occur  without  collective  help."  But  this  de-
scriptive  point  is  hardly  an  argument  against  rights.  Many  good
things  depend  for  their  existence  on  collective  institutions,  and
this  is  not  an  argument  that  those  things  are  bad.  Economic  pros-
perity,  a  pluralistic  culture,  sufficient  quantities  of nutrition,  hous-
ing  for  all  or  most,  freedom  from  violence,  racial  equality,  low
rates  of  unemployment-all  these  are,  under  imaginable  condi-
tions,  secured  best  or  only  with  collective  help.  They  are  no  less
desirable  for  that."

68 

I  discuss  some  of 

these 

issues 

in  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  On  Property  and

Constitutionalism, 14  CARDOZO  L.  REv.  907  (1993).

69  An  important  qualification  comes  from  ROBERT  ELuICKSON,  ORDER  WITHOUT  LAW

(1991)  (showing  that  social  norms,  with  law-like  functions,  can  emerge  spontaneously).

70  Self-help  remedies  are  of  course  imaginable,  but  they  would  likely  lead  to  much

more  fragile  protection  of property  and  person  than  modem  polities  seek.

71  The  general  point  is  made  by  the  greatest  critic  of  socialism  in  the  twentieth

century,  Friedrich  Hayek:

It  is  regrettable,  though  rot  difficult  to  explain,  that  in  the  past  much  less  at-
tention  has  been  given  to  the  positive  requirements  of  a  successful  working  of
the  competitive  system  than  to  these  [previously  discussed]  negative  points.  The
functioning  of  a  competition  not  only  requires  adequate  organisation 
[sic]  of
certain  institutions  like  money,  markets,  and  channels  of  information-some  of
which  can  never  be  adequately  provided  by  private  enterprise-but  it  depends
above  all  on  the  existence  of  an  appropriate  legal  system,  a  legal  system  de-
signed  both  to  preserve  competition  and  to  make  it  operate  as  beneficially  as
. In  no  system  that  could  be  rationally  defended  would  the  state
possible  . . .
just  do  nothing.  An  effective  competitive  system  needs  an  intelligently  designed
and  continuously  adjusted  legal  framework  as  much  as  any  other.

FRIEDRIGH  HAYEK,  THE  ROAD  TO  SERFDOM  28-29  (1946).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 741 1994-1995

NOTRE DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

It  is  also  important  to  point  out  that  references  to  rights  can
make  for  unduly  rigid  understandings  of  complex  problems  and
can  sometimes  stop  discussion  in  its  tracks  before  analysis  has  even
started.  Claims  of  right  often  have  the  vices  of  rules.  Even  worse,
rights  can  be  conclusions  masquerading  as  reasons.  In  thinking
about  claims  of right,  it is  often  necessary  to  be  detailed  and  con-
crete  about  the  social  consequences  of  competing  courses  of  ac-
tion.  The  invocation  of  "rights"  can  be  a  serious  obstacle  to  this
process.  Consider,  for  example,  the  current  debates  over  regula-
tion  of  the  electronic  media,  violent  pornography,  hate  speech  at
universities,  or  advertising  for  cigarettes.  To  say  that  any  restriction
on  these  forms  of  expression  violates  the  "right  to  free  speech"
may  in  the  end  be  correct;  but  this  requires  a  long  and  complex
argument,  not  a  shorthand  phrase.  The  claim  of  a  "right  to  free
speech"  is  far  too  general  and  abstract  to  support  the  argument.
Here  it  does  seem  important  and  true  to  say  that  rights,  stated
abstractly,  do  not  solve  concrete  cases.  They  are  indeterminate
until  they  are  specified.

As  they  operate  in  law,  rights  generally  are  specified.  Hence
the  rights  protected  by  the  Constitution  and  the  common  law  are
far  from  indeterminate,  however  hard  it  is  to  know  what  they  are
when  stated  abstractly.  The  claim  of  indeterminacy  is  for  this  rea-
son  far  too  broad.  The  problem,  to  which  the  critics  have  correct-
ly  drawn  attention,  lies  in  the  use  of  general  claims  of  right  to
resolve  cases  in  which  the  specification  has  not yet  occurred.

It  is  also  true  that  efforts  to  think  about  many  social  and
economic  problems  in  terms  of rights  can  obscure  those  problems.
A  claimed  right  to  clean  air  and  water  or  to  safe  products  and
workplaces  makes  little  sense  in  light  of the  need  for  close  assess-
ment, in  particular  cases,  of the  advantages  of greater  environmen-
tal  protection  or  more  safety,  as  compared  with  the  possible  ac-
companying  disadvantages-higher  prices,  lower  wages,  less  em-
ployment,  and  more  poverty.  Perhaps  the  legal  system  will  create
rights  of a  kind  after  it  has  undertaken  this  assessment.  But  to  the
extent  that  the  regulatory  programs  of  the  1970s  were  billed  as
simple  vindications  of  "rights,"  they  severely  impaired  political
deliberation  about  their  content  and  about  the  necessity  for  trade-
offs.72

It  seems  correct  too  to  say  that  civic  virtue-responsibility  to
one's  neighbors  and  to  one's  nation-is  an  important  part  of

72 

I  attempt  to  defend  this  claim  in  SUNSTEIN,  supra note  10,  at  74-110.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 742 1994-1995

19951

RIGHTS  AND  THEIR  CRITICS

citizenship.  This  is  an  aspect  of  citizenship  that  is  notoriously  ne-
glected  in  public  discussion  and  social practice.  Whether  rights  are
the  culprit  here  may  be  questioned.  But  insofar  as  rights  are  un-
derstood  in  purely  self-iAterested  terms,  it  is  certainly  conceivable
that  they  can  crowd  out  issues  of responsibility.

Nor should  it be  denied  that  rights, can  protect  existing  distri-
butions  and  practices.  Many  rights,  particularly  those  associated
with  the  Takings  Clause  of  the  Fifth  Amendment  and  the  Due
Process  Clauses  of  the  Fifth  and  Fourteenth  Amendments,  have
been  so  understood  for  many  years.7'  But  this  is  hardly  a  chal-
lenge  to  rights.  Whether  rights  do have  this  function  depends  not
on  their  status  as  rights  but  on  what,  particularly,  rights  are.  And
whether  rights  should  protect  existing  distributions  'and  practices
cannot  be  decided  in  the  abstract.  Such  protection  is  not  always  a
bad  idea.  Whether  it  is  justified  depends  on  the  appropriate
weight  to  be  given  to  the  interests  in  stability  and  expectations,
and  on  the  merits  of  those  distributions  and  practices.  This  is  a
complex  matter  that  cannot  be  resolved  a  priori.

D.  Confusions and Misconceptions

Despite  the  various  partial  truths  in  the  attack  on  rights,  there
is  a  pervasive  problem  in  that  attack:  Rights  need  not  have  the
functions  or  consequences  that  they  are  alleged  to  have.  The  chal-
lenge  to  rights  is  properly  directed  against  certain  kinds  of rights,
not  against  rights  in  general.  At  most,  the  challenge  to  rights
creates  a  contingent,  partial  warning  about  the  appropriate  con-
tent  of rights  and  about  the  possibly  harmful  role  of certain  social
institutions  safeguarding  rights.  It  is  not  what  it  purports  to  be,
that  is,  a  general  claim  about  rights  as  a  social  institution.  More
specifically,  the  current  devaluation  of  rights  suffers  from 
two
serious  problems.  Both  of  these  problems  are  products  of  some
pervasive  confusions.

Many  critics  of  rights  complain  about  what  they  see  as  a  cul-
tural  shift  from  the  1960s,  in  which  rights  have  crowded  out  re-
sponsibilities.74  Simply  as  a  matter  of  cultural  description,  the
claim  is  far  too  crude.  In  some  areas,  including  for  example  sexu-
ality,  it  is  plausible  to  say  that  a  belief  in  private  autonomy  has

73  See,  e.g.,  RIcHARD  A.  EPSTEIN,  TAKINGS  (1985);  Cass  R-  Sunstein,  Sexual  Orientation
and  the  Constitution: A  Note  on  the  Relationship  Between  Due  Process and Equal  Protection, 55
U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  1161  (1988).

74  See,  e.g.,  GLENDON,  supra note  1,  at  1-17.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 743 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

prevailed  at  the  expense  of a  commitment  to  responsible  behavior.
But  in  other  areas,  the  last  few  decades  have  witnessed  an  increase
in  social  and  legal  responsibilities  and  a  decreased  commitment  to
rights.  Consider,  for  example,  cigarette  smoking;  corporate  miscon-
duct;  air  and  water  pollution;  sexual  harassment;  and  racist  and
sexist  speech.  In  all  of  these  areas,  people  who  were  formerly
autonomous,  and  free  to  act  in  accordance  with  their  own  claims
of  right,  are  now  subject  to  socially  and  sometimes  legally  en-
forced  responsibilities.  We  have  seen,  in  the  last  few  decades,  a
redefinition  of areas  of right  and  a redefinition  of areas  of respon-
sibility. 
I  do  not  intend  to  celebrate  these  redefinitions,  but  only
to  suggest  that  purely  as  a  matter  of  description,  there  has  been
no  general  shift  from  responsibility  to  rights.

Now  turn  from  description  to  evaluation.  The  first  problem  is
that whether  rights  are  associated  with  excessive  individualism,  with
excessive  self-interest,  or  with  anything  else  that  is  excessive  de-
pends  on  what  rights  specifically  are.  It  should  go  without  saying
to  protect  human  beings,75  each  of
that  rights  are  designed 
whom  is  an  individual;  but  this  cannot  be  a  complaint  of  the
critics  of  rights.  Instead,  many  such  critics  seem  to  object  that
rights  are  associated  with  pernicious  forms  of  individualism  and
self-interestedness.  But  this  is  not  the  case.  To  take  two  examples,
the  right  to  subsistence  and  the  right  to  environmental  quali-
ty-whether  or  not  these  should  be  codified  in  law-do  not  seem
to  promote  selfishness.  Both  rights  might  be  products  of  altruism,
and  may  promote  altruism  and  even  feelings  of  responsibility.  In
fact  many  rights  are  designed  to  encourage  precisely  the  forms  of
deliberation  and  communal  interaction  that  critics  favor.  A  wide
range  of  protected  interests  count  as  "rights,"  and  the  critics  fail
to  make  some  important  distinctions  among  diverse  legal  instru-
ments.

The  second  problem  is  that  the  critics  seem  to  think  that  the
explosion  of  "rights  talk"  accounts  for  certain  social  failures,  in-
cluding  failures  of  social  responsibility.  This  is  far  too  simple  a
claim.  In  fact,  the  opposite  is  as  likely  true-failures  of social  re-
sponsibility  give  rise  to  assertions  of  rights.  In  any  case,  the
claimed  association  depends  on  empirical  claims  that  are  highly
speculative  and  that  lack  clear  support.

75 

I  mean  to  put  to  one  side  and  not  to  assess  the  question  whether  nonhuman
creatures  or  objects  should  have  rights,  for  the  ultimate  protection  of  human  beings  or
for  other  reasons.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 744 1994-1995

1995]

RIGHTS AND  THEIR  CRITICS

1.  Diverse  Rights

The  two  problems  can  be  brought  together  if we  attend  to  a
familiar  conceptual  confusion. 6  Often  critics  write  as  if rights  and
responsibilities  are  opposed,  or  as  if  those  who  favor  the  former
are  completely  different  from  those  who  favor  the  latter.  As  they
see  it,  rights  are  individual,  atomistic,  selfish,  crude,  licentious,
antisocial,  and  associated  with  the  Warren  Court.  Responsibilities,
on  the  other  hand,  are  seen  as  collective,  social,  altruistic,  nu-
anced,  and  associated  with  appropriate  or  traditional  values.  But
this  understanding  is  quite  inadequate,  for  some  rights  lack  the
characteristics  claimed  for  them,  and  other  rights  have  the  fea-
tures  associated  with  responsibilities."'

For  example,  the  right  to  freedom  of  speech  may  be  owned
by  individuals,  but  it  is  a  precondition  for  a  highly  social  process,
that  of  democratic  deliberation.  That  right  keeps  open  the  chan-
nels  of communication;  it  is  emphatically  communal  in  character.
It  ensures  a  sine  quo  non  of  sociality,  an  opportunity  for  people
to  speak  with  one  other.  Indeed,  everyone  who  owns  a  speech
right  does  so  partly  so  as  to  contribute  to  the  collectivity;  it  is  this
fact  that  explains  the  government's  inability  to  "buy" speech  rights
even  when  a  speaker  would  like  to  sell.7'  So  too,  the  right  to
associational  freedom  is  hardly  individualistic.  It  is  meant  precisely
to  protect  collective' action  and  sociality.

Consider  another  time-honored  liberal  right,  the  right  to  a
jury  trial.  This  right  is  far  from  atomistic.  Quite  the  contrary,  it
ensures  a  role  for  the  community  in  adjudicative  proceedings.79
The  right  to  religious  liberty  protects  individuals  (surely  this  does
not  count  against  the  right),  but  it  is  also  designed  to  protect  the
collectivity  by  ensuring  social peace  and  thus  by  making  democracy
possible."0  The  right  to  vote,  also  owned  by  individuals,  protects

76  A  related  confusion  is  embodied  in  the  notion  that  rights  posit  a  wholly  autono-
mous,  asocial  "subject."  Rights  do  no  such  thing.  They  are  political  instruments  with  no
necessary  metaphysical  foundation.

77  See,  e.g.,  Akhil  R.  Amar,  The  Bill  of Rights  As  A  Constitution,  100  YALE  LJ. 1131,
(discussing  the  nonatomistic  character  of  most  rights  at  the  founding

(1991) 

78  See,  e.g.,  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Government  Control of Information,  79  CAL.  L.  REV.  889,

See Amar,  supra note  77,  at  1182-99.

79 
80  See  Stephen  Holmes,  Gag Rules  or  the  Politics  of  Omission,  in  CONSTITUTIONALISM

AND  DEMOCRACY  19  (ion Elster  &  Rune  Slagstad  eds.,  1988).

1201-10 
period).

914-16  (1986).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 745 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

collective  processes  of governance.  The  right  to  be  free  from  racial
discrimination,  protected  against  the  states  by  the  Fourteenth
Amendment,  is  not  antisocial.  It  ensures  communal  decency  by
protecting  against  the  exclusion  of subordinated  groups.  The  right
to  be  free  from  racial  discrimination  also  guarantees  a  form  of
sociality.

Even  the  right  to  property  can  be  understood  not  as  a  meth-
od  for  protecting  self-interested  acquisition  (though  it  does  have
this  function),  but  instead  as  an  indispensable  condition  for  citi-
zenship,  a  collective  goal  and  a  collective  good.8 1  If property  can
be  taken  at  the  government's  whim,  people  are  not  likely  to  have
the  independence  and  the  security  that  will  permit  them  to  criti-
cize  the  government  openly.  More  generally,  we  have  seen  that
the  right  to  private  property  solves  a  collective  action  problem
faced  by  everyone  in  the  state  of  nature,  and  in  that  sense,  sup-
plies  what  is  both  technically  and  nontechnically  described  as  a
collective  good.

At  this  stage  we  can  make  the  Hohfeldian"2  point  too  often
neglected  by  many  critics  of  rights:  In  an  important  sense,  rights
and  duties  imply  each  other."  They  are  correlative.  To  say  that
someone  has  a  right  is  usually  to  say  that someone  else  has  a  duty.
If Jones  has  a  right  to  property,  other  people  have  a  duty  not  to
trespass  on  what Jones  owns.  If Smith  has  a  right  to  be  free  from
racial  discrimination  in  employment,  employers  have  a  duty  to
ignore  the  color  of  Smith's  skin.  The  right  not  to  be  murdered
imposes  a  duty  on  people  not  to  take  the  lives  of  others.  Rights
are  not  opposed  to  responsibilities.  On  the  contrary,  rights  are
responsibilities.

Not  only  do  rights  create  duties,  but  the  imposition  of  a  duty
also  serves  to  create  a  right.  If X  is  under  a  duty  not  to  discrimi-
nate  or  not  to  trespass,  people  dealing  with  X  possess  certain
rights.  Most  duties  create  a  correlative  right.  Return,  in  this  con-
nection,  to  one  of Professor  Glendon's  special  concerns-the  ques-
tion  whether  we  should  create  a  duty  to  help  others.  That  duty
seems  to  be  a  classic  communal  responsibility,  far  removed  from
the  legalistic  world  of  rights.  But  appearances  are  misleading.

81 

See JEREMY  WALDRON,  THE  RIGHT  TO  PRIVATE  PROPERTY  1-30  (1988)  (discussing  the

diverse  functions  of  the  right  to  property).

82 

See  Wesley  N.  Hohfeld,  Some  Fundamental Legal  Conceptions  As  Applied  in  Judicial

Reasoning, 23  YALE  LJ.  16  (1913).

83  A  qualification  emerges  from  RAZ,  supra  note  13,  at  170-71,  but  the  qualification

does  not  seem  important  to  my  purposes  here.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 746 1994-1995

1995]

RIGHTS AND  THEIR  CRITICS

Indeed,  Glendon's  discussion  comes  close  to  an argument  not only
for  a  new  duty,  but  also  for  a  new  right:  a  right  to  assistance,  to
be  granted  to  vulnerable  people  and  held  by  them  against  both
other  people  and  the  government.  Glendon  herself  refers  to
Franklin  Roosevelt's  proposed  "second  bill  of  rights,"  which  in-
cluded  the  right  to  adequate  food  and  clothing,  to  a  decent
home,  to  adequate  medical  care,  to  good  education,  and  to  a
useful  and  remunerative  job. 4  Of  course  these  are  rights  and
their  invocation  represents  a  form  of  "rights  talk,"  but  they  cer-
tainly  and  emphatically  reflect  a  sense  of  collective  responsibili-
ty.'  They  are  not  associated  with  self-interest,  or  at  least  not  (in
any  simple  sense)  with  the  self-interest  of those  who  must  respect
them.

It  is  perfectly  possible  that  any  such  second  bill  of  rights
would  be  a  bad  idea.  That  is  not  my  point.  No  one  should  deny
that  the  proliferation  of  rights  may  be  unfortunate  or  worse;  too
many  rights  may  even  contradict  one  another.  The  new  Eastern
European  Constitutions  are  an  unfortunate  illustration."  I  am  not
attempting  to  defend  any  particular  system  or  set  of rights,  but  in-
stead  suggesting  something  far  simpler:  Since  rights  tend  to  imply
responsibilities  simply  as  a  matter  of logic,  and  vice  versa,  it is  not
easy  to  understand  the  claim  that American  law  needs  responsibili-
ties  rather  than  or  in  addition  to  rights.

The  claimed  opposition  between  rights  and  responsibilities
faces  some  additional  difficulties  as  well.  Rights  of  the  most  tradi-
tional  sort,  including  property,  may  be  the  necessary  condition  for
enabling  a  sense  of  collective  responsibility  to  flourish.  People
without  rights  to  their  property  may  be  so  dependent  on  official
will  that  they  cannot  exercise  their  responsibilities  as  citizens.
Moreover,  a  principal  characteristic  of  totalitarian  states  is  the
endless  cataloguing  of responsibilities  owed  by  citizens  to  the  state.
The  Soviet  Constitution  was  an  ignoble  example.  For  example,
that  Constitution  created  a  duty  "to  make  thrifty  use  of  the

84  President  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt,  Message  to  Congress  on  the  State  of the  Union
(Jan.  11,  1944),  in  13  THE  PUBLIC  PAPERS  AND  ADDRESSES  OF  FRANKLIN  D.  ROOSEVELT  32,
41  (Samuel  I.  Rosenman  ed.,  1969);  see  also GLENDON,  supra note  1,  at  104.

85  The  suggestion  that  responsibility  should  be  exercised  instead  of  legal  compulsion

is  taken  up  in  Part  III  infra.

1992,  at  18.

86  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Something  014  Something  New,  E.  EuR.  CONST.  REv.,  Spring

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 747 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

people's  wealth,""7  "to  preserve  and  protect  socialist  property,"'
to  "work  conscientiously," 9  and  "to  concern  themselves  with  the
upbringing  of  children."9  The  Soviet  Constitution  offers  a  cau-
tionary  note  against  enthusiasm  for  responsibilities,  at  least  if these
are  to  be  treated  as  an  explicit,  legally  codified  concern  of  the
state  (putting  the  Hohfeldian  point  to  one  side)."

These  points  suggest  a  broad  conclusion  about  the  recent
criticism  of  rights.  Those  who  believe  in  more  reflective  public
deliberation  are  making  an  important  point;  we  have  far  too  little
such  deliberation,  and  part  of the  problem  involves  unduly  simple
arguments  based  on  alleged  rights.  But  the  critics  should  not
claim  to  be  making  so  general  a  criticism  of  rights.  Instead,  they
should  offer  a  fine-grained  account  allowing  people  to  identify
both  the  sorts  of  interests  that  cannot  be  intruded  on  without
special justification  and  the  sorts  of institutions  that  should  protect
various  interests.  Surely  such  an  inquiry  will justify  a  redescription
of certain  interests  in  terms  that  have  nothing  to  do  with  rights  or
that  treats  rights  not  as  axiomatic  but  as  the  outcomes  of a  com-
plex  set  of  judgments.  For  example,  consider  the  problems  of
environmental  protection  and  plant  closings. 2  But  it  is  equally
certain  that  many  "rights" will  survive  in  their  current  state.

2.  Constitutional  Rights  and Judicial  Review

It  is  important  to  insist  that  such  an  inquiry  will  suggest  that
the  category  of  human  rights  is  not  coextensive  with  the  category
of  constitutional  rights  or  the  category  of  judicially  enforceable
rights.  Constitutional  rights  qualify  as  such  for  special  and  partly
contingent  reasons,  having  to  do  with  institutional  issues  and  with
the  reasons  for  distrust  of  ordinary  politics  in  the  particular  na-
tion.9"  Constitutional  rights  are  usually  and  rightly  thought  to
have  a  "vertical"  dimension,  allocating  power  between  the  govern-
ment  and  the  individual.  But  they  also  have  an  important  "hori-
zontal"  dimension,  allocating  power  among  different  branches  of
government  by,  for  example,  granting  authority  to  the  judiciary

Id.  (Article  61).

87 
88  Id.
89 
90 
91 
92  See  GLENDON,  supra note  1,  at  29-30,  111-12.
93  See  Cass R.  Sunstein,  Liberal  Constitutionalism and Liberal Justice,  72  TEx.  L.  REv.

Id.  (Article  60).
Id.  (Article  65).
See  id. at  18-19.

305  (1993).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 748 1994-1995

1995]

RIGHTS AND  THEIR CRITICS

that  might  otherwise  be  exercised  by  the  legislature.  The  horizon-
tal  allocation  requires  some  justification  in  terms  of  the  different
capacities  of  different  institutions.

Many  critics  are  speaking  to  the  issue  of  institutional  charac-
ter,  complaining  about  courts,  not  about  rights.94  But  there  is  of-
ten  a  solid justification  for a  constitutional  and  also judicial  role  in
the  protection  of  rights.  Under  plausible  assumptions,  the  institu-
tion  of  constitutional  rights  will  survive  as  an  invaluable  one,  espe-
cially  to  the  extent  that  such  rights  can  safeguard  interests  that  are
at  excessive  risk in  ordinary  politics.  It is  also  likely,  in  many  imag-
inable  situations,  that  the  institution  of judicial  review  will  survive
as  well.95  Many  prominent  critics  of  judicial  review  are  making
conceivably  but  only  contingently  convincing  empirical  claims
about  the  likely  inclinations  and  character  of judges."  They  are
not  doing  what  they  purport  to  be  doing,  that  is,  showing  a  gener-
al  incompatibility  between judicially  vindicated  constitutional  rights
and  democracy.  Often  such  rights  promote  democracy,  and  are
not  antithetical  to  it.97  The  'attack  on  an  excessive  judicial  role
should  be  separated  from  the  attack  on  rights  as  such.

3.  The  Legal  System  and  Its  Pathologies

Perhaps  these  basic  arguments  would  not  entirely  satisfy  many
critics  of rights.  Perhaps  they  would  want  to  characterize  the  prob-
lem  as  the  constant  resort  to  the  legal  system  as  a  remedy  for
social  ills,  rather  than  the  use  of public  deliberative  processes  and,
best  of  all,  of  self-help  and  nongovernmental  institutions.  In  the
last  generation  we  have  seen  quite  absurd  claims  of  right  in  cases
involving  the  law  of  tort  and  the  law  of  the  Constitution.  Is  it
unconstitutional-invasive  of  right-for  government 
to  require
people  to  wear  helmets  when  they  ride  motorcycles?"  Many  peo-
ple  think  that  such  questions  are  rhetorical  and  that  such  cases
give  rights  a bad  name.

94  See,  e.g.,  WALDRON,  supra note  81.
95  There  is  of  course  a  difference  between  constitutional  rights  and  judicially  en-
forceable  constitutional  rights;  some  constitutional  rights  might  be  enforceable  only
through  politics.

96  See  WALDRON,  supra note  81.
97  The  classic  statement  is  JOHN  HART  ELY,  DEMOCRAcY  AND  DISTRUST  (1980).
98  See,  e.g.,  Picou  v.  Gillum,  874  F.2d  1519  (11th  Cir.),  cert.  denied,  493  U.S.  920

(1989).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 749 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

It  may  therefore  be  the  peculiar  interaction  between  Ameri-
can  individualism,  American  law,  and  "rights  talk,"  rather  than
rights  themselves,  with  which  critics  are  most  concerned.  On  this
view,  the  problem  is  not  so  much  rights  in  general,  but  rights
claims  that  deny  obligations  to  others,  that  ignore  the  possibility
that  private  actors  can  and  should  take  care  of  themselves,  and
that  are  associated  with  immaturity,  personal  self-interest,  hedo-
nism,  and  the  short  term.  To  the  extent  that  the  critics  seek  to
revive  a  richer  and  more  differentiated  kind  of public  debate  and
to  emphasize  the  need  for  greater  attention  to  the  possibilities
and  obligations  of  private  organizations,  they  are  entirely  persua-
sive.  The  mind-numbingly  familiar  oppositions  of  matched  legalis-
tic  rights-pro-life  versus  pro-choice,  associational  freedom  versus
nondiscrimination, 
employment
rights-are  part  of the  culture  of the  soundbite,  which  provides  no
help  to  those  seeking  to  think  through  or  to  assist  people  with
complex  realities.

autonomy 

business 

versus 

But  it  is  important 

to  sort  out  the  relationships  between
"rights  talk"  and  "the  impoverishment  of  political  discourse. "'
Some  critics  suggest  that  political  discourse  is  in  significant  part  a
creature  of  what  happens  with  courts  and  law."0  But  this  is  an
empirical  claim,  and  it  may  not  be  true.  To  be  sure,  political  dis-
course  is  often  impoverished,  and  correctives  for  the  current  situa-
tion  should  be  a  principal  concern  of current  reformers.  This  is  a
central  issue  for  modern  democracies.  If  one  looks  at  the  promi-
nent  places  for  political  discussion-say,  the  television  and  most
popular  radio  stations-one  will  find  little  deliberation  and  little
serious  attention  to  public  issues,  and  such  attention  as  there  is
appears 
Sometimes  the  banality  consists  of reflexive  claims  about  rights.

sensationalistic,  prurient,  sentimental, 

and  banal.'

Important  questions,  however,  remain:  To  what  extent  can
this  phenomenon  be  attributed  to  "rights  talk"  within  the judiciary
and  the  legal  system?  By  what  mechanism  has  "rights  talk"  pro-
duced  problems  in  public  deliberation?  Can  an  association  be
shown?  Careful  work  has  shown  that  many  arguments  about  the
social  effects  of judicial  decisions  tend  to  be  overstated,  specula-

99  GLENDON,  supra note  1,  at  x.
100 
101 

See,  e.g.,  id.  at  87,  105.
See,  e.g.,  GASS  R.  SUNSTEIN,  DEMOCRACY  AND  THE  PROBLEM  OF  FREE  SPEECH  (1993).
For  a  helpful  discussion  of  American  traditions  in  this  respect,  see  JOSEPH  M.  BESSETrE,
THE  MILD  VOICE  OF  REASON  1-39  (1994).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 750 1994-1995

1995]

RIGHTS AND  THEIR CRITICS

tive,  or  without  much  support. 1
2  The  current  situation-of  inad-
1
equate  democratic  deliberation-is  not  clearly  traceable  to judicial
protection  of  rights.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  far  more  plausibly  a
product  of  the  system  of  education  and  the  demands  of  the
broadcasting  market."° 
is  with  impover-
ished  political  discourse, 
incentives,
norms,  and  practices  of  those  who  impart  political 
informa-
tion-on  their  responsibilities,  and  on  the  legal  framework,  or
rights,  under  which  they  undertake  those  responsibilities.

If  the  critics'  concern 

they  might  focus  on 

the 

There  is  enormous  room  for  reform  here,  drawing  on  experi-
ence  in  other  nations  and  involving  changes  both  in  private  sector
practices  and  in  the  regulatory  system  governing  the  media.",4
For  example,  the  government  might  offer  larger  subsidies  to  high
quality  broadcasting  or  encourage  more  attention  to  public  issues
through  licensing  policies.  It might  offer  guidelines  or  recommen-
dations  designed  to  work  against  the  culture  of  the  soundbite.  It
might  attempt  to  encourage  opinion  polls  that  involve  public  de-
liberation  rather  than  quick  and  often  ill-considered  individual
reactions." 5  All  this  seems  plausible.  What  I  am  questioning  is
the  suggestion  that  "rights"  are  a  major  culprit  here.  On  the  con-
trary,  rights  of some  sort  are  likely  to  be  an  important  part of any
effort  to  improve  public  deliberation.

III.  RIGHTS  AND  RESPONSIBILITIES  REVISITED

sense  of  social 

I  have  suggested  that  many  of  the  most  enthusiastic  and  vivid
challenges  to  rights  are  based  on  the  idea  that  the  American  em-
phasis  on  rights,  and  perhaps  especially  on  legal  rights,  has  caused
a  weakened 
responsibility.  The  Hohfeldian
impose  responsibilities,  while  responsibilities
point-that  rights 
create  rights-severely  complicates  this  idea.  But putting  that  point
to  one  side,  we  should  acknowledge  that  an  insistence  on  people's
rights  ought  not  to  disparage  people's  responsibilities.  This  idea
could  perhaps  qualify  as  a  twenty-first-century  analogue 
to  the
Ninth  Amendment.'  Certainly  we  should  keep  in  mind  the  im-
portant  point  that  people  may  have  a  right  to  do  something  that

See  C.  EDWIN  BAKER,  ADVERTISING  AND  A  DEMOCRATIC  PRESS  44-82  (1994).

102  See  generally GERALD  N.  ROSENBERG,  THE  HOLLOW  HOPE  (1990).
103 
104  See  id. at  80-82.
105  SeeJAMES  FISHKIN,  DEMOCRACY  AND  DELIBERATION  (1991).
106  "The  enumeration  in  the  Constitution,  of  certain  rights,  shall  not  be  construed  to

deny  or  disparage  others  retained  by  the  people."  U.S.  CONST.  amend.  IX.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 751 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

they  would  be  irresponsible  to  do.  Or  to  put  things  another  way,
it  may  be  very  wrong  to  exercise  one's  rights.

Indeed,  it  is  unquestionably  objectionable  to  engage  in  much
conduct  that  one  has  a  right  to  do.  Some  platitudes  are  worth
repeating:  We  may  have  a  right  to  say  offensive  things,  even  gro-
tesquely  offensive  things,  but  most  people  do  not  and  should  not
exercise  that  right  very  often.  People  may  have  a  right  to  treat
each  other  in  many  disrespectful  ways,  but  disrespectful  treatment
is  not  for  that  reason  acceptable.  An  extremely  wealthy  person  has
a  right  to  keep  all  his  money  (after  taxes),  and  to  give  none  of it
to  charity,  but  selfishness  and  hoarding  are  not  to  be  applauded.
A  lawyer  has  a  right  to  refuse  to  do  pro  bono  work,  but  lawyers
should  generally  do  pro  bono  work.

The  point  bears  particularly  on  the  controversial 

issues  of
pregnancy  and  abortion.  Under  the  Constitution,  women  have  a
right  to  have  abortions.  But  it  is  important  to  insist  that  this  is  a
right  that  ought  not  to  be  exercised,  or  to  have  to  be  exercised,
very  often,  and  that  in  a  society  with  1.5  million  abortions  per
year,  something  is  extremely  wrong.  Even  people  who  favor  the
abortion  right  ought  to  be  clear  that  an  abortion  is  a  tragic  event
and  that  steps  should  be  taken  to  make  abortions  rare.  In  the
aftermath  of  the  Supreme  Court's  refusal  to  overrule  Roe  v.
Wade,"7  it  is  perfectly  appropriate  for  people  on  all  sides  of  the
issue  to  shift  public  debate  in  the  direction  of ways  to  minimize
the  incidence  of  abortion.  Efforts  to  discourage  pregnancies  that
will  result  in  abortions,  and  even  to  discourage  abortion  itself
through  moral  suasion,  should  not,  as  a  general  rule,  be  taken  as
unfortunate  interferences  with  a  "right,"  even  if some  such  efforts
might  be  rejected  as  punitive  or  discriminatory.

However  we  may  think  about  this  heated  subject,  the  example
demonstrates  the  basic  point  that  a  nation  ought  not  to  say  that
because  people  have  a  legal  right  to  do  something,  society  and  its
various  components  have  no  business  complaining  about  people
who  exercise  that  right,  or  engaging  in  moral  disapproval  of peo-
ple  who  do  what  they  have  a  right  to  do.  On  the  contrary,  a  large
part  of  moral  education  consists  of  the  inculcation  of  norms  and
values  that  discourage  harmful  or  offensive  behavior  even  though
it  is  not  unlawful.  One  possible  pathology  of a  culture  of rights  is
that people  will  think  that  because  they  have  a  right to  do  X,  they
cannot  be  criticized  or  blamed  for  doing  X.  This  conclusion  ap-

107  See  Planned  Parenthood  v.  Casey,  112  S.  Ct.  2791  (1992).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 752 1994-1995

1995]

RIGHTS AND  THEIR CRITICS

pears  to  have  become  common  with  respect  to  free  speech,  where
speakers  sometimes  complain  that  it  is  objectionable  even  to  chal-
lenge  them  for  engaging  in  offensive  or  degrading  speech."0 8  A
legal  censure  from  moral
well-functioning'  culture  distinguishes 
censure.  It  allows  people  the  freedom  to  do  many  things  that  are
properly  criticized  on  moral  grounds.

The  point  bears  on  recent  claims  by Justice  Thomas  and  oth-
er  critics  of  rights. Justice  Thomas  is  concerned  that  an  emphasis
on  what  people  have  a  right  to  do  has  produced  a  kind  of moral
relativism  and  standardlessness  where  right-holders  insist  on  their
rights  and  do  not pause  to  evaluate  whether  their  conduct  is  valu-
able  to  themselves  or  to  society.  Justice  Thomas  is  particularly
troubled  that  the  grant  of  rights  can  make  people,  and  especially
disadvantaged  people,  think  of  themselves  as  victims,  whose  basic
goal  is  to  assert  their  claims  and  to  seek  protection  from  govern-
ment.  On  this  view,  the  recognition  of  rights  can  generate  forms
of  dependency,  self-pity,  and  lack  of  initiative  that  are  extremely
damaging  to  rights-holders  themselves.  Ideas  of this  sort  have  also
played  a 
sometimes  made  by
recent  arguments, 
self-proclaimed  feminists  countering  certain  prominent  feminist
claims-with  the  critics  urging  that  the  emphasis  on,  for  example,
rights  against  sexual  harassment  and  pornography  has  encouraged
in  which  equality  and
women 
self-respect  become  all  the  more  difficult  to  obtain. 109

to  join  a  cult  of  victimhood, 

role 

in 

lack 

rights 

The  fear  of  an  association  between  the  recognition  of  legal
rights  and  failures  in  responsibility  and  self-help  seems  plausible  in
to  desirable  goods
many  settings.  People  who 
in
may-from  fear,  self-interest,  or  sheer  desperation-engage 
socially  productive  conduct.  (Of course  they  may  engage  in  unpro-
ductive  and  even  dangerous  conduct  instead.)  For  example,  there
is  a  familiar  and  wholly  reasonable  fear  that  a  "right  to  welfare"
could  discourage  productive  labor.  It  is  possible  too  that  people
who  think  of  themselves  as  victims,  needing  and  enforcing  rights,
will  fail  to  engage  in  activity  that  is  ultimately  rewarding  to  them-
selves  and  to  society  as  a whole.

108  For  example,  some  people  have  claimed  "censorship"  in  response  to  Senator  Paul
Simon's  attempts  to  monitor  televised  violence.  See,  e.g.,  Raymond  L.  Fischer,  Is It  Possible
to  Regulate  Television  Violence?,  USA  TODAY,  July,  1994  (Magazine),  at  72  (describing  the
ACLU's  position  that  "violent  speech  has  been  protected  by  the  First  Amendment  for
more  than  50  years"  and  media  organizations'  opposition  to  the  "momentum  building  in
Washington  for  censorship  as  a  solution  to  violence").

109  See  SOMMERS,  supra note  1;  STROSSEN,  supra note  24,  at  119-40,  179-215.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 753 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[VCol.  70:4

These  claims  are,  however,  empirical  ones,  and  they  are  quite
speculative.  They  cannot  be  credited  in  the  abstract.  Whether  they
are  true,  and  in  what  settings  they  are  true,  requires  much  more
work  than  has  been  supplied  thus  far.  Indeed,  the  converse  phe-
nomenon  may  occur,  with  recipients  of rights  conceiving  of them-
selves  as  anything  but  victims  and  helpless.  Perhaps  people  who
are  given  rights-to  own  property,  to  be  free  from  segregation,  to
be  free  from  sexual  harassment-will  be  more  likely  to  conceive  of
themselves  as  receiving  and  deserving  equal  respect.  It  is  surely
plausible  that  the  recognition  of rights  often  converts  people  from
victims  into  citizens.  Certainly  a  major  point  of  rights  guarantee  is
to  do  precisely  this.

In  an  important  respect,  moreover,  the  critique  of  rights  in
favor  of  responsibilities  seems  to  have  things  backward.  Rights
claims  are  often  a  response  to  a  failure  of  social  responsibility
rather  than  a  cause  of  individual  irresponsibility.  We  might  look
again  at  the  abortion  problem,  which,  for  many,  exemplifies  the
hazards  of  rights-based  approaches." °  To  be  sure,  it  does  seem
inadequate  to  think  of abortion  in  terms  of a  right  to  "privacy"-a
word  that  does  not  appear  in  the  Constitution  at  all  and  that  in
any  case  fails  to  come  to  grips  with  the  abortion  question.  To
oppose  the  abstract  "right to  life"  to  the  equally  abstract  "right  to
choose"  is  entirely  unhelpful.  As  many  people  have  suggested,  a
social  goal  might  be  not  to  protect  an  abstract  right  to  choose,
but instead  to  develop  methods  to  protect  unborn  life  while  simul-
taneously  providing  help  and  support  for  mothers.'

If  we  acknowledge  all  this,  how,  if  at  all,  might  the  abortion
right  be justified?  The  answer  has  everything  tq  do  with  social  con-
text  and  with  failures  of social  responsibility.  Under  conditions  of
equality  on  the  basis  of  sex  and  without. widespread  poverty,  the
argument  for  an  abortion  right  would  be  far  weaker."2  Surely  it
is  correct  to  say  that  in  a  society  in  which  duties  to  the  vulnerable
were  taken  seriously,  the  case  for  a  right  to  abortion  would  be
much  less  plausible  than  it  now  is.  In  such  a  society,  men  as  well
as  women  would  be  required  (by  social  norms  and  perhaps  by

110 
111 

See,  e.g.,  GLENDON,  supra note  1,  at  58-66,  164-68.
See,  e.g.,  MARY  ANN  GLENDON,  ABORTION  AND  DIVORCE  IN  WESTERN  LAW  (1987);
Michael  W.  McConnell,  Religion  and  the  Search for  a  Principled Middle  Ground  on  Abortion,
92  MICH.  L.  REv.  1893  (1994)  (reviewing  ELIZABETH  MENSCH  &  ALAN  FREEMAN,  THE  POLI-
TICS  OF  VIRTUE:  Is  ABORTION  DEBATABLE?  (1993)).

112  This  is  one  lesson  of  Glendon's  work,  though  it  is  not  a  lesson  that  Glendon

draws  herself.  See  GLENDON,  supra note  111.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 754 1994-1995

19951

RIGHTS AND THEIR  CRITICS

law)  to  devote  their  bodies  to  the  protection  of their  children.  In
such  a  society,  women  who  need  help  would  get  help-before,
during,  and  after  pregnancy." 
In  such  a  society,  the  existence  of
social  assistance  would  argue  against  the  right  to  abortion,  by
making  child-bearing  and  child-rearing  less  difficult  and  less  a
source  of  inequality  than  it now  is  for  many  women.

Most  important,  in  such  a  society  restrictions  on  abortion
would  be  based  on  a  general  and  neutral  form  of compassion  for
the  vulnerable,  rather  than  the  now  pervasive  desire-prominent,
though  (I  emphasize)  by  no  means  universal,  in  the  pro-life  move-
ment-to  control  women's  reproductive  capacities,  and  by  means
of  that  control  to  prescribe  traditional  gender  rules  through  law,
and  in  that  way  to  continue  a  system  of  discrimination  that  is
based  on  sex.

I  have  described  a  society  in  which  any  right  to  abortion
might  seem  puzzling  or  even  unnecessary.  This  is  not,  of  course,
the  society  in  which  we  live.  If one  looks  at the  context  in  which
restrictions  on  abortion  take  place-at  their  real  purposes  and
their  real  effects-the  abortion  right  is  most  plausibly  rooted  not
in  privacy  but in  the  right to  equality  on  the  basis  of sex.  I  cannot
fully  support  the  claim  here," 4  but  a  few  points,  bearing  on  the
nature  of  rights  claims  in  general,  may  be  suggestive.

Current  law  does  not  compel  men  to  devote  their  bodies  to
the  protection  of other  people,  even  if life  is  at stake,  and  even  if
men  are  responsible  for  the  very  existence  of those  people.  Many
studies  have  shown  that  current  restrictions  on  abortion  could  not
be  enacted  without  the  active  support  of  those  who  believe  that
such  restrictions  are  an  important  means  of  reasserting  traditional
gender  roles."-  Of  course  such  support  is  not  barred  by  any  le-
gitimate  theory  of democracy,  but it suggests  that  the  relevant  laws
are  in  fact  founded  in  significant  part  (though  certainly  not  uni-
versally)  in  prejudice.  And  under  current  conditions,  women  who
need  social  assistance  or  (at  least  equally  important)  help  from
fathers  do  not  get  nearly  enough-not  merely  during  pregnancy,
but before  and  after  as  well.

If this  is  the  case,  the  very  existence  of the  abortion  right  can
be  seen  as  a  response  to  a  failure  of  social  responsibility.  The

113  See  id. at  53-58  (discussing  the  European  practice  of  care  for  pregnant  women).
114  See  SUNSrEJN,  supra  note  60,  at  270-85,  for  a  more  complete  discussion  of  this

claim.

115  See,  e.g.,  KRISTEN  LUKER,  ABORTION  AND  THE  POLITICS  OF  MOTHERHOOD  (1984).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 755 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Val.  70:4

right  cannot  be  justified  in  the  abstract-its  existence  owes  every-
thing  to  context.  In  this  lies  a  large  lesson.  Rights  often  emerge
precisely  because  of  the  refusal  of  private  and  public  institutions
to  recognize  and  to  carry  out  their  duties.  When  the  environment
is  badly  degraded,  when  the  most  vulnerable  people  are  left  to
fend  for  themselves,  or  when  children  are  at  risk,  it  should  be
unsurprising  to  find  vigorous  if apparently  odd  claims  for  "rights."
The  claims  for  a  right  to  clean  air  and  water,  to  food,  to  a  decent
place  to  live,  to  a  safe  workplace,  to  children's  rights,  or  to  "free
reproductive  choice'"-all  these  must  be  understood  in  their  con-
text,  as  responses  to  failures  of social  responsibility.

Critics  of  rights  are  sometimes  persuasive  in  asserting  that
rights-based  arguments  can  obscure  the  problems  at  hand.  It  is
very  plausible  to  think  that  vulnerable  people  should  not  have  a
legally  enforceable  right to  freedom  from  everything  to  which  they
are  vulnerable,  in  part because  such  a  right  could  impair  responsi-
bility.  It  is  very  plausible  to  think  that  instead  of  emphasizing  a
right  to  abortion,  we  should  alter  the  social  conditions  that  make
abortion  attractive  or  necessary.  Arguments  on  behalf  of rights  can
simplify  complex  issues,  beg  important  questions,  and  treat  issues
involving  trade-offs  among  competing  goals  as  soluble  through
easy  formulas.  But  it  would  be  unfortunate  if  plausible  objections
to  rights-based  thinking  were  taken  as  a  reason  to  ignore  or  to
disparage  those  who  are  proclaiming  their  rights,  rather  than  to
improve  the  conditions  that  have  made  it  necessary  for  people  to
resort  to  proclamations  of rights  in  the  first  place.

IV. 

CONCLUSION

There  have  been  many  different  strands  in  recent  critiques  of
rights.  Some  of those  strands  point  to  legitimate  concerns.  We  can
identify  rights  claims  that  are  genuinely  absurd,  and  it  is  important
to  acknowledge  that a  society  pervaded  by  rights  may  be  pathologi-
cal.  My  basic  point  here  is  that  the  category  of  rights  is  extremely
broad  and  that  for  this  reason,  no  general  critique  of  rights  will
make  much  sense.  Those  who  blame  "rights"  have  misdescribed
their  real  target.  In  the  last  generation,  morever,  there  has  been
no  general  shift  from  responsibilities  to  rights.  Instead  there  have
been  multiple  particular  shifts  in  both  directions.

Some  rights  are  a  precondition  for  social  interaction.  Rights
are  not  opposed  to  responsibilities,  at least  not  in  any  simple  way;
rights  are  responsibilities.  Rights  need  not be  associated  with  exces-
sive  self-interest  or  excessive  individualism.  The  real  question  is

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 756 1994-1995

1995] 

RIGHTS AND  THEIR CRITICS 

757

not  whether  we  should  have  rights,  but  what  rights  we  should
have.  Some  of what  I  have  discussed  here  bears  on  that  question,
but  to  make  much  progress  on  it,  much  more  will  have  to  be  said
about  both  values  and  facts.  I  conclude  with  the  suggestion  that
we  should  cease  discussing  -whether rights  are  desirable  and  cease
opposing  rights  to  responsibilities.  We  should  embark  instead  on
the  more  fine-grained  task  of  deciding  what  categories  of  rights
are  appropriate  in  what  settings.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 757 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

Cass  R.  Sunstein

Cass  R.  Sunstein  obtained  his  J.D.  degree,  graduating  magna
cum  laude,  from  Havard  Law  School  in  1978.  After  graduation,  he
served  as  a  law  clerk  for  the  Honorable  Benjamin  Kaplan,  Su-
preme Judicial  Court  of  Massachuetts  for  one  year,  followed  by  a
clerkship  with  the  Honorable  Thurgood  Marshall,  Supreme  Court
of the  United  States.  In  1980,  Mr.  Sunstein  worked  as  an Attorney-
Advisor  in  the  Office  of  Legal  Counsel  at  the  United  States  De-
partment  of Justice  before  joining  the  University  of  Chicago  Law
School  faculty  in  1981.

In  his  career,  Professor  Sunstein  has  taught  at  the  University
of  Chicago,  Harvard  Law  School,  Columbia  Law  School,  and  is
currently  the  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence  at  the
University  of  Chicago  Law  School  as  well  as  a  Professor  in  the
Department  of Political  Science  at  the  University  of  Chicago.  Pro-
fessor  Sunstein  specializes  in  constitutional  law  and  theory,  admin-
istrative  law,  civil  procedure,  and jurisprudence.

Professor  Sunstein  currently  serves  as  one  of the  Co-Directors
of  the  Center  on  Constitutionalism  in  Eastern  Europe,  University
of Chicago,  and  he  is  the  Vice-Chair  for  the Judicial  Review  Com-
mittee,  Section  on  Administrative  Law  and  Regulatory  Practice  of
the  American  Bar  Association.  He  is  also  the  Contributing  Editor
of  The American Prospect and  a  member  of  the  American  Law  Insti-
tute  and  the  American  Academy  of Arts  and  Sciences.

During  his  career,  Professor  Sunstein  has  served  on  several
editorial  boards,  including  Studies  in  American  Political Development,
Journal of Political Philosophy,  Constitutional Political Economy,  and  he
was  the  Associate  Editor  of  Ethics  from  1986  to  1988.  Professor
Sunstein  is  also  a  former  Chair  of  the  Administrative  Law  Section
of  the  Association  of  American  Law  Schools  and  a  former  Vice-
Chair  of  the  American  Bar  Association  Section  on  Governmental
Organization  and  Separation  of  Powers.  Professor  Sunstein  has
testified  before  numerous  governmental  bodies  on  many  occasions,
including  the  Senate Judiciary  and  Government  Affairs  Committees
and  the  House  Rules  Committee.  He  has  also  advised  several  na-
tions  on  law  reform,  including  Ukraine,  Romania,  Poland,  South
Africa,  Bulgaria,  Lithuania,  Albania,  Israel,  and  China.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 758 1994-1995

19951

SUNSTEIN  PUBLICATIONS

Books  Authored  by  Professor  Sunstein

FREE  MARKETS  AND  SOCIAL JUSTICE  (forthcoming  1996).

LEGAL  REASONING  AND  POLITICAL  CONFLICT  (forthcoming  1995  or

DEMOCRACY  AND  THE  PROBLEM  OF  FREE  SPEECH  (1993);

republished  in  soft  cover  (1995).

THE  PARTIAL  CONSTITUTION 

(1993);  republished 

in 

soft  cover

1996).

(1994).

AFMER  THE  RIGHTS  REVOLUTION:  RECONCEIVING  THE  REGULATORY

STATE  (1990);  republished  in  soft  cover  (1993).

CONSTITUTIONAL  LAw  (1st  ed.  1986;  2d  ed.  1991)  (with  Geoffrey

R.  Stone,  Louis  M.  Seidman,  and  Mark  V.  Tushnet).

Books  Edited  by  Professor  Sunstein

THE  BILL  OF  RIGHTS  IN  THE  MODERN  STATE  (1992)  (with  Geoffey

R.  Stone  and  Richard  A.  Epstein).

FEMINISM  AND  POLITICAL  THEORY  (1990).

Chapters  or Articles  in  Books

Political Conflicts  and Legal Agreements,  in  THE  TANNER  LECTURES  ON

HUMAN  VALUES  (forthcoming  1996).

Gender,  Caste,  Law,  in  HUMAN  CAPABILITIES  (Jonathan  Glover  &

Martha  Nussbaum  eds.,  forthcoming  1995  or  1996).

Incommensurability and Modes of Valuation: Some Applications in  Law,
in  INCOMMENSURABILrIY  (R.  Chang  ed.,  forthcoming  1995).

The  Politics of Constitutional Amendment  in  Eastern Europe (with
Stephen  Holmes),  in  CONSTITUTIONAL  AMENDMENT
(S.  Levinson  ed.,  forthcoming  1995).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 759 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

Academic Freedom and Law:  Liberalism, Speech  Codes,  and Related
Problems, in ACADEMIC  FREEDOM  (Louis  Menand  ed.,
forthcoming  1995).

On Finding Facts, in  QUESTIONS  OF  EVIDENCE  (James  Chandler  et

al.  eds.,  1994).

The Enduring Legacy  of Republicanism, in  A  NEW  CONSTITIONALISM:
DESIGNING  POLITICAL  INSTITUTIONS  FOR  A  GOOD  SOCIETY
(Stephen  L.  Elkin  &  Karol  Edward  Soltan  eds.,  1993).

Democracy  and Shifting Preferences, in  THE  IDEA  OF  DEMOCRACY

(David  Copp  et  al.  eds.,  1993).

Constitutionalism, Prosperity, Democracy:  Transition in  Eastern Europe, in

CONSTITUTIONAL  POLITICAL  ECONOMY  (1991).

Political Self-Interest in  American Public Law,  in  BEYOND  SELF-INTEREST

(Jane J.  Mansbridge  ed.,  1990).

Pornography and Free Speech,  in  CIVIL  LIBERTIES  IN  CONFLICT  (Larry

0.  Gostin  ed.,  1988).

Protectionism, National Markets,  and the American Supreme  Court, in

NATIONAL  INTEGRATION  AND  THE  FUTURE  OF  THE  EUROPEAN
ECONOMIC  COMMUNITY  (European  University  Institute,  1988).

Constitutions and Democracies: An  Epilogue, in  CONSTITUTIONALISM
AND  DEMOCRACY  (Jon Elster  &  Rune  Slagstaad  eds.,  1988).

Compelling Government Action:  The  Problem of Affirmative Rights,  in

THE  CAMBRIDGE  LECTURES  (1988).

Legislative  Attacks  on  School  Desegregation,  in  CIVIL  RIGHTS  IN

THE  EIGHTIES:  A  THIRTY  YEAR  PERSPECTIVE  (1984).

Articles  in Journals

Remembering the  Sixties  (forthcoming  1996).

Incompletely  Theorized Agreements,  108  HARV.  L.  REV.  (forthcoming

1995).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 760 1994-1995

1995] 

SUNSTEIN  PUBLICATIONS 

761

On Legal Theory  and Legal Practice, in  NOMOS:  THEORY  AND

PRACTICE  (forthcoming  1995).

The First Amendment  in  Cyberspace, YALE  L.J.  (forthcoming  1995).

Rules  and Rulelessness,  CAL.  L.  REV.  (forthcoming  1995).

The  Idea of A  Useable Past, COLUM.  L.  REV.  (forthcoming  1995).

What  the  Civil Rights Movement  Was  and Wasn't, IND.  L.J.

(forthcoming  1995).

Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  (1995)

(with  Richard  Pildes).

Well-Being  and the State,  107  HARV.  L.  REV.  1303  (1994).

The Anticaste Principle, 92  MICH.  L.  REv.  2410  (1994).

Conflicting Values  in  Law,  62  FORDHAM  L.  REV.  1661  (1994).

Homosexuality and the  Constitution,. 70  IND.  L.J.  1  (1994).

Economic Incentives, Environmental Law,  and Democracy, 21  ECOLOGY

L.Q. 455  (1994)  (Symposium).

Liberal Constitutionalism and Liberal Justice, 72  TEX.  L.  REV.  305

(1994).

(1994).

Incommensurability and Valuation in  Law, 92  MICH.  L.  REV.  779

The President and the Administration, 94  COLUM.  L.  REv.  1  (1994)

(with  Lawrence  Lessig).

Article II  Revisionism, 92  MICH.  L.  REv.  131  (1993).

Standing Injuries, 1993  SuP.  CT.  REV.  37.

Information, Please, E.  EUR.  CONST.  REV.,  Summer  1993,  at  54.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 761 1994-1995

762 

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  70:4

Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law, 22 J. LEGAL  STUD.  217

(1993).

Environmental Economics, AM.  PROSPECT,  Spring  1993,  at  12.

Words,  Conduct,  Caste, 60  U.  CHI.  L.  REv.  795  (1993).

In  Defense  of Liberal Education, 43 J. LEGAL  EDUC.  22  (1993).

On Analogical Reasoning, 106  HARV.  L.  REV.  741  (1993).

On  Truisms and Constitutional Obligations: A  Response,  71  TEX. L.

REV.  669  (1993)  (with  David  A.  Strauss).

The  Myth  of the  Unitary Executive,  7  ADMIN.  L.J.  AM.  U.  299  (1993).

Federalism in  South Africa? Lessons  From the American Experience, AM.

U. J.  INT'L  L.  &  POL'Y  (1993)  and  in FROM  APARTHEID  TO
DEMOCRACY  (N.  Kittrie  ed.,  1994).

Half-Truths of the First Amendment,  1993  U.  CHI.  LEGAL  F.  25.

Against Interest-Group Theory,  36 J.L.  &  ECON.  379  (1993).

Informing America: Risk,  Disclosure, and the First Amendment,  20  FLA.

ST.  U.  L.  REV.  653  (1993).

On Property and Constitutionalism, 14  CARDOzO  L.  REV.  907  (1993).

The  Negative Constitution: Transition in Latin America, U.  MIAMI  L.

REV.  (1993),  reprinted in TRANSITION  TO  DEMOCRACY  IN  LATIN
AMERICA:  THE  ROLE  OF  THE JUDICIARY  (I.  Stotzky  ed.,  1993).

What's Standing After Lujan ?  Of Citizen  Suits,  "Injuries," and Article

III, 91  MICH.  L.  REV.  163  (1992).

On Marshall's Conception of Equality, 44  STAN.  L.  REV.  1267  (1992).

Public Choice, Endogenous Preferences, 12  INT'L  REV.  L.  &  ECON.  289

(1992).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 762 1994-1995

1995] 

SUNSTEIN  PUBLICATIONS 

763

The  Senate,  the  Constitution, and the  Confirmation Process, 101  YALE

L.J.  1491  (1992)  (with David  A.  Strauss).

Economics  and the Environment: Trading Debt  and Technology for

Nature, 17  COLUM.  J.  ENVTL.  L.  93  (1992)  (with  Catherine
O'Neill).

Free Speech  Now,  59  U.  CHI.  L.  REv.  255  (1992).

Neutrality in  Constitutional Law  (with special reference to pornography,

abortion, and surrogacy), 92  COLUM.  L.  REv.  1  (1992).

Democratizing America Through Law,  25  SUFFOLK  U.  L.  REv.  949

(1991).

Constitutionalism and Secession,  58  U.  CHI.  L.  REv.  633  (1991).

Ideas,  Yes;  Assaults, No,  AM.  PROSPECT,  Summer  1991,  at  36.

Politics and Preferences, 20  PHIL.  & PUB.  AFF.  3  (1991),  reprinted in
DEMOCRAY:  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE  (J.  Arthur  ed.,  1992).

Three  Civil Rights Fallacies, 79  CAL.  L.  REv.  751  (1991).

Administrative Substance, 1991  DUKE  LJ.  607.

Political Economy,  Administrative Law: A  Comment, 6 J.L.  ECON.  &

ORGANIZATION  299  (1991).

The Limits  of Compensatory Justice, in  NOMOS:  COMPENSATORY  JUSTICE

(John W.  Chapman  ed.,  1991).

What Judge Bork  Should Have Said, 23  CONN.  L.  REv.  205  (1991).

Why  Markets Won't Stop  Discrimination, 8  SOC.  PHIL.  & POL'Y  21

(1991),  and  in REASSESSING  CIVIL  RIGHTS  (E.  Paul  ed.,  1991).

Law  and Administration After  Chevron,  90  COLUM.  L.  REv.  2071

(1990).

Republicanism, Rights: A  Comment on Pangle, 66  CHI.-KENT  L.  REV.

177  (1990)  (response  to  Thomas  L.  Pangle).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 763 1994-1995

764 

NOTRE  DAME  LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  70:4

Republicanism and the Preference Problem, 66  CHI.-KENT  L.  REV.  181

(1990).

Why  the  Unconstitutional Conditions Doctrine Is An  Anachronism (With
Particular Reference  to Religion,  Speech,  and Abortion), 70  B.U.  L.
REV.  593  (1990).

Remaking Regulation, AM.  PROSPECT,  Spring  1990,  at  73.

Principles, Not Fictions, 57  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  1247  (1990).

Norms  in Surprising Places: The  Case of Statutory Interpretation, 100

ETHICS  803  (1990).

Paradoxes of the Regulatory State, 57  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  407  (1990).

Constitutional Politics and the  Conservative Court, AM.  PROSPECT,

Spring  1990,  at  51.

HUMAN.  101  (1990).

Unity  and Plurality: The  Case of Compulsory  Oaths, 2  YALE  J.L.  &

Interpreting Statutes in  the Regulatory  State, 103  HARV.  L.  REV.  405

(1989)  (recipient  of  1990  award  of American  Bar  Association
for  best  annual  scholarship  in  administrative  law).

Disrupting Voluntary  Transactions, in  NOMOS:  MARKETS  AND JUSTICE

(John W.  Chapman  & J  Roland  Pennock  eds.,  1989).

Of the  Costs and Benefits  of Aggressive Judicial Review  of Agency  Action,

1989  DUKE  L.J.  522.

The First Amendment  and Cognition: A  Response,  1989  DUKE  L.J.  433.

Low  Value  Speech Revisited, 83  Nw.  U.  L.  REV.  555  (1989).

Introduction: Notes  on Feminist Political Thought, 99  ETHICS  219

(1989).

REV.  337  (1989).

Is  There An  Unconstitutional Conditions Doctrine?, 26  SAN  DIEGO  L.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 764 1994-1995

1995] 

SUNSTEIN  PUBLICATIONS 

765

Six  Theses  on  Interpretation, 6  CONST.  COMMENTARY  91  (1989).

Beyond  the Republican Reviva  97  YALE  L.J.  1539  (1988).

Standing and the Privatization of Public Law,  88  COLuM.  L.  REV.  1432

(1988).

Sexual  Orientation and the  Constitution: A  Note on  the Relationship
Between Due Process and Equal Protection, 55  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.
1161  (1988).

Constitutionalism After  the New  Deal,  101  HARV.  L.  REV.  421  (1987).

Lochner's  Legacy,  87  COLUM.  L.  REV.  873  (1987),  reprinted in LAW

AND  LIBERALISM  IN  THE  1980s  157  (Vincent  Blasi  ed.,  1991).

Routine and Revolution, 81  NW.  U.  L.  REV.  869  (1987),  riprinted in
CRITIQUE  AND  CONSTRUCTION  (R  Lovin  & M.  Perry  eds.,
1990).

Changing Conceptions of Administration, 1987  B.Y.U.  L.  REV.  927.

The  Beard Thesis  and Franklin Roosevelt,  56  GEO.  WASH.  L.  REV.  114

(1987).

(1986).

Lochner's  Misunderstood Legacy,  COLUM.  OBSERVER  (1987).

Judicial Review  of Administrative Action  in a  Conservative Era, 39

ADMIN.  L.  REV.  353  (1987)  (transcript  of panel  discussion).

Legal Interference with Private Preferences, 53  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  1129

Two  Faces of Liberalism, 41  U.  MIAMI  L.  REV.  245  (1986).

The Role  of the President and OMB  in Informal Rulemaking, 38  ADMIN.

L.  REV.  181  (1986)  (with  Peter  L.  Strauss).

Government Control of Information, 74  CAL.  L.  REV.  889  (1986).

Pornography and the First Amendment,  1986  DUKE  LJ. 589.

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 765 1994-1995

766 

NOTRE  DAME  LAW REVIEW 

[Vol.  70:4

Madison and Constitutional Equality, 9  HARV. J.L.  &  PUB.  POL'Y  11

(1986).

(1986).

Notes  on  Pornography and the First Amendment,  3 J.L.  & INEQUALILY

Factions, Self-Interest, and the APA:  Four Lessons Since  1946, 72  VA.  L.

REV.  271  (1986).

Deregulation and the  Courts, 5 J.  PUB.  POL'Y  &  MANAGEMENT  (1986).

Interest Groups in American Public Law,  38  STAN.  L.  REV.  29  (1985)

(recipient  of American  Bar Association  award  for distinguished
scholarship  in  administrative  law).

Reviewing Agency  Inaction After Heckler  v.  Chaney,  52  U.  CHI.  L.

REV.  653  (1985).

(1984).

Naked Preferences and the  Constitution, 84  CoLUM.  L.  REV.  1689

In Defense of the Hard Look: Judicial Activism  and Administrative Law,

7  HARV.  J.L.  &  PUB.  POL'Y  51  (1984).

Hard Defamation  Cases, 25  WM.  &  MARY  L.  REV.  891  (1984).

Rights, Minimal Terms,  and Solidarity: A  Comment,  51  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.

1041  (1984).

Deregulation and the Hard-Look Doctrine, 1983  Sup.  CT.  REV.  177.

Is  Cost-Benefit Analysis a Panacea for Administrative Law?,  29  U.  CHI.

L.  SCH.  REC.  19  (1983).

Public Employee  Strikes,  Executive Discretion, and the Air  Traffic

Controllers, 50  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  731  (1982)  (with  Bernard  D.
Meltzer).

Participation, Public Law,  and  Venue Reform,  49  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  976

(1982).

Public Programs and Private Rights, 95  HARV.  L.  REv.  1193  (1982)

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 766 1994-1995

19951

SUNSTEIN  PUBLICATIONS

(with  Richard  B.  Stewart).

Section  1983  and the Private Enforcement  of Federal Law, 49  U.  CHI.  L.

REV.  394  (1982).

SUP.  CT.  REv.  127.

1267 (1981).

Public Values, Private Interests, and the Equal Protection Clause, 1982

Cost-Benefit Analysis  and the  Separation of Powers, 23  ARIz.  L.  REV.

Selected  Essays  and  Reviews

Equality and Free Expression, NEW  REPUBLIC,  Jan.  9,  1995,  at  42

(reviewing  NADINE  STROSSEN,  DEFENDING  PORNOGRAPHY:  FREE
SPEECH,  SEX,  AND  THE  FIGHT  FOR  WOMEN'S  RIGHTS  (1995)).

Founders, Keepers, NEW  REPUBLIC,  May  24,  1993,  at  38  (reviewing
SAMUEL  H.  BEER,  TO  MAKE  A  NATION:  THE  REDISCOVERY  OF
AMERICAN  FEDERALISM  (1993)).

Valuing Life,  NEW  REPUBLIC,  Feb.  15,  1993,  at  36  (reviewing  W. KiP
VISCUSI,  SMOKING:  MAKING  THE  RISKY  DECISION  (1993),  and  W.
KIP  VISCUSI,  FATAL  TRADEOFFS:  PUBLIC  AND  PRiVATE  RESPONSI-
BILITIES  FOR  RISK  (1993)).

Against Positive Rights, E.  EUR.  CONST.  REV.,  Winter  1993,  at  35

(1993).

Where Politics Ends, NEW  REPUBLIC,  Aug.  3,  1992,  at  38  (reviewing
MORTON  HORWrrZ,  THE  TRANSFORMATION  OF  AMERICAN  LAW,
1870-1960  (1992)).

In  Memoriam: Hans, 59  U.  CHI.  L.  REv.  571  (1992)  (Hans  Zeisel).

New Deals, NEW  REPUBLIC,  Jan.  20,  1992,  at  32  (reviewing  BRUCE

ACKERMAN,  WE  THE  PEOPLE  (1991)).

Is  The  Court Independent?, N.Y.  REV.  BOOKS  (1992)  (reviewing

WILLIAM  H.  REHNQUIST,  GRAND  INQUESTS  (1992),  and  GERALD
N.  ROSENBERG,  THE  HOLLOW  HOPE  (1990)).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 767 1994-1995

NOTRE  DAME  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  70:4

Something  Old,  Something New,  E.  EUR.  CONST.  REV.,  Spring  1992,

at  18.

Rightalk,  NEW  REPUBLIC,  Sept.  2,  1991,  at  33  (reviewing  MARY  ANN

GLENDON,  RIGHTS  TALK:  THE  IMPOVERISHMENT  OF  POLITICAL
DISCOURSE  (1991)).

The  Spirit of the Laws,  NEW  REPUBLIC,  Mar.  11,  1991,  at  32

(reviewing  LAURENCE  H.  TRIBE  &  MICHAEL  C.  DORF,  ON
READING  THE  CONSTITUTION  (1991)).

Feminism and Legal Theory,  101  HARV.  L.  REV.  826  (1988)

(reviewing  CATHERINE  A.  MACKINNON,  FEMINISM  UNMODIFIED
(1987)).

Book  Review,  96  ETHICS  (1986)  (reviewing JOHN  KEANE,  PUBLIC

LIFE  AND  LATE  CAPITALISM).

Book  Review,  95  ETHICS  (1984)  (reviewing  BAER,  EQUALITY  UNDER

THE  CONSTITUTION).

Judicial Relief and the Public Tort Law, 92  YALE  L.J.  749  (1983)

(reviewing  PETER  SCHUCK,  SUING  GOVERNMENT  (1983)).

Politics and Adjudication, 94  ETHICS  126  (1983).

HeinOnline  -- 70 Notre Dame L. Rev. 768 1994-1995

