 Cass R. Sunstein* In the United States, the President is controlled by the Constitution, and in all respects subordinate to it. Insofar as it deals with presidential power, however, the American Constitution has proved to be a highly malleable document. With very few exceptions,' the constitutional provisions relating to the President have not been changed at all since they were ratified in 1787. But in the late twentieth century, those provisions do not mean what they meant in 1787. The Constitution is a legal document, and it is enforced judicially; but its meaning was hardly fixed when it was ratified. In particular, the contemporary President has far broader powers than the original Constitution contemplated. It is remarkable but true that large-scale changes in the authority of the President have been brought about without changes in the constitutional text, but nevertheless without significant illegality. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. There is some dispute about whether the task of producing a strong President without endangering liberty has been successfully accomplished in the United States. Some people think that the American President is much too powerful; 4 others think that America has a weak president who is circumscribed by congressional "micromanagement" and unable to accomplish the tasks for which he is elected. This debate raises complex questions that I cannot discuss here. My purpose here is far narrower. I intend to show how the modern presidency is quite different from the founders' presidency, and then to make some observations about how all this has come about. 3. See Cass R. Sunstein, Constitutionalism After the New Deal, 101 HARV. L. It cannot be disputed that the original understanding of the presidency called for much less presidential authority than is taken for granted today.6 To be sure the prominent founder Alexander Hamilton, sought a powerful presidency.7 Moreover, the new Constitution created an executive where the Articles of Confederation did not; the creation of a novel executive branch was one of the most important innovations in the Constitution. But the original American President was exceptionally weak by contemporary standards. We can put constitutional changes in the power of the President in several categories. First, some changes offend no constitutional provision, but involve alterations from what the framers had expected or had hoped to achieve. Second, some changes do not clearly offend the constitutional text, but do violate the framers' understanding of what the text meant. Third, some changes offend the constitutional text. I will try to distinguish among these different kinds of changes below. By contrast, the modern President is a principal national lawmaker. The content of federal law has a great deal to do with the President's program and agenda. Much of this shift has occurred simply because of an unanticipated shift in power from the states to the federal government. The decline of limits on the power of the national government has helped to increase the authority of the President.1 In implementing national law, the executive branch, therefore, issues an extraordinary range of regulations affecting the national economy. Washington's own approach does seem extreme; as I have noted, the Constitution itself authorizes a broader role.29 But in the founding period, it was hardly believed that the President would have the current powers of initiative, granting him considerable power over the content of national law. The President's modern power of initiative, with respect to the budget and lawmaking, is quite fundamental to the nature of our government. Of course, much legislation is initiated by people other than the President. But it is plausible to think that no one has as much authority as the President himself. This is not a violation of the Constitution. It is, however, a wholly unanticipated increase in presidential power. We should distinguish among three categories here. First, some of these exercises of authority may have been unconstitutional. Some of them may have required a congressional declaration as a precondition for national action. Second, some may have been permissible because they involved military action short of "war." Third, some may have been permissible because the category of "sudden attack" must be understood capaciously under current conditions. I cannot desegregate these various possibilities here. Instead I offer a simple point: in any of these cases, the President's power goes far beyond what was expected. Many of the changes have occurred because the relevant constitutional provisions are both spare and ambiguous, and they allow adaptation to changing circumstances. For example, the grant of "executive power" to the President leaves much uncertainty. To many modern readers, the term connotes all or much law-implementation. 39 It may have carried a narrower meaning in the founding period. Or consider the authority of the President in the area of foreign affairs. The relevant provisions are highly ambig The Constitution also contains important silences. The Constitution does not say whether the veto power comprehends policy disagreements. It does not describe the precise relation between the President and the administration. It does not discuss whether the President may submit a budget. Constitutional change has occurred in part because of constitutional ambiguities and silences. It seems obvious that a constitution that is not rigid, and that leaves gaps and uncertainties, will allow for adaptation without amendment or illegality. Many constitutions contain emergency provisions, allowing the government to have special powers under conditions of emergency. Most notably, the American Constitution contains no emergency provisions (although the President is allowed to suspend the writ of habeas corpus during war 0 ). It might seem natural to think that in spite of the absence of explicit emergency powers, many increases in presidential authority have occurred as a result of emergencies. Certainly it is true that some such increases occurred in the New Deal period, as a result of what some people believed to be the emergency conditions of the Great Depression. And some of the most dramatic exercises or vindications of presidential authority involved what many thought to involve emergency. 4' In general, however, changing powers of the presidency are not a product of emergencies. It would be a mistake to think that authorities have been conferred on the President because of an implicit "emergency provision" allowing American officials to do what is necessary in dire circumstances. Indeed, the President has rarely been found to have special authority to act during emergencies. A domestic crisis-widespread unemployment, social unrest Some academic observers43 believe that in the United States, interpretation of the Constitution depends less on constitutional text and history and more on particular, casespecific judicial decisions. This process of case-by-case development allows the meaning of the document to change over time. Indeed, constitutional law in America (and in many other nations as well) has many features of the common law process. In that process, no one sets down broad legal rules in advance. The meaning of the Constitution is Instead, the rules not a product of antecedent rules. emerge narrowly as judges decide individual cases. Governing principles come from the process of case-by-case adin judication, and sometimes advance. It does seem clear that much of constitutional law in the United States comes not from the constitutional text itself, but from judge-made constitutional law, interpreting constitutional provisions. For this reason, the meaning of the document is not rigidly fixed when the document is written and ratified. Something of this kind is certainly true for the powers of the President, and the system of common law constitutionalism helps explain the shifting understandings of presidential power. Consider, the complex question whether Congress or the President may discharge high-level public officials (the Secretary of State, the Attorney General, the Secretary of the Interior). The text of the Constitution does not speak clearly on this issue; instead, the governing constitutional principles have been worked out in the process of case-by-case adjudication. In Myers v. United States,44 the Court said that high-level executive officers must be subject to the plenary control of the President. In Humphrey's Executor v. United States,45 the Court qualified this rule, saying that officials exercising quasi-legislative and quasi-executive functions may be immunized from the President. In Bowsher v. Synar,46 the Court distinguished between a congressional role in removal of law-implementing officials, which would be impermissible, and independence, which would be acceptable. And in Morrison v. Olson,4 7 the Court said that purely executive officers may sometimes be made independent of the President. This elaborate body of doctrine, reflecting changing understandings over time, is a classic illustration of how the process of case-by-case adjudication, unburdened by general rules given in advance, can allow presidential authority to shift. Some people, most notably Lawrence Lessig,48 have argued that when circumstances have changed, the Supreme Court must "translate" the original constitutional text or history in order to adapt it to the new conditions. Suppose, for example, that the founders of the Constitution originally sought to allow the President to make war on his own only for defensive purposes-to repel sudden attacks on the United States. Suppose, too, that in modern conditions, threats to Canada and Mexico are extremely threatening to the United States because of the strategic importance of these nations to the American capacity for self-defense. Or suppose (as many people believe) that under current conditions, the line between "offensive" and "defensive" use of the military becomes extremely thin. New circumstances have made that original line far more ambiguous than it was at the founding. Some people, most notably Bruce Ackerman, think America has had more than one constitutional regimethat at crucial moments in our history, the people have inaugurated large-scale changes in the Constitution.5 1 The Civil War, for example, is said to have inaugurated a Second American Republic, with new understandings of the allocation of power between the nation and the states, and with new understandings of the allocation of power between the nation and the states, and with new understand In this essay, I have outlined some aspects of the extraordinary changes in the constitutional power of the President. I have also offered some diverse explanations of the changing nature of that constitutional power. There is no question that the current President is quite different from the founders' President. In some ways, it is hard for those committed to the project of constitutionalism to explain the discontinuities, which complicate the idea that the written constitution has a high degree of stability over time. One of the distinguishing features of the American Constitution is 54. See the criticisms of Ackerman in Cass R. Sunstein, New Deals, THE NEW for