Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Yale Law Journal Company, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Yale Law Journal. 
This content downloaded from 139.80.123.48 on Thu, 29 Oct 2015 11:08:21 UTC All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions The First Amendmentin Cyberspace 
I go on this greatrepublicanprinciple,thatthe peoplewill have virtue andintelligenceto select menof virtueandwisdom.Is thereno virtue among us? If there be not, we are in a wretched situation. No theoreticalchecks, no form of government,can renderus secure.To supposethatany formof governmentwill securelibertyor happiness without any virtue in the people, is a chimericalidea. If there be sufficient virtue and intelligence in the community, it will be exercised in the selectionof these men; so thatwe do not dependon theirvirtue,or putconfidencein ourrulers,butin the people who are to choose them.' [T]he right of electing the membersof the Governmentconstitutes more particularlythe essence of a free and responsiblegovernment. The value andefficacy of this rightdependson the knowledgeof the comparativemeritsanddemeritsof thecandidatesforpublictrust,and on the equal freedom, consequently,of examining and discussing these meritsand demeritsof the candidatesrespectively.2 "[T]elevisionis just anotherappliance.It's a toasterwith pictures."3 t KarlN. LlewellynDistinguishedServiceProfessorof JurisprudenceL,aw School andDepartment of Political Science, Universityof Chicago.I am gratefulto ElenaKagan,LarryLessig, GeoffreyStone, David Strauss,and EugeneVolokhfor helpfulcomments,andto SophieClarkfor researchassistanceand valuablediscussions.An overlappingbutmuchshorteressay, TheFutureof the FirstAmendmenta,ppears as an afterwordto CASSR. SUNSTEIND,EMOCRACAYNDTHEPROBLEMOFFREESPEEC H(2d ed. 1995). 
SEVERASLTATECONVENTIOONNSTHEADOPTIOONFTHEFEDERACLONSTuMON536-37 (photo.reprint 1987) (JonathanElliot ed., 2d ed. 1836). 
MADISON341, 397 (GaillardHunted., 1906) In his report,Madisonobjects to the SeditionAct on First Amendmentgrounds. 
(1985) (quotingMarkFowler,formerFCCChair). 
1757 
Imagine you had a device that combined a telephone, a TV, a camcorder,and a personalcomputer.No matterwhere you went or whattime it was, yourchildcould see you andtalkto you, you could watch a replayof yourteam'slast game, you could browsethe latest additionsto the library,or you could find the best prices in town on groceries,furniture,clothes-whatever you needed. 
Imaginefurtherthe dramaticchangesin your life if: * The best schools, teachers,and courses were availableto all students, without regard to geography, distance, resources, or disability; 
* The vast resourcesof art,literature,and science were available everywhere, not just in large institutionsor big-city libraries and museums; 
*ServicesthatimproveAmerica'shealthcaresystemandrespond to otherimportantsocialneedswereavailableon-line,withoutwaiting in line, when and whereyou neededthem; 
* You could live in manyplaces withoutforegoingopportunities for useful and fulfilling employment,by "telecommuting"to your office throughan electronichighway . . . 
* You could see the latest movies, play the hottestvideo games, or bank and shop from the comfort of your home whenever you chose; 
* You could obtaingovernmentinformationdirectlyor through local organizationslike libraries,apply for and receive government benefits electronically,and get in touch with governmentofficials easily .... 
Thus wrote the Departmentof Commerceon September15, 1993, when the federal governmentannouncedan "Agendafor Action"with respectto "the National Information Infrastructure."T5he statement may seem weirdly futuristic,but the nationis not at all farfromwhatit prophesies,andin ways thathave alreadyalteredsocial and legal relationsand categories. 
Consider the extraordinarilyrapid development of the institution of electronicmail, which lies somewherebetweenordinaryconversation("voice mail")and ordinarywrittencommunication("snailmail"or "hardmail"),or whichperhapsshouldbe describedas somethingelse altogetherE.-mailhas its own characteristicnormsandconstraintsT.hose normsandconstraintsarean importantpartof the informal,unwrittenlaw of cyberspace.The normsand constraintsare a form of customarylaw, determininghow and when people communicatewith one another.6Perhapsthere will be a formal codification movementbeforetoo long; certainlythe normsandconstraintsarecodifiedin the sense that, without governmentassistance,they are easily accessible by people who want to know what they are.7 
The CommerceDepartment'sclaims aboutlocationhave startedto come true. What it meantto "live in California"became altogetherdifferent,after the invention of the airplane,from what it meant in (say) 1910. With the adventof new communicationstechnologies,the meaningof the statement,"I live in California"has changed at least as dramaticallyI.f people can have instantaccess to all librariesandall movies, andif they can communicatewith a wide rangeof public officials, pharmacistse,ducators,doctors,and lawyers by touching a few buttons, they may as well (for most purposes) live anywhere. 
In any case, the existence of technologicalchange promises to test the system of free expression in dramaticways. What should be expected with respectto the FirstAmendment? 
II. THE PRESENT:MARKETSAND MADISON 
Therearetwo free speechtraditionsin the UnitedStates,not simplyone.8 There have been two models of the First Amendment,correspondingto the two free speech traditions.The first emphasizes well-functioning speech markets.It can be tracedto JusticeHolmes' greatAbramsdissent,9wherethe notion of a "marketin ideas"receivedits preeminentexposition.The market model emerges as well from Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo,10 invalidatinga "rightof reply"law as appliedto candidatesfor elected office. It finds its most recentdefiningstatementnot in judicial decisions, but in an FCC opinion rejectingthe fairnessdoctrine. 
The secondtradition,andthe secondmodel,focuseson publicdeliberation. The second model can be traced from its origins in the work of James Madison,12 with his attack on the idea of seditious libel, to Justice Louis Brandeis,with his suggestionthat"thegreatestmenaceto freedomis an inert people,""3throughthe workof AlexanderMeiklejohn,who associatedthe free speechprinciplenot withlaissez-faireeconomics,butwithidealsof democratic deliberation.14 The Madisoniantraditionculminatedin New YorkTimes v. Sullivan15 and the reaffirmationof the fairness doctrine in the Red Lion case,16 with the Supreme Court's suggestion that governmentalefforts to encouragediverseviews andattentionto publicissues arecompatiblewith the free speech principle--even if they resultin regulatorycontrolson the owners of speech sources. 
Underthe marketplacemetaphort,he FirstAmendmentrequires-at least as a presumption-a free speech market, or in other words a system of unrestrictedeconomic marketsin speech.Governmentmustrespectthe forces of supply and demand.At the very least, it may not regulatethe contentof speech so as to push the speech marketin its preferreddirections.Certainlyit must be neutral with respect to viewpoint. A key point for marketplace advocatesis that greatdistrustof governmentis especially appropriatewhen speech is at issue. Illicit motives are far too likely to underlie regulatory initiatives.For the marketplacemodel, Tornillo'7is perhapsthe centralcase. The FCC has at times come close to endorsingthe marketmodel, above all in its decision abandoningthe fairness doctrine.'8When the FCC did this, it referredto the operationof the forces of supply and demand,and suggested that those forces would producean optimal mix of entertainmentoptions."9 Hence formerFCC ChairMarkFowler describedtelevision as "justanother appliance. It's a toaster with pictures."20Undoubtedly,the rise of new communicationstechnologieswill be takento fortify this claim.21 
Those who endorsethe marketplacemodel do not claim thatgovernment may not do anythingat all. Of coursegovernmentmay set up the basic rules of propertyand contract;it is these rulesthatmake marketsfeasible. Without such rules, marketscannot exist at all.22Governmentis also permittedto 
ConvergingCommunicationsMedia, 104 YALEL.J. 1719 (1995). 

It is regrettable,thoughnot difficult to explain, thatin the past much less attentionhas been given to the positive requirementsof a successfulworkingof the competitivesystem than to these [previously discussed] negative points. The functioningof a competitionnot only requires adequateorganizationof certain institutionslike money, markets,and channels of information-some of which can never be adequatelyprovidedby privateenterprise-but it depends, above all, on the existence of an appropriatelegal system, a legal system designed both to preservecompetitionand to make it operateas beneficiallyas possible.... protect against market failures, especially by preventing monopolies and monopolisticpractices.Structuralregulationis acceptableso long as it is a content-neutraalttemptto ensurecompetition.It is thereforeimportanto note thatadvocatesof marketplacesanddemocracymightworktogetherin seeking to curtailmonopoly.Of course,the preventionof monopolyis a precondition for well-functioninginformationmarkets. 
Governmenthas a finalauthorityt,houghthis authoritydoes not easily fall withinthe marketplacemodelitself. Most people who acceptthe marketplace model acknowledgethatgovernmentis permittedto regulatethe variouswelldefined categories of controllable speech, such as obscenity, false or misleading commercialspeech, and libel.23This acknowledgmentwill have large and not yet explored consequencesfor governmentcontrols on new informationtechnologies.Perhapsthe government'spowerto controlobscene, threatening,or libelous speech will justify special rules for cyberspace.24But with these qualifications,the commitmentto free economic marketsis the basic constitutionalcreed. 
Many people think that there is now nothing distinctive about the electronicmedia or aboutmoderncommunicationstechnologiesthatjustifies an additional governmentalrole.25If such a role was ever justified, they would argue, it was because of problems of scarcity. When only three televisionnetworksexhaustedthe availableoptions,a marketfailuremayhave called for regulationdesigned to ensure that significantnumbersof people were not left withouttheirpreferredprogramming.2B6ut this is no longer a problem.With so dramatica proliferationof stations,most people can obtain the programmingthey want, or will be able to soon.27With cyberspace, people will be able to make or to participatein their own preferred programmingin their own preferred"locations"on the Internet.With new technologies, perhapsthere are no real problemscalling for governmental controls,except for those designedto establishthe basic framework. 
In no system that could be rationallydefended would the state just do nothing. An effective competitivesystem needs an intelligentlydesignedand continuouslyadjustedlegal frameworkas muchas any other. 
FRIEDRICHA. HAYEKT, HEROADTO SERFDOM38-39 (1944). 
323 (1974); Miller v. California,413 U.S. 15 (1973). 

G. KRATTENMAKER& LUCAS A. POWE, JR., REGULATINGBROADCASTPROGRAMMING27 Krattenmaker& Powe, supra note 21. 

householdsthathave television-and manycitizens are withoutaccess to the Internet.NRTCExecutive: DirecTva Big Hit in the Country,MULTICHANNENLEWSD,ec. 15, 1994, at 32 [hereinafterDirecTva Big Hit]; see infratext accompanyingnotes 145-51. 
The second model, receiving its most sustainedattentionin the writings of AlexanderMeiklejohn,28emphasizesthat our constitutionalsystem is one of deliberativedemocracy.This system prizes both political (not economic) equalityanda sharedcivic culture.It seeks to promote,as a centraldemocratic goal, reflectiveand deliberativedebateaboutpossible courses of action. The Madisonianmodel sees the rightof free expressionas a key partof the system of public deliberation. 
On this view, even a well-functioning information market29is not immunefrom governmentcontrols.Governmentis certainlynot permittedto regulatespeech however it wants;it may not restrictspeech on the basis of viewpoint. But it may regulatethe electronicmedia or even cyberspaceto promote,in a sufficientlyneutralway, a well-functioningdemocraticregime. It may attemptto promote attentionto public issues. It may try to ensure diversity of view. It may promotepolitical speech at the expense of other formsof speech.In particulare,ducationalandpublic-affairsprogrammingo,n the Madisonianview, has a special place. 
I cannot attemptin this space to defend fully the propositionthat the Madisonianconceptionis superiorto the marketplacealternativeas a matter of constitutionallaw;30a few brief notes will have to suffice. The argument for the Madisonianconceptionis partlyhistorical;the Americanfree speech traditionowes muchof its originandshapeto a conceptionof democraticselfgovernment.The marketplaceconceptionis a creationof thetwentiethcentury, not of the eighteenth.As a matterof history,it confuses modernnotions of consumersovereigntyin the marketplacewith democraticunderstandingsof sovereignty,symbolizedby the transferof sovereigntyfromthe King to "We the People." The American free speech traditionfinds its origin in that conceptionof sovereignty,which,in Madison'sview, doomedthe SeditionAct on constitutionalgrounds.31 
But the argumentfor Madisonianismdoes not rest only on history;it is partly evaluative as well. We are unlikely to be able to make sense of our consideredjudgmentsaboutfreespeechproblemswithoutinsistingthatthefree speechprincipleis centrally(thoughcertainlynot exclusively)connectedwith democraticgoals,32and withoutacknowledgingthat marketplacethinkingis inadequatelyconnected with the point and function of a system of free expression. A well-functioning democracy requires a degree of citizen participation,which requiresa degree of information;3a3nd large disparities 
1805 (1995), on the risks posed by such a system. 
in political (as opposed to economic) equality are damagingto democratic aspirations.34To the extent that the Madisonian view prizes education, democratic deliberation, and political equality, it is connected, as the marketplace conception is not, with the highest ideals of American constitutionalism. 
Some people think that the distinction between marketplace and Madisonian models is now an anachronism.35Perhaps the two models conflictedat an earlierstage in history;but in one view, Madisonhas no place in an era of limitless broadcastingoptions and cyberspace. Perhaps new technologiesnow meanthatMadisoniangoals canbest be satisfiedin a system of free markets.Now that so many channels,e-mail options, and discussion "places"are available,cannoteveryonereador see whatthey wish? If people want to spend their time on public issues, are there not countless available opportunities?Is this not especially truewith the emergenceof the Internet? Is it not hopelessly paternalistic,or anachronisticf,or governmentto regulate for Madisonianreasons? 
I do not believe that these questionsare rhetorical.We know enough to know that even in a periodof limitless options, our communicationssystem may fail to promotean educatedcitizenryand politicalequality.Madisonian goals may be severelycompromisedeven undertechnologicallyextraordinary conditions. There is no logical or a priori connection between a wellfunctioningsystem of free expressionand limitless broadcastingor Internet options.We could well imaginea science fictionstoryin which a wide range of options coexisted with little or no high-qualityfare for children, with widespreadpolitical apathy or ignorance,and with social balkanizationin which most people's consumption choices simply reinforced their own prejudicesand platitudes,or even worse. 
Quite outside of science fiction, it is foreseeable that free marketsin communicationswill be a mixed blessing. They could create a kind of accelerating"raceto the bottom,"in which many or most people see lowquality programming involving trumped-up scandals or sensationalistic anecdotes calling for little in terms of quality or quantityof attention.It is easily imaginablethatwell-functioningmarketsin communicationswill bring abouta situationin which many of those interestedin politics merely fortify their own unreflectivejudgments,and are exposed to little or nothingin the way of competingviews,36IIttis eeaasiyiliymaginable thatthe contentof the most widely viewed programmingwill be affectedby the desiresof advertisers,in such a way as to produceshows thatrepresenta bland,watered-downversion of conventionalmorality,and that do not engage serious issues in a serious way for fear of offending some groupin the audience.37 
Consider,by way of summaryof existing fare, the suggestionthat TV favors a mentality in which certain things no longer matter particularly:skills like the ability to enjoy a complex argument,for instance,or to perceivenuances,or to keep in mindlargeamountsof significantinformation,or to remembertodaywhatsomeonesaid last month,or to considerstrongandcarefullyarguedopinionsin defiance of what is conventionally called "balance."Its content lurches between violence of action, emotionalhyperbole,and blandnessof opinion.... CommercialTV... has come to presentsociety as a pagancircusof freaks,pseudo-heroes,andwild morons,struggleson the sandof a Colosseumwithoutwalls. It thushelps immeasurablyto worsenthe defects of Americanpubliceducationandof tabloidnews in* print3.8 From the standpoint of the present, it is easily imaginable that the television-or the personal computer carrying out communications functions-will indeed become "just another appliance ... a toaster with pictures,"andthatthe educativeor aspirationagloals of the FirstAmendment will be lost or even forgotten. 
I shall say more aboutthese pointsbelow.39For now it is safe to say that the law of free speech will ultimatelyhave to make some hardchoices about the marketplaceanddemocraticmodels.It is also safe to say thatthe changing natureof the informationmarketwill test the two modelsin new ways. In fact, the SupremeCourthas recentlyofferedan importantdiscussionof the topic, TurnerBroadcastingSystem,Inc. v. FCC.40Turneris also the most sustained explorationof the relationshipbetweenconventionallegal categoriesand the new informationtechnologies.The decisioncontainsa rangeof lessons for the future. 
My principalpurposehere is to discuss the role of the FirstAmendment and Madisonianism in cyberspace-or, more simply, the nature of constitutionalconstraintson governmentregulationof electronicbroadcasting, especially in the aftermathof Turner.In so doing, I will cover a good deal of ground,and a numberof issues of law andpolicy, in a relativelyshortspace. I do, however, offer three relatively simple goals to help organize the discussion. Most important,I attempt to make a defense of Madisonian conceptionsof free speech, even in a periodin which scarcityis no longer a serious problem.The defense stressesthe risks of sensationalism,ignorance, failure of deliberation, and balkanization-risks that are in some ways heightened by new developments. In the process I discuss some of the questionsthat are likely to arise in the next generationof free speech law. 
I have two othergoals as well. I attemptto identifyan intriguingandnew model of the First Amendmentand to ask whetherthat model-the Turner model-is well adapted to the future of the speech market. A relatively detailed and somewhat technical discussion of Turnershould prove useful, because the case raises the largerissues in a concretesetting. 
I also urge that,for the most part,the emergingtechnologiesdo not raise new questionsaboutbasicprinciplebutinsteadproducenew areasfor applying or perhapstesting old principles.The existing analogiesare often very good, and this means thatthe new law can begin by buildingfairly comfortablyon the old. The principalproblemwiththe old law is not so muchthatit is poorly adaptedfor currentissues-though in some cases it may be-but thatit does not depend on a clear sense of the purposeor point of the system of free expression. In building law for an age of cyberspace, government officials-within the judiciaryand elsewhere-should be particularlycareful not to treatdoctrinalcategoriesas ends in themselves.Much less shouldthey act as if the First Amendmentis a purposelessabstractionunconnectedto ascertainablesocial goals. Instead they should keep in mind that the free speech principle has a point, or a set of points. Among its points is the commitmentto democraticself-government. 
The Turnercase is by far the most importantjudicial discussionof new media technologies, and it has a range of implications for the future. I thereforebegin with thatcase, turningto broaderissues of law and policy in Part V. It is important,however, to say that Turnerinvolved two highly distinctive problems:(a) the peculiar "bottleneck"producedby the current system of cable television, in which cable owners can control access to programminga;nd(b) the possibleriskto free televisionprogrammingcreated by the rise of pay television. These problemsturnedout to be centralto the outcomein the case. Forthis reason,Turneris quitedifferentfromimaginable futurecases involving new informationtechnologies,includingthe Internet, which includesno bottleneckproblem.Significantly,the Internetis ownedby no one and controlled by no organization.But at least potentially, the principlesin Turnerwill extend quitebroadly.This is especially true insofar as the Court adopted ingredientsof an entirely new model of the First Amendmentand insofar as the Court set out principlesgoverning content discrimination,viewer access, speakeraccess, and regulationof owners of speech sources. 
In the last decade, it has become clear that cable television will be in potentialcompetitionwith free broadcastingI.n 1992, motivatedin largepart by concerns about this form of competition,Congress enacted the Cable Television ConsumerProtectionand CompetitionAct (the Act).41The Act contains a range of provisions designed to protect broadcastingand local producers,and also at least nominallydesignedto protectcertainconsumers from practices by the cable industry.The relevant provisions include rate regulationsforcableoperatorsa, prohibitionon exclusivefranchiseagreements between cable operatorsand municipalities,and restrictionson affiliations between cable programmersand cable operators.42 
A majorpartof the Act was motivatedby the fearthatcable television's success could damage broadcasttelevision.43If cable flourishes, perhaps broadcasterswill fail? The scenario seems at least plausible in light of importantdifferencesin relevanttechnologies.Broadcasttelevisioncomes, of course,fromtransmittingantennae.It is availableforfree,thoughin its current form, it cannotprovidemorethana few stations.By contrast,cable systems makeuse of a physicalconnectionbetweentelevision sets anda transmission facility, and throughthis routecable operatorscan providea largenumberof stations.Cable operatorsare of course in a positionto decide which stations, andwhich stationowners,will be availableon cabletelevision;cableoperators could thus refuseto carrylocal broadcastersT.o be sure,cable operatorsmust respondto forces of supplyanddemand,andperhapsthey would do poorlyif they failed to carry local broadcasters.But because they have "bottleneck control" over the stations that they will carry, they are in one sense monopolists,or at least so Congressappearsto have thought. 
fortypercentof Americanslacka cableconnection,andmustthereforerely on broadcaststations.44(This is a point of general importancein light of the possibility that access to communicationstechnology will in the futurebe unequally distributed.)In the Act, the potentialconflict between cable and broadcast television led Congress to set out two crucial, hotly disputed provisions. Both provisionsrequiredcable operatorsto carrythe signals of 
1135-36. 
local broadcasttelevision stations.These "must-carryr"uleswere the focus of the Turnercase. 
The first provision, section 4, imposes must-carry rules for "local commercialtelevision stations."45Under the Act, cable systems with more than twelve active channelsand more thanthree hundredavailablechannels mustset aside as manyas one-thirdof theirchannelsfor commercialbroadcast stations requestingcarriage.46These stationsare defined to include all fullpower television broadcastersexcept those that qualify as "noncommercial educational"stations.47 
Section 5 adds a different requirement.4I8t governs "noncommercial educationaltelevision stations,"definedto include(a) stationsthatare owned and operated by a municipality and that transmit "predominantly noncommercialprogramsfor educationalpurposes"4o9r (b) stationsthat are licensed by the FCC as such stationsand that are eligible to receive grants from the Corporationfor Public Broadcasting.5S0ection 5 imposes separate must-carryrules on noncommercialeducationalstations.A cable system with more than thirty-sixchannelsmust carryeach local public broadcaststation requestingcarriage;51a station having between thirteenand thirty-six must carrybetween one and three;52and a stationwith twelve or fewer channels must carryat least one.53 
What was the purposeof the must-carryrules?This is a complex matter. A skeptic, or perhapsa realist,might well say that the rules were simply a product of the political power of the broadcastingindustry.Perhaps the broadcastingindustry was trying to protect its economic interests at the expense of cable. This is a quitereasonablesuggestion,for it is unlikelythat marketarrangementswould lead to a situationin which significantnumbers of Americans are entirely without access to television broadcasting.The scenariothatCongressapparentlyfeared-a victoryof cabletelevisionoverthe broadcastingindustry,with the resultthat forty percentof Americanswould lack television at all-seems wildly unrealistic.Insofar as Congress was responding to the interests of local broadcasters,it may well have been cateringto interest-powerratherthanattemptingto protectotherwisedeprived consumers. 
defendedas public-interestedor as helpingviewersandconsumers,will often be a productof privateself-interest,and not good for the public at all. It is undoubtedlytrue that industrieswill often seek governmenthelp againstthe marketplace,invoking public-spiritedjustificationsfor self-interestedends.54 Whetherand to what extentthis is a constitutional(as opposedto a political) problem may be disputed.55But it points to a distinctive and legitimate concernaboutgovernmentalregulationof the communicationsindustry. 
The interest-groupaccountthereforehas considerableplausibility.On the otherhand,some people mightreasonablythinkthatthe must-carryruleswere a good-faitheffort to protectlocal broadcastersn,ot because of theirpolitical power,but because theirspeech is valuable.Theirspeech is valuablebecause it ensuresthat viewers will be able to see discussionof local political issues. Perhapsthe must-carryrules-especially section 5, but perhapssection 4 as well-had powerfulMadisonianjustificationsinsofaras cable operatorsmight choose stations that failed to offer adequatediscussion of issues of public concern, especially to the local community.Otherobserversmight invoke a differentjustification,also with Madisonianovertones.Perhapsthe effort to protect broadcasterswas a legitimate effort to safeguardthe broadcasting industry,not because of the political power of the broadcasters,and not becauseof the contentof broadcastservice,butbecausemillionsof Americans mustrely on broadcastersfor theirprogrammingP.erhapsCongresswantedto ensureuniversalviewer access to the televisionmarket.On this view, the key goal behind the must-carryrules was to ensureviewer access. 
Let us put these possibilities to one side and take up the constitutional issue. In Turnert,he cableoperatorschallengedsections4 and5 as inconsistent with the First Amendment.They did not make a distinctionbetween section 4 and section 5; to the cable companies,both provisions were illegitimate interferenceswith theirrightto choose suchprogrammingas they wished.For obvious reasons, the government also made no such distinctions. The governmentwantedto defendboth provisions,and a defense of section 5, by itself, would produceonly a partialvictory.The key aspectsof the case lay in the operators'contentionthat both sections amountedto a form of content regulation,and thateven if they shouldbe seen as content-neutralt,hey were unconstitutionablecause inadequatelyjustified. 
In its response,the Courtcreatedsomethingvery muchlike a new model for understandingthe relationshipbetween new technologies and the First Amendment.This model is a competitorto the marketplaceand Madisonian alternatives.And while it is somewhatunruly,it is not difficultto describe.It comes from the five basic componentsof the Court'sresponseto the cable operators'challenge. 
First,the Courtheld thatcabletelevisionwouldnotbe subjectto the more lenient free speech limitationsappliedto broadcasters.5O6n the Court'sview, the key to the old broadcastcases was scarcity,and scarcityis not a problem for cable stations. To be sure, there are possible "marketdysfunctions"for cable television; as noted, cable operatorsmay in a sense be a monopolyby virtue of their "bottleneckcontrol."But this structuralfact did not, in the Court's view, dictate a more lenient approachin the cable context. In the Court'sview, the key point in the past cases had to do with scarcity. 
This is an especially significant holding.57 It suggests that new technologieswill generallybe subjectto ordinaryfree speechstandardsn,ot to the morelenientstandardsappliedto broadcastersS.carcityis rarelya problem for new technologies. 
Second, the Court said that the Act was content-neutrala,nd therefore subjectto the morelenientstandardsgoverningcontent-neutrarlestrictionson speech. For the Court,the centralpoint is that"themust-carryrules, on their face, impose burdensand confer benefitswithoutreferenceto the contentof speech."58This is because "the extent of the interferencedoes not depend uponthe contentof the cable operators'programming."5In9 the Court'sview, the regulationsare certainlyspeaker-based,since we have to know who the speakeris to know whetherthe regulationsapply;but they are not contentbased, since they do not punishor requirespeech of a particularcontent. 
This holding is also quite important.It means that Congress will be permittedto regulateparticulartechnologiesin particularways, so long as the regulationis not transparentlya subterfugefor a legislativedesireto promote particularpoints of view. It meansthatCongresscan give special benefitsto special sources,or impose special burdenson disfavoredindustries. 
Third,the Courtsaid that therewas insufficientreasonto believe that a content-based"purpose"underlaythe content-neutramlust-carrylaw.60Hence the contentneutralityof the law could not be impeachedby an investigation of the factors that led to its enactment.The Court explored the relevant 
neverbeen a secureone. See RonaldH. Coase, TheFederalCommunicationCsommission,2 J.L.& ECON. 1, 14, 20 (1959). Perhapsmarketfailuresof a certainsortjustifiedspecial controlson local broadcasting. See OWEN& WILDMANsu,pra note 26, at 275-76. But if this is true,the questionbecomes whetherthere are marketfailures, and of what sorts, ratherthan whetherthere is "scarcity."Hence the Court'scrisp distinctionbetween scarce sourcesand nonscarcesourcesis quitecrude. 
legislative findings, which showed not only a (by hypothesisquestionable61) congressionalinterestin encouragingthe sortsof programmingofferedby local broadcastersb,ut also a distinctiveandlegitimateconcernthatcable operators have a strongfinancialinterestin favoringtheirown affiliatedprogrammers, and in doing so at the expense of broadcaststations.The findingstherefore suggested that the cable operatorshave an economic incentive not to carry local signals. 
This fact led to the importantproblemsupportingthe Act: Withoutthe must-carryprovision, Congress concluded, there would be a threat to the continuedavailabilityof free local broadcasttelevision.62The eliminationof broadcasttelevision would in turnbe undesirablenot because broadcasters deserveprotectionas such-they do not-but because(a) broadcasttelevision is free and (b) thereis a substantialgovernmentinterestin assuringaccess to free programming,especially for people who cannot afford to pay for television. As Congress had it, the must-carryrules would ensure that the broadcaststationswould stay in business. 
The Court said that this purpose-the protection of access to free programmingthroughthe protectionof broadcaststations-was unrelatedto the content of broadcastexpression and was therefore legitimate. It was significantin this regardthat for Congressto seek to protectbroadcasters, Congressdid not have to favorany particularkindor speechor any particular point of view. To be sure, and importantly,Congress' descriptionof the purposesof the Act also referredto a content-basedconcern-to the effect that broadcastprogrammingis "animportantsourceof local news[,] public-affairs programmingand other local broadcast services critical to an informed electorate," and also to the judgment that noncommercialtelevision in particular"provideseducationalandinformationapl rogrammingto theNation's citizens."63On the Court'sview, however,these statementsdid not show that the law was content-basedT.heacknowledgmenotf certainvirtuesof broadcast programmingdid not mean that Congressenactedthe legislation because it regarded broadcast programming as substantively preferable to cable programming. 
Fourth,the Courtsaid thatstrictjudicial scrutinywas not requiredby the fact that the provisions (a) compel speech by cable operators,(b) favor broadcastprogrammersover cable programmersa,nd (c) single out certain members of the press for disfavoredtreatment.MThe fact that speech was mandatedwas irrelevantbecausethe mandatewas content-neutraalndbecause sortmightbe legitimate,see infratextaccompanyingnotes77-82 (discussingJusticeO'Connor'sanalysis), but thereis of course a presumptionagainstit. 
cable operatorswould not be forcedto altertheirown messages to respondto the broadcastsignals. So too, the Courtsaid that a speaker-basedregulation would not face special judicial hostility so long as it was content-neutralI.t was importantin this regardthatthe regulationof this particularindustrywas based on the special characteristicsof thatindustry-in short,"thebottleneck monopolypowerexercisedby cableoperatorsandthedangersthispowerposes to the viabilityof broadcasttelevision."6I5n such a case, the Courtconcluded, legislative selectivity would be acceptable. 
These conclusions are also of special importancefor the future. They reinforcethe pointthatCongressmay favorsome industriesover others.They also suggest thatCongressmay compelcompaniesto give access to speakers, at least so long as (a) the companiesthemselves are permittedto offer the messages they favor and (b) the access rights are given out on a contentneutralbasis. The TurnerCourtstressedthe governmentalgoal of ensuring access to free programmingfor viewers;but in upholdingthe Act, it also said thatit was legitimateto requireaccess forspeakers,so long as the requirement of contentneutralitywas met. 
Finally, the Court explored the question whether the must-carryrules would be acceptableas content-neutrarlegulationsof speech. Content-neutral regulationsmay well be invalid if they fail a kind of balancingtest.66The Courtconcludedthat "intermediatescrutiny"would be applied.67The Court said the appropriatetest, drawing on familiar cases,68would involve an exploration whether the regulation furthers an important or substantial governmentinterestandwhetherthe restrictionon FirstAmendmentfreedoms is no greaterthan necessaryto promotethat governmentinterest.The Court hadno difficultyin findingthreesubstantialinterests:(a) preservingfree local television, (b) promotingthe widespreaddisseminationof informationfroma multiplicityof sources, and (c) promotingfair competitionin the marketfor television programming.69On the Court's view, each of these was both importantand legitimate. 
What is of particularinterest is the fact that interests (a) and (b) are connectedwith Madisonianaspirations.Thusin an especially significantstep, the Courtsuggestedthata content-neutraelffortto promotediversitymay well be justified.In its most straightforwaredndorsementof the Madisonianview, the Court said that "assuringthat the public has access to a multiplicityof informationsources is a governmentalpurpose of the highest order,for it 
importantgovernmentinterestand be narrowlytailoredto achieve thatinterest). 
promotes values central to the First Amendment."70Hence the Court expressedspecial concern,in a perhapsself-consciousecho of RedLion, over the cable operator's "gatekeeper[]control over most (if not all) of the television programmingthat is channeledinto the subscriber'shome."71The Courtalso emphasized"[t]hepotentialfor abuseof this privatepower over a central avenue of communication"7.2 It stressed that the First Amendment "does not disable the governmentfrom taking steps to ensure that private interests not restrict, through physical control of a critical pathway of communication,the free flow of informationand ideas."73 
On the otherhand,the Courtthoughtthatit was impossibleto decide the case without a betterfactual recordthan had been developed thus far.74As it stood, the record was insufficient to show whetherthe must-carryrules would serve these legitimateinterests.Wouldlocal broadcastersactuallybe jeopardized without the must-carryrules? Here we should return to the possibility,of which the Courtwas surelyaware,thatthe rules were really an effort to favor the broadcastingindustry,not to help viewers. 
The Court suggested that courts should maintain a basic posture of deferenceto Congress'predictivejudgments.75In its view, judges shouldnot second-guessthose judgmentseven if they distrustthem. On the otherhand, Congress' judgments would face a form of independentjudicial review, designed to ensurethat Congresshad made "reasonableinferencesbased on substantialevidence."76The Courtthereforeremandedthe case to the lower court for factual findingson (a) the questionwhethercable operatorswould refuse significantnumbersof broadcaststationswithoutthe must-carryrules and (b) the question whetherbroadcaststations, if denied carriage,would deteriorateto a substantialdegreeor fail altogether. 
JusticeO'Connor'sdissentingopinion,joined by threeotherJustices,also deserves some discussion, since the opinion may have considerablefuture importancein view of the obviousinternalfragmentationof the Courton these questions.JusticeO'Connorinsistedabove all thatthe must-carryrules were based on content.77To reachthis conclusion,she investigatedthe Act and its historyto show thatthe nominallyneutralmeasureswere in fact designedto promote local programming. In her view, the existence of content discriminationwas not decisive against the must-carryrules. It was still necessaryto see whetherthe governmentcouldbringforwarda stronginterest, 
for this reason.See id. at 2473. 
and show that the regulationpromotedthat interest.But Justice O'Connor found thatthe governmentcould not meet its burden. 
In Justice O'Connor'sview, the interestin "localism"was insufficient justification.78In words that have considerablebearingon what government may do with any informationsuperhighway: 
It is for private speakersand listeners, not for the government,to decide what fractionof theirnews and entertainmenotught to be of a local characterand what fraction ought to be of a national (or international)one. And the same is trueof the interestin diversityof viewpoints: While the governmentmay subsidize speakers that it thinksprovidenovel pointsof view, it may not restrictotherspeakers on the theorythatwhat they say is moreconventional.79 
JusticeO'Connorreferredindependentlyto the interestsin public-affairs programmingand educationalprogramming,findingthat these interestsare "somewhatweightier"thanthe interestin localism. But in her view, "it is a difficult question whetherthey are compelling enough to justify restricting other sorts of speech."80Because of the difficulty of that question, Justice O'Connordid not say whether"theGovernmentcouldset some channelsaside for educationalor news programming."8(This is of coursea centralissue for the future.) 
In her view, the Act was too crudely tailored to be justified as an educational or public-affairs measure. The Act did not neutrally favor educationalor public-affairsprogrammings,ince it burdenedequally "CNN, C-Span, the Discovery Channel,the New InspirationalNetwork, and other channelswith as muchclaim as PBS to being educationalor relatedto public affairs."82Whether or not a neutrallaw favoring educationaland publicaffairsprogrammingcould surviveconstitutionalscrutiny,this Act could not, for it was insufficientlyneutral. 

I have noted that there have been two free speech traditionsand two principal models of free speech. The marketplacemodel eschews content regulation; it is animated by the notion of consumer sovereignty. The Madisonianmodel may permit and even welcome content regulation;it is rooted in an understandingof political sovereignty.There is now a third model-the Turnermodel-of what governmentmay do. An interesting question,not fully resolvedby Turneritself, hasto do with the extentto which the Turnermodel will incorporatefeaturesof its predecessors. 
The new model has four simple components. Under Turner, (a) governmentmay regulate(not merelysubsidize)new speech sourcesso as to ensureaccess for viewerswho would otherwisebe withoutfree programming and (b) governmentmay requireownersof speech sourcesto provideaccess to speakers, at least if the owners are not conventionalspeakerstoo; but (c) governmentmust do all this on a content-neutrablasis (at least as a general rule);but (d) governmentmay supportits regulationnot only by referenceto the provisionof "accessto free televisionprogramming"but also by invoking suchdemocraticgoals as the needto ensure"anoutletfor exchangeon matters of local concern"and "accessto a multiplicityof informationsources."83 
Remarkablye,veryJusticeon the Courtappearedto accept(a), (b), and(c) and partsof (d) (with minorqualifications)P.erhapsthe most notablefeature of the Court'sopinionis its emphasison the legitimacyandthe importanceof ensuringgeneralpublic (viewer)access to free programmingI.n this way, the Courtaccepted at least a modest aspect of the Madisonianideal, connected with both political equality and broad disseminationof information.This generalgoal is likely to have continuingimportancein governmentalefforts to control the informationsuperhighwayso as to ensureviewer and listener access. The TurnerCourthas putits stampof approvalon thatgoal. Recall in particularthatthe governmentjustifiedthe must-carryruleson the theorythat without those rules, ordinarybroadcasterswould be unableto survive. The consequence would be that people without cable would be without broadcastingat all. The Courtenthusiasticallyacceptedthis claim. It said that "to preserve access to free television programmingfor the 40 percent of Americanswithout cable" was a legitimateinterest.84This holding suggests thatthe governmentmay provideaccess not only throughsubsidies,but also throughregulation. 
On the otherhand,the Court'squite odd refusal85to distinguishbetween sections4 and 5 andits use of the presumptionagainstcontentdiscrimination seem to supportthe marketplacemodel. Certainlythe Courtdid not say that it would be receptiveto contentdiscriminationif the discriminationwere an effort to promoteattentionto public affairsand exposureto diverse sources. The Court did not claim or in any way imply that educationaland publicaffairsprogrammingcouldbe requiredconsistentlywiththe FirstAmendment. On the contrary,it suggestedthat it would view any contentdiscrimination, including content discrimination having these goals, with considerable skepticism.The result is a large degree of confusionwith respectto whether andhow governmentmaypromoteMadisonianaspirationsI. will returnto this point. 
The Court's major internaldispute involved the question whether the content neutrality of the must-carryrules was impeached by the history suggesting that Congress was particularly enthusiastic about local programming.This is an issue on which reasonablepeople may disagree;it turnslargely on the extent to which statementsin the legislative historywill be used to cast light on legislative goals. But the issue of content discriminationseems, on inspection, to rest on a matternot discussed by anyone on the Court;it is principallythat matter,not the legislative history, thatraises special issues aboutcontentdiscrimination. 
Moreconcretely:Fromthe standpointof traditionaflree speechargument, there is an obvious problemwith the analysis offered by the TurnerCourt. Section 4 and section 5 are quite different;they appearto have different justifications.In any case, differentcarriagerequirementsin the two sections, targeted to two different kinds of broadcasting,plainly reveal content discriminationT.he two sectionsexplicitlydefinetheircorrelativeobligations in termsof the nature,or content,of theprogrammingT.his is proofof content discrimination. 
How shouldthatdiscriminationbe handled?Underthe Madisonianview, there is all the differencein the worldbetween section 4 and section 5. As I havenoted,section5 imposescertaincarriagerequirementfsoreducationaland public-affairs stations, whereas section 4 imposes different carriage requirementsfor commercialstations.ForMadisonians,section5 standson far stronger ground, since it is apparentlyan effort to ensure education and attention to public issues. It seems to serve straightforwarddemocratic functions.This does not meanthatit is necessarilylegitimate.PerhapsJustice O'Connor'sresponse-to theeffect thatsection5 does not adequatelypromote thatgoal-is decisive as againsta Madisoniandefenseof section5. But section 4 appearsto standon farweakergroundfromtheMadisonianstandpointT.hus Madisonianswould distinguishbetweenthe two provisionsand would be far more hospitable toward section 5.86 
In fact, the Courtshouldhave analyzedthe two sections differently.The validity of section 4 turnedon whetherthe factualrecordcould supportthe Broadcasting and the Future of Cable Regulation, 17 HASTINGSCOMM.& ENT. L.J. 65, 91-95 (1994), for an argument that on remand, the district court should uphold section 5 even if it finds section 4 unconstitutional. 
Technologicaldevelopmentsenjoyedby so manypeople bringwith them extraordinarypromise and opportunities from the standpoints of both Madisonianism and the marketplace.From nearly108any point of view, nostalgiafor preexistingspeech marketsmakeslittle sense. 
The economic point is obvious,for the costs of transacting-of obtaining information and entering into mutually beneficial deals-will decrease enormously,and hence it will be mucheasierfor consumersto get what they want, whateverit is that they want. To say the least, a shoppingtrip-for groceries,books, medicines,housing,trialtranscriptsc,lothing-will be much simplerthan it now is; it may well be significantlysimplernow than it was when this Essay was first written.'09In these ways the new information technologies are a greatboon. 
At the same time, and equally important,there are potentialdemocratic gains, since communicationamong citizens and between citizens and their representativeswill be far easier.Citizensmay be able to expresstheirviews to public officials andto receive answersmoreeffectively.To statea view or ask a question on the issue of the day, no town meeting need be arranged. High-quality, substantive discussions may well be possible among large numbersof people;townmeetingsthataregenuinelydeliberativemay become commonplace.Votingmay occurthroughthe Internet.This is one of the most intriguingfeaturesof cyberspace.11I0t will be possible to obtaina greatdeal of informationaboutcandidatesandtheirpositions. 
In fact much of this has alreadyoccurred.The practiceof journalismhas changed in the sense that reporterscommunicateregularlywith readers.1"1 Before the 1994 elections, public librarycomputersdelivered considerable informationaboutthe candidatesvia the WorldWide Web of the Internet.112 The Web also allows people to see photographsof candidatesand to have access to dozens of pages of informationaboutthem andtheirpositions.The Webmay be used nationallyfor these purposesas earlyas 1996. A numberof elected officials-in the White House, the Senate,andthe House-now have e-mail addressesand communicatewith theirconstituentsin cyberspace. 
In Minnesota,five candidatesfor governorand three candidatesfor the senate participatedin debates on electronic mail.113 In 1993, President Clinton established connections with millions of e-mail users, putting his addressinto theirsystem andinvitingthemto give reactionson public issues. Candidatesgenerallyare obtainingand publicizinge-mail addresses.114Thus presidentialcandidateLamarAlexanderlaunchedhis campaignwith a forum via America Online, in which he spoke to all those who chose to join the forum.11'The Madisonianframeworkwas based partly on the assumption that large-scale substantive discussions would not be practicable.116 Technologymay well renderthatassumptionanachronistic. 
The result may be of particularbenefit for people of moderateor low income. People withoutsubstantialmeansmay nonethelessmaketheirviews heard. So too relativelypoor candidatesmay be able to communicatemore cheaply.117In this way the new communicationstechnologies may relieve some of the pressure for campaign finance restrictionsby promotingthe Madisoniangoal of political equality.118In the midst of economic inequality, perhapstechnological advancescan make political equality a more realistic goal. 119 
Moreover,educationaboutpublicissueswill be muchsimplerandcheaper. The government,andrelevantinterestgroups,will be able to statetheircases far moreeasily. And aftertouchinga few buttons,people will be able to have access to substantialinformationabout policy dilemmas-possible wars, environmentarlisksandregulationsl,egaldevelopmentst,rials,medicalreform, anda good deal more.Consideras simplyone example,the astonishingservice LEXIS Counsel Connect. With this service a lawyer can have access to essentially all proposedlaws. A lawyer can also join substantive"discussion groups,"dealingwith,forexample,the Simpsontrial,recenttax developments, risk regulation, securities arbitration,affirmative action, LEXIS Counsel Connect,cyberspace,theFirstAmendmentin cyberspace,andmuchmore.The proliferationof law-relateddiscussiongroupson law-relatedtopics is one tiny illustrationof a remarkableculturaldevelopment.Thus the Usenet includes morethan 10,000 discussiongroups,dealingwith particlephysics, ring-tailed lemurs,and Rush Limbaugh,amongcountlessothers.120 
Feb. 27, 1995, at 30-33. 

the "evil" of parties. See James Madison,Parties, NAT'L GAZETTEJa,n. 23, 1792, reprintedin 14 THE PAPERSOFJAMESMADISON197-98 (RobertA. Rutlandet al. eds., 1983). On the risksof governmentby referendum,see DAVIDB. MAGLEBY,DIREcT LEGISLATION(1984). 
calls for avoiding "informationhaves"and "have-nots." 
"bottom-up"quality.In contrastto the mass media, in which a large broadcasterspeaks to millions, the Internetallows individualcitizens to spreadnews or commentaryto one person, or to hundreds,or to thousands,or to millions. The problem of access to the media is in this respect greatly reduced. A 
At least from the standpointof the foundingera, andfrom the standpoint of democratictheory,the new technologyalso carrieswith it significantrisks. There are two majorproblems.The first is an absence of deliberation.The second is an increasein social balkanization. 
a. Absence of Deliberation 
The Madisonian view of course places a high premium on public deliberation, and it disfavors immediate and inadequately considered governmentalreactions to pressures from the citizenry1.21 The American polity is a republic,not a directdemocracy,andfor legitimatereasons;direct democracyis unlikelyto providesuccessfulgovernance,for it is too likely to be free from deliberationandundulysubjectto short-timereactionsandsheer manipulation.Fromthe inceptionof the Americansystem a largepoint of the system of republicanismhas been to "refineand enlarge the public view" throughthe system of representation.122 
This process of refinementand enlargementis endangeredby decreased costs of communication.As I have noted,discussionsin cyberspacemay well be both substantive and deliberative;electronic mail and the Internet in particular hold out considerable promise on this score.123 But communicationsbetweencitizensandtheirrepresentativemsayalsobe reactive to short-term impulses, and may consist of simple referenda results insufficientlyfilteredby reflectionand discussion. 
In the currentperiod,thereis thus a seriousrisk thatlow-cost or costless communicationwill increasegovernment'sresponsivenessto myopicorpoorly consideredpublicoutcries,or to sensationalisticor sentimentalanecdotesthat are a poor basis for governance.Althoughthe apparentpresence of diverse public voices is often celebrated,electoralcampaignsandtreatmentof public issues already suffer from myopia and sensationalism,124and in a way that compromises founding ideals. On this count it is hardly clear that new technologies will improvematters.They may even make things worse. The phenomenonof "talkradio"has achievedconsiderableattentionin this regard. It is surely desirableto provideforumsin which citizens can speakWithone decentralizedsystem has the distinctvirtueof promotingJeffersonianaspirationsto citizenship. 
OF REASON(1994). 

RHEINGOLDs,upra note 6. 
R. KINDER, NEWS THATMATTERS (1987); PHYLLISKANISS, MAKINGLOCALNEWS (1989). See also STEPHENBREYER,BREAKINGTHEVICIOUSCIRCLE33-51 (1993). another,especially on public issues. But it is not desirable if government officials are reactingto immediatereactionsto misleadingor sensationalistic presentationsof issues. 
Ross Perot's conception of an "electronic town meeting" is hardly consistentwith foundingaspirations,at least if the meetinghas the power to makedecisions all by itself. Democracyby soundbiteis hardlya perfectideal. New technologies may make democracy by soundbite far more likely. Everythingdependson how thosetechnologiesaredeployedin communicating to public officials. 
We can makethese pointsmorevivid with a thoughtexperiment.Imagine that throughthe new technologies, the communicationsoptions were truly limitless. Each personcould design his own communicationsuniverse.Each person could see those things that he wantedto see, and only those things. Insulationfrom unwelcome materialwould be costless. Choice of particular subjectsand points of view would be costless too. Wouldsuch a system be a communicationsutopia?Wouldit fulfill FirstAmendmentaspirations?125 
The answeris by no meanssimple.Of coursea systemof this kindwould have advantages.It might well overcomesome of the problemsproducedby extremes of wealth and poverty,at least insofar as poor people could both speak and hearfar more cheaply.But the aspirationto an informedcitizenry may not be well served.Underthe hypothesizedsystem,perhapsmost people would be rarelyor poorlyinformed.Perhapstheirconsumptionchoices would disserve democraticideals.126If the system of free expressionis designedto ensureagainstan "inertpeople,"we cannotknow,a priori, whethera system of well-functioningfree marketswould be desirable. 
b. Balkanizationand Self-Insulation 
The hypothesizedsystem would have anotherproblem:It would allow people to screenout ideas, facts, or accountsof facts thatthey finddisturbing. In the currentsystem, people are often confrontedwith ideas and facts that they find uncongenial. This is an importantdemocraticgood; it promotes educationanddiscussion.A well-functioningsystemof free expressionis one in which people areexposedto ideasthatcompetewith theirown, so thatthey can test their own views and understandotherperspectiveseven when they disagree.This processcan producea capacityfor empathyandunderstanding, so that other people are not dehumanizedeven across sharpdifferences in judgmentandperspective.Importanftormsof commonalityandrespectmight emerge simply by virtueof presentingthe perspectivesof othersfrom others' points of view. 

A system of individually designed communicationsoptions could, by contrast,result in a high degree of balkanization,in which people are not presentedwith new or contraryperspectives.Such a nationcould not easily satisfy democraticand deliberativegoals. In such a nation, communication among people with differentperspectivesmight be far more difficult than it now is; mutualintelligibilitymaybecomedifficultor even impossible.In such a nation, there may be little commonality among people with diverse commitments,as one groupcaricaturesanotheror understandsit by meansof simple slogans thatdebaserealityand eliminatemutualunderstanding. 
These suggestionsarefarfromhypotheticalT.heycapturea significantpart of the reality of currentcommunicationsin America. They create serious political risks. 
It is farfromclearhow governmentcan or shouldovercomethese various problems. Certainlygovernmentshould not be permittedto censor citizen efforts to communicatewith representatives,even if such communications carryrisksto deliberativeideals.It does seemclear,however,thatgovernment shouldbe cautiousaboutspurringon its own the use of new technologiesto promoteimmediate,massive public reactionsto popularissues. Government by referendum is at best a mixed blessing, with possible unfortunate consequenceswhereverit is tried.12T7he electronicmedia shouldnot be used to createa formof governmentby referendumR.egulatoryeffortsto facilitate communicationneed not be transformedinto an effortto abandonrepublican goals. 
Ratherthan spurringreferendain cyberspace,or referendaby soundbite, governmentshould seek to promotedeliberationandreflectionas partof the process of eliciting popularopinion.28 Any such efforts might well be made part of a general strategyfor turningnew communicationstechnologies to constitutionalends. As we have seen,electronicmailhas considerablepromise on this score. 
A large questionfor both constitutionalaw and public policy has yet to receive a full democraticor a judicial answer:To what extent, if any, do Madisonian ideals have a place in the world of new technologies, or in cyberspace?Some people think that the absence of scarcity eliminates the 
DELIBERATION1-2, 84 (1991). argumentfor governmentalregulation,at least if it is designed to promote attentionto publicissues, to increasediversity,or to raisethe qualityof public debate.'29If outlets are unlimited,why is regulationof any value? In the future,people will be able to listen to whateverthey want, perhapsto speak to whomeverthey choose. Oughtthis not to be a constitutionalideal? 
The questionis meantto answeritself, but perhapsenoughhas been said to show thatit hardlydoes that.Recallfirstthatstructurarlegulation,assigning propertyrights and making agreementspossible, is a preconditionfor wellfunctioningmarkets.Laissez-faireis a hopelessmisdescriptionof free markets. A large governmentrole, with coercive features, is requiredto maintain markets. Part of the role also requires steps to prevent monopoly and monopolisticpractices. 
Moreover,Madisoniangoals neednot be thoughtanachronisticin a period of infinite outlets. In a system of infinite outlets, the goal of consumer sovereigntymay well be adequatelypromoted.Thatgoal has a distinguished place in both law and public policy. But it should not be identifiedwith the Constitution's free speech guarantee. The Constitution does not require consumersovereignty;for the most part,the decision whetherto qualify or replacethatgoal with Madisonianaspirationsshouldbe madedemocratically rather than judicially. A democraticcitizenry armed with a constitutional guaranteeof free speechneednot see consumersovereigntyas its fundamental aspiration.13C0ertainlyit may choose consumersovereigntyif it likes. But it may seek instead to ensure high-qualityfare for children, even if this approachdepartsfrom consumersatisfaction.It may seek more generallyto promoteeducationaland public-affairsprogramming. 
The choice betweenthesealternativesshouldbe madethroughthepolitical branchesratherthanas a matterof constitutionalaw. In this Section, I try to supportthis basic conclusion,andto do so in a way thatis attunedto manyof the pathologiesof "command-and-controrl"egulation.The goal for the future is to incorporateMadisonianaspirationsin a regulatoryframeworkthatis alert to the difficulty of anticipatingfuturetastes and developments,that sees that incentives are better than commands,and that attemptsto structurefuture change ratherthanto dictateits content. 

principle with consumer sovereignty.See SUNSTEIN,supra note 12, at 77-81. The experience of the Bundesverfassungsgericht(GermanConstitutionalCourt)is of special interest,for the Court has selfconsciously decidedthatdemocraticaspirationsrequirethe governmentto regulatethe broadcastmediato create a forum for speakerswith a broadrange of interestsand opinions. See DAVID P. CURRIE,THE CONSTTUTIONOFTHEFEDERALREPUBLICOFGERMANY227-33 (1994); CASs R. SUNSTEIN,supra note 12, at 77-79 (discussingrecentBundesverfassungsgerichctases). 
It is commonly thought that viewers and listeners purchase a communicationsproduct,andthattheirpurchasedecisionsshouldbe respected; but this pictureis not altogetherright.The decisions of viewers and listeners are differentfrom most consumptiondecisions, in the sense thatviewers and listenersoftenpay nothingforprogramminga,ndoftenthey are,in a sense, the productthatis being sold. For muchcommercialprogramminga, key source of revenuesis advertisers,andprogrammersdeliverviewers to advertisersin returnfor money.Forthisreasonthebroadcastingmarketis not a conventional one in which people purchasetheirpreferredproducts.People's viewing and listening time is boughtand sold. 
There is an important consequence for the substantive content of broadcasting:What is providedin a communicationsmarketis not the same as what viewers would like to see. Advertisershave some power over the content of communication, for they may withdraw their support from disfavoredprogrammingT.heymaywithdrawtheirsupportnot simplybecause the programming does not attract viewers, but also because (a) the programmingis critical of the particularadvertisers,(b) it is critical of commerceis general,(c) it stirsup a controversialreactionfrom some partof the audience, or (d) it is "depressing"or creates "an unfavorablebuying atmosphere."There is a great deal of evidence that advertisercontrol does affect the content of programming."3C' ontroversialprogramshave been punished; presentationsof contested issues, such as abortion, have been affectedby advertisers'goals.132 
In an era of numerous options, the influence of advertising over programmingcontentshouldbe less troublesome,since controversialpointsof view shouldfindan outlet.Certainlythereis no suchproblemon the Internet. But therewill nonethelesscontinueto be a structuraplroblemin broadcasting markets,since viewers' demandfor programswill not be fully responsiblefor theprogramsthatareactuallyprovided.Manyimaginableproposalscouldhelp counterthisproblem.Suchproposalsshouldnotbe foundunconstitutionaelven if consumersovereigntyis the overridingpolicy goal.'33 
If we put the questionsraisedby advertisersto one side, we might urge thatthereis a decisive argumentin favorof the marketplacemodelandagainst Madisonianism. The marketplace ideal values "choice," whereas the 12, at 62-66. 
Madisonianalternativecan be seen to reflecta formof dangerouspaternalism, or disrespectfor people's diversejudgmentsabout entertainmentoptions.'34 PerhapsMadisonianismis illiberalinsofar as it does not respect the widely divergentconceptionsof the good thatare reflectedin consumptionchoices. 
The argumentis certainlyplausible.In mostarenas,consumersareallowed to choose as they wish, and governmentalinterferencerequires special justification.But in this context, at least, the argumentfrom choice is quite unconvincing,for it wronglytakespeople's consumptionchoices as definitive or exhaustiveof "choice."In fact the notionof "choice"is a complex one that admits of no such simple understanding.'3I5n a democraticsociety, people makechoices as citizens too. They makechoices in democraticarenasas well as in storesandbeforetheircomputers.Whatthosechoices aredependson the context in which they are made. 
For this reason,the insistenceon respectfor "choice,"as a defense of the marketplacemodel, sets up the legal problem in a question-beggingway. People do make choices as consumers,and these choices should perhapsbe respected. But those choices are heavily geared to the particularsetting in whichthey aremade-programmingconsumptionT.heydo notrepresentsome acontextual entity called "choice." In fact there is no such acontextual entity. 
The questionis not whetheror not to respect"choice,"but what sorts of choices to respect. More particularly,the question is whether to allow democraticchoices to makeinroadson consumptionchoices. In a free society, consumptionchoices shouldusuallybe respected.ButtheConstitutiondoes not requirethis result, and in some settings democraticjudgments contraryto consumption choices are legitimate. For example, a requirement that broadcastersprovidefree mediatime for candidatesmightwell receive broad publicsupport,even if viewerswould,at the relevanttime, opt for commercial programming."37There should be no constitutional barrier to such a requirement. 
The centralpoint is thatin theircapacityas citizens assessingthe speech market,people may well make choices, or offer consideredjudgments,that diverge from their choices as consumers.138Acting through their elected representativest,he publicmaywell seek to promote(forexample)educational KRATrENMAKER& POWE,supra note 25. 
1, 78-79 (1995); AmartyaSen, InternalConsistencyof Choice, 61 ECONOMETRIC4A95 (1993). 
simply change the channel,or cease watchingat all. This may be a good objection,as a matterof policy, to anyparticularinitiative.The importantpointis thatit is anobjectionof policy,notof constitutionalaw. 
Preferencesand Politics, 20 PHIL.& PUB. AFF. 3 (1991). programming,attention to public issues, and diverse views. Perhaps the public-or a majorityactingin its democraticcapacity-believes thateducation and discussionof public issues are bothindividualand collective goods. Any system of expressionhas culturalconsequences;it helps createand sustaina certain kind of culture. Perhapsthe public wants to ensure a culture of a certain sort, notwithstandingconsumptionchoices.139Perhaps it seeks to protectchildrenandadolescents,andsees regulationof broadcastingas a way of accomplishingthatgoal. Perhapspeoplebelieve thattheirown consumption choices are less thanideal, andthatforjustice-regardingor altruisticreasons, orbecauseof theirbasiccommitmentsandjudgments,regulationsshouldforce broadcastersor cable operatorsto improveon existing low-qualityfare. 
Perhapspeople seek andhencechoose to ensuresomethinglike a political community,not in the sense of a place where everyone believes the same thing, but in the sense of a polity in which people are generallyawareof the issues that are important o the futureof the polity.Perhapspeople thinkthat thebroadcastingmediashouldhave a degreeof continuitywiththe educational system, in the sense that broaddisseminationof knowledge and exposureto different views are part of what citizens in a democraticpolity deserve. Perhapspeople believe that many citizens do not value certainhigh-quality programmingpartlybecause they have not been exposed to it, and perhaps experimentsare designedto see if tastesfor such programmingcan be fueled throughexposure.140 
Wouldmeasuresstimulatedby suchthoughtsbe objectionablei,llegitimate, or even unconstitutional?Wouldthey interferein an impermissibleway with somethingcalled "choice"?I do not believe so. Surelyany sucheffortsshould be policed by courts, so as to ensurethat governmentis not discriminating againstor in favor of certainviewpoints.The mere fact that the democratic majorityseeks to overcomeconsumptionchoices is not legitimatingby itself; the democratic judgment may be unacceptableif it involves viewpoint discriminationor content discriminationsuggestive of viewpoint bias. But rightlyconceived,ourconstitutionahleritagedoes notdisablethepublic,acting throughtheconstitutionaclhannels,fromimprovingtheoperationof the speech market in the ways that I have-suggested. Whetherit should do so is a questionto be answereddemocraticallyratherthanjudicially. 
If I were to choose between living in a society which enjoys freedomof expression,but not havingthe rightmyself, or enjoyingthe rightin a society whichdoes not have it, I wouldhave no hesitationin judging thatmy own personalinterestis betterservedby the firstoption. Id. at 39. 
et al., A Theoryof Fads Fashion, Customand CultureChangeas InformationalCascades, 100 J. POL. ECON.992 (1992) (theorizingthatbecausedecisionsbaseduponlimitedinformationarefragile,relatively unimportantnew informationmay radicallyshift social equilibria). 
An importantissue forthe futureinvolvestheuse of old analogiesin novel settings. The new technologies will greatly increase the opportunitiesfor intrusive, fraudulent,harassing,threatening,libelous, or obscene speech.141 Witha few brieftouchesof a finger,a speakeris now be ableto communicate to thousandsor even millions of people-or to pinpointa message,perhapsa commercial,harassing,threateninginvasivemessage,to a particularperson.A libelous message, or grotesque invasions of privacy, can be sent almost costlessly. Perhaps reputationsand lives will be easily ruined or at least damaged.Therearedifficultquestionsaboutthe extentto which an ownerof a computerservice mightbe held liable for what appearson that service.142 
At this stage, it remainsunclearwhetherthe conventionallegal standards should be alteredto meet such problems.For the most part,those standards generallyseem an adequatestartandmustsimplybe adaptedto new settings. For purposesof assessing cyberspace,thereareoften apt analogieson which to draw.In fact the legal culturehas no way to thinkaboutthe new problems except via analogies.The analogiesare built into our very language:e-mail, electronicbulletinboards,cyberspace,cyberspaces,'43and much more.1" 
Thus, for example, ordinarymail provides a promisingfoundationon which to build the assessmentof legal issues associatedwith electronicmail. It is farfromclearthatthe standardsfor libelousor fraudulentcommunication must shift with the new technologies. To be sure, there will be new and somewhatvexing occasions for evaluatingthe old standardsJ.udgesmay not understandthe novel situations,especially those involving the Internet.In particular,the low cost of sending and receiving electronic mail, and of sending it to thousands or millions of people, may produce some new developmentsandputhighpressureon old categories.Certainlyit is likelythat new and unanticipatedproblemswill ariseanda degreeof judicialcautionis thereforedesirablein invokingthe FirstAmendment.But it is by no means clear thatthe basic principleswill themselveshave to be muchchanged. 
I have noted thatthe governmenthas said that "universalaccess" is one of its goals for the informationsuperhighway.The question of access has several dimensions. To some extent it is designed to ensure access to broadcastingoptionsfor viewersandlisteners-the centralproblemin Turner. Here a particularconcernis thatpoorpeople shouldnot be deprivedof access to a valuable good. Currently the expense of Internet connections is prohibitively high for many families. This may entail a form of disenfranchisementand to some extent the problemis to ensure access for certainspeakerswho wantto reachpartof the viewing or listeningpublic.In cyberspace,of course, people areboth listenersand speakers. 
Perhapsthe goal of universalviewer or listeneraccess shouldbe viewed with skepticism.The governmentdoes not guaranteeuniversalaccess to cars, or housing, or food, or even healthcare.It may seem puzzlingto suggestthat universalaccess to informationtechnologiesis an importantsocial goal. But the suggestioncan be shown to be less puzzlingthanit appears.Suppose,for example, that a certainnetworkbecomes a principalmeans by which people communicate with their elected representatives; suppose that such communicationsbecomea principalpartof publicdeliberationandin thatway ancillaryto the rightto vote. Supposetoo thatcompaniesengage in a formof "electronicredlining,"in whichtheybypasspoorerareas,bothruralandin the inner city.145We know that a poll tax is unconstitutionalbecause of its harmful effects on political equality.16 On a broadly similar principle, universalaccess to the networkmightbe thoughtdesirable.To be sure, such access would be most unlikelyto be constitutionallymandated,since the right to vote is technicallynot involved. But universalaccess could be seen to be partof the goal of political equality.More generally,universalaccess might be necessary if the networkis to serve its intendedfunction of promoting broaddiscussionbetweencitizensandrepresentativesI.t is notablethatat least seven million Americans,most of whom arepoor,lack telephones,andhence are withoutbasic access.147 
The point might be generalized.For any particularspeaker,part of the advantage of having access to a certain means of communicationis that everyone,or almosteveryone,or a wide rangeof people,can be reached.The Postal Service, for example, is justifiedin parton the groundthat a national systemof mail is necessaryor at leasthelpfulfor thosewho sendmail;we can be assuredthatany lettercan reacheveryone.The claim is controversial.But perhaps a requirementof universal access can be justified not as an inefficient"48effort to subsidize people who would be without service, but on the quite differentgroundthatuniversalservice is a way of promotingthe at 25, 26. 

access. communicativeinterestsof thosewho alreadyhave service.The interestsof the lattergroupmay well be promotedby ensuringthatthey can reacheveryone, or nearlyeveryone. 
Arguments of this kind have been used throughoutthe history of telecommunicationsregulation.For most of the twentiethcentury,therehave been cross-subsidies,as local companieswith local monopolieshave charged high prices to certain customers (usually businesses) with which they subsidizedless profitableservices.Perhapsa similarmodel would makesense for moderntechnologies. The issue is alreadyreceiving considerablepublic attention.149 
There are, however, significant inefficiencies in this model of crosssubsidization,150and a system of open-endedcompetitionmay well be better thanone basedon universalaccess.It maybe thatopen-endedcompetitionwill provideuniversalaccess in any case, or somethingvery close to it. Or it may be thatopen-endedcompetition,combinedwith selective subsidies,would be betterthanthe regulatoryapproach.This questioncannoteasily be answered in the abstract.Certainlydebateover universalaccess shouldnot be resolved by constitutionalfiat. This is an areafor public debateand a large degree of experimentation. 
In general, any regulatorycontrols should take the form of flexible incentives ratherthan rigid commands.Command-and-controslystems are usuallyineffectivein achievingtheirown goals;they tendto promoteinterestgroup power, in which well-organized private groups are able to use governmentalauthorityto redistributewealth or opportunitiesin their favor; they also tend to be inefficient.151 
I cannot discuss this issue in detail here, but the explosion of new technologiesreinforcesthe point.It is predictablethatownersof some services will attemptto obtain governmentalaid to disadvantageactual or potential competitors.152 Especially in an era of rapid and only partly foreseeable technologicalchange,the government'sbasic duty is to providea framework for competitive development,153ratherthan specificationof end-states.Any 
COLUMJ.. ENvTL.L. 171 (1988). A vigorouspopulartreatmentis PHILIPK. HOWARDT,HEDEATHOF COMMOSNENSE(1994). FRIEDRICAH. HAYEKT,HECONSTITUTIOFNLIBERT(Y1960), can well be read as a sustainedattackon command-and-controrlegulation,and whatHayek says bearsdirectlyon efforts to regulateemergingtechnologies. 
54-55. 
note 151. suchspecificationswill likelyprovecounterproductivien lightof developments that cannotnow be predicted. 
This is not to say that governmentregulationhas no place, or even that government should restrict itself to the task of ensuring well-functioning markets.But even good Madisoniansshouldinsist thatrigid dictatesoughtto be avoided. Regulationwill do far better if it takes the form of incentives ratherthanmandates.Consider,as possible forerunnersof futureapproaches, the FCC'suse of auctionsystemsaccompaniedby the grantof "points"toward licensing'54 for preferredlicensees. Consider too the use of government subsidies to public broadcastingor to certainhigh-qualityprograms,or the transfer of resources from commercial broadcastersfor the benefit of noncommercial,educational,or public-affairsprogrammingI.nitiativesof this sortwould not mandateparticularresultsbutinsteadwouldcreatepressuresto improvethe speech market. 
C. Law 
The ultimate shape of constitutionalconstraintson regulation of the electronic media cannot be foreseen. Too many new possibilities will come into view. Too manydistinctionswill becomerelevant.Consider,for example, the fact that for many dozens of years, there has been a clear difference between two different kinds of communication. The first is ordinary broadcastingor publishing,in whichan ownermakesavailablea certainrange of communications;offers that range of communicationsas an indivisible package for hundreds, thousands, or millions of subscribers;and sells advertisingtime for commercialinterests.The second involves the mail, in which one persontypicallysendsa messageto another,or in whichone person might send a message to a groupof people;in any case mail involves highly differentiated,ratherthan indivisible, communication,in the sense that no single "package"is made availableto wide rangesof people. Moreover,no advertisersneed be involved. Many of the complexities in free speech law have arisenfromthis distinction,thoughthe implicationsof the distinctionare of course sharplycontested. 
New technologiesmay weakenor even undothe distinctionbetweenthese two categories.In the long-termfuture,the "mail"analogy may become the more apposite one, as it becomes simplerand cheaperfor a personto send communicationsto any particularperson,or to a large group of people, on such terms as he chooses. Communicationsmay decreasinglycome in an indivisiblepackage,andincreasinglytaketheparticularformthattheparticular actorschoose. Perhapsin the future,"broadcastingw"ill increasinglyhavethis women applicants.See JohnMcMillan,Selling SpectrumRights,J. ECONP.ERSP.,Summer1994, at 145. characteristic.Often the purchaserof the relevantinformationwill pay for it without the intermediation of advertisers.'55In such a future, the constitutionalissues will takeon differentdimensions.A key questionwill be the extentto whichthe owneror managerof the "mail"may be held liable for injuriesthatoccuras a resultof use of some service.It will be plausibleto say thatjust as the United States and FederalExpressare not liable for harms causedby packagesthey carry,so too the ownerof an electronicserviceought not to pay damagesfor harmsthatownerscannotreasonablybe expected to preventor control.But it is far too soon to offer particularjudgmentson the issues that will arise. 
It is nonethelesspossible to describecertaincategoriesof regulationand to set out some generalguidelinesabouthow theymightbe approachedI. have suggested that existing law provides principlesand analogies on which it makes sense to draw. An exploration of new problems confirms this suggestion. It shows that current categories can be invoked fairly straightforwardlyto make sense of likely futuredilemmas. 
A largelesson mayemergefromthediscussion.Oftenparticipantsin legal disputes,andespeciallyin constitutionadlisputes,disagreesharplywithrespect to high-level,abstractissues;thedebatebetweenMadisoniansandmarketplace advocates is an obvious illustration.But sometimes such disputantscan converge,or narrowtheirdisagreementa greatdeal, by grapplingwith highly particularproblems.In otherwords, debateover abstractionsmay conceal a potential for productivediscussion and even agreementover particulars.156 Perhapsthis is a strategythroughwhichwe mightmakemuchprogressin the next generationof free speech law. 
Many actual and imaginablelegislative efforts are designed to ensure competitionin the new communicationsmarkets.There is no constitutional problemwith such efforts.'57The only qualificationis thatsome such efforts might be seen as subterfugefor content regulation,disguised by a claimed need to promote monopoly; but this should be a relatively rare event. If governmentis genuinelyattemptingto preventmonopolisticpractices,andto offer a structurein which competitioncan take place, there is no basis for constitutionalcomplaint.HereFirstAmendmenttheoristsof widely divergent views might be broughtinto agreement. 

competition). 
It is predictablethatgovernmentmightseek to assist certaintechnologies that offer great promise for the future.Some such efforts may in fact be a result of interest-grouppressure.But in general, there is no constitutional obstacleto governmenteffortsto subsidizepreferredcommunicationssources. Perhapsgovernmentbelievesthatsometechnologicalinnovationsareespecially likely to do well, or thatthey couldreceiveparticularlyvaluablebenefitsfrom national assistance. At least so long as there is no reason to believe that governmentis favoring speech of a certaincontent,efforts of this kind are unobjectionableas a matterof law.158They may be objectionableas a matter of policy, since governmentmay makebadjudgmentsreflectingconfusionor factionalinfluence;but thatis a differentissue. 
In her dissentingopinion in Turner,JusticeO'Connorsuggestedthatthe appropriateresponse to governmentdesire for programmingof a certain contentis not regulationbut insteadsubsidization.15T9his idea fits well with the basic model for campaign finance regulation, set out in Buckley v. Valeo.'60 It also fits with the idea, found in Rust v. Sullivan,161 that the governmentis unconstrainedin its powerto subsidizesuchspeechas it prefers. Hencethereshouldbe no constitutionaolbjectionto governmenteffortsto fund public broadcasting,to pay for high-qualityfare for children,or to support programmingthat deals with public affairs.'62Perhapsgovernmentmight do this for certainuses of the Internet. 
To be sure, it is doubtfulthatRustwould be takento its logical extreme. Couldthe governmentfundtheDemocraticConventionbutnottheRepublican Convention?Could the governmentannouncethat it would fund only those public-affairsprogramsthatspoke approvinglyof currentgovernmentpolicy? If we take the First Amendmentto ban viewpointdiscrimination,fundingof this kind should be held to be improperlymotivated.On the other hand, governmentsubsidiesof educationalandpublic-affairsprogrammingneed not 
governmentfunding of the Corporationfor Public Broadcastingand the National Endowmentfor the Humanities.In principle,such fundingis justifiedin light of the "publicgood" featuresof the relevant productsand in light of the possibility thatthe fundedsourcescan increaseopportunitiesfor preference formationby providinggreaterexposureto high-qualitymaterial.See ANDERSON,supra note 135, at 149. But the ultimatevalue of fundingdependson a rangeof morepracticaland empiricalissues thatcannot be decideda priori, includingthe actualproductsthatresult,the opportunitiesto provideprivatefunding instead,and the alternativeuse of governmentmoney. raise serious risks of viewpoint discrimination. It therefore seems unexceptionableforgovernments,hortof viewpointdiscriminationt,o subsidize those broadcasterswhose programmingit prefers,even if any suchpreference embodies content discrimination. So too, government might promote "conversations"or fora on e-mail thatinvolve issues of publicimportance,or that attemptto promoteeducationalgoals for childrenor even adults.163 
Not OtherwiseGet Carriage 
Suppose that a particularcommunicationscarrier has room for five hundredchannels;supposethatfourhundredchannelsarefilled, but thatone hundredare left open. Wouldit be legitimatefor governmentto say thatthe one hundredmustbe filled by stationsthatwould otherwisebe unablebe pay for carriage?Let us suppose that the stations would be chosen througha content-neutraslystem, such as a lottery.Fromthe FirstAmendmentpoint of view, this approachseems acceptable.The governmentwould be attempting to ensure access for speakerswho would otherwisebe unable to reach the audience.It is possible thatas a matterof policy, governmentshouldhave to providesome paymentto the carrierin returnfor the access requirementB.ut theredoes not seem to be a FirstAmendmentproblem. 

Stations,Filling Vacancieswith a LotterySystemor Timesharing In her dissenting opinion in Turner,Justice O'Connor suggested the possibility that carrierscould be requiredto set aside certainchannelsto be filled by a randommethod.64The advantageof this approachis thatit would promote access for people who would otherwise be denied carriage, but without involving governmentin decisions about preferredcontent. This approachshouldraise no FirstAmendmentdifficulties. 
ConventionalMarketFailure,But ToEnsure Universalor NearUniversalConsumerAccess to Networks 
The protection of broadcastersin Turnerwas specifically designed to ensure continued viewer access to free programming.Notably, the Court permittedgovernmentto achieve this goal throughregulationratherthan with elections). 
throughsubsidy.Of coursesubsidyis the simplerandordinarilymoreefficient route. If governmentwants to make sure that all consumershave access to communicationsnetworks,why shouldgovernmentnot be requiredto pay to allow such access, on a kind of analogueto the food stamp program?The ordinaryresponse to a problemof access is not to fix prices but insteadto subsidize people who would otherwisebe withoutaccess. The TurnerCourt apparentlybelieved thatit is constitutionallyacceptablefor the governmentto ensure that industry (and subscribers),ratherthan taxpayers, provide the fundingfor those who would otherwiselack access. 
The preciseimplicationsof this holdingremainto be seen. It is impossible to foresee the range of structuralregulationsthat might be proposedin an effortto ensurethatall or almostall citizenshave access to free programming or to some communicationsnetwork,includinganypartsof the "informational superhighway."Some such regulationsmight in fact be based on other,more invidious motives, such as favoritismtowarda particularset of suppliers;as we have seen, this may well be true of the measurein Turneritself. The Turner decision means that courts should review with some care any governmentalclaim thatregulationis actuallybased on an effort to promote free access. But the key pointhereis thatif the claim can be madeout on the facts, structuralregulationshouldbe found acceptable. 

Harassing Broadcastingor Messages 
New technologieshave greatlyexpandedthe opportunityto communicate obscene, libelous, violent, or harassingmessages-perhaps to generalgroups via stationson (for example)cable television,perhapsto particularpeople via electronic mail.'65Invasions of privacy are far more likely. The Internet poses special problemson these counts. As a generalrule, any restrictions should be treatedlike those governingordinaryspeech, with ordinarymail providingthe best analogy.If restrictionsarenarrowlytailored,andsupported by a sufficiently strongrecord,they shouldbe upheld. 
Considerin this regardthe highly publicizedcase involving "cyberporn" at the University of Michigan.166A studentis alleged to have distributeda fictional story involving a fellow student,explicitly named,who was, in the story, raped, tortured,and finally killed. The first question raised here is whetherstateor federallaw providesa causeof actionfor conductof this sort. Perhapsthe story amountsto a threat,or a form of libel, or perhapsthe most plausiblestatelaw claim wouldbe basedon intentionalinflictionof emotional 
ArrestedAfterSending ViolentFiction over Internet,N.Y TIMES,Feb. 11, 1995, at A10. distress. The next question is whether,if a state law claim is available,the awardof damageswould violatethe FirstAmendment.At firstglance it seems that the question shouldbe resolvedin the same way as any case in which a writeruses a real person'sname in fiction of this sort. And it certainlydoes not seem clearthatthe FirstAmendmentshouldprohibitstatesfromawarding damagesfor conductof this kind, so long as no politicalissue is involved.167 Perhapsthe ease of massive distributionof such materials,which can be sent to much of the worldwith the touchof a button,arguesin favorof loosening the constitutionalconstraintson compensatorydamages. 
Whatof a regulatoryregimedesignedto preventinvasionof privacy,libel, unwantedcommercial messages, and obscenity,168harassment,or infliction of emotional distress?Some such regulatoryregime will ultimatelymake a greatdeal of sense. The principalobstaclesare thatthe regulationsshouldbe both clear and narrow.It is easy to imaginea broador vague regulation,one thatwould seize uponthe sexuallyexplicitor violentnatureof communication to justify regulationthatis farbroaderthannecessary.Moreover,it is possible to imaginea situationin whichliabilitywas extendedto anyowneror operator who could have no knowledgeof the particularmaterialsbeing sent.169The underlyingquestion,having to do with efficient risk allocation,involves the extent to which a carriermight be expected to find and to stop unlawful messages; thatquestiondependsuponthe relevanttechnology. 
Considermore particularlypossible efforts to controlthe distributionof sexually explicit materialson the Internet.Insofaras the governmentseeks to ban materials that are technically obscene, and imposes civil or criminal liability on someone with specific intent to distributesuch materials,there should be no constitutionalproblem. By hypothesis, these materials lack constitutionalprotection,andmaterialslackingconstitutionaplrotectioncanbe bannedin cyberspaceas everywhereelse. On the otherhand,manyactualand imaginablebills would extendbeyondthe technicallyobscene,to include(for example) materialsthat are "indecent,"or "lewd,"or "filthy."17T0erms of this sort createa seriousrisk of unconstitutionavlaguenessor overbreadth.171 At least at first glance, they appearunconstitutionaflor thatreason. 
telecommunicationsprovidersof obscene materials. 
Decency Act of 1995, in the U.S. Senate.In an effort to controldigitalpornographyi,t originallywould have made all telecommunicationsprovidersdoing business in the United States (from the telephone companies,all the way down to offices thatuse local areanetworks)liablefor the contentof anythingsent over theirnetworks.As it emergedfromcommittee,S. 314 exemptedcarriersfrom liability.Id.; see also PeterH. Lewis, Despite a New Planfor CoolingIt Off, CybersexStaysHot, N.Y.TIMESM,ar.26, 1995, at 1, 34 (discussingS. 314 and its potentialunconstitutionality) 
Children'sTelevisionv. FCC, 11 F.3d 170 (D.C. Cir. 1993);Action for Children'sTelevisionv. FCC,932 F.2d 1504 (D.C. Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 112 S. Ct. 1281 (1992). 
The bestjustificationfor expansivetermsof this kindwould be to protect children from harmful materials. It is true that the Internet contains pornographyaccessible to children,some of it coming from adultsexplicitly seeking sexual relationswithchildren.Thereis in fact materialon the Internet containing requests to childrenfor their home addresses.'72Solicitationsto engage in unlawfulactivityareunprotectedby the FirstAmendment,whether they occur on the Internetor anywhere else. For this reason, regulation designedto preventthese sortsof requestsshouldnotbe held unconstitutional. 
But when governmentgoes beyond solicitation,and bans "indecent"or "filthy"materialin general,the questionis quitedifferent.Herea centralissue is whetherthe governmenthas chosenthe leastrestrictivemeansof preventing the relevantharmsto children.In a case involving"dial-a-porn,"for example, the Court struck down a ban on "indecent"materialson the ground that childrencould be protectedin other ways.173On the Madisonianview, this outcome is questionable, since "dial-a-porn"ranks low on the First Amendmenthierarchy.But underexisting law, it seems clear thatin orderto supportan extensionbeyondobscenity,Congresswouldhaveto show thatless restrictive alternativeswould be ineffectual.The question then becomes a factual one: What sorts of technologicaloptions exist by which parentsor otherscan providethe relevantprotection?To answerthis question,it would be necessaryto explorethe possibilityof creating"locks"withinthe Internet, for use by parents,or perhapsfor use by those who write certain sorts of materials.174 
Differentquestionswouldbe raisedby the impositionof civil or criminal liability not on the distributorshaving specific intent to distribute,but on carrierswho have no knowledgeof the specific materialsat issue, and could not obtain such knowledge without considerabledifficulty and expense. It might be thought that the carriershould be treatedlike a publisher,and a publishercan of course be held liable for obscene or libelous materialseven if the publisherhas no specific knowledgeof the offending material.But in light of the relativelylow costs of searchin the worldof magazineand book publishing,it is reasonableto thinkthat a publishershould be chargedwith havingcontrolover the contentof its publications.Perhapsthe samecannotbe saidfor the ownerof an electronicmailservice.Herethe properanalogymight instead be the carriageof mail, in which owners of services are not held criminallyor civilly liable for obscene or libelous materials.The underlying theoryis thatit wouldbe unreasonableto expectsuchownersto inspectall the materialsthey transporta,ndtheimpositionof criminalliability,at least,would have an unacceptablyharmfuleffect upon a desirableservice involving the 
Heart of the First Amendmentin the Age of InteractiveMedia, 104 YALEL.J. 1619, 1632-34 (1995). distributionof a greatdeal of protectedspeech.If carrierswere held liable for distributingunprotectedspeech,therewouldinevitablybe an adverseeffect on the disseminationof protectedspeech too. In other words, the problemwith carrierliability,in this context,is thatit would interferewith protectedas well as unprotectedspeech. 
How do these points bear on the FirstAmendmentissue with respectto the Internet?Some of the services thatprovideaccess to the Internetshould not themselvesbe treatedas speakers;they areprovidersof speech, but their own speech is not at issue. This pointis closely relatedto the debatein Turner about the speech status of cable carriers.But whether or not a carrieror provideris a speaker,a harmfuleffect on speechwouldraiseFirstAmendment issues. We can see this point with an analogy. Certainlyit would not be constitutionalto say that truckowners will be criminallyliable for carrying newspaperscontainingarticlescriticalof the President.Sucha measurewould be unconstitutionailn its purposesandin its effects, even if the truckowners are not speakers.Fromthis we can see thata criminalpenaltyon carriersof materialthat is independentlyprotectedby the First Amendmentshould be unconstitutionalT.hus a criminalpenaltycould not be imposedfor providing "filthy"speech, at least if "filthy"speech is otherwiseprotected. 
But a penaltyimposedon otherwiseunprotectedmaterialsraisesa different question. Suppose that the governmentimposes criminalliability on carriers or providersof admittedlyobscenematerialon the Internet.The adverseeffect on unprotectedspeechshouldnotby itself be foundto offendthe Constitution, even if therewouldbe a harmfuleconomiceffect, andeven unfairness,for the providerof the service. Insteadthe constitutionalquestionshouldturnon the extent of the adverse effects on the disseminationof materials that are protectedby the Constitution.If, for example, the imposition of criminal liabilityfor the distributionof unprotectedspeechhad seriousharmfuleffects for the distributionof protectedspeech,the FirstAmendmentissue would be quite severe. But thatquestioncannotbe answeredin the abstract;it depends on what the relevantrecordshows with respectto any such adverseeffects. 
To answer that question,we need to know whethercarrierliability, for unprotectedspeech, has a significantadverseeffect on protectedspeech as well. We need to know,in short,whetherthe properanalogyis to a publisher or instead to a carrierof mail. It is thereforeimportantto know whethera carriercould, at relativelylow expense, filterout constitutionallyunprotected material,or whether,on the contrary,the impositionof criminalliability for unprotectedmaterialwould drive legitimatecarriersout of business,or force them to try to undertakeimpossibleor unrealisticallyexpensive "searches." The answer to this question will depend in large part on the state of technology. ToEnsurePublic 
Affairsand EducationalProgramming 
It can readilybe imaginedthatCongressmightseek to promoteeducation via regulationor subsidy of new media. It might try to ensure attentionto public affairs. Suppose, for example, that Congresssets aside a numberof channelsfor public-affairsandeducationalprogrammingo,n thetheorythatthe marketplaceprovidestoo muchcommercialprogrammingT.his notionhas in fact been under active considerationin Congress.Thus a recent bill would have requiredall telecommunicationscarriersto provideaccess at preferential ratesto educationaland healthcare institutions,state and local governments, public broadcast stations, libraries and other public entities, community newspapers,and broadcastersin the smallestmarkets.175 
Turnercertainlydoes not standfor the propositionthat such efforts are constitutional.By hypothesis,any such regulationwould be content-based.It would thereforemeet with a high level of judicial skepticism.On the other hand, Turner does not authoritatively suggest that such efforts are unconstitutionalT.he Courtdid not itself say whetherit would acceptcontent discriminationdesigned to promoteMadisoniangoals. Certainlythe opinion suggests thatthe government'sburdenwouldbe a significantone. But it does not resolve the question. 
It is notablethatJusticeO'Connor'sopinionappearsquitesensibleon this point, and she leaves the issue open.176 As I have noted, her principal argumentis thatthe "must-carryr"ulesaretoo crude.Certainlycrudelytailored measuresgive reason to believe that interest-grouppressures,ratherthan a legitimateeffort to improveeducationaland public-affairsprogramming,are at work.But if the relevantmeasuresactuallypromoteMadisoniangoals, they should be upheld. There is of course reasonto fear that any such measures have less legitimatepurposesand functions,and hence a degree of judicial skepticism is appropriate.But narrowmeasures, actually promotingthose purposes,are constitutionallylegitimate. 
VI. MADISON IN CYBERSPACE? 
Do Madisonianideals have an enduringrole in Americanthoughtabout freedomof speech?The SupremeCourthas not saidfor certain;its signalsare quite mixed; and the existence of new technologies makes the question differentand far more complex than it once was. It is conceivablethat in a worldof newly emergingandcountlessoptions,the marketwill proveliterally unstoppable,as novel possibilities outstripeven well-motivatedgovernment controls. 
If so, this result should not be entirely lamented. It would be an understatementto say that a world in which consumers can choose from limitless choices has manyadvantages,not leastfromthe Madisonianpointof view. If choices are limitless, people interestedin politics can see and listen to politics;perhapsthey can even participatein politics,andin ways thatwere impossiblejust a decadeago. But thatworldwouldbe farfromperfect.It may increase social balkanization.It may not promote deliberation,but foster insteada series of referendain cyberspacethatbetrayconstitutionalgoals. 
My centralpoint here has been thatthe system of free expressionis not anaimlessabstractionF.arfrombeinganoutgrowthof neoclassicaleconomics, the FirstAmendmenthas independentand identifiablepurposes.Free speech doctrine,with its proliferatingtests, distinctions,andsubparts,shouldnot lose touch with those purposes.Rooted in a remarkableconception of political sovereignty,the goals of the FirstAmendmentareclosely connectedwith the foundingcommitmentto a particularkindof polity:a deliberativedemocracy among informedcitizens who are political equals. It follows that insteadof allowingnew technologiesto use democraticprocessesfortheirown purposes, constitutionallaw shouldbe concernedwith harnessingthose technologiesfor democraticends-including the foundingaspirationsto public deliberation, citizenship, political equality,and even a certainkind of virtue. If the new technologies offer risks on these scores, they hold out enormouspromiseas well. I have arguedherethatwhetherthatpromisewill be realizeddependsin significantparton judgmentsof law, includingjudgmentsaboutthe point of the First Amendment. 
