© 1995 by The Universityof Chicago 
Reinventing the Regulatory State 
RichardH. Pildest CassR. Sunsteintt 
TABLE OF CONTENTS t Professor of Law, University of Michigan Law School. 
if Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, The University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. We are grateful to Bruce Ackerman, Steven Croley, Richard Fallon, Elizabeth Foote, Lisa Heinzerling, Jim Krier, Kyle Logue, Richard Posner, Sophie Clark, and Peter Strauss for helpful comments. For research assistance, we thank Deborah Hamilton. 
HeinOnline -- 62 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1 1995 
HeinOnline -- 62 U. Chi. L. Rev. 2 1995 
INTRODUCTION 
Probably the most important development in administrative law in the 1980s came not from federal courts, nor even from Congress, but from Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush. In two executive orders, President Reagan asserted vigorous centralized control over the regulatory process. The first such order, Executive Order 12291, laid out a set of substantive principles, most notably cost-benefit analysis, and said that these principles would be binding on executive agencies to the extent permitted by law.' This Order also contained an important procedural provision. It required all major regulations to be accompanied by a "regulatory impact analysis," which would be submitted for review and approval to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs ("OIRA"), an institution within the Office of Management and Budget ("OMB"). 2 The order amounted to an effort to promote centralized OMB control of the regulatory process, to be conducted in accordance with presidential policies favoring deregulation and close attention to cost. 
President Reagan's second relevant executive order, Executive Order 12498, went a step further. It required each agency to submit an "annual regulatory plan," consisting of proposed actions for the next year, that was to be included in a publicly available annual document, the Regulatory Program of the United States.3 Under this order, all agencies were required to submit their proposals to OIRA for review and approval.4 New initiatives not included in the annual plan were permitted only under a narrow set of circumstances.5 The Order placed OIRA in the center of regulatory planning. 
The Reagan initiatives were defended with several theoretical and empirical arguments. National bureaucracies are numerous, even chaotic, and regulations that are nominally independent of one another may produce considerable inconsistency in practice. Some degree of presidential review of the regulatory process is probably necessary to promote political accountability and to centralize and coordinate the regulatory process. These 1 Exec Order No 12291 § 2, 3 CFR 128 (1981), reprinted in 5 USC § 601 note (1988). 2 Id § 3 at 128-30. ' Exec Order No 12498, 3 CFR 323 (1985), reprinted in 5 USC § 601 note (1988). 4 Id at 324. 6 Id at 324-35. are important goals, particularly in light of the need for sensible priority setting in a nation that devotes extraordinary resources to some minor problems and low levels of funding to some major problems.' 
In addition, the cost of regulation-perhaps as high as $400 billion annually,7 with up to $124 billion spent on environmental regulation alone--is too high for the benefits received.9 We could obtain the same level of benefits far more cheaply. Perhaps centralized presidential control could diminish some of the characteristic pathologies of modern regulation-myopia, interestgroup pressure, draconian responses to sensationalist anecdotes, poor priority setting, and simple confusion. In theory, OMB control promised to bring about not only greater political accountability, but also more in the way of technocratic competence, thus returning to the original New Deal goal of combining democratic and technocratic virtues. ° Many people thought that the new system of OMB oversight was admirably well suited to overcoming the difficulties in the regulatory process." 
Despite these points, the Reagan orders were extremely controversial. The criticisms fell into four basic categories: counterproductive transfer of authority from regulatory agencies to OMB. This transfer of authority, it was said, disregarded the cgoavmepathraetiPvereesixdpeenrttisneo opfotwheeragtoenbcriiensganabdovuitolaanteydstuhcehlatrwan,swfehric.h2 The transfer was especially controversial in light of the perception that OMB would be unduly biased against regulation. 3 oversight was too secretive. In their view, the lack of public visibility disguised a new system in which well-organized private groups-particularly regulated industries-were allowed to dictate national policy.'4 Especially during the period of Vice President Quayle's Council on Competitiveness, some feared that regulatory policy was being made by a "shadow government" operating at the behest of private factions and accountable, in practice, to no one with an adequate claim to public legitima15 cy. 
dwarfed OMB's limited resources and resulted in excessive delay. The few officials at OIRA lacked the time and capacities to engage in truly expert assessment of regulation and its complex costs and benefits. Because OMB was unable effectively to assess the wide range of regulations submitted to it, its principal function was to slow things down. The result was to deprive the public of desirable or necessary regulations and, on occasion, to violate the law. 6 
reflected in the Reagan orders. In their view, cost-benefit analysis was too partisan a standard to capture the full array of considerations properly invoked by regulatory agencies. In practice and perhaps in principle, critics urged, the idea of cost-benefit analysis was a device not for producing the right kind and amount of regulation, but for diminishing the role of regulation even when it was beneficial. This substantive agenda, it was said, violated "' See Erik D. Olson, The QuietShift ofPower: Office ofManagement& BudgetSupervi. sion of EnvironmentalProtectionAgency Rulemaking UnderExecutive Order12,291, 4 Va J Nat Resources L 1, 31-35 (1984). 
' See Role of the Council on Competitiveness in Regulatory Review, Hearings before the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs, 102d Cong, 1st Sess 2 (1991) (statement of Sen Glenn). 
concluded that OMB delayed EPA regulations that were subject to statutory deadlines for ninety-one days on average. EnvironmentalDefense Fund v Thomas, 627 F Supp 566, 571 (D DC 1986). Although § 8(a)( review regulations "for which consideration or reconsideration under the terms of this Order would conflict with deadlines imposed by statute or by judicial order," the court concluded that this section of the Order was "simply ignored." Id at 570-71. 
An article from the same time period asserts that the average time for all regulatory reviews by OMB was sixteen days. DeMuth and Ginsburg, 99 Harv L Rev at 1088 (cited in note 11). For an illuminating discussion of agency-OIRA interactions, see E. Donald Elliott, TQM-ing OMB: Or Why RegulatoryReview UnderExecutive Order 12,291 Works Poorly and What President Clinton Should Do About It, 57 L & Contemp Probs 167 (1994). the President's duty under the Take Care Clause and also was unjustified in light of the need for regulation in many areas of modern life.' 
In light of the extraordinary importance of OMB oversight to so much of American government, many observers were extremely curious to see how President Clinton would reform the Reagan initiatives. The process of reform was surprisingly slow. Whereas President Reagan had issued the first of the two executive orders within one week of assuming office, President Clinton did not respond for many months. On September 30, 1993, however, President Clinton issued his long-awaited repeal and replacement of Executive Orders 12291 and 12498.18 
President Clinton's Order, Executive Order 12866, is a dramatic and in many ways quite surprising step. First and in some ways foremost, it maintains the basic process inaugurated by President Reagan, including the essential procedural provision of Executive Order 12291: the requirement that major regulations be submitted to OMB for general review and oversight.'9 It also includes the essential procedural provision of Executive Order 12498: the requirement that agencies submit an annual regulatory plan, compiled in conjunction with OMB." 
At least equally important, Executive Order 12866 also maintains much of the substantive focus of the Reagan orders, including the emphasis on cost-benefit analysis as the basic foundation of decision.2' President Clinton thus rejected the view that an assessment of costs and benefits is an unhelpful or unduly sectarian conception of the basis of regulation. 
At the same time, the Clinton Order marks a number of important substantive and procedural shifts. Executive Order 12866 includes a set of innovations specifically designed to overcome the problems faced in the Reagan and Bush administrations. In particular, it addresses unnecessary conflicts between agencies and OMB, and the appearance (or perhaps the reality) of factional influence over the review processY It also places the Vice President squarely in charge of the regulatory processY It reduces the number of rules that OMB will review, perhaps by as much as one-half. It seeks to overcome the "ossification" of rule making, in part by encouraging negotiated rule making.' 
The Order also includes a new, complex, and somewhat unruly set of substantive principles to govern agency decisions. Some of these principles are an outgrowth of the commitment to "reinventing government" in the service of more flexible management.' Some of them qualify the commitment to cost-benefit analysis, though in ambiguous ways. Some of them point in the direction of comparative risk assessment." Apart from their merits as policy reforms, some of these innovations are of uncertain legality. 
This Article evaluates Executive Order 12866 as part of President Clinton's program for "reinventing government." We do this in an effort to help point the way toward procedural and substantive reforms that might increase coordination and rationality in federal regulation, and in this way diminish currently excessive costs, while at the same time promoting the democratic character of regulatory processes through methods that will take advantage of appropriately informed public judgments about risk. 
To introduce some of our themes in advance: The modern regulatory state delivers insufficient benefits at unnecessarily high costs. A range of imaginable improvements could decrease = See text accompanying notes 81-87. 
Rulemaking, 3 CFR 776 ( 
' This is the major theme of David Osborne and Ted Gaebler, Reinventing Government:How the EntrepreneurialSpiritis Transformingthe PublicSector (Addison-Wesley, 1991), which has obviously had an enormous influence on the Clinton administration. See Vice President Al Gore, From Red Tape To Results: Creatinga Government that Works Better and Costs Less, Reportof the NationalPerformanceReview (US GPO, 1993). ' See text accompanying notes 155-59. the costs of regulation and thus reduce prices, increase employment, and promote international competitiveness. Through such steps, reduced costs could also reduce poverty and thus risks to life and health." Through similar steps, reforms could reallocate regulatory resources to places where they will do the most good. In this way, regulatory programs could deliver greater protection of safety and health and, in the process, save many lives. 
The modem regulatory state should also be more democratic. Currently, regulation is far too inaccessible to public control. Instead, it is enshrouded in technocratic complexities not subject to public debate, affected by misleading, sensationalist anecdotes, or, even worse, subject to the influence of well-organized private groups with personal stakes in the outcome. A range of improvements could make the democratic process work better. The key task for those interested in regulatory performance is to find ways of simultaneously promoting economic and democratic goals.' 
We offer a range of proposals designed to accomplish this task. A special goal is to incorporate public judgments about risk so long as they are appropriately informed and reasonable, even when those judgments diverge from expert understandings. We spend considerable space on this complex subject, contending that public judgments often reflect a distinctive kind of rationality, one that rejects some conventional forms of cost-benefit balancing. Executive Order 12866 might well be administered in a way that takes advantage of this insight. In short, we offer the following recommendations: 
of rationalizing regulatory policy by ensuring good priority setting, comparison of risks in terms of seriousness, and careful attention to the most important problems. To this end, it should issue guidelines and recommendations for the best use of limited 
See generally Ralph Catalano, The Health Effects of Economic Insecurity,81 Am J Pub Health 1148 (1991); Ralph L. Keeney, MortalityRisks Induced by Economic Expenditures, 10 Risk Analysis 147 (1990); Aaron Wildavsky, Searchingfor Safety 61-75 (Transaction, 1988). 
'8 It is too soon for any real conclusions about the actual implementation ofExecutive Order 12866. We note, however, that the first major report on the Order was concerned almost exclusively with procedural issues of internal governmental management; it said nothing about whether the Order was actually making for better or worse regulation. See Office of Management and Budget, Report on Executive Order No 12866, Regulatory Planning and Review, 59 Fed Reg 24276 (1994). There appears to be a risk that OIRA will be unduly concerned with procedural issues and fail to focus on what is most important, the substance of regulation. public and private resources, together with information about the concrete, actual consequences of current efforts and about ways of improving them.' The ultimate goal should be neither to stop nor to spur regulation, but instead to make sure that regulation works well. 
other federal officials, based on shared goals and on a clear understanding ofjurisdictional lines. OIRA should not operate as a last-minute obstacle to agency proposals. 
review" in which it demonstrates in concrete terms how, and at what cost, regulation under its supervision has promoted particular social goals. To this end, OIRA should publicize its shortterm and long-term goals for regulation in relatively concrete terms and show whether and how the government has made progress in meeting those goals. It should do this as part of a general effort to encourage public trust and public understanding of regulatory outcomes and choices. It should also attempt to promote, to the extent feasible, citizen participation in the process of setting regulatory priorities. 
aggregate costs and benefits, but also in terms that reflect democratic judgments about qualitative differences among qualitatively different risks. By qualitative differences, we mean to include an understanding of whether a risk is voluntarily incurred, especially dreaded, equitably distributed, potentially irreversible or catastrophic, faced by future generations, or incurred by discrete groups within the population. To incorporate an understanding of these factors, OIRA and relevant agencies might experiment with three approaches: (a) develop formulas that assign numbers to, and thus incorporate, qualitative differences; (b) offer a two-stage analytic process, the first based on conventional cost-benefit balancing, the second introducing qualitative differences in order to produce a final judgment; and (c) use different forms of citizen participation so as to build into the regulatory process an understanding of informed public judg 
Many proposals in Congress suggest this approach by requiring comparative risk assessment. See the Johnston Amendment, S 171 § 123, 103d Cong, 1st Sess (May 4, 1993), in 139 Cong Rec S5362 (May 4, 1993). See also the important discussion of "riskrisk" trade-offs in John Graham and Jonathan Wiener, Risk vs. Risk (Harvard, forthcoming 1995). ments about how different risks should be treated. We offer comments on all three proposals below. 0 
regulation to more experimentation with information disclosure as a remedy for risk and with economic incentives. Informational remedies should be based on a careful understanding of how people process information and develop trust, a key ingredient of successful risk communication. If methods ofinformation processing are not kept in view, informational remedies can be futile or even counterproductive. Moreover, the use of incentives should be limited to certain specific circumstances that we identify. 
interest in improving health and safety regulation. Without a firm signal from the highest levels of government, OIRA is unlikely to be able to accomplish much of its mission, and the potential advantages of centralized control will be lost. 
This Article is organized into five parts. Part I describes the history of presidential oversight of the regulatory process, showing that such oversight has been a steady development in the twentieth century and that it can now be said to be permanent, or at least as permanent as any procedural innovation not required by the Constitution itself. Part H deals with institutional issues, in particular with those procedures designed to bring about greater openness and visibility. This self-conscious effort at democratization is one of the most distinctive features of Executive Order 12866. Part II also discusses the fact that the Order contains an apparent presidential (and vice-presidential) veto on agency regulations-a bold step that goes well beyond anything that Presidents Reagan or Bush endorsed, at least publicly. It concludes with a discussion of the Order's partial and unprecedented inclusion of the independent regulatory commissions. 
Parts III, IV, and V are the heart of the Article. Part III turns to substance and, in particular, to the question of regulatory ends. It focuses on cost-benefit analysis, comparative risk assessment, and the problem of regulatory rationality in general. There is good reason for enthusiasm about some basic goals and possibilities of these technologies-to increase sensible priority setting, to limit the unnecessarily high costs of regulation, and to make sure that government controls actually improve people's lives. But it is important to ensure a form of these analytic techSee Part IV.F. niques that is attuned to some of the complexities of social valuation of different risks in different contexts of social life. 
Part IV offers a number of suggestions on this score. It tries to make sense of the evident ambivalence in Executive Order 12866 toward cost-benefit analysis. We suggest that there are conceptions of rationality that resist the effort to align diverse social goods along a single metric, and that cost-benefit analysis disregards what we call the expressive dimension of regulation. Part IV also urges possible modifications to conventional costbenefit analysis, designed specifically to make a place for adequately informed and rational public judgments about risks. 
Part V discusses the question of regulatory means. Its principal topic is the conspicuous effort in Executive Order 12866 to go beyond command-and-control regulation in the interest of providing less costly means for achieving regulatory goals. Here we emphasize an unmistakable trend in federal regulation: information disclosure as a remedy for risk. We also deal with the replacement of command-and-control approaches with economic incentives. We discuss the ways in which new strategies should take account of ordinary understandings of risk and also attempt to build public trust. Through this discussion of means, as through the earlier discussion of ends, we suggest reforms that will simultaneously promote economic and democratic goals. 
I. BACKGROUND: A NEW AND PROBABLY PERMANENT FEATURE 
OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 
Almost since the birth of the modern administrative agency, American presidents have struggled to assert more centralized control over the regulatory state. Indeed, a recent study asserts that "the history of the presidency in the twentieth century has been the history of presidents' attempts to gain control of the sprawling federal bureaucracy."3' Typically, these attempts have generated sharp congressional resistance. 
The first step in this direction can probably be traced to President Theodore Roosevelt's creation, in 1903, of a commission designed to study the scientific work done by government agencies in order to recommend more efficient coordination. The results presaged those of similar reform efforts to follow. The commission recommended that the thirty scientific agencies be con"1Forrest McDonald, The American Presidency:An IntellectualHistory 329 (Kansas, 1994). solidated into one, in order to minimize duplication and inefficwiehnicchy.deRcolionseedvetlot afcotrwonardite.3d2 this recommendation to Congress, 
Roosevelt then created a second commission, the Keep Commission, to study a broader array of administrative reforms. In some ways a precursor of Vice President Gore's recent National Performance Review, the Keep Commission found that many civil servants were underemployed and resistant to new technologies, such as typewriters and adding machines. It also concluded that the system of supply acquisition was hopelessly chaotic. 3 The Keep Commission forwarded eleven formal reform proposals to Congress. When it did so, the century's first major battle between Congress and the White House over control of administration was joined. Congress not only declined to act on any of the proposals, but also expressed outrage at the Executive's effort to seize "an authority previously the exclusive and unchallenged domain of Congress."' In addition, Congress prohibited the use of government funds for such commissions in the future and even refused to appropriate funds to publish the Keep Commission's report.35 
At Congress's invitation, President Taft attempted to centralize and coordinate the budgetary process. Although Congress rejected Taft's particular proposals, by 1921 Congress granted the President effective oversight control of agency fiscal requests by enacting the Budget and Accounting Act.38 This was an extraordinary development, in many ways a precursor of current efforts to centralize the regulatory process. For the first time, the President would be given statutory authority to submit an annual budget to Congress. Wilson's wartime presidency aggressively set into motion the vision of a more managerial presidency.37 
In the period after the war, the ideas of consolidation and efficiency-motivated reorganization swept the business community. Congress eventually followed suit in 1932 with the Government Reorganization Act,38 which granted the President unilateral authority, subject to legislative veto,39 to reorganize the administrative branch. Franklin Roosevelt's Brownlow Commission revived Wilson's famous distinction between policy and administration;' the Commission saw "policy" as the joint domain of the President and Congress, whereas "administration," it asserted, must be under the direct and exclusive command of the President. Despite an initial congressional outcry, most of the Committee's proposals were enacted.4 A key reform, with lasting consequences, was the creation of the Executive Office of the President.' 
In 1949, the Hoover Commission produced yet another effort to create a more coordinated and managerial presidency. It issued 277 specific proposals for reorganizing and consolidating agencies. More than half of these were adopted via statute or executive order, with the purpose of creating a "clear line of command from the top to the bottom, and a return line of responsibility and accountability from the bottom to the top."43 
The most direct precursor to the current structure of executive oversight of regulation was the Nixon Administration's system of "Quality of Life" reviews. Nixon's response to the expanding administrative bureaucracy was to create a "counter-bureaucracy" in the White House. He doubled the executive office staff, created the modern OMB, and established the Domestic Council (chaired by a top aide, John Ehrlichman). The Council met with representatives of different departments having jurisdiction over a problem and tried to develop coordinated policy positions for presidential approval.' In the "Quality of Life" review process, agencies were required to submit significant rules to OMB in advance of publication in the Federal Register. OMB's principal duty was to circulate the agency draft to other agencies for review and comment. Although the process was intended to apply ' Act of June 30, 1932, §§ 401-08, Pub L No 72-212, 47 Stat 382, 413-15, codified at 5 USC §§ 124-31 (Supp 1932). 
'9 The constitutionality of the legislative veto was not litigated until INS v Chadha, 462 US 919, 959 (1983), when it was invalidated. 
" See Woodrow Wilson, Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics (Houghton Mifflin, 1925). 
41 McDonald, The American Presidencyat 333 (cited in note 31). 42 Arnold, Making the ManagerialPresidency at 114 (cite in note 35). 4' McDonald, The American Presidencyat 335 (cited in note 31). 
4 Richard P. Nathan, The Plot That Failedand the Administrative Presidency45-49 (Wiley, 1975). to all agencies, only EPA and OSHA were actually subject to the reviewing process. OMB's goal was rarely substantive; it served instead a coordinating function.45 
President Ford continued the interagency review process and added to it a process designed to control the effects of regulation on inflation. Most important, the Council on Wage and Price Stability ("CWPS") reviewed regulations to assess these effects. In addition,- OMB promulgated a circular to agencies arguing that the inflationary impact of a proposed rule could best be assessed through a quantitative cost-benefit comparison." The Council's role was principally technical, consultative, and advisory. It was understood that the relevant agency might well persist in the face of CWPS disagreement. Despite often antagonistic relationships between the agencies and CWPS, many observers believed that CWPS enhanced both public participation and the agencies' analytical capabilities.' Congress ultimately enacted a statute allowing CWPS to participate in rule making and to explore adverse effects on inflation.48 
President Carter,built on the Ford precedent through a successor to CWPS, the Regulatory Analysis Review Group ("RARG"). RARG consisted of representatives from major agencies, OMB, CWPS, and the Council of Economic Advisors. The purpose of this fifteen-agency group was to conduct interagency review of cost-effectiveness analyses, which were required of "significant" rules from relevant agencies. Notably, the Executive Order establishing the RARG review process did not require costbenefit analysis.49 In fact RARG reviewed relatively few rules, though the President did resolve a few highly controversial issues. 
dialogue, coordination, and analytical precision, as well as to reduce regulatory costs. But a decisive step came within a week of President Reagan's inauguration, with the formal creation of a mechanism for OMB review of major regulations. The most important of the new innovations, contained in Executive Order 12291, were (1) a set of substantive principles for all agencies to follow, "to the extent permitted by law," including a commitment to cost-benefit analysis; ( Impact Analysis, including a cost-benefit analysis, accompany all "major" rules; and (3) a formal mechanism for OMB oversight, with a general understanding that OMB had some (undefined) substantive control. President Reagan considered subjecting the independent agencies to the new Order, but ultimately declined to do so, partly because of concerns about legal authority, but mostly because of fears of an adverse congressional reaction.50 The independent agencies were asked voluntarily to comply with Executive Order 12291, but not one of them formally acknowledged their willingness to do so. 
Executive Order 12291 proved extremely controversial. Nonetheless, President Reagan expanded on the basic idea four years later with Executive Order 12498. As noted above, that Order established a requirement that agencies submit "annual regulatory plans" to OMB for review.5 The result is an annual publication, the Regulatory Program of the United States, which contains a discussion of all proposed actions that might be either costly or controversial. Executive Order 12498 served to increase the authority of agency heads over their staffs by exposing proposals to top-level review at an early stage. But it also increased the authority of OMB by allowing OMB supervision over basic plans and by making it hard for agencies to proceed without OMB preclearance. 
The Bush Administration continued the Reagan procedures. Its principal innovation was the Council on Competitiveness, chaired by the Vice President. The Council engaged in occasional review of agency rules, operating as a kind of supervisor of OMB itself. It also set out a number of principles and proposals for regulatory reform." 
President Clinton's Executive Order 12866 is the latest step in this process; we will investigate it shortly. Our current point is more general. From the recent evidence, it seems clear that presidential oversight of the regulatory process, though relatively new, has become a permanent part of the institutional design of American government. This new institutional arrangement has occurred for reasons parallel to the development of a centralized 'o Peter M. Shane and Harold M. Bruff The Law of PresidentialPower 358-60 (Carolina Academic, 1988). 
5' See text accompanying notes 3-5. 
5 See Office of Management and Budget, Regulatory Programof the United States Government,April 1, 1990-March31, 1991 5 (US GPO, 1990). budget in the 1920s. Any president is likely to seek assurance that an unwieldy federal bureaucracy conforms its actions to his or her basic principles. Any president is likely to be concerned about excessive public and private costs. And any president is likely to want to be able to coordinate agency activity so as to ensure consistency and coherence and to guard against the imposition of conflicting duties on people who must comply with the law. The result of these forces is that a centralizing and rationalizing body, housed within OMB and devoted to regulation, has emerged as an enduring, major, but insufficiently appreciated part of the national government. 
Executive Order 12866 makes three major institutional changes from the Reagan-Bush procedures. It imposes new disclosure requirements. It attempts to sort out the allocation of authority among agencies, the White House, and OIRA. Finally, it includes the independent agencies within some aspects of presidential oversight. 
As we have said, there are strong reasons for creating and maintaining an executive office entrusted with the job of coordinating modern regulation, promoting sensible priority setting, and ensuring conformity with the President's basic mission.53 In view of the wide array of regulatory programs administered by modern government, the absence of such an office would probably guarantee duplication, parochial perspectives, and inefficiency. A number of separate agencies and programs deal with environmental and other risks, and it is therefore important to share information, to reduce inconsistency, and to devote scarce resources to places where they will do the most good. 
The past process of OIRA review has been imperfectly equipped to carry out these tasks. Too often OIRA has become involved at very late stages, operating as a kind of last-minute barrier to action at a point when cooperation and trust are nearly impossible." Too often relations between OIRA and the agencies have been adversarial, with considerable distrust and even a ' See Carnegie Commission, Risk and the Environment (cited in note 6); Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circleat 61-68 (cited in note 6). 
4 See Elliott, 57 L & Contemp Probs at 171-74 (cited in note 16). degree of "guerilla warfare."55 What is needed instead is a definition of shared goals and objectives, accompanied by good and continuous working relations, clear jurisdictional authority, and mutual investment in the basic goals of improving regulatory performance according to agreed-upon criteria. 
Executive Order 12866 is designed in part to achieve these goals, though some of the evidence for this conclusion lies outside the four corners of the document. The Order establishes the agencies as the principal decision makers, and in this way it insists, more than its predecessors, on agency autonomy." In general, the process appears to involve a government-wide system of priority setting, rather than one concentrated in OMB. Thus the Order contemplates an annual agency policy meeting to set priorities and coordinate activities. 7 The Order also requires each agency head to designate a Regulatory Policy Officer, who is to be involved "at each stage of the regulatory process."8 
Following this provision, the Clinton Administration has created a set of Regulatory Policy Officers within each agency.59 These officers are specifically charged with improving the regulatory process by ensuring conformity with Executive Order 12866. The officers work with a new Regulatory Working Group created by the Order, chaired by the OIRA Administrator, and attended by specially appointed White House Regulatory Policy Advisors.60 The purpose of this system is to promote early interaction and cooperation by coordinating agency and OIRA behavior, and also to ensure exchange of information among agencies, with a particular eye toward sensible treatment of problems that cut across agencies.6 In a similar attempt to limit conflicts and to reduce unnecessary layers of bureaucratic oversight, Executive Order 12866 also attempts to reduce the number of rules to be reviewed by OIRA, cutting the number in half from previous years. 2 The Order seeks to promote democratization as well by Id at 171. 
See Exec Order No 12866 § 2(a), 3 CFR at 640 (cited in note 18). 57 Id § 4(a) at 642. 

See Report on Executive Order No 12866, 59 Fed Reg at 24290 (cited in note 28). o Id. See Exec Order No 12866 § 4(d), 3 CFR at 643 (cited in note 18), for the Order's creation of the Regulatory Working Group. 
c' See the helpful discussions in Carnegie Commission, Risk and the Environment at 19-20, 71-72 (cited in note 6). 
' See id. requiring the OIRA Administrator to meet with members of the public and to convene conferences to this end.' 
It is impossible to tell at this stage whether these institutional innovations will accomplish a great deal. Much of the evidence will come from the regulations that eventually emerge. If cooperation is an end in itself, it is a limited one, and the success of the new process will be measured principally by substance-what emerges from it. Two early reasons for concern are the apparent absence of clear OIRA focus on regulatory consequences, and the apparent failure to develop a close sense of regulatory priorities through general publicity about the nature of various risks and the costs of eliminating them.Y It would be highly desirable for OIRA to attempt to place problems in broad risk categories and to attempt to regulate risks that are of the highest priority.' For democratic reasons, it would also be desirable for OIRA to make information about risk categories broadly available to the public and to be responsive to the weight that the public places on various risks. The EPA undertook an early effort to this effect and updated it in 1990.' The 1990 study identified a number of "relatively high-risk problems," including habitat alteration and destruction, species extinction and loss of biological diversity, ozone depletion, and global climate change. It also found a number of "relatively medium-risk problems," including pesticides, surface water toxins, acid deposition, and airborne toxins. And it identified a number of "relatively low-risk" problems, including oil spills, radionuclides, groundwater pollution, and thermal pollution.' A 1994 report of the National Academy of Sciences basically approved the EPA's ranking and approach.' This might serve as a model for the federal government as a whole. 
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, it would be desirable for the executive branch to identify its long-term risk-reduction goals, at least in broad terms, and to report on its progress toward reaching those goals. Executive Order 12866 contains no mechanism of this kind. 
In general, however, there is reason for optimism both in the maintenance of the OIRA reviewing process and in the steps to limit antagonism between the agencies and OIRA and to promote attention to shared regulatory goals. We now turn to some institutional details. 
The Reagan orders contained no provisions governing disclosure or regulation of communications between private parties and OIRA, or within the executive branch itself. The absence of formal procedures was itself a cause of considerable controversy.69 Many people alleged that private communications had occurred and that OIRA was basing its decisions on pressure from business groups with self-interested stakes in the outcome.7" 
As a matter of policy, the rules governing disclosure of communications with OIRA are quite important. Informal communications between the executive branch and affected citizens may be "the lifeblood of the administrative process,"7 in the sense that they may well be crucial to the development of sound regula 
See text accompanying notes 14-15. 
70 See Olson, 4 Va J Nat Resources L at 31-35 (cited in note 14); Percival, 54 L & Contemp Probs at 168-72 (cited in note 17). Early in the Reagan administration, the Department of Justice advised OMB to make public all substantive communications between OMB and private parties. See Stephen G. Breyer and Richard B. Stewart, Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 684 (Little, Brown, 3d ed 1992), summarizing Memorandum from Larry Simms, Acting Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, to Director of the Office of Management and Budget (1981). An implementing memorandum from OIRA offered a complex set of guidelines. See Memorandum, Additional Procedures Concerning QIRA Reviews Under Executive OrderNos 12291 and 12498, from Wendy L. Gramm, Administrator, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, published in Office of Management and Budget, Regulatory Programof the United States Government,April 1, 1990-March 31, 1991 605 (US GPO, 1990). Congress held many hearings about the absence of disclosure of communications between OIRA and private groups, or between OIRA and the agency itself. See Clean Air Act Implementation (Part 2): Hearings before the Subcommittee on Health and the Environment of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, 102d Cong, 1st & 2d Sess (1991-92). Informal agreements were reached between the White House and Congress, without formal legislation, requiring disclosure of most substantive communications from private parties. The understandings are published in the Congressional Record. See 136 Cong Rec S17608-10 (Oct 27, 1990). They did not, however, cover the Council on Competitiveness, which became the focal point of concern. See id. 
71 Home Box Office, Inc. v FCC, 567 F2d 9, 57 (DC Cir 1977). sue. Perhaps those background beliefs are already understood. If they are not, interviews can be helpful, but structured questionnaires might be used where the former are not feasible. The process of eliciting views should be at least somewhat open ended; investigators should not force the process into predetermined channels. The process might start with questions like "tell me about radon" and seek elaboration of the responses. Studies of different risk problems suggest that after twelve interviews or so, few new concepts emerge in the answers."o 
Second, initial material should be designed to provide the relevant information in a way that responds to those background beliefs. To the extent that the elicitation process reveals gaps and errors in these beliefs, the material should address them. In addition, rather than providing bare information, the material should provide it in a form directed to taking action. Third, the initial material should be tested empirically with potential users. Iterations of this process yield the most effective forms of information disclosure. 
Applying this approach in 1987, experts were able to generate a highly effective brochure for addressing the radon problem, a brochure that was far more effective than the widely distributed EPA brochure on that topic. The elicitation process revealed that, in addition to holding many accurate beliefs about radon exposure, people also held many inaccurate beliefs: that radon contamination of surfaces is permanent (39 percent); that radon affects plants (58 percent); that it contaminates blood (38 percent); and that it causes breast cancer (29 percent).38' Few people understood that radon decays quickly (13 percent).382 The combination of some of these beliefs would make the radon problem seem severe and unsolvable; consider the lack of knowledge of the fact that radon decays quickly. 
On the basis of this information, brochures were designed that specifically addressed the flaws and gaps in people's background beliefs. The unsuccessful EPA brochure had been prepared through traditional methods; scientific experts were asked what information was relevant and it was then packaged attractively. The initial version of EPA's "Citizen's Guide to Radon," for example, did not discuss whether radon contamination is perma 
Id at 2052. 
331 Id. The permanent contamination figure is from written surveys; the other figures are based on interviews. 
3" Id. nent. When empirically tested, this EPA brochure performed significantly worse than the brochures prepared through the alternative method. When people were asked to recall simple facts, they did equally well with all the brochures. But when faced with tasks requiring inference, the new brochures "dramatically outperformed" the EPA material.' For example, when asked what a homeowner could do to reduce high radon levels in the house, 43 percent of EPA readers answered "don't know" and 9 percent said "there is no way to fix the problem." In contrast, 100 percent of the readers of the brochure designed on the basis of risk communication studies, and 96 percent of the readers of another, answered "hire a contractor to fix the problem."384 
This approach stands in sharp contrast to that reflected in one of the most carefully prepared and broadly circulated manuals on risk information and its communication. This manual, produced for the Chemical Manufacturers Association, sought to provide advice to plant managers on the most effective means to make public comparisons between different kinds of risks. The chemical industry drew on literature concerning effective communication, but it did not test its manual empirically. When that was done, it turned out that the advice was flatly wrong. There was no correlation between actual public assessments of the risks and those the manual predicted.385 
Informational remedies should also respond to various heuristics and anomalies that can affect how people "hear" warnings and advice. For example, it matters a great deal whether a health effect is framed as a loss or a gain. People are far more willing to forego gains than to accept losses; they are persistently "loss averse,"1 6 and loss aversion affects people's reaction to information about risk. Thus, real-world experiments show that pamphlets describing the positive consequences of breast selfexaminations (for example, women who undertake such examinations have a greater chance of finding a tumor at a treatable stage) are ineffective, whereas there are significant changes in behavior from pamphlets that stress the negative consequences of a refusal to undertake self-examinations (women who fail to perform such examinations have a decreased chance of finding a tumor at a treatable stage)." Similar results were found for efforts to inform people of the advantages of energy insulation: an emphasis on the gains from insulation produced far less change than an emphasis on the losses from noninsulation.' 
Vivid and personal information can also be more effective than statistical evidence. The same study of energy conservation showed that it was not helpful for auditors to point to the cracks around homeowners' doors and to recommend weatherstripping. But striking results followed from a simple statement to the effect that the cracks, added together, would equal a hole the size of a basketball, combined with the question: "And if you had a hole that size in your wall, wouldn't you want to patch it up? That's what weatherstripping does." 89 So, too, the "availability" heuristic, discussed above,3" means that certain events that can be easily recalled will seem more probable than they are in fact; regulators should respond to and take advantage of this heuristic in attempting to convey accurate information. 
Finally, there is evidence that people sometimes try to reduce cognitive dissonance by discounting certain risks.39' When dissonance is at work, information about risk may be discounted, and hence information campaigns can fail. In order to convey information effectively, regulators should attempt to respond to danger posed by dissonance reduction. Efforts to convey information about the risk of AIDS, for example, appear to be adversely affected by a frequent tendency of people to assume that the risk does not apply to them.392 In many cases, this appears to be an irrational form of denial, spurred in part by a perception that condom use detracts from sexuality.393 It has been suggested that private and public actors concerned about the spread of AIDS should attempt to convey information not merely by stating the facts, but also by doing so in a way that is intentionally tar' Beth E. Meyerowitz and Shelly Chaiken, The Effect of Message Framingon Breast Self-Examination,Attitudes, Intentions, and Behavior, 52 J Personality & Soc Psych 500 (1987). 
' Marti Hope Gonzales, Elliot Aronson, and Mark A. Costanzo, Using Social Cognition and Persuasionto PromoteEnergy Conservation:A Quasi-Experiment,18 J Applied Soc Psych 1049 (1988). 
9 Id. m See text accompanying notes 210-11. ...See Aronson, The SocialAnimal at 85-92, 175-245 (cited in note 257). "9 Id at 91-92. 
Id. See also Lawrence Lessig, The Regulationof Social Meaning, 62 U Chi L Rev (forthcoming Summer 1995). geted at this negative (and by no means inevitable) image of condom use.394 
Effective regulatory emphasis on information disclosure should learn from these risk-communication investigations. To provide meaningful information about risk, regulators should learn what people already know and assume, as well as what they need to know. Appropriate information must then be developed, tested, and refined until empirical investigation demonstrates that the intended information is, in fact, being conveyed. 95 The next step in information- and education-based regulatory strategies is to incorporate these insights. 
By economic incentives, we mean financial penalties imposed on harm-producing behavior, and financial rewards attached to harm-reducing behavior. Such penalties or rewards might supplement and sometimes even displace command-and-control regulation. The Clinton Order firmly and specifically endorses economic incentives; it favors performance standards over design standards and specifies "user fees or marketable permits" as remedies of choice. Economic incentives appear to be playing a role in the regulatory policy of the Clinton Administration.39 
The supporting work behind Executive Order 12866 recognizes that it is often inefficient for government to prescribe the means for achieving social objectives. 97 Often it would be far better, on economic grounds, for government (a) to create economic incentives to engage in socially desirable conduct, and (b) to permit the market to decide how companies respond to those incentives. It is especially inefficient for government to dictate technology. A far better approach is to impose a fee or a tax on harmful behavior,398 and to let market forces determine the re 
See Aronson, The Social Animal at 237-42 (cited in note 257), for a series of interesting remarks on the relation between background beliefs and regulatory problems. 
' Compare the discussion of the confusion induced by California's Proposition 65, in W. Kip Viscusi, Predictingthe Effects of Food Cancer Warnings on Consumers, 43 Food Drug Cosmetic L J 283 (1988). 
' See Lubbers, 43 Duke L J at 1171 (cited in note 136). See also the discussion of the Clinton Administration's proposals for reforming the Clean Water Act in text accompanying notes 429-36. 
'" See Lubbers, 43 Duke L J at 1170 (cited in note 136). "' See Breyer, Regulation and its Reform at 164-71 (cited in note 284). A Coasian sponse to the increased cost. Another good approach is for government to set the total quantity of a pollutant that will be permitted, then grant or sell a fixed number of tradable allowances or permits to discharge that substance. Government should generally impose fees on those who put pollutants into the atmosphere-instead of (for example) mandating a particular substance for use in motor vehicles. Consumption of the harm-producing good will decline. Producers will shift to less harmful methods of production. 
More generally, government might adopt a simple, two-step reform policy in the area of social risks and social harms. 99 First, those who impose harm should be required to pay for it-by purchasing permission to do so, perhaps through a licensing procedure. Second, those who obtain the resulting permission should be able to trade their "licenses" with other people. In the pollution context, this would mean that people who reduce their pollution below a specified level could trade their "pollution rights" for cash. In one move, such a system would create market-based disincentives to pollute and market-based incentives for pollution control. Such a system would also reward rather than punish technological innovation in pollution control, and do so with the aid of private markets. Very generally, and quite outside the environmental area, it makes sense to think about programs of this sort for regulation of harmful behavior."°° 
An idea of this kind might be made part and parcel of a system of "green taxes." With such a system, government might impose taxes rather than mandates on people who impose externalities on others-users of dirty automobiles, smokers, farmers who employ undesirable pesticides, coal-fired power plants, and users of other products that contribute to destruction of the ozone layer or to the greenhouse effect. Tax levies of various sorts are used by many nations already, though they have qualification is necessary here: Sometimes the apparent victim of the harmful conduct is in the best position to avoid the harm, and in such cases it is possible to say that the apparent victim should be charged with taking preventive or remedial measures. An example would be a case in which workers could cheaply prevent the costs of a chemical in the workplace by wearing masks or clothing that prevent the harm from occurring. Of course, there may be moral or other grounds for deciding not to place the responsibility to avoid harm on the cheapest cost avoider. 
' Here we generalize from the helpful discussion in Ackerman and Stewart, 13 Colum J Envir L 171 (cited in note 348). 
'4 The most controversial application would be civil rights, but some have taken the proposal seriously even there. See Jerry L. Mashaw, Implementing Quotas, 79 Georgetown L J 1769 (1991). been slow in coming to the United States."' These levies have had, or are projected to have, good results. Thus a higher tax on leaded gasoline in Great Britain increased the market share of unleaded gas from 4 percent to 30 percent within less than a year.4 2 It is estimated that a tripling of pesticide prices would cut pesticide use in half4.0 3 It is also estimated that a fee of $110 per ton on carbon would decrease carbon dioxide emissions by 20 percent from previous 1988 levels by 2005.' An added advantage of such strategies is that they generate government revenues, thus reducing public deficits.4 5 
Economic incentives could be applied in other areas as well. Workers' compensation plans, for example, operate to enhance workplace safety. According to a careful study, "If the safety incentives of workers' compensation were removed, fatality rates in the United States economy would increase by almost 30 percent. Over 1,200 more workers would die from job injuries every year in the absence of the safety incentives provided by workers' compensation."4 6 This contrasts with a mere 2-4 percent reduction in injuries from OSHA, an amount that links up well with the fact that annual workers' compensation premiums are more than one thousand times as large as total annual OSHA penalties.40 7 The tax system could be used to punish employers who provide dangerous workplaces. 
It is well understood that economic incentives have advantages from the standpoint of efficiency, and thus far we have seen that a shift to incentives would probably be efficient and effective. What consequences would such a shift have for democratic government? 
The answer is that it could have significant beneficial consequences."° The current system puts public attention in the 41 A study by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development found over ffty environmental charges among fourteen of its members. See Lester R. Brown, Christopher Flavin, and Sandra Postel, Saving the Planet:How to Shape an Environmentally SustainableGlobalEconomy 143 (Norton, 1991). 
2 Id. 40 Id at 146. 4 Id at 148. ' The suggested carbon tax would generate an estimated $120 billion. Id at 145. 4' W. Kip Viscusi, Reforming ProductsLiability 178 (Harvard, 1991). 
Id at 178-79. 
The point is nicely treated in Ackerman and Stewart, 13 Colum J Envir L 171 (cited in note 348), and we draw on their discussion here. wrong places. Imagine, for example, that Congress and the citizenry-following the contemporary model-are focusing on whether ethanol, or some other gasoline substitute, should be required in new cars. It is perfectly predictable that in answering this question, well-organized groups with significant stakes in the outcome will bring their influence to bear. It is also predictable that producers of the competing products may seek and actually obtain regulatory benefits, and for reasons bearing little or no relationship to environmental protection. 
At the same time, the underlying substantive question-whether ethanol is actually an environmentally superior product-will have to be resolved on the basis of technological complexities not easily addressed by the public or its representatives. If this is the issue on which the political process focuses, there is likely to be a series of laws that represent not publicspirited deliberation with a measure of broad accountability, but instead trade-offs among well-organized private groups, or, in Madisonian terms, government by faction. By directing attention to means, this system creates strong incentives for interest groups to ensure that they are favored in the legislature or the bureaucracy. 
Compare a system of economic incentives. Here the issue is not one of means, but the amount of sulfur dioxide that will be allowed into the atmosphere-an issue to be resolved in the process of deciding how many licenses to be given out, and for how much pollution. An advantage of this shift is that it would ensure that citizens and representatives would be focusing on how much pollution reduction there should be, and at what cost. The right question would be put squarely before the electorate. No longer would it be possible to pretend that environmental protection is costless. No longer would the central issue be displaced by the largely incidental question of means. 
Moreover, a system of financial penalties or rewards allows less room for interest-group maneuvering. The large question-how much environmental protection at what cost-does not permit legislators to favor a well-organized, narrow group, such as the agricultural lobby or the coal lobby. Special favors cannot be provided so readily through a system of economic incentives. The very generality of the question will work against narrow favoritism. To be sure, the ultimate question of pollution reduction may be answered in a way that reflects sustained political pressure rather than democratic deliberation. But the risks are reduced, certainly as compared with the existing system. 
There are other democratic advantages as well. Economic incentives should simultaneously promote coordination and rationality in regulation by giving government an incentive to attend closely, and for the first time, to how other risks are treated. This should bring a salutary measure of structure and sense to risk regulation in general. As an important by-product, the new system should create a powerful incentive to obtain information about the actual effects of pollution and pollution control. If members of Congress are deciding on the level of risk reduction, they will not want to do so in a vacuum, especially in light of the significant costs of large reductions. Affected groups will therefore be encouraged to engage in research about real-world consequences. 
As we have seen, information about consequences frequently remains in its most preliminary stages. The new premium placed on information should be a particularly important gain. There is every reason to design a regulatory strategy that puts a premium on greater research, so that when we act, we know what we are getting, and at what price. 
All these considerations suggest that economic incentives-favored so firmly on economic grounds-have as one of their principal justifications a series of democracy-reinforcing, faction-limiting characteristics. 9 
The movement toward economic incentives is preliminary but real. Thus far, it has occurred mostly in the environmental area. An important series of administrative initiatives have brought about "emissions trading," especially under the Clean Air Act.41 Under EPA's policy, a firm that reduces its emissions below legal requirements may obtain "credits" that can be used against higher emissions elsewhere. Through the "offset" policy, which is formally codified in the Clean Air Act,41' a company may locate in an area not in compliance with national air quality standards if and only if it can offset the new emissions by reducing existing emissions, either from its own sources or from other firms. 
4r But see Heinzerling, 62 U Chi L Rev at 471-72 (cited in note 190), for cautionary note4s1.0 See Environmental Protection Agency, Emissions Trading Policy Statement; General Principles for Creation, Banking and Use of Emission Reduction Credits, 51 Fed Reg 43814 (1986). 
411 42 USC § 7503(c) (1988 & Supp 1992). Through the "banking" policy, firms are permitted to store emission credits for their own future use.412 Companies may also engage in "netting," by which a firm modifies a source, but avoids otherwise-applicable emissions limits by reducing emissions from another source within the same plant. Existing sources may also place an imaginary "bubble" over their plants, allowing increased emissions levels for some emitting devices, so long as the total emissions level meets the aggregate requirements. 
We now have a good deal of evidence about the emissions trading program. For various reasons, the program's use has been quite limited.41 A 1989 study showed forty-two federal bubbles, ninety state bubbles, two thousand federal offsets, between five thousand and twelve thousand acts of netting, and one hundred acts of banking.414 Despite this limited activity, there is considerable evidence that this policy has been successful. Overall, the program has produced savings of between $525 million and $12 billion.415 By any measure, this is a large gain. On balance, moreover, the environmental consequences have been neutral or better. Offsets must, by definition, produce environmental gains. The preliminary evidence shows favorable effects from bubbles as well.4"6 There may be modest beneficial effects from banking and modest adverse effects from netting4.1 ' The overall environmental effect is therefore neutral or even good, cost entirely to one side. Consider the following table by way of summary: 
See outline of emissions trading program in Tietenberg, Emissions Tradingat 7-9 (cited in note 338). 
41 See Daniel J. Dudek and John Palmisano, Emissions Trading: Why is this Thoroughbred Hobbled?, 13 Colum J Envir L 217 (1988). 
...Robert W. Hahn and Gordon L. Hester, Marketable Permits: Lessons for Theory and Practice,16 Ecol L Q 361, 374 table 2 (1989). 
45 Id at 374 & table 2. 41 Id at 375. 417 Id at 374 table 2. 
number of* internal transactions 5,000 to 12,000 
1,800 
approved bubbles 
approved bubbles 
40 <100 2 0 
cost savings (millions) 
Environmental quality impact $25 to $300 Insignificant in permitting in individual costs; $500 cases; probably to $12,000 in insignificant emissions in aggregate control costs 
$300 $135 
EPA has also permitted emissions trading for lead. Under this policy, a refinery that produced gasoline with lower-thanrequired lead levels could earn credits. These could be traded with other refineries or banked for future use.419 Until the program's termination in 1987, when the phasedown of lead ended, emissions credits for lead were widely traded. EPA concluded that there had been cost savings of about 20 percent over alternative systems, making total savings in the hundreds of millions 
Reinventing the RegulatoryState of dollars.42 There have been initial administrative efforts as well with respect to water pollution and ozone depletion.42' 
The most dramatic program of economic incentives can be found in the 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act. The Act now explicitly creates an emissions trading system for the control of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions, major contributors to acid deposition. In these amendments, Congress has made an explicit decision about the aggregate emissions level for a pollutant.' The goal is to reduce sulfur dioxide emissions by ten million tons each year, with initial standards going into place in 1995 and much tighter standards coming into effect by 2000.' Whether the particular decision about the size of the reduction is the correct one may well be disputed. But there are large democratic benefits from ensuring that public attention is focused on that issue. 
The acid deposition provisions have other beneficial features. Congress has said that polluters may obtain allowances for emissions avoided through energy conservation and renewable energy. In this way, conservation strategies are made privately profitable.424 This provision creates an incentive to shift to conservation and renewable sources, without providing further environmental degradation. 
Moreover, polluters are explicitly permitted to trade their allowances; this is a first in national legislative policy.' In this way, entities that are able to reduce their pollution below the specified level receive economic benefits. An especially intriguing provision allows spot and advance sales of sulfur dioxide allowances, to be purchased at $1,500 per ton.426 Through this route, polluters must-for the first time-pay a fee for their pollution. 
"' Environmental Protection Agency, Costsand Benefits ofReducingLead in Gasoline, FinalRegulatoryImpactAnalysis viii-31 (1985). See also Hahn and Hester, 16 Ecol L Q at 387-88 (cited in note 414). 
421 On ozone depletion, see Environmental Protection Agency, Protection of Stratospheric Ozone, 53 Fed Reg 30566 (1988); on water pollution, see Robert W. Hahn and Robert N. Stavins, Ineentive-Based Environmental Regulation:A New Era from an Old Idea?, 18 Ecol L Q 1, 18-19 (1991). See also text accompanying notes 429-36. 
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 § 406, Pub L No 101-549, 104 Stat 2399, 263233, codified at 42 USC § 7651 note (Supp 1993). 
" Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 §§ 401(b), 404-05, 104 Stat at 2585, 2592-613, codified at 42 USC §§ 7651(b), 7651c, 7651d (Supp 1993). 
USC § 7651c(f)( 
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 § 403, 104 Stat at 2589, codified at 42 USC § 7651b (Supp 1993). 
4 42 USC § 7651b(b). Equally intriguing is a provision calling for auction sales of specified numbers of sulfur dioxide allowances.4"7 Here the market is permitted to set the price for polluting activity. For example, in the first auction of these rights, in 1993, the average price for the right to discharge one ton of sulfur dioxide in 1995 was $156; by 1994, the market price had risen to $159 per ton.428 
For the most part, however, the Clean Air Act does not require polluters to pay for their "licenses." Instead, government is granting initial marketable pollution allowances to existing sources for free. This might be a short-term measure to protect reliance interests underlying existing uses, for political or more substantive reasons. As further experience with these approaches develops, perhaps Congress will take the next step of requiring dischargers to pay for their emissions by requiring polluters to purchase their allowances in the first place. Executive Order 12866 holds out promise that future legislative and administrative initiatives will pursue regulation through incentive-altering structures more fully. 
Executive Order 12866 is already having significant effects on the development of alternative regulatory strategies. The Clean Water Act is up for reauthorization this year, and the Clinton Administration, through EPA, has put forward a comprehensive set of proposals for revamping administration of the Act (the Clean Water Initiative, or "CWI"). These proposals include measures to deal with toxic discharges; nonpoint sources of pollution; watersheds; and the funding, monitoring, and enforcement aspects of water pollution control. 
The Clinton CWI reflects the Executive Order's influence at every turn and, more generally, the prevalent techniques by which regulatory policy is now made. To begin with, the CWI is accompanied by an extensive analysis of the benefits and costs of the proposed new regulatory approaches.2 9 Moreover, where commensurating benefits and costs would involve controversial value judgments, the analysis does not attempt to force a single metric on the problem and obscure important qualitative distinc4 Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 § 416(d), 104 Stat at 2629, codified at 42 USC § 7651o(d) (Supp 1993). 
' Utilitiesgobble up air-pollutioncredits, Chi Trib § 3 at 3 (Mar 30, 1994). 41 President Clinton's Clean Water Initiative: Analysis of Benefits and Costs, Environmental Protection Agency 800-R-94-002 (Mar 1994). tions. For example, the analysis carefully documents the physical water-quality benefits to be expected without attempting to monetize these in order to "weigh" them against costs.' ° In one area where some basis for attaching dollar values to the relevant benefits plausibly exists (the value to urban households of clean water for various purposes), the analysis attempts to do so." But the analysis does not hide the uncertainty behind these estimates, and it consistently makes its underlying assumptions clear. A strong emphasis is placed throughout on more flexible regulatory strategies that pursue the most cost-effective approach to producing a given level of benefits. 
Thus, rather than requiring all municipalities (as current law does) to meet the same standards for combined sewer overflows and storm water discharges, the CWI proposes different regulatory regimes for large and small cities." Similarly, the CWI proposes building on the recent Clean Air Act approach by using market mechanisms, such as tradable permits, to improve water quality in the most efficient way. The basic concept here is that all sources discharging into the same body of water in a similar manner should be permitted to negotiate among themselves (through trading discharge permits) as to how to achieve a federal water-quality standard for that body. EPA estimates that about 940 bodies of water would benefit from trades between certain point sources and nonpoint sources, and 210 bodies of water would be able to benefit from trades between point sources. 3 In addition, EPA has identified numerous public treatment plants that would be able to reduce pollution more cheaply by negotiating reductions in inputs from the relevant sources. All told, EPA estimates that permitting trades of these sorts would achieve the same level of water-quality improvement at savings of between $658 million to $7.5 billion peryear.4 ' "' Thus, EPA projects that its proposals for nonpoint source controls will produce measurable water-quality improvements in 7.1 million lake acres and 156,200 river miles; or that these proposals have a "high or medium" likelihood of producing measurable improvement in 52 percent of impaired or threatened rivers and 63 percent of lakes. Id at ES-7. Similarly, the proposals for addressing combined sewer overflows are estimated to reduce the average number of overflows from fifty to eighty events per year to approximately three to four; this would reduce the number of water-quality violations for each system from one hundred to two hundred days per year to ten to twenty, and reduce by 35 to 65 percent the annual discharges of various chemicals and toxic substances. Id at 23-24. 
=' Id at ES-9 to ES-10, 48-58. 
Id at viii. 4" Id at 46. 4 Id at 47. 
This attention to more flexible, cost-effective regulatory strategies is evidenced in the Initiative's bottom-line summary of its cost consequences. The analysis projects that if the CWI were adopted as proposed, it would lead to additional incremental expenditures of $5 to $9.6 billion per year." But the analysis also claims that this is vastly less-amounting to savings of $29 to $33.8 billion-than would be generated under the regulatory approaches required by current law. 8 The important point is not that these numbers are to be believed (although even if discounted substantially, they still suggest roughly the magnitude of expected savings from more flexible regulatory strategies). More significantly, Executive Order 12866 is already bringing about systematic analysis of major new regulatory initiatives by encouraging new means to environmental ends. 
In some areas, economic incentives are inappropriate. If government seeks to ban a substance entirely, a prohibition makes sense, rather than a high fee for marketing or use. At least if the benefits of the substance do not outweigh the danger, and if less dangerous substitutes are available, a ban is the preferred course. 
In addition, where economic incentives are warranted, it is sometimes best to regulate quantity rather than price. Marketable permits that regulate the quantity discharged, rather than emission fees, may well be the better approach to market strategies for pollution reduction. Setting emission fees at the right level to achieve the desired reduction requires detailed (marginal cost and benefit) information, which is usually unavailable, with respect to an industry's demand curve for emissions. In contrast, once the acceptable total level of emissions is determined, it is much easier to determine the appropriate quantity different producers should be permitted to discharge. That is what quantity-based marketable permits or allowances do. When these permits are traded, the market will then set their price. Although emissions fees are typically the way theorists analyze incentive approaches to pollution regulation, these approaches are often more appropriately pursued through quantity-based permits or 43 Id at ES-1. 
' Id. The document refers to the larger figure that current law would require as being based on a "stringent interpretation" of current law. Id. " 1995] allowances." Auctions are also a promising approach, with the benefit of market rather than governmental setting of initial prices for the allowances." 
On the other hand, fees or taxes may sometimes be preferable. An advantage of taxes as a response to (say) pollution problems is that the government need not even calculate the socially optimal level of pollution, a complex question to be sure. Rather than compute the tax at a level designed to achieve a predetermined quantity (a difficult task, for reasons described above), government could simply tax polluters at a level equal to the harm done to others from the pollution generated. On a standard view, this would generally equal the lower of either the cleanup costs, or the amount of money society is willing to accept in exchange for living with the pollution. Under this approach, the polluters would internalize the social cost of polluting, and would have every incentive to pollute at the socially optimal level. Computing the social harm done from a given unit of pollution may well be easier in many contexts than computing the total socially optimal quantity. Moreover, this approach allows the market to respond to fluctuations in the socially optimal quantity, which may frequently arise from changes in technology, market substitutes, increased demand, and so forth. 
The main difficulty with this approach stems from the problem of calculating the amount of the fee or tax. Cleanup costs are often incalculable, and there are problems with relying on aggregated willingness to pay, even if it is calculable."9 Nonetheless, there are undoubtedly circumstances in which pollution taxes are better than quantity limits, because taxes are a better response to government's informational limits. Which approach is best cannot be decided in the abstract. 
As we have noted, sometimes economic incentives are undesirable for what we have described as expressive reasons. Perhaps a curbside tax is a more efficient response to the problem of solid waste disposal than mandatory recycling, at least in the short term (though this could encourage people to dispose of their wastes in more covert, and environmentally harmful, ways)."0 
See James E. Krier, MarketablePollutionAllowances, 25 U Toledo L Rev 449, 45253 (1994). 
' For a discussion of recent FCC experiences, see John McMillan, Selling Spectrum Rights, J Econ Perspectives 145 (Summer 1994). 
See text accompanying notes 257-65. 
See generally Peter S. Menell, Beyond the Throwaway Society: An Incentive Approachto RegulatingMunicipalSolid Waste, 17 Ecol L Q 655, 687-90 (1990). But mandatory recycling might affect social norms with respect to consumption, waste disposal, and environmental protection, in a way that has better long-term consequences, and that in any case responds better to the public's understanding of how best to conceive of social obligations in the area of solid waste disposal. The choice between curbside taxes and mandatory recycling cannot be resolved in the abstract. But insofar as economic incentives treat a public bad as a commodity, they might be objectionable on expressive grounds. It is rarely urged, for example, that the emissions trading model makes sense in the antidiscrimination area; a "discrimination license" would be inconsistent with the general effort to delegitimate racial prejudice."' 
A final problem is that a system of economic incentives can bring about distortions that must be addressed through governmental action. In the environmental area, emissions trading programs can lead to "hot spots," which occur when trades lead sources to concentrate pollution in some local area."2 There are important equitable issues here, connected to those treated above: the "hot spots" may have unfortunate distributional effects, burdening identifiable social groups."3 This is less of a problem to the extent that the pollutant has no local effects and is troubling only when mixed in a larger environment (which might be true, to a significant degree, of sulfur dioxide).'" But where local concentration effects are a problem, controls on trades or location of sources will have to be reintroduced. Indeed, the regulatory approach to trades in nitrogen oxides already manifests such an approach. Unlike with sulfur dioxides, trades in nitrogen oxides (which cause smog) must be approved by environmental officials in the states where the extra pollutants will be admitted; in addition, such trades are supposed to be "directionally correct," in that sellers must be upwind of buyers."5 41 But see Mashaw, 79 Georgetown L J 1769 (cited in note 400); the idea is proposed by way of satire in Derrick Bell, And We Are Not Saved. The Elusive Quest for Racial Justice 88-89 (Basic Books, 1987). 
See Krier, 25 U Toledo L Rev at 454 (cited in note 437). 
See Hornstein, 92 Colum L Rev at 592-98 (cited in note 286); Carol M. Rose, EnvironmentalLessons, 27 Loyola L Rev 1023, 1030 (1994). 
Krier, 25 U Toledo L Rev at 454 (cited in note 437). 
See Matthew L. Wald, Eastern Utilities in Unusual Pact: A Smog Tradeoff, NY Times Al, B2 (Mar 16, 1994). For more information on initial experiments with trading permits to discharge nitrogen oxide, see Northeast UtilitiesPropose NOx Trade in First Test ofInterstateSwap Scheme, 24 Envir Rep (BNA) 1998 (Mar 25, 1994); New Initiative Will Allow Companies to Trade NOx Emission Credits, EPA Says, 24 Envir Rep (BNA) 282-83 (June 11, 1993). The right solution varies from context to context, but it seems likely that appropriate structures and policies can be developed to address these concerns.' 
This Article has emphasized three principal points. The first involves regulatory institutions. The second involves regulatory ends. The third involves regulatory means. 
We have suggested that an institution in OMB to oversee and coordinate regulatory policy is, at least potentially, highly salutary. Staffed by appropriate employees, such an entity could help coordinate solutions to similar problems that arise across different agencies. Moreover, by introducing a more comprehensive perspective on risk regulation, such a body could encourage sensible priority setting. Executive Order 12866 takes coordination a step further than the Reagan-Bush approaches. It does so, most importantly, by attempting to promote early intrabranch discussion of regulatory proposals and to ensure more continuous consultation about regulatory goals. This reform is part of a conspicuous effort to reduce agency-OIRA antagonism by encouraging cooperation at all stages of rule making. The Order also takes the important step of including the independent agencies, if only in a modest, procedurally oriented way. 
Executive Order 12866 begins as well to address the conflict between centralization and participation. The Order requires disclosure of contacts with private groups. It also opens up the process of discussion between OMB and the agencies-a step that might be legally unnecessary, but is nonetheless desirable. Finally, the Order is plainly designed to take advantage of information from affected persons at early stages of agency action. 7 These measures reflect appreciation not only of the need for relevant information, but also of the central role that public trust plays in risk perception, evaluation, and remediation. 
With respect to the current institutional framework, our principal suggestion is that in its implementation, Executive Order 12866 should be used to create better priority setting. This ' See Howard Latin, Ideal Versus Real Regulatory Efficiency: Implementation of Uniform Standardsand "Fine-Tuning"Regulatory Reforms, 37 Stan L Rev 1267, 1331-32 (1985). 
"' See Exec Order No 12866 §§ 1(b)(9), 4(e), 3 CFR at 640, 643-44 (cited in note 18). See also the remarks of Sally Katzen, Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, in Colloquium, 8 Admin L JAm U at 53 (cited in note 18). idea is only incipient in Executive Order 12866. Toward this end, OIRA (perhaps bolstered by the addition of employees trained in relevant fields in addition to economics and policy analysis) should generate recommendations about which risk priorities ought to be viewed as most pressing." As we have emphasized, the judgment about which risks are most pressing, and about which problems are most severe, does not depend solely on quantity or on numbers of lives saved. It depends a great deal on the context in which risks are imposed and on such factors as whether relevant risks are catastrophic, irreversible, involuntarily imposed, faced by future generations, or inequitably distributed. 
Precisely how these recommendations might be turned into policy commitments requires further thought about the best mix of democratic and technocratic influences. Certainly, OIRA's efforts are unlikely to be productive without a firm commitment to better risk management at the presidential or vice presidential level. Under the right circumstances, OIRA might be given some substantive power to define risk priorities, or perhaps Congress would act on OIRA's recommendations. For now, OIRA could at least move the reform process forward by providing information and recommendations about risk priorities. As we have said, this view of OIRA's role is, at most, incipient in Executive Order 12866, but we think such a role would contribute significantly to improving regulation. 
In order to monitor OIRA activity, new mechanisms should be created to allow something in the way of official and private "performance review," through studies showing which regulations have been issued by the Administration, with particular attention to their anticipated and actual real-world consequences. Such a step would create good incentives for OIRA and also enable the public to see what, as a matter of substance, has been done in the regulatory arena. Thus far OIRA's attention appears to have been focused mostly on procedural matters,"9 and insufficiently on the hard (and far more important) substantive issues involved in improving regulation. 
On the question of regulatory ends, Executive Order 12866 is, perhaps understandably, a bit uncertain. The Order does not embody a clear conception of what it means for regulation to be rational. The Order qualifies the Reagan-Bush conception of costbenefit analysis, but it does not reject the technique entirely. 
See Colloquium, 8 Admin L J Am U at 53 (cited in note 18). 
See Report on Executive Order No 12866, 59 Fed Reg at 24290 (cited in note 28). Instead, it requires a modified form of cost-benefit analysis, one that calls on agencies to incorporate ambiguous concerns for "equity" and "distributive impacts" into CBA. There is evident doubt about the prior use of cost-benefit techniques; attenuated endorsement of the basic method; and vague modifications that leave the final outcome, in terms of actual effects on agency policy, quite unpredictable. 
The best way to progress beyond this ambivalence is to recognize its causes. We have focused on three such causes: legitimate conflicts between expert and lay value systems and conceptions of rationality; the incommensurability of some benefits and costs that can only be compared qualitatively; and the relevance of expressive concerns in choosing regulatory policies. We do not urge a general abandonment of analytic approaches to regulatory policy, nor do we deny the importance of CBA or comparative risk assessment, especially in a period in which regulation is far too costly a means of achieving its own goals. We have, however, argued for qualifying conventional CBA, and for embodying in CRA an understanding of qualitative differences among risks. Perhaps the qualification could take place through formal analysis that incorporates unconventional variables. But if we attempt to incorporate all relevant concerns into policy analysis at the same time, we risk undermining the genuine benefits that more analytic approaches can provide. 
Instead, we might split the process of CBA into two stages. In the first, the focus should be on a quantitative cost-benefit assessment of those dimensions that can properly be subject to this approach. To deal with incommensurability problems, the analysis should disaggregate benefits and costs so as to indicate how they are distributed over various groups and interests. In the second stage, agencies should take into account differences between expert and lay value frameworks, concerns for equity, the expressive dimensions of the choice, and other relevant values not subject to the cost-benefit approach. Perhaps mechanisms could be created to promote citizen evaluation of regulatory alternatives, though any efforts in this direction must necessarily be tentative and experimental. CRA might proceed similarly, with attention to the sorts of factors that we have emphasized here. 
With respect to regulatory means, Executive Order 12866 is also a step in the right direction. A pervasive problem with national regulatory law is the use of rigid, highly bureaucratized command-and-control regulation, which dictates, at the national level, risk control strategies for hundreds, thousands, or millions of companies in an exceptionally diverse nation. Such regulation is highly inefficient. Even more fundamentally, such strategies are deficient from the standpoint of a well-functioning democratic process. Often they ensure that citizens and representatives will be devoting their attention not to general questions of value-what levels of risk reduction and cost trade-offs are appropriate-but instead to the largely incidental and publicly inaccessible question of what technologies are now available. They focus on the question of regulatory "means," a focus that increases the power of well-organized private groups by allowing them to press the law in the service of their own parochial ends. 
In this light, it is no wonder that some observers think that our current system is a kind of Madisonian nightmare, in which James Madison's vision of deliberative democracy has been transformed into a system of government as a series of interest-group deals.450 Executive Order 12866 holds out much promise on this front. It adopts a kind of presumption against command-andcontrol regulation. It presages a greater shift to economic incentives, to informational remedies, and to performance rather than design standards. All of these are desirable suggestions. But we have cautioned that some of these new strategies are not likely to be effective unless they deal with the ways in which ordinary people process and conceive of risks. 
The solution to this problem lies in strategies that respond to people's background assumptions and to their diverse valuations of diverse risks. Indeed, a principle of this kind-that risk evaluation should take into account informed public valuations-should be placed at the center of modern efforts to reinvent the regulatory state. We have suggested that such efforts could promote economic goals, by reducing the billions of dollars unnecessarily spent on regulation and by ensuring that resources are devoted to the many serious problems that remain inadequately addressed. Such efforts could promote democratic goals as well, by reducing interest-group power, poor priority setting unreflective of public judgments, and the role of sensationalist anecdotes in regulatory policy. A reinvented government could simultaneously increase efficiency and improve the democratic character of the regulatory state. This task has technocratic dimensions, but it is far from only technocratic. It also requires government to respond to public understandings and valuations 4- See Stewart, 57 U Chi L Rev 335 (cited in note 346). 
