 Cass R. Sunstein* When historians write about historical issues associated with the American Constitution, what is their goal? What are they trying to do? At one stage the answer was simple: Offer an accurate description of the facts. If it turns out that the Framers were good democrats attempting to discipline potentially evil representatives by reference to the will of the assembled people, the historian should simply announce that (happy) fact. If, on the other hand, the facts show that the Framers were manipulative, self-interested aristocrats seeking to limit the power of the public, the historian's job is to say so. * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor ofJurisprudence, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Akhil Amar, Elena Kagan, Larry Lessig, David Strauss, G. Edward White, Gordon Wood, and especially Richard Ross for helpful comments on a previous draft. in constitutional law, but also to academic lawyers involved in constitutional argument. With this in mind we come to the idea of a useable past. 1 This idea points to the goal of finding elements in history that can be brought fruitfully to bear on current problems. The search for a useable past is a defining feature of the constitutional lawyer's approach to constitutional history. It may or may not be a part of the historian's approach to constitutional history, depending on the particular historian's conception of the historian's role. The historian may not be concerned with a useable past at all, at least not in any simple sense. Perhaps the historian wants to reveal the closest thing to a full picture of the past, or to stress the worst aspects of a culture's legal tradition; certainly there is nothing wrong with these projects. But constitutional history as set out by the constitutional lawyer, as a participant in the constitutional culture, usually tries to put things in a favorable or appealing light without, however, distorting what actually can be found. cynical, or dishonest, or debased, or reflective of a form of "history lite"? The question cannot be answered in the abstract. Sometimes the charge of cynicism, dishonesty, debasement, or "liteness" is entirely warranted. For example, it is familiar to find a constitutional lawyer reading history at a very high level of abstraction ("the Framers were committed to freedom of speech") and concluding that some concrete outcome follows for us ("laws regulating obscenity are unconstitutional"). This use of history is not honorable. It is a bad version of formalism-the pretense that concrete cases can be resolved by reference to general propositions, when in fact some supplemental value judgments are required. 12 9. See 1 Bruce Ackerman, We the People (1991). 10. On how the notion of objectivity might be maintained despite the inevitability of a On the other hand, constitutional lawyers should not argue that the Constitution requires whatever they think a good constitution would say, and as a way of disciplining legal judgment, constitutional lawyers should look to history as a part of constitutional interpretation. Hence there is nothing at all dishonorable in the idea that constitutional lawyers should try to identify those features of the constitutional past that are, in their view, especially suitable for present constitutional use. The American constitutional culture gives special weight to the convictions of those who ratified constitutional provisions, and though I cannot fully defend the claim here, I believe that this interpretive practice is legitimate. Constitutional law is based on ideas about authority, not just on ideas about the good or the right. Constitutional history16 provides a way of constraining legal judgments, invoking a set of provisions with at least some kind of democratic pedigree, and providing a shared set of materials from which judicial reasoning can proceed.17 Nothing in these remarks is inconsistent with the proposition that much in our constitutional history is bad and no longer useable. Some aspects of constitutional history that are of considerable importance to (1994) (unpublished manuscript, on file with Columbia Law Review). Of course there remains the question of deciding at what level of generality the history is to be read. If read at a high level, the history could authorize any decision at all; if read at a very low level, the result would probably be useless for current problems. It follows that some kind of intermediate course will make best sense, though I can hardly discuss this complex issuethe issue of "how to read" the past for constitutional purposes-in this space. Doubts about the possibility of the historical enterprise-how can we know what long-dead people really meant? how can we possibly reconstruct their world?-seem to me overstated in principle; but whether or not they are overstated, such doubts are hard for the constitutional lawyer to entertain. For better or for worse, the lawyer participates in a culture in which historical arguments are important, and it is therefore unhelpful to throw up one's hands. 18. I am very grateful to Richard Ross for helpful discussion of the thoughts in this paragraph. has been quite damaging to the academic study of law (and to the profession of history as well).23 But republicanism is sharply opposed to interest-group pictures of governance. It favors instead a conception of deliberative democracy. For constitutional lawyers as well as historians, this is a matter of considerable importance. It bears on how we think about the Founding document and it also relates to, though it certainly does not resolve, a range of concrete constitutional controversies. 23. Liberalism and republicanism are opposed, for example, in White, supra note 5, and Rodgers, supra note 5. Rodgers in particular identifies liberalism with an "inability to imagine politics as anything other than interest group pluralism," and as committed to "procedural neutrality." These understandings of liberalism, found in much historical work, are extremely odd, and based at most on certain strands in liberalism. Those strands should hardly be identified with the liberal tradition itself. Mill, Rawls, and Raz, for example, thoroughly reject these ideas, and reject them because of their understanding of what liberalism entails. See John Smart Mill, Considerations on Representative Government (Gateway Editions 1962) (1861); John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1971); Joseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom (1986). to constitutional Notwithstanding these points, Flaherty is undoubtedly correct to point to the area of eighteenth-century "rights" as one that modem constitutional commentators have inadequately understood, certainly in law. There is a great deal more to do on this important subject. Perhaps Flaherty's essay can help constitutional lawyers to embark on this long overdue task. When they do so, it will probably be as part of their interpretive enterprise, and what I am emphasizing here is that this enterprise has special characteristics that distinguish it from the enterprise of the ordinary historian.