Congress, Constitutional Moments, and the Cost-Benefit State 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
In this article,Cass Sunstein exploresthe 104th Congress' attempts at regulatory reform. ProfessorSunstein believes that the election of this Congress, with its distinctive approachto government,signals the dawning of a "constitutional moment" in which the role ofgovernment at all levels will be reexamined. Without full public supportfor sweeping changes in government, this moment has not yet materialized. When and ifit does, regulatory reform will be one of its aspects. Indeed the nation has alreadybegun to examine regulation to determineifthe benefitsjustify the costs. Unfortunately, the 104th Congress has, thusfar,failed adequately to address this burgeoning cost-benefit state. Sunstein claims that Congress'failurereflects its inability to redesign the massive federalregulatoryscheme. He suggests that the executive branch should oversee regulatoryreform, with Congressrelegatedto providingbroad policy direction. Sunstein also suggests that Congressadopt an Administrative Substance Act, building upon the recent learning about the performance of regulation and modeled after the AdministrativeProcedureAct. Sunsteinfurther callsfor the enactment of a "substantivesupermandate"requiringa general background rule of cost-benefit balancingfor allfederal regulation; but he contends that any description of costs and benefits should reflect the full range of diverse values expressed by the public at large. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Law, The University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Bruce Ackerman and Susan Rose-Ackerman for helpful discussions; to Ackerman, Elizabeth Garrett, Richard Pierre, Richard Posner, Richard Stewart, Peter Strauss, and Jonathan Wiener for valuable comments; to Keith Sharfman for outstanding and indispensable research assistance; and to many participants in the legislative debates for helpful background. 
unintended consequences of regulations................ 261 better incentives to compile andprovide accurate information........................................... 264 
judgments in regulatingrisks.......................... 264 
than means and should use performancestandards ratherthan design standards.......................... 267 III. REGULATORY REFORM AND THE 104TH CONGRESS: A FAILED EFFORT AT FUNDAMENTAL CHANGE ............................. 269 
B. Particulars.............................................. 272 
the House. ........................................... 274 
IV. TOWARD NEW INITIATivEs ..................................... 286 
B. Modest Changes ......................................... 289 
C. Ambitious Goals ......................................... 296 
problems and increase the executive's role in priority setting. .............................................. 297 
and more cost-effective reductions..................... 297 V. POSSIBLE FUTURES ............................................. 298 A. Cost-Benefit Balancing................................... 300 B. Pollution Prevention ..................................... 301 C. Free Market Environmentalism ........................... 303 D. DemocraticEnvironmentalism ............................ 305 VI. CONCLUSION .................................................. 307 
INTRODUCTION 
The 104th Congress promised to change the national government in fundamental ways. Spurred by widespread popular dissatisfaction with government, the House of Representatives attempted to rethink national institutions more deeply than at any time since the New Deal; in fact the New Deal itself was a central target of the process of rethinking. America may be on the verge of a constitutional moment in which Americans answer foundational questions in novel ways.' 
The election of the 104th Congress signalled the transformation of America into a genuinely post-New Deal regulatory state. This emerging nation remains in a process of development; but it may be described as a cost-benefit state, one whose performance will be assessed, both in particular and in general, by comparing the costs of government action with its benefits. This idea requires a good deal of specification, but it unites developments not only in the national legislature, but in the executive branch, the judiciary, and state government as 2 well. 
My purpose here is to evaluate the efforts of the 104th Congress to give legal form to this constitutional moment. My particular interest is Congress' effort to reform the modem regulatory state. Charged by a popular mandate for reform and a high level of ambition, Congress debated both substantive and procedural "supermandates" cutting across all federal regulation. 3 Thus the 104th Congress devoted a large part of its agenda to "rethinking the regulatory state." The Contract With America also promised to address basic regulatory issues. 4 In large-scale hearings, Congress examined problems of overregula1. I borrow the idea of a constitutional moment from Bruce Ackerman, who proposes a "dualist" approach to constitutional interpretation-an approach that claims that America has witnessed two types of decisions: foundational ones made by the American people and more ordinary ones made by their representatives. 1 BRUCE AcKEImsAN, WE Ta PEOPLE: FoUNDATIONS 6 (1991). A constitutional moment is a period of popular development of principles that results in revolutionary reform. Id. at 21. Ackerman identifies three such moments in American history: the Founding, Reconstruction, and the New Deal. Id. at 58; see also text accompanying notes 16-34 infra. 
form. See Exec. Order No. 12,866, 3 C.F.R. 638 ( that agencies assess the costs and benefits of a regulation before adopting it); Exec. Order No. 12,498, 3 C.F.R. 323 (1986), repintedin 5 U.S.C. § 601 ( regulations annually) (revoked 1993); Exec. Order No. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. 127 (1982), reprinted in 5 U.S.C. § 601 ( outweigh its costs) (revoked 1993). On the role of cost-benefit balancing in the courts, see Motor Vehicles Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mutual Auto. Ins., 463 U.S. 29, 54-55 (1983) (endorsing cost-benefit analysis for automobile safety standards regarding automatic seatbelt systems); Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201, 1215-17 (5th Cir. 1991) (rejecting EPA's ban on asbestos because EPA failed to adhere to its statutory mandate to impose the least burdensome solution). On state and local government, see TED GAEBLER & DAVID OSBORNE, REINVENTING GoVERNMENT: How Tm ENrmPRNmUIAL SPIRIT Is TRANSFORnmiNo a PUBLIc SECTOR (1991) (advocating that government at all levels should be reformed to behave more like the private sector). 

THE HOUSE REPUBLICANS TO CHANGE THE NATION 131-35 (Ed Gillespie & Bob Schellhas eds., 1994) (proposing to require federal agencies to prepare a risk assessment for each new regulation, an annual tion and the prospects for cost-benefit balancing.5 Finally, the House passed and the Senate debated measures that, if enacted, would have represented the largest changes to the Administrative Procedure Act6 since its enactment in 
By the close of the first session, however, relatively little had happened. There was no constitutional transformation for a simple reason: The public has not (yet) called for one in the way that American institutions require. To be sure, the House passed eleven major pieces of legislation in two monthsincluding the Congressional Accountability Act,7 the Line Item Veto Act s and the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act.9 But only six of those measures were enacted into law. The Balanced Budget Amendment 10 passed the House but faced defeat in the Senate, as did tax legislation, welfare reform, a new crime bill, and term limits legislation. The Line Item Veto Act and litigation reform passed the House and Senate in different forms, but await the work of conference committees, stalled in the case of the line item veto by the Republicans' reluctance to give this power to President Clinton." 
All in all, there was a great deal of noise and bluster-a great deal of signalling-but surprisingly little in the way of concrete results. In the end, the enacted measures proved modest and mostly procedural. The apparently more ambitious proposals contained some good features. But many of their provisions were crude, unimaginative, and far more procedural than advertised. Rather than reflecting new and better thinking about substantive regulation, these provisions represented an effort to clog the administrative process with paperwork. In fact, members of Congress sometimes appeared to misunderstand the content of the very legislation they were debating. Congress revealed only a partial awareness of the recent outpouring of research on regulationresearch that could have produced the basis not only for fundamental change, but also for a consensus cutting (more or less) across partisan lines. Congress' emphasis on cost-benefit analysis showed a healthy appreciation for balancing rather than absolutism; but it was only a start. Congress may well have laid the groundwork for future developments. But because of its own institutional weaknesses and the system of checks and balances-including above all bicameralism and the possibility of presidential veto-actual changes will take more time. As a practical matter, these institutional weaknesses significantly hamper Congress' ability to produce a constitutional moment in the context of the modem regulatory state. 
Both institutional and substantive lessons will emerge from this article. On the institutional side, I claim that Congress is quite ill-equipped to produce sensible, constitution-like reform, at least if it tries to offer details. With respect to regulation, a group of generalist representatives-all with numerous issues to address, few with particular expertise in regulatory law, and many beholden to special interests-is not in a position to produce desirable, largescale reforms, unless it restricts itself to generalities. Such a group is prone to sharp internal divisions that are not subject to reasonable mediation without a good deal of specialization in regulation. Indeed, the task of producing constitution-like change in the modem state is far more difficult than it was in the New Deal era. It is easier to create a regulatory state than it is to dismantle one, especially in an era in which every industrialized nation is committed to controlling the operation of the marketplace. 
reinforced by recent experience. As we will see, the 104th Congress was split between two different sets of interests: technocratic forces seeking to discipline agency decisions with better policy analysis and forces of reaction seeking to stop agency action even when it would improve social well-being. There is thus an interesting contrast between the performances of Congress and the executive branch. Even those who reject President Clinton's approach to regulation should recognize that his administration has shown far more sophistication and creativity in this area than Congress. 12 (The same is true for the adminis12. For example, Vice President Gore's task force, which is currently conducting the National Performance Review, has produced a series of reports on "reinventing government.' See, e.g., BILL CLINTON & AL GORE., REINvENTNr, WORKER SAFETY AND HEALTH (May 1995) (detailing reforms of OSHA); BILt CLINTON & AL GoRE, REvENTINrG RGULATION OF DRuGs AND MEDICAL DEVICES (April 1995) (detailing reforms of FDA); BILL CLINTON & At GORE, REINvENTING ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION (March 1995) (detailing reforms of EPA). See alsoExec. Order No. 12,898, 3 C.F.R. 859 ( environmental justice part of their missions); Exec. Order No. 12,866, supra note 2 (defining principles of regulation including examining the effectiveness of existing regulation, encouraging flexibility in method of compliance, and assigning costs and benefits of new regulations); Memorandum on Regulatory Reform, 31 WEEKt.Y Coam. PREs. Doc. 695, 695-96 (Apr. 21, 1995) (directing agencies to waive penalties in certain cases and to reduce the frequency of required reports); Memorandum on Customer Service, 31 WEEKLY CoM. PREs. Doc. 456, 456 (March 22, 1995) (directing agencies to implement steps to ensure better customer service); Memorandum on Regulatory Reform, 31 WEmKLY Comp'. PREs. Doc. 363, 364 (Mar. 4, 1995) (calling on agencies to cut obsolete regulations). 
On March 16, 1995, President Clinton announced govermnentwide regulatory reform. White 
trations of Presidents Reagan and Bush. 13) The executive branch has been highly attuned to the need to compare costs and benefits, to attend to results rather than processes, and to enlist the private sector in engineering least-cost solutions. Improvements in regulatory performance are more likely to come from the executive than from a Congress saddled with its institutional deficiencies. Perhaps Congress should give substantial discretion to administrators, allowing them to design appropriate regulatory tools and perhaps to set priorities as well.14 Indeed many current problems result from statutes that either produce poor incentives or forbid more imaginative, cheaper, and more effective solutions-or that ban cost-benefit balancing altogether.' 5 
we now have: a system containing both economic and democratic failures, where priorities are not set carefully and where interest groups wield excessive power over government. Certainly it is important to provide methods for assessing regulatory performance. At least in principle, some form of cost-benefit analysis could simultaneously promote political accountability and regulatory efficiency. In this way, it could be part of a system of deliberative democracy. But any movement toward a cost-benefit state should be accompanied by an understanding of the importance of public judgments in regulatory law, the limits of the criterion of private willingness to pay, and the need to 1995 (press release), available in WESTLAW, Pres-Daily Database. The initiative to reform EPA will: ( incentives for self-disclosure and correction; (4) increase the use of emissions trading; ( pollution rules; (6) give greater flexibility to recipients of grants; and (7) create a faster self-certification program for minor changes to pesticides. Id. The initiative to reform OSHA will: ( command-and-control to partnerships with business (which means negotiated, rather than dictated, regulations); (2) update obsolete and confusing standards; and ( hazards in order of danger). White House Office of Communications, Presidentand Vice President Announce OSHA Reform. May 16, 1995 (press release), availablein WESTLAW, Pres-Daily Database. See also Regulation:EPA, DOE,DOI Reform andEliminate Rules, GRE Nwm, Aug. 3, 1995, available in LEXIS, News Library, Gmwre File (reporting Clinton administration announcement of reforms of twenty-eight federal agencies). 
benefits (at $150 million annually) would exceed the costs (at S95 million annually). Bruce Alpert, EPA Issues New Rules on Refinery Pollution,N. ORLEANS TIMEs-PIcAYUNE, July 29, 1995, at A8. On another front, the National Performance Review report on the FDA, REINVanNG REGULATION OF DRUGS AND MEDICAL DEvicEs, supra, called for exemptions of low-risk medical devices from premarket review; reducing or eliminating many approval requirements for drugs; excluding drug and biologic manufacturers from most environmental assessments; and spreading the marketing of medical devices by charging use fees for reviews and also by committing FDA to meet performance standards. Id.at 4-5. BRUCE A. ACKERMAN & WILIAM T. HASSLER, CLEAN COAL/DIRTY AIR: OR How THE CLEAN Am ACT BECAME A MULTIBILLION-DOLLAR BAr.-OUT FOR HIGH SULFUR COAL PRODUCERS AND WHAT SHOULD BE DONE ABotrr IT 4-12 (1983) (defending the New Deal model); STEPHEN BREYER, BREArmNG TaE Vicious CIRCLE: TowARD EFFECTivE RISK REGULATION 59-61, 64-68 (calling for the creation of a new administrative group to oversee "risk regulation") ( Prodelegation:WhyAdministratorsShouldMake PoliticalDecisions, IJ. L. ECON. & ORG. 81, 95 (1985) ("[I]t may make sense to imagine the delegation of political authority to administrators as a device for improving the responsiveness of government to the desires of the electorate.'). 
create market mechanisms that do not place excessive informational demands on government. 
More specifically, I suggest that a general requirement of cost-benefit analysis would indeed be a constitution-like amendment, and a highly undesirable one, if it is understood in the most ambitious possible way: as an effort to ensure that all regulatory statutes are implemented by reference to the principle of economic efficiency based on the criterion of private willingness to pay. Regulatory measures have diverse foundations, and many legitimate statutes are not rooted in the efficiency criterion at all. 
If cost-benefit analysis is understood more modestly as an effort to require balancing rather than absolutism, it is a good idea and should generally be required. But so understood, cost-benefit analysis can be specified in many different ways. Congress should give appropriate guidance so that agencies can make reasonable rather than unreasonable specifications. I offer some suggestions about how these tasks might be accomplished; to this end I emphasize qualitative as well as quantitative factors, public judgments about risk, and the highly diverse foundations of regulatory enactments. 
This article comes in four parts. Part I examines the popular shift in the perceived role of the national government-a shift that may yet culminate in a constitutional moment. Part I also outlines what has been learned thus far about regulation. Part II describes what the 104th Congress proposed and summarizes this failed constitutional moment. Part III explores how the principal proposals might be improved. Part IV addresses the future of the cost-benefit state. 
II. 
The New Deal was of course a substantial reformation of the original constitutional structure. 16 It qualifies as a substantial reformation above all because it refashioned the three basic cornerstones of that structure: federalism, checks and balances, and individual rights. 17 
In the 1930s the powers of the national government were expanded in an extraordinary way, in favor of a system that exercised something close to general police powers.' 8 The original understanding of a sharply constrained cen16. See AcKERmAN, supra note 1,at 47-50, 105-130 (discussing the New Deal as the third American constitutional regime); Cass R. Sunstein, ConstitutionalismAfter the New Deal, 101 HARv. L. REV. 421, 423-25, 430-46 (1987) (discussing the substantial effects of the New Deal on previous constitutional understandings). 
ERA] (describing President Roosevelt's emphasis on populism and nationalism, rather than individualism); THEODORE J. Lowi, Tan PERSONAL PRESIDENT: POWER INVESTED, PRONSE UNFULFILLED 52-58 (1985) hereinafter PERSONAL PREsmENT] (describing the New Deal shift in power from Congress to the President by delegating significant discretion to federal agencies). 
regulate interstate commerce broadly to include the regulation of private activity that may indirectly affect commerce); see alsoPERSONAL PRESIDENT supranote 17, at 49-50 (discussing the judicial ratification of the government's expansive powers). tral government was therefore repudiated by the nation. There were simple grounds for this repudiation. First, state autonomy seemed an obstacle to democratic self-government, not a crucial part of it-especially in the midst of the Depression, when states were generally perceived as ineffectual entities buffeted by private factions. As a result of the New Deal, state autonomy was very different in 1940 from what it had been in 1920. 
Second, the system of checks and balances came under sharp criticism. To many observers, especially during the Depression, that system seemed dysfunctional and anachronistic in modem society. 19 Effective businesses do not operate through checks and balances; why should government paralyze itself in this way?20 In response, Congress delegated enormous policymaking power to the President and created a large number of powerful executive and independent agencies.2 ' Crucially, Congress designed these agencies to limit the consequences of the system of checks and balances by allowing a high degree of administrative autonomy. Thus the new agencies had a large degree of discretionary authority under open-ended statutory standards. They also combined traditionally separated powers of adjudication, execution, and legislation. 
These institutional shifts resulted from a critical national judgment made during the Depression: that individual rights, properly conceived, included not merely the common law catalogue of private interests, but also governmental protection against many of the harms and risks of a market economy. These harms and risks included unemployment, poverty, malnutrition, homelessness, lack of education, and hopelessness as a result of disability.22 Indeed the common law catalogue seemed overprotective as well as underprotective, for it was unduly solicitous of private property. The common law was a regulatory system enjoying no special status; it should be evaluated pragmatically and in terms of its consequences for the human beings subject to it. Here it often seemed to fail. Hence the national government was authorized to engage in a wide range of redistributive policies. 
If the New Deal qualifies as a constitutional moment, it is because of its revolutionary redefinition of constitutional commitments. 23 Indeed, an astonishing feature of the New Deal was its relative rapidity. Many changes came in the brief period from 1932 through 1936, and were clearly supported and ratified by the public. Such rapid change was possible partly because it is a relatively simple step for a legislature to create a range of new bureaucratic institutions, at least if the legislature does not specify each agency's duties in advance. In fact, the New Deal entities operated with little statutory guidance; Congress usually contented itself with open-ended delegations of authority.24 As we shall see, the relative simplicity of the New Dealers' task contrasts dramatically with the complexity of the task faced by the 104th Congress. 25 Moreover, in the early 1930s the public's support for the New Deal was broader and deeper than public support for fundamental change in the 1990s-though the public may unite behind such change before long. 
The New Deal reformation served as the foundation for the basic orientation of the national government until the election of President Ronald Reagan. One development during that period has been of special importance: the "rights revolution" of the 1960s and 1970s, which reinforced many New Deal tendencies through the creation of a remarkable array of new agencies. These agencies were designed to protect against threats to life, health, and safety from consumer products, workplaces, and, above all, to protect the environment.26 Economic arguments about external harms reinforced claims for new statutory "rights." Hence this period saw the creation of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Consumer Protect Safety Commission, the Council on Environmental Quality, and several other administrative agencies. 
It is notable that during both the New Deal and the rights revolution, no mechanism was created to evaluate regulatory performance. No system assessed whether agencies were making things better or worse. In the New Deal, any such system might have seemed peculiar in light of the widespread national enthusiasm for the President and for the possibilities of benign administration. In addition, cost-benefit thinking was largely foreign to political actors, and hence cost-benefit analysis played little or no role in public debate. No mechanism existed to protect against the possibility that "government failure" would replicate "market failure." 
One of the most striking features of the period since 1980 has been sustained national criticism of the New Deal reformation. In light of the election of the 104th Congress, this criticism may well be signalling the first genuinely foundational challenge to American government since the New Deal itself. The Contractwith America clearly suggested that large-scale change was at issue. It is worthwhile to pause over the constitution-like character of recent challenges to the current governmental structure. Critics often suggest that the naienced a constitutional moment. If the term is seen as a metaphor, rather than a legal term of art, it is sufficient to work from more abstract and intuitive ideas of the sort described in the text. 
PuBLic Autorrry 132-33 (Ist ed. 1969) (describing the perceived need for broad authorizing statutes as government expanded its powers). 
tional government has far exceeded the appropriate limits of its authority and argue for a return to the original structure.2 7 Many assert that a devolution of power to the states would promote both democratic and economic goals;2 s the Unfunded Mandate Reform Act and Congress' recent interest in "block grants" for states to use basically as they wish reflect this criticism.2 9 
In this way there is a wholesale attack on the existing allocation of authority between the national government and the states. But "horizontal" issues of government structure are receiving similar attention. Concerned about the extent of policymaking discretion given to regulatory agencies, many suggest that Congress should reassert its constitutional prerogatives by narrowing administrative discretion. 30 It is urged that the New Deal's enthusiasm for independent bureaucracy, and for a large lawmaking role for executive agencies, should be revisited, and that Congress should make the fundamental choices of policy. 
Finally, and perhaps most fundamentally, pre-New Deal principles of private right have enjoyed a rebirth with the suggestion that modem regulatory programs violate liberty, rightly conceived. 31 These principles play a significant part in current debates, as reflected in arguments in favor of removing constraints from the marketplace and imposing new compensation obligations on government. 32 Thus the movement for deregulation has become far more sweeping than it was in the Reagan period. The Takings Clause has become a rallying cry for a new enthusiasm for the protection of private property-challenging such well-established federal programs as the Endangered Species Act and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act's protection of wetlands. 
Some criticisms of regulatory performance have been far narrower and more pragmatic in character, focusing less on basic theory and more on the economic consequences of regulation. It is here that cost-benefit balancing, accompanied by risk analysis, has played a special role. As I have noted, the New Deal period was accompanied by no mechanism for monitoring regulatory performance. But it is now suggested that national government has failed to perform the tasks assigned to it and has often made things worse.33 In this view, there is no suggestion that markets are ideal; but often markets work better than the regulatory programs designed as solutions. Increasingly, assessment of regulatory performance has taken the form of cost-benefit analysis. 34 
If we are indeed in the midst of a constitutional moment, it began with the election of President Ronald Reagan and was spurred by the dramatic and largely unanticipated shift in the direction and composition of the Congress in the 1994 elections. The Contract With America presented the electorate with a set of promises for fundamental reform. The importance of the Contract should not be understated, for it helped to organize a formerly unruly House of Representatives and provided public benchmarks against which the House would be measured. It is clear that in the 104th Congress, the House of Representatives acted in a remarkably rapid and sweeping fashion, offering the Senate a chance to make the most significant changes in the national government since the New Deal. The Senate declined the opportunity, largely because the public showed its uncertainty about such far-reaching change. If the nation follows the Senate's course, the effort at constitutional revision will have failed. But any predictions on this count are premature. Let us turn, then, away from theory and toward more pragmatic issues involving the performance of the regulatory state. 
B. 
In the last decade, something very close to a consensus has emerged on some of the most important problems in existing government regulation. If government were to act on this consensus, it would introduce important changes. Those changes need not amount to anything like a constitutional moment; here we are not speaking of the most basic constitutional commitments. But the changes would be far from a mere matter of tinkering. The consensus has the following features. 
As we will see, measurement of costs and benefits can be highly controversial. But under any measure, there can be no doubt that resources for risk reduction are badly allocated.3 5 As much as $500 billion may be spent each year on regulation,3 6 and of this amount, more than $130 billion is spent on (claiming that the mattress flammability standard resulted in a substantial increase in costs, but no statistically significant increases in consumer safety); Sam Peltzman, Toward a More General Theory of Regualtion, in CHICAGO Srtmms N PoLmcAL EcoNoMY, supra, at 234 (explaining the problem of diffuse interests that allows small groups to exert control over regulatory agencies); George J. Stigler, The Theory ofEconomic Regulation, in CHICAGO STUins iN POLITICAL EcONoMY, supra,at 209 (arguing that regulatory agencies created to protect the public often succumb to interest group pressures). 
No. 12,291, supra note 2. 
eliminate small public health risks); Richard H. Pildes & Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State 62 U. Cm. L. RE. 1, 4 ( 
( environmental protection alone.37 A recent study suggests that better allocation of health expenditures could save 60,000 additional lives at no increased cost, and that, alternatively, we could maintain the current number of lives saved with $31 billion in annual savings.3 8 
This overall spending pattern includes serious and apparently unjustified 39 asymmetries in life-saving expenditures among the areas of regulation. For example, compare transportation safety regulation, which costs a median of $56,000 per life-year saved, to occupational safety regulation, costing a median of $350,000 per life-year saved, and environmental regulation, costing a median of $4,200,000 per life-year saved. 40 These variations are compounded by variations in the effectiveness of safety standards within each area. 41 Annual lives saved are highly variable. In transportation, the Federal Aviation Administration's seat cushion flammability regulation saves thirty-seven lives each year, while the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's passive restraints/belts regulation saves no fewer than 1,850 lives annually; in occupational safety, OSHA's hazard communication regulation saves 200 lives per year, OSHA's oil and gas well service regulation saves fifty lives per year, OSHA's grain dust regulation saves four lives per year, and OSHA's formaldehyde regulation saves 0.010 lives per year; and in environmental safety, EPA's asbestos regulation saves ten lives each year, while EPA's land disposal regulation saves 2.5 lives per year.42 
Of course calculations of costs and benefits are somewhat speculative, and these numbers are only estimates. But with better allocation of resources and more deliberative judgments, much could be improved. Consider Table 1, which certainly does not capture all relevant factors-it does not even describe total benefits-but which is at least highly suggestive of poor resource allocations. 43 
In addition to this apparently inconsistent structure, the goal of achieving sensible priority-setting is undermined by the fact that agencies have substantially different standards for deciding when risks are large enough to require any regulation at all.44 For example, the International Commission on Radiological Protection recommends that environmental factors be regulated when calculated to cause an incremental cancer risk of about 3 in 1000, for those exposed over a lifetime. American agencies do not follow this recommendation, and national practices are highly variable. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission mandates regulation where incremental cancer risks exceed 1 in 1000; the EPA does so when the risk exceeds an acceptable range that varies from 1 in 10,000 to 1 in 1,000,000.4 5 
The FDA set its standard at 1 in 1,000,000, but courts have interpreted the Delaney Clause to require a standard of essentially zero.46 
OSHA interprets the "significant risk" requirement in its governing statute to mean that an incremental cancer risk of 1 in 1000 will initiate regulation;4 7 labor groups have sought to require regulation when the risk is 1 in 1,000,000. As we will see, a single number may not make sense in light of different contextual judgments. 48 But in the face of these variations, good priority-setting is unlikely. 
than rigid commands. 
Too often government regulates through rigid commands, precluding industries from using more flexible and cost-effective measures that achieve the same goals.49 For example, in air and water pollution control, the rigid "best available technology" approach,50 which mandates control technologies for hundreds or even thousands of firms, gives industries little incentive to improve existing pollution control technologies. Incentive-based systems could save billions of dollars. 51 Yet in spite of the potential advantages, efforts to seek better regulatory tools are hobbled by the statutory status quo, which either forbids such tools or engrafts them onto a bureaucratically complex system.52 cost. 
A study based on data from 1984 suggests that the EPA's "netting" emissions trading program saves between $525 million and $12 billion each year.5 3 The Clinton Administration calculates that its market-oriented proposals for amending the Clean Water Act could save between $1 and $12 billion over alternative approaches.5 4 Thus studies show that incentive-based mechanisms for controlling air pollution could have accomplished the same result at one-quarter the 55 
Encouraging companies to disclose information is an especially valuable incentive-based approach to risk regulation. If companies offer information about risk, consumer and worker behavior will probably be affected.5 6 The national government has offered many initiatives in this direction. Consider in particular the Toxic Release Inventory of the Superfund Amendments, which requires companies to publish annual reports detailing the amount of toxics they release into the environment. This program has been highly successful, spurring voluntary reductions at relatively low costs. Reacting to public concern about the information in these mandatory disclosures, many companies have voluntarily pledged to reduce toxic releases. 57 A great deal of work remains to be done in conceiving and designing appropriate informational approaches to risk.5 8 
consequences of regulations. 
Many regulatory initiatives result in harmful unintended consequences. Under the existing regulatory system, there is no systematic way to ensure that those consequences receive attention.5 9 Hence regulation tends to be based on partial perspectives that emerge from close attention to mere pieces of complex problems. This myopic approach ignores the importance of ensuring that regulation does not have unexplored side-effects or increase harms or risks on balance. 60 A particular problem arises from "health-health" tradeoffs, which arise when regulation of one health risk increases another health risk.61 Suppose, for example, that elimination of asbestos, a carcinogenic substance, makes cars less safe because asbestos is the best substance to use in making brake linings. 62 Or suppose that the ban on asbestos encourages companies to use even more dangerous substitutes. 63 It is pervasively true that controls on one risk may increase another risk. Unfortunately, risk regulation is not designed with this problem in mind. 
An incipient literature deals with a related issue. It suggests that regulatory expenditures can profoundly affect social well-being and actually cost health and even lives. Regulatory expenditures may produce greater unemployment by increasing production costs and decreasing profits. Unemployment breeds poverty, which, in turn, breeds poor health and increased mortality rates. A 1990 study developed a model to quantify the common sense view that "richer is safer."' 4 The study suggests that a regulatory expenditure of $3 million to $7.5 million may cause a statistical fatality.65 
In a concurring opinion in a 1991 D.C. Circuit case involving an occupational safety and health regulation, Judge Williams invoked this evidence to suggest that OSHA's refusal to engage in cost-benefit analysis might not be beneficial for workers. 66 Judge Williams reasoned that if a fatality results from an expenditure of $12 million, some regulations might produce more fatalities than they prevent. 67 As Table I illustrates, many regulations do cost more than $12 million per life saved. In Judge Williams' view, an agency that fails to measure the overall social costs against benefits falls accurately to measure mortality gains against losses. 
The claimed relationship between wealth reductions and mortality is controversial.68 But a number of studies find such a relationship and indicate that regulations may, in fact, cause more fatalities than they prevent. Consider the following summary of studies showing a causal relation between wealth and 69 mortality: unlikely to translate into significant, aggregate health impacts). 
and Safety Regulation, 8 J. RIsK & UNCERTAITY 43, 49, tbl. 1 ( 
This work is in its initial stages, and any findings should be taken with many grains of salt.70 But certainly it would be good for government to know about unintended adverse consequences and to try to counteract them to the extent feasible. Unfortunately, there is now no systematic mechanism by which government regulators are made attentive to harmful unintended consequences. 
Often government lacks information about the harms that regulation is designed to counteract. Often it must act, or fail to act, in a context of considerable scientific uncertainty. 7 1 Without accurate data, any exercise in quantification can be illusory,72 giving the impression of far more knowledge than people actually have. 
In these circumstances government should place a high premium on acquiring as much accurate information as possible. Much of the relevant information can be found in the private sector, which is best equipped to determine actual emissions levels and the costs of risk control. But the current regulatory structure does not create incentives to compile accurate information about risks. Indeed, it creates incentives to distort the facts. Hence industry faces incentives to report costs that are far higher than reality73 and is not encouraged to compile more information than is already available. 
regulatingrisks. 
It seems clear that government should respond to reasonable judgments about risk; but whose judgments should be counted as reasonable? Countless studies show systematic differences between expert and citizen judgments about risk.7 4 This is one of the most robust findings in an extensive litera70. See Portney & Stavins, supra note 37, at 118-19 (advocating use of cost-benefit analysis because the theoretical limitations of health-health analysis make it less useful in practice). 
(examining formaldehyde regulation to emphasize the difficulty of determining what poses a health risk and the degree to which regulation is necessary). 
ScIENcE AND VAs.Es IN RiSK MANAGEmENT 29, 42-43 (Deborah G. Mayo & Rachelle D. Hollander eds., 1991) (attributing the push toward quantification to the adversariness of law and politics in the United States). 
information about hazardous products because the information may reduce sales). 
between experts and laypersons). ture.75 The following table summarizes the results of a national opinion poll in which experts and citizens ranked environmental health risks.7 6 
A recent study in Canada shows similar results. 77 It reveals that the Canadian public sees cigarette smoking and motor vehicle accidents as far less dangerous than do Canadian toxicologists. It also shows that the public ranks many risks higher than do toxicologists; the most dramatic disparities along this dimension involve chemical pollution, ozone depletion, nuclear waste, food additives, pesticides in goods, and PCBs. 
What accounts for these differences? Some are simply attributable to citizens' ignorance of scientific facts. This ignorance has many sources, including sensationalist media reports and heuristics that produce systematic biases. 78 process of congressional review might also deter agencies from submitting illconsidered or faction-driven regulations to Congress. Moreover, agencies might more frequently signal to Congress that some statutorily mandated regulations make little sense, and the process of review might lead Congress to change the relevant statute.20 7 It is in part for these reasons that President Clinton expressed enthusiasm for congressional review. 20 8 
It is unclear, however, how much this provision would add, since Congress can already enact legislation to prevent any and all regulations from becoming law. There are risks as well. A serious problem with congressional review is that it might, in practice, give well-organized interest groups a chance to bring pressure to bear on hundreds or even thousands of regulations. In this way it might increase rather than decrease the problem of factional influence. 20 9 Section 801 would also require Congress to expend limited resources reviewing a wide range of agency rules, many of which should be uncontroversial. 
The competing considerations do not lead to any obvious conclusion. But a new statutory provision for congressional review adds nothing to Congress' existing authority. Setting up a formal mechanism for review of regulations is probably too costly and time-consuming to be worthwhile; narrower "reporting" strategies could accomplish the same goals. Hence section 801 might well impose costs that are not justified by benefits. 
Modest Changes2 10 
How might Congress improve the proposals mentioned above? I begin with some modest changes designed to accomplish Congress' apparent goals in a more effective manner. 
Some theoretical issues. If a substantive supermandate is to operate as a kind of constitutional amendment to the regulatory state, it seems crucial to understand what cost-benefit balancing actually entails. Much of the national debate in the last year involved the value of cost-benefit analysis. Proponents characterized cost-benefit analysis as a method of disciplining administrative power through salutary balancing; opponents feared that cost-benefit analysis cold-heartedly sacrifices human health and life for the sake of mere dollars. But this is at best a caricature. By itself, the notion of cost-benefit analysis appears very close to empty; everything depends on how costs and benefits are characterized and on how underlying issues of valuation are resolved. 2 11 
Two criticisms can be made of a proposed framework (or supermandate) for evaluating governmental performance. The first is that the framework is wrong because it ignores certain important variables, or is founded on an indefensible theory of value. The second criticism is that the framework is incompletely specified, in the sense that its meaning depends on further subsidiary judgments that have yet to be offered. Cost-benefit analysis is properly subject to the first kind of criticism to the extent that it purports to align values along the single metric of aggregated private willingness to pay-and evaluates regulation by reference to that criterion alone. Indeed, regulation might be founded on citizen judgments that have no clear parallel in aggregated willingness to pay.2 12 Or it may be rooted in distributive rather than allocative goals; consider the antidiscrimination laws as possible examples. To the extent that cost-benefit analysis is rooted in the technical economists' understanding, it has a great deal to offer, but it cannot capture many appropriate goals of regulation. 
As a political creed, however, the principal problem with cost-benefit analysis is that it is incompletely specified. Its meaning depends on how costs and benefits are characterized and on how issues of valuation are resolved. Do equitable concerns enter the cost-benefit calculus? Suppose, for example, that a certain environmental risk is concentrated among African-Americans. 21 3 Can a good cost-benefit analysis take this into account? Or suppose that some of the benefits of regulation are aesthetic. How will these benefits be valued? An extensive literature explores the valuation of human life.2 14 Though, by itself, cost-benefit analysis takes no position on the associated controversies, regulators asked to operate under cost-benefit analysis must take some such position. 
With these points in mind we can ask the general question: Would a general requirement of cost-benefit analysis be a sensible supermandate for the regulatory state? 
Would such a requirement be like a constitutional amendment, or would it be a modest way of disciplining agency discretion? 
The most basic point here is that the modem state includes a diverse array of regulatory statutes, with diverse legitimate purposes, including but not at all limited to economic efficiency. 
Consider the following: " Many important regulatory states are plausibly understood in terms of economic efficiency; 2 15 they can be seen as efforts to counteract market failures. The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act 2 16 and the Toxic Substances Control Act2 17 are examples. Such statutes may be designed to overcome an absence of sufficient information; harms to third parties; or collective action problems of various sorts.218 " Some statutes are designed to eliminate illegitimate discrimination or what might be understood as caste-like features in modem society.2 19 Though some people think that such statutes can be defended on efficiency grounds, 22 0 their animating impulse has little to do with economic efficiency. " Some statutes are designed to protect cultural aspirations. 2 21 Examples include measures safeguarding the national parks, encouraging high-quality programming, and protecting endangered species. " Some statutes are designed to redistribute to the poor or to others understood as having a good claim to public help. This is so even though regulation is a poor tool for this purpose,22- and though redistribution may really benefit well-organized interest groups with little claim to public assistance. The Social Security Act is an obvious example of redistributive law; the Agricultural Adjustment Act can also be understood in this way, with appropriate qualifications for its interest-group dimensions. 
Doubtless other possibilities could be mentioned. 223 The point is that the highly diverse grounds for federal regulation raise many questions about costbenefit analysis as the only ground for regulation. 
If it is intended as a quasi-constitutional amendment to the regulatory state, a cost-benefit supermandate could be understood in at least three different ways. In its most ambitious form, the mandate would amount to an endorsement of the principle of economic efficiency as the exclusive basis-the "decision criterion"--for interpretation and application of all statutes.2 2 4 This would be a fundamental change both because it would understand cost-benefit analysis in a particular way-as a term for the criterion of economic efficiency-and because it would amend statutes that, when enacted, seemed motivated by something other than the efficiency criterion. 
If this were the understanding of the supermandate, all of the statutes to which the supermandate applies would henceforth be understood in efficiency terms. To say the least, this would be a dramatic shift in national understandings. It would indeed represent a kind of constitutional amendment of the administrative state, rebuilding regulatory efforts on a new foundation. While the most ambitious reformers in the Senate and the House came close to this view, none endorsed it explicitly. 
Another, less ambitious possibility is to understand the cost-benefit criteria in efficiency terms, but only for those statutes that were designed to promote economic efficiency. Under this approach, the supermandate would not alter the basic understandings of existing statutes. It would instead have a more modest but nonetheless important goal: imposing a particular understanding of technocratic rationality on statutes formerly understood and implemented in a less precise, more ad hoc, and more intuitive way. As we will see, there is much to be said in favor of this basic approach. 
A third and least ambitious possibility is to understand cost-benefit criteria in a less technical and more common-sensical way, as an invitation to balance a range of variables under statutes that had formerly been thought to be absolutist and hence to forbid balancing. On this view, a supermandate would not be so ambitious as to call for the use of purely economic criteria. It would more modestly ask administrators to look at costs, or adverse effects, as well as at benefits. This was probably the goal of the majority of those members of Congress who were in favor of a substantive supermandate. And if the supermandate is understood in these terms, it makes a great deal of sense. As we will see, the principal objection to such a supermandate is that it is too openended. Congress can and should take steps to clarify it, though-I emphasize-without mandating the efficiency criterion outside of the context of "market failure" statutes.225 
The House and Senate bills offered almost no guidance for characterizing costs and benefits, and no guidance at all on the crucial issue of how to value best justificatory apparatus for demarcating the scope of state power from the area of individual choice"). Even when economic efficiency is not the basis for the statute, or when benefits cannot be quantified, it makes sense to require agencies to quantify costs to the extent that this is possible. costs and benefits. For this reason, the provisions look highly substantive but are in fact largely procedural. Without guidance to constrain valuation, a requirement of cost-benefit analysis is quite open-ended, though certainly not meaningless. It alerts agencies to the need to balance a range of considerations and as a procedural requirement, it will affect outcomes. Moreover, courts may invalidate outcomes that, by general understandings, seem either out of line with existing practice or too absolutist. 226 Certainly there is a difference between agency behavior under balancing statutes and agency behavior under statutes that forbid balancing. 227 
It is possible to conclude that Congress should restrict itself to a call for cost-benefit analysis and leave the details to agencies.228 Perhaps Congress lacks the detailed understanding that would enable it to answer the more specific questions. But if we are at all concemed about administrative discretion, we should urge greater guidance from the national legislature.2 29 In any case the generic bills introduced in the House and Senate would be much improved if they offered more direction to agencies. I offer two suggestions here. 
aggregate amount of lives saved, but also about a range of factors involving the nature of the particular risk. For most people, the most salient contextual features are: ( uncontrollable; ( (4) whether the risk is voluntarily incurred; ( distributed or concentrated on identifiable, innocent, or traditionally disadvantaged victims; (6) whether the risk is well understood; (7) whether the risk would be faced by future generations; and (8) whether the risk is familiar.2 30 
Any cost-benefit analysis that Congress requires regulatory agencies to perform should reflect these factors. In developing a cost-benefit formula, Congress should recognize that a purely quantitative or monetary understanding of costs and benefits is inadequate. The various consequences of regulation ought not to be thought commensurable along a single metric. 23 1 Any cost-benefit analysis should be accompanied by a disaggregated, qualitative description of the consequences of government action, so that Congress and the public can (rejecting an EPA asbestos regulation issued under the Toxic Substance Control Act because the agency failed to consider less burdensome alternatives). 
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, 7 U.S.C. §§ 136-136y ( §§ 7401-7671q (1988 & Supp. V 1993), Delaney Clause, 21 U.S.C. § 348(c)( Endangered Species Act, 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531-1544 ( 
to changes in science and newly discovered evidence and arguing that "Congress should content itself with the most general kinds of policy guidance"). 
to administrative agencies and advocating that Congress enact detailed legislation to limit agencies' power). But see Mashaw, supra note 14, at 97 (arguing against greater guidance and instead advocating broad delegations of authority to administrative agencies). 
identifying qualitatively different effects, and taking account of effects on diverse groups"). obtain a fuller picture than the crude and misleadingly precise "bottom line" of the cost-benefit analysis. 232 This is not at all to deny that it is important to be precise and quantitative when possible. It is only to say that any "bottom line" characterization and assessment of costs and benefits will involve judgments about values, not about science; Congress and the public should see what those judgments are. 233 
I have suggested that regulatory statutes have legitimate and diverse functions and that some of those functions do not involve economic efficiency. For this reason, the efficiency criterion is inadequate as a complete guide to the regulatory state. It is therefore best for Congress to understand costs and benefits in the economic fashion only for statutes that are designed to overcome market failures. And even here, there is room for qualifying the economic analysis-when, for example, the risk at issue is inequitably distributed, and when political actors believe that it deserves special attention for that reason.2 4 When the statute does not involve market failure, Congress would still require cost-benefit balancing as the general background rule; but it should understand the definition of costs and benefits to be sufficiently broad as to allow administrators to depart from purely economic criteria. Judicial review should be available to police administrative decisions for reasonableness and consistency.2 35 In the long run, it might be hoped, a common law of regulatory practice might emerge to create rationality and reasonableness where there is now a high degree of arbitrariness. 
problems of incommensurability, qualitative distinctions-are probably too subtle and complex to justify anything like legislative codification. Instead they suggest that Congress should: ( analysis fails to account for "the diversity of people's values"). 
identifiable significant benefits, including social, economic, ecological, distributional,and aesthetic benefits, that are reasonablyexpected to result directly or indirectly from implementation of a rule or an alternative to a rule." My italicized additions allow agencies to define "benefit" to account for citizen judgments. 
agency shall offer a disaggregated description of the relevant costs and benefits, containing an account of the qualitative differences, if any, among the costs and benefits at stake." This provision permits a more comprehensive examination of the full cost-benefit landscape. 
the agency shall, in evaluating and comparing costs and benefits, consider public judgments about how best to assess relevant risks, including whether the risks under consideration are involuntarily incurred, likely to affect future generations, potentially catastrophic, especially dreaded, irreversible, or inequitably distributed." The list is not exhaustive, but does provide agencies an opportunity to account for diverse public judgments. 
their preferred directions. It should instead provide room for a formal channel to qualify the economic analysis when, for example, poor people are peculiarly at risk. 
(discussing whether the EPA regulatory decision had a "reasonable basis"). of cost-benefit balancing, 236 with a relatively open-ended understanding of both costs and benefits; (2) permit agencies to understand cost-benefit analysis in a way that best fits with the particular statutory scheme; ( costeffectiveness or "least cost" requirement as part of the supermandate; and (4) require more technical cost-benefit balancing on a statute-by-statute basis, when there is a considered legislative judgment that the statute is a response to a market failure, economically defined. Congress should, however, attempt to impose some constraints on agency valuations and tools, as I will now discuss. 
Floors and ceilings. It is of course troublesome to assign dollar values to life, partly for the reasons I have sketched. But since tradeoffs of multiple kinds are inevitable, it may be best for Congress to set out some guidelines, including floors and ceilings governing expenditures, without pretending to say how much a life is "really worth." In light of the diversity of regulated risks, no single number would make sense for valuing life. 237 But it may make sense to set benchmark standardsof, for example, $10 million per life saved as the presumptive maximum amount and $3 million as the presumptive minimum. These benchmarks might be accompanied by explicit permission for agencies to select a lower or higher amount if the agency can explain that special circumstances call for it. 
There is a crudeness, however, in the very notion of "dollars per life saved." A well-functioning regulatory state should not be interested in how many lives are saved, but in how many statistical years, or how many decently liveable statistical years, are added by regulation.23 8 An agency would do better to save forty statistical years than it would to save three, even though, through both steps, it might be taken to have "saved a life." Where resources are limited, it makes sense to devote resources to saving people who have the most good years ahead. This judgment may appear controversial, but it seems supported by common sense and economic criteria.239 Hence Congress should probably set floors and ceilings not for lives saved but for life-years saved, with permission to depart on the basis of justifications that are articulated publicly and are reasonable on the merits. For life-years, a presumptive ceiling of $500,000 might be a reasonable place to start. Of course any floors and ceilings should be accompanied with adjustments for inflation. 
Without a figure per life or life-year saved, agencies effectively have discretion to weigh costs and benefits however they wish. Congress should offer some guidelines to achieve consistency across agency lines. At a minimum Congress should require agencies to be explicit about their valuations, so that these valuations will be subject to legislative and public oversight and review. 
supra. 
1994) (discussing the diversity of valuations suggested in contingent valuation studies). 
Were Now for Saving Lives?, 40 LAW & CorrEw. PRoBs. 5 (Autumn 1976); Pildes and Sunstein, supranote 35, at 83-86 (asserting that quality-adjusted life years is a promising method for incorporating lay perspectives into regulation). 

We have seen that there is a pervasive problem in risk regulation, one that is only now receiving public attention, and one that was not adequately addressed in the proposals before the 104th Congress.2 40 The problem occurs when the diminution of one risk simultaneouslyincreasesanotherrisk.24 1 For example, fuel economy standards, designed partly to reduce environmental risks to life and health, may make automobiles less safe, thus increasing risks to life and health. Regulations designed to control the spread of AIDS and hepatitis among health care providers may actually cost lives by increasing the costs of health care, and thus making health care less widely available.2 42 Regulation of nuclear power may make nuclear power safer; but by increasing costs, such regulation promotes reliance on other energy sources, such as coal-fired power plants, which carry risks of their own.2 43 The general problem is ubiquitous. 
this problem. Congress should consider a new provision to this effect: "( create countervailing risks that are greater than those of regulated risks. (2) This section shall not apply if it is inconsistent with the provisions of the enabling statute pursuant to which the agency is acting." 
Such a provision would require agencies to ensure that overall risks are not increased. It would not fundamentally change current law. But it would be a modest step toward a more coordinated treatment of risk.244 
Thus far I have offered modest suggestions that build on existing proposals. Three more ambitious strategies would accomplish a great deal more. 
required only to 'consider' such risks. H.R. 1022, 104th Cong., 1st Sess. § 105(4). 
lead farmers to switch to other, more dangerous fumigants); Graham & Wiener, supra note 61, at 5-25; Sunstein, supranote 61; text accompanying notes 59-70 supra(discussing harmful, unintended consequences of regulations). 
OSHA regulation, but commented on OSHA's failure to follow the "universal precautions" requirement. Id. at 825. Judge Posner explains: 
OSHA also exaggerated the number of lives likely to be saved by the rule by ignoring lives likely to be sacrificed by it, since the increased cost ofmedical care, to the extent passed on to consumers, will reduce the demand for medical care, and some people may lose their lives as a result. 
Id. at 826. 
View of NuclearEnergy, 70 IND. L.J. 679, 705-06 ( plants contribute significantly to greenhouse gases and to the air pollution which causes acid rain). 
Risk Tradeoffs, in RisK VERsus RisK, supra note 61, at 220-40. 
increase the executive's role in priority setting. 
As Justice Breyer suggests, a statute could give the executive some degree of authority to divert public and private resources from small environmental problems to large ones, ensuring greater cost-effectiveness in government and better priority-setting. 245 There are some dangers with this proposal-a small group of bureaucrats should not have the authority to decide on basic social priorities. Nonetheless, a greater degree of executive priority-setting would make sense. 
Justice Breyer's approach should be qualified by remembering that people are legitimately concerned with the various contextual factors discussed above-the voluntariness of the risk, its potentially catastrophic character, whether it is especially dreaded, whether it is equitably distributed, and so forth.24 6 Efforts at better priority-setting received some modest attention in the 104th Congress; but the proposals were not very ambitious. 24 7 
Often the problem with federal regulation is that the government lacks knowledge of the least expensive means of producing the preferred regulatory end. If the private sector were permitted to select the means, it could do so far more cheaply. This point has been recognized in Europe and Japan, under the general rubric of "environmental contracting." 248 In the Netherlands, for example, the government has experimented with comprehensive, multimedia environmental targets for pollution reduction and has developed strategies to work with industry groups to achieve overall goals. 249 As part of the agreement with industry groups, the government agrees to waive otherwise applicable pollutant-by-pollutant regulations, and to limit changes in requirements during the length of the contract period. 
In the United States, the EPA has taken modest steps in the same direction. For example, the EPA and Amoco concluded that a plantwide approach would better decrease chemical releases than the existing command-and-control system. 5 0 Similarly, under the Clean Air Act, companies can, in essence, "contract out" of technology-based regulations for six years if they achieve a 90 environmental law "proved to be especially fertile ground" for agency experimentation). 
amendment No. 1507). 
CONTRACTs AND CovENANTs: NEav INSTRUMENTS FOR A REALISTIC ENvIRmOmmrNAL PoLICY? (Jan M. van Dunn6 ed., 1993). 
Environment, 22 ENvrL. L. 1, 29 ( note 82, at 421-22. 
percent reduction in toxic pollutants before the EPA promulgates relevant regulations. 2 5' 
Under most federal statutes, however, the EPA cannot approve private plans as substitutes for public mandates, even if the plans promise better results for less money. Congress should move in the direction of allowing private substitutes, so long as government monitoring is maintained.2 52 A provision of the June discussion draft of the Dole bill endorsed this strategy, but because its relationship to other statutes was quite ambiguous, it was unclear whether the provision would enable agencies to waive existing statutory requirements. 2 53 
We have seen that command-and-control regulation can be highly dysfunctional. Sometimes relevant statutes forbid agencies from choosing incentivebased strategies even where such strategies would be more effective. Congress might move away from command-and-control regulation by enacting a statute stating: "Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an agency shall be permitted to use economic incentives to induce industries to eliminate or reduce risks, if it can show that these methods will produce at least equivalent benefits in a more cost-effective manner."2 54 Of course, such a provision could increase the risk of litigation initiated by self-interested private groups seeking to stall desirable regulation.2 55 It could also allow agencies unenthusiastic about regulatory mandates to proceed with less effective means of achieving compliance. But despite the potential for abuse, the problems with existing command-andcontrol processes-excessive costs and insufficient regulatory benefits25 6-are probably sufficient to make it worthwhile to move in this direction. 
In the area of regulatory reform, and particularly in the context of health, safety, and the environment, a number of creative ideas are percolating throughout the nation. These ideas have already had effects on legislation; they will have increasingly significant consequences inthe coming years. Using Perceived Problems Approved Measures 1970s Environmentalism excessive pollution; power of industry 
Cost-Benefit Analysis refusal to balance; absolutism 
Pollution Preven- Free Market tion Environmentalism technological fixes; end of the pipe controls; power of industry national ambient Toxic Substances elimination of air quality stan- Control Act; lead (CAA); dards; technologi- FIFRA asbestos rule cal requirements (TSCA) Disapproved Measures 
common law Preferred Soluions Attitude Toward CBA command-andcontrol; best available technology; technology forcing hostility 
Delaney Clause; national ambient air quality standards; technology-based regulation of course favorable tinkering with Clean Air Act best available current cars; tech- especially unholy technology in nological fixes coalitions CAA and CWVA; for water pollu- Superfund; comtion mon law balancing require- solar energy; create property ments electric cars; rights; watch the clean fuels; elimi- market work nating "root cause" economic incenives in the form of "polluters pay" and emissions trading 
environmental regulation as an example, I organize those ideas into four general frameworks: cost-benefit analysis, pollution prevention, free market environmentalism, and democratic environmentalism. 
The following table is designed to provide capsule descriptions: Five Approaches to Regulatory Reform absence of welldefined property rights; environmentalism as a form of socialism; factionalism command-andcontrol; poor priority-setting; absence of public deliberation; interest group power common law; the Emergency Plantakings approach ning and Conto environmental sumer Right to regulation; ef. Know Act; wetlands protec- National Environion and endan- mental Policy gered species act Act; acid deposireform tion provisions of 
CBA favorable, but favorable insofar tany questions, as they limit facsince there is a tional power, large government focus democracy role in setting on right quesprices and/or tions, and put a quantities; under- premium on stands "eco- acquiring infornomic" incentives mation as creation of real markets consumer sovereignity, based on maximizing welfare through well-informed public judgments based on people's ideals and convictions suspicion, since CBA need not produce pollution prevention Attitude Toward Economic Inentives hostility favorable insofar as they minimize costs suspicion Normative Ideal strict enforcement good balancing of clean pollutionof statutory man- relevant variables; free technologies, dates maximizing social with "deep" ecolwelfare ogy and spiritual values as possible aggregating prianimating ideals; vate preferences nature as a source for environmental of value and other goods 
One possibility, captured in many of the current proposals, is to shift in the direction of cost-benefit balancing for all statutes. Many current statutes forbid balancing and call for absolutism. Such an approach is not easy to justify.257 Thus the various statutes that are defined in terms of health or technology might be amended to call for cost-benefit analysis.2 58 As we have seen, this shift-in the direction of a cost-benefit state-responds to several current problems with regulation. Moreover, it is important to offer some criteria by which to monitor regulatory performance, and cost-benefit analysis is probably the best available technique for embarking on a form of "national performance review." 
By itself, however, a shift towards cost-benefit analysis would be only a modest improvement over the status quo. We have seen that, as an abstraction, cost-benefit analysis lacks a theory of value. If this defect is remedied in the economist's fashion, by rooting cost-benefit analysis in the economic criterion of private willingness to pay, it becomes quite controversial and indeed hard to defend as a global approach. Environmental amenities are not best valued by aggregating private willingness to pay.259 
Apart from the question of valuation, engrafting a cost-benefit requirement onto current law is only a modest shift; it does not represent a sufficiently fundamental change from the system of command-and-control regulation. Because the calculation of both costs and benefits can be enormously difficult, requiring agencies to make the necessary inquiries will impose large informational burdens on government. A general requirement of cost-benefit analysis allows legislators to take credit for "getting the regulators under control" without making the hard choices. Such a credit-claiming device hardly substitutes for reinvented government. 
say, 1986 to replace an "absolutist" five-year plan for producing wheat with another five-year plan, one that better recognized the need for balancing competing variables. This step might have been an improvement; but a five-year the use of carcinogens in food additives. Congress has enacted several bans on cost-benefit balancing. See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. § 7409(c) ( Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1311(b) ( §§ 7475(a)(4), 7503(a)(2) (1988 & Supp. V 1993). See generallyNational Ambient Air Quality Standard Regulations, 40 C.F.R. §§ 50.1-.12 ( 
Howard Latin, Ideal Versus Real Regulatory Efficiency: Implementation of Uniform Standards and "Fine-Tuning" RegulatoryReforms, 37 STAN. L. REv. 1267, 1273-75, 1279 (1985) (criticizing proponents of cost-benefit analysis for their unrealistic assumption that all environmental conditions and control strategies can be known). It is of course possible that cost-benefit analysis would itself fail costbenefit analysis; thus technology-based approaches could be justified as a response to government's lack of information and proper incentives. Similarly, it is possible that health-based standards can be justified by their aspirational and political values-providing a benchmark to which even dirty places may aspire. These ideas do not, however, argue against the background rule I defend above. See text accompanying notes 226-244 supra. 
pay); text accompanying notes 272-276 infra. plan based on governmental balancing is no less a five-year plan than one based on governmental absolutism. 260 Governmental dictation of outcomes based on cost-benefit analysis is better than governmental dictation based on absolutism, but neither is ideal. A system in which agencies decide what is to be done only after considering all costs and benefits is likely to be time-consuming and will inevitably produce large-scale errors. Such a system imposes enormous data collection requirements on agencies and also forces them to make difficult, and hardly scientific, judgments about basic values. This approach may well be attractive to members of Congress seeking reelection, but it is not a great deal better than the status quo. 
In fact it would be easy to imagine a generation of dreary cycles with respect to regulatory reform. In those cycles, conservatives might call for more balancing of costs and benefits, more procedures, and fewer deadlines for administrators; liberals would then argue against cost-benefit analysis and for health-based or technology-based standards, fewer procedures, citizen suits for regulatory beneficiaries, and stricter deadlines; conservatives, a few years later, would seek greater procedural requirements and more attention to costs; liberals would respond with the familiar litany; and so on until, say 2050. 
Although this cyclical model is not a bad description of the regulatory debates since 1980, its continuation would represent an enormous failure of imagination and creativity. It would fix American policy in the outmoded debates of the early 1970s, before the outpouring of learning that makes the "more" or "less" debate seem so unhelpful. A cost-benefit state ought not to content itself with governmental specification of outcomes after governmental cost-benefit judgments have been made. It ought instead to create incentives for nongovernmental actors to generate information and to produce outcomes based on incentives generated by democratic judgments. 
In the last decade many people have enthusiastically embraced "pollution prevention" as the regulatory strategy of choice.261 On this view, government should eliminate pollutants from the market rather than require pretreatment or impose technological requirements to reduce the harmful effects of pollutants. Prominent examples of pollution prevention include the elimination of lead from gasoline; the phaseout of chlorofluorocarbons; government bans on DDT, can be justified partly on the ground that individuals have far better relevant information than does government. See F.A. HAYEK, Tim CoNsTuToN oF LmERTY 106-120 (1960). 
pollution prevention is the only effective environmental strategy); Barry Commoner, Failureofthe Environmental Effort, 18 ENvTL. L. REP. 10,195, 10,195 ( environmental effort is that pollution can be prevented). See alsoSymposium, PollutionPrevention,29 GA. L. REv. 313 ( 1995, available in WESTLAW, Pres-Daily Database (President Clinton's statement announcing the launch of EPA project to reduce pollution). PCBs, and asbestos 262; the shift from high-polluting fossil fuels to clean, renewable energy sources; and restrictions on mercury pollution in the Great Lakes and phosphate pollution in local rivers. 
Why is pollution prevention so attractive to so many people? Enthusiasts contend that by preventing the production or use of certain pollutants, government can make much more progress in reducing pollution than it can by imposing technological controls or fixes. 263 The proper analogy, it is said, is to the contrast between prevention and cure. We know that cures tend to be both more expensive and less effective than preventive measures. American government has focused on cures; it should shift to prevention. From this perspective, the basic cause of environmental degradation is current technology, above all fossil fuels and modem cars. At the same time, the capacity of technology to diminish its own environmental damage is rapidly becoming exhausted. Instead of imposing decreasingly effective technological fixes, would it not be better to take steps to ensure that environmentally harmful substances are not produced at all? 
Often the answer to this question is affirmative; often pollution prevention is both feasible and appropriate. 264 But as a global approach, pollution prevention is inadequate. 265 In some cases pollution prevention would impose extremely high costs-including environmental costs-for little environmental or other gain. Recall here that a federal court of appeals invalidated one of the most ambitious of the recent pollution prevention strategies-the ban on the manufacture and use of asbestos--on the ground that: (a) the benefits of the ban could not, in many sectors, be shown to justify the costs and (b) the ban on asbestos could itself produce a variety of environmental and health-related problems stemming from the use of environmentally inferior substitutes.266 
This example can be duplicated in many other contexts. Indeed the goal of pollution prevention, if taken literally, would be a social disaster. For example, an immediate and wholesale shift to electric cars might seem the best way to prevent air pollution from motor vehicles. But electric cars are now extremely expensive, and the costs, for workers and consumers, of a ban on contemporary automobiles would plainly be excessive. In fact, electric cars produce environ262. But see Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201, 1215-17 (5th Cir. 1991) (invalidating EPA ban on "for all practical purposes, all present and future uses of asbestos"). 
achieved by pollution prevention rather than control technologies). 
codified at 40 C.F.R. § 1) (detailing EPA's agenda for a comprehensive reevaluation of its rfles); SciaNcE ADvisoRy BOARD, EPA, No. SAB-EC-90-021, RFDUcINo RISK: SErr7No PRIORmEs AND SmaTA'GIES FOR Evrmo~mEaNrAL PROTECnON 22 ( Water Act proposals have also focused on pollution prevention strategies. See, e.g., 141 CONG. Rac. ES10 (daily ed. Mar. 3, 1995) (statement of Rep. Oberstar). 
prevention). 
presented insufficient evidence to justify asbestos ban). mental harms of their own267 -a potential problem for many pollution prevention strategies. 
In these circumstances, pollution prevention is sometimes worse than costbenefit analysis or economic incentives. By imposing a direct cost on polluting activity, economic incentives can identify the circumstances in which prevention or cure makes the most sense. For example, fees imposed on the production of sulfur dioxide may lead some companies to eliminate sulfur dioxide; in any case the judgment would be left to (appropriately constrained) market forces. Alternatively, cost-benefit analysis might show that pollution prevention is not worthwhile. 
The appropriate conclusion is that pollution prevention is often a good regulatory strategy, but that it cannot be adopted in all or even most contexts. Whether it is the best solution depends on the pollutant in question, the available substitutes, and the effects of the preventative approach. 
Much creative thought has been dedicated to using "free markets" as a mechanism for promoting environmental and other goals. 268 To free market advocates, the problem of environmental degradation stems from a simple fact: the absence of secure property rights in environmental amenities.2 69 The creation of secure property rights tends to reduce environmental problems. 
There is much truth to this suggestion, and there is considerable promise to the resulting proposals. If environmental assets were owned, so that owners faced the full costs of excessive development, it is likely that excessive pollution would be prevented. In many settings, free market environmentalism points in promising directions. Consider, for example, possible amendments to the Endangered Species Act, related to proposals introduced in the 104th Congress. In its current form, the Act creates difficult problems for any landowner who discovers that his land contains a critical habitat for an endangered or threatened species. Discovery of such a habitat subjects the property to a range of limitations.270 Hence a landowner has an incentive either to lie about the facts or to proceed with development as rapidly as possible to avoid the constraints of the Endangered Species Act. It would be far better to use market approaches so that landowners are rewarded rather than punished by a discovery that threatened or endangered species need their land.27 1 
34 (doubting the ability of low emission vehicles to improve air quality and energy security). 
EnvironmentalProtection,15 HARv. J.L. & PUB. POL'Y 297 ( protection, including market-based solutions). 
(1991) (proposing an approach to environmental protection based on property rights). 
Works, 104th Cong., Ist Sess. ( Gregg Easterbrook, author) (advocating the creation ofprivate preservation firms that would operate on a free market basis); see also Incentivesfor PrivateLandowners Underthe EndangeredSpecies Act: 
For two reasons, however, free market environmentalism is an incomplete solution. First, it is not always possible to assign ownership rights. Consider, for example, the problems posed by acid deposition, the greenhouse effect, and the destruction of the ozone layer. Economic incentives, based on market thinking, may be preferable to command-and-control measures; but it is difficult to imagine a system in which private ownership rights are fully allocated. 
The second reason is more theoretical. Free market environmentalism depends on the view that the market paradigm should be deemed normative for purposes of environmental protection. Thus the key question becomes how much people, as consumers, would pay for environmental amenities. 272 The answer to that question defines people's "choices" and "values." Indeed, for free market environmentalists it is hard to imagine how choices and values might otherwise be understood. 
But it is wrong to take private choices, expressed in the market domain, as definitional of preferences. 273 Private willingness to pay in the market domain reflects a particular setting; it does not reflect global choices or valuations.2 74 The choices people make are a function of the particular role in which they find themselves. As consumers, people make choices that diverge from those they make as citizens. The appropriate kind and degree of environmental protection raise issues that should be discussed by citizens offering reasons for one or another view. This democratic conception of environmental protection competes with the market-oriented view. Of course, a democratic approach to environmental law will use market incentives in many contexts, partly because of the advantages of market incentives on simple democratic grounds. 
existing habits, and these should probably be changed; indeed, in the environmental context they had better be.2 75 Consider, for example, the issues posed by littering and recycling. Social norms with respect to these issues have shifted dramatically in the last generation. Thus the act of recycling is now, in many communities, taken for granted, where a decade ago that same act was perceived as odd or fanatical. Or consider smoking. A principal issue here is whether smoking is promoted or undermined by social norms. Large reductions in smoking among African-American teenagers appear to have been Hearings Before the Subcomm. On Environment and Natural Resources of the House Comm. on MerchantMarineandFisheries,103d Cong., 1st Sess. ( File [hereinafter Hearings](statement ofRobert Thornton, attorney, Nossaman, Guthner, Knox & Elliot) (advocating a "Habitat Transaction Method" that awards conservation credits to landowners who preserve or enhance habitats). 
(exploring private willingness to pay as a method of valuation). 
best addresses environmental evaluation). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Rules, 96 CoLum. L. Rav. (forthcorning 1996); Cass R. Sunstein, On the ExpressiveFunction ofLaw, 144 U. PA. L. REv. (forthcoming 1996). 
( construct social meaning); Sunstein, supra note 274. brought about by changes in social norms.276 A prime purpose of environmental law is to shape norms and habits. The central weakness of free market environmentalism is that it removes this issue from the agenda. 
A final approach would base regulatory law on people's reflective judgments, as citizens, about their basic goals. On this view, the most significant problems in the current system consist of interest-group power, myopic responses to sensationalist anecdotes, and inadequate information. A market-oriented understanding of the regulation is inadequate because it fails to provide a forum for public deliberation. Similarly, a purely technocratic conception is inadequate because it devalues the need to rely on people's reflective judgments.2 77 More specifically, the technocratic approach fails to reflect the various qualitative factors that influence public judgments about risk-whether a risk is voluntarily incurred, equitably distributed, potentially catastrophic, especially dreaded, and so forth.2 78 And as we have seen, there is a difference between the judgments people make as citizens and those they make as consnmers; in principle, the former are the relevant judgments with respect to public policy. 
A good model for democratic environmentalism is the Emergency Planning and Community Involvement Right-to-Know Act,2 79 which requires the creation and publication of a list of release levels for each of more than three hundred toxic chemicals that exceed threshold quantities. 280 The result is a Toxic Release Inventory, an annual EPA report of toxic chemical releases that summarizes the relevant information. The publicity has two desirable consequences. First, the Toxic Release Inventory gives states and localities the information needed to decide whether to act at the governmental level. The Toxic Release Inventory thereby spurs decentralized political action. Second, public reaction to the publication leads many companies to pledge to make voluntary reductions. Thus the Monsanto Corporation pledged a ninety percent cut within four years, and AT&T established a goal of eliminating all toxic air emissions by the turn of the century; many other companies have produced new waste reduction initiatives as well.2 8' 
1995, availablein WESTLAW, Alinews Database (noting a 51% drop in smoking among black teens, but a 14% increase among white teens); see alsoRichard J. Bonnie & Barbara S. Lynch, Time to Up the Ante in the War on Smoking, Issuas Sci. & TEcH., Sept. 22, 1994, at 33 (noting a decline in daily smoking among African Americans from 16% in 1980 to 4A% in 1993). 
solution" to the problem of risk regulation. BREYEPR, supra note 14, at 59 
11,00111,050 (1988 & Supp. V 1993). 

For democratic environmentalists, 28 2 much of the promise of economic incentives lies in the fact that they promise to reduce interest-group power by removing attention from the question of means, which is so clearly a recipe for interest-group struggle. Economic incentives also have the advantage of focusing the public's attention on the right questions. 28 3 Hence the acid deposition provisions of the 1990 Clean Air Act are a model for the future because they reflect a democratic judgment about outcomes. 28 4 The much-criticized (and internationally much-imitated) National Environmental Policy Act285 is also a model from the democratic point of view, insofar as it requires the disclosure of environmental consequences before the government can act,2 86 and in that sense spurs political (but not judicial 28 7) safeguards. It is especially important to ensure that public judgments are adequately informed. A system in which the public responds to misleading and sensationalistic anecdotes only parodies democratic aspirations.28 8 
Of course these are stylized discussions of abstractions that must be applied to complex policy initiatives. It is best to approach particular problems in a pragmatic and experimental manner. All four approaches have something to offer, and they can be combined in different ways to arrive at the best solution. In cases involving dangerous substances with good substitutes, the argument for pollution prevention is overwhelming. Where private ownership is possible, free market environmentalism may well be preferable to the alternatives, notwithstanding the theoretical objections offered above. In some situations, cost-benefit balancing at the government level is unavoidable. We may believe that for reasons associated with democratic environmentalism, a strong commitment to the protection of endangered species makes sense. But even if this is so, it may be best to use market-like instruments to accomplish democratic goals-through, for example, "habitat credits" that reward rather than punish landowners who discover that their land supports the continued existence of an endangered species. 2 89 
Some of the most promising modem initiatives are rooted in democratic judgments, but at the same attempt time to harness private initiative and market forces in the interest of those veryjudgments. In this way it may be possible to REv. L. 1333, 1341-55 (1985) (arguing for use of marketable pollution rights to enhance democratic quality of environmental policy making). 

318 ( Amendments of 1990 promotes democratic deliberation about environmental protection). 
1993). 

curiam) (holding that so long as an agency follows NEPA's procedural requirements, the only role for a court is to make sure that the agency considered environmental consequences). 
less than fully informed public outcry surrounding the Love Canal scandal. Subsequent studies suggest that the risks to humans from hazardous waste dumps are actually very low. See id. at 160. accommodate both free market and democratic environmentalism, nominally opposed foundations that could make a creative rapprochement. This is the direction in which the most productive reforms might lead. They would produce a kind of cost-benefit state, but one that is neither purely technocratic nor entirely founded on the willingness-to-pay criterion. In such a state, regulatory outcomes would be founded on value judgments that are reflective, reasoned, and democratically developed. An approach of this kind would synthesize emerging enthusiasm for technocratic tools and for decreased cost with the basic American commitment to deliberative democracy. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The election of the 104th Congress, together with the Contract with America, signals that the nation may be in the midst of a constitutional moment. At the very least the 104th Congress raised more fundamental questions about the national government than at any time since the New Deal. Most of the key initiatives were passed by the House but floundered in the Senate. The public never authoritatively committed itself to such fundamental change, and hence the constitutional moment, though signalled, failed to occur. Whether it will happen in the future depends on the judgments of the American peopleon whether those judgments will be made with the firmness that American institutions require. 
Even if regulatory reform does not become part of a constitutional moment, the nation is embarking increasingly on the project of assessing government performance by asking whether the benefits justify the costs. The regulatory state is becoming something like a cost-benefit state; this is an unmistakable feature of public life in many institutions of American government. In light of the chaotic and uncoordinated character of modem regulation, this is in many ways a salutary development. But it is only a start, above all because the abstract ideas of "cost" and "benefit" need to be specified by some theory of value. In the 104th Congress, legislative debates over regulatory reform were mostly procedural and unimaginative, trapped in an increasingly pointless discussion of whether "more" or "less" regulation is desirable. In the end, almost nothing happened. 
To be sure, some proposals would have improved the modem regulatory state by reducing regulatory excesses and encouraging better priority-setting. In addition, the deliberative process of the Senate reflected a learning process in which poorly conceived provisions were deleted 290 and better alternatives were proposed. 291 But for the most part, these proposals were far less sophisti290. See for example, the Glenn bill, which preserved the EPA's Toxic Release Inventory program in its entirety; this bill was defeated by Senate Republicans. Ronald Begley, FrustrationsMount in Effort to Scale BackRegulations, CHEMIcAL WL-, July 26, 1995, at 9. See also Proposalto Revive Regulatory Bill Gets Cool Reception from Dole, Industry, Daily Lab. Rep. (BNA) No. 152, at D-16 (Aug. 8, 1995). 
1995). cated and creative than those that emerged from the executive branch, including the "reinventing government" working groups. 
A general lesson emerges from this phenomenon. In the last fifteen years, the executive branch has embraced a form of cost-benefit analysis for specific purposes-to promote better priority-setting, to move towards market-oriented tools, to exempt de minimis risks, to attend to informed public judgments, to foster voluntary and least-cost compliance, and to focus on ultimate results rather than methods and processes. To be sure, there is much to criticize in the efforts of the executive branch.292 But all in all, they are quite promisingcertainly more so than the various bills that attracted so much attention in the 104th Congress. 
As we have seen, balancing is preferable to absolutism. The point is especially important in light of the fact that with respect to the protection of human health, absolutism may actually be counterproductive and hence far from what it seems.293 But cost-benefit balancing is an abstract idea that needs specification, and it is insufficient to graft a supermandate of "balancing" on top of a structure of command-and-control regulation. Future congressional debate over the regulatory state should not remain frozen in a discussion of whether regulation imposes excessively high costs (it surely does) or whether more should be done to protect people from a range of harms, including risks to life and health (it surely should). Too many proposals in the 104th Congress reflected too little of the learning of the last twenty years of experience. Embodying instead the unhelpful (though accurate) judgment that there is "excessive" regulation, they attempted to clog the administrative process with paperwork. 
There is an institutional lesson from all this: Congress is not well-equipped effectively to redesign the regulatory state. The executive branch, with its cadre of experts in numerous substantive areas, is in a better position. For this reason it may be best for Congress to limit its efforts to providing broad signals about what is wrong and to allow the executive branch, within limits, to provide solutions. Statutes that permit or require economic incentives, and that call for suitably constrained balancing, may be the best that Congress can do. 
But there is a substantive lesson as well. If there is to be an Administrative Substance Act, it should build on the foundation laid by recent learning about regulatory performance. In the process it would be possible not only to save billions of dollars unnecessarily wasted on current programs, but also to save many thousands of lives. 
A constitutional moment of the sort signaled by the 104th House of Representatives deserves far more reflection and scrutiny than the House itself was willing to give it. And a cost-benefit state will have many questions to answer, OF REGULATORY ANALYsIs INTE FEDERAL BUREAUCRACY 165-75 (1991) (evaluating the regulatory analysis conducted by various executive branch agencies). See also OFFCE OF POUCY ANALYsis, EPA, REP. No. EPA/23012-871025a, UNFINSHED Busnwss: A CoMPARATIVE ASSESSMENT OF ENviRoNmENTAL PROBLEMS 94-100 (1987) (challenging the focus of EPA's regulatory priorities through a comparison of the risks associated with thirty-one major environmental problems). 
especially on underlying questions of valuation. I have suggested that a general background requirement of cost-benefit balancing-a substantive supermandate-should be enacted. I have also suggested that this background rule can and should be rejected through clearly expressed legislative judgments in particular statutes. In describing costs and benefits, Congress should allow room for a diverse array of values, and not limit agencies to the criterion of private willingness to pay. Many statutes require or permit agencies to promote goals independent of economic efficiency, and such statutes are entirely legitimate. Legislation that would amend all such statutes in favor of the efficiency criterion would indeed be quasi-constitutional in nature. But in a well-functioning deliberative democracy, such legislation would be hard to defend on the merits. 
More modestly, an Administrative Substance Act, amending the regulatory state, should include the background requirement I have described and also require agencies to act in a cost-effective fashion. Congress should move as well in the direction of requiring economic criteria where the underlying statute is best understood as remedying a market failure, economically defined. A cost-benefit state, understood in these terms, could make large improvements, without embarking on foundational reform and without answering the hardest questions, by offering initiatives that make sense under any reasonable theory of value. 
