 Cass R. Sunsteint In this Essay, I make a simple and somewhat impressionistic argument. I start with the suggestion that the issue of affirmative action should be settled democratically, not judicially. Certainly the Supreme Court should not invalidate most race-conscious remedial programs. But until recently, there has been little or no sustained democratic deliberation on the issue. The citizenry's ambivalence about-or hostility toward-affirmative action has been expressed mostly in private and not in public arenas. The enormous diversity of affirmative action programs, not to mention the separable justifications for and variable efficacy of each program, has not received much public attention. Some programs work well; some do not; and neither empirical data nor public judgments about their content and value have been reflected in program design. Law School and Department of Political Science. That, in a nutshell, is the argument to follow.2 I do not claim that the Court has always been self-conscious about the virtues of casuistry thus described. But if the point is correct, it bears a great deal on the relations between the Court and a well-functioning system of political deliberation. It connects, for example, to current debates about the relationship between the Constitution and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation; here too, the Court might use a casuistical method to spur public discussion. There are, however, serious questions about whether current public processes are sufficiently deliberative, especially in the area of affirmative action. People often think one thing but say another, because of the effects of social pressures and social norms on what can be said in public? For example, in most contemporary American circles, a strong social stigma against anti-Semitic statements exists; people who think anti-Semitic things are unlikely to make such statements on television or in a public debate. In many groups where religious convictions are both deep and widespread, people cannot confess their uncertainty about whether God exists; they may attend church regularly despite their doubts on that score. In other places, people cannot acknowledge that they are deeply religious; in such places, social norms punish public declarations of religious convictions The general point is simple: social norms drive a wedge between public statements and private beliefs, hopes, and convictions. is no isolated phenomenon limited to left-leaning intellectuals. It is a pervasive fact of social life. It appears whenever prevailing norms discourage people from taking issue with a widely held social belief. Those interested in democratic politics should notice the omnipresent role of public constraints on public statements. 2. For a similar argument, see Paul J. Mishkin, The Uses of Ambivalence: Reflections on the Supreme Court and the Constitutionality of Affirmative Action, 131 U. PA. L REV. 907 (1983) (discussing lack of congruence between the Supreme Court's methods and results in their affirmative action cases). The argument is generalized in Cass R. Sunstein, Foreword: Leaving Things Undecided, 110 Hzv. L. REV. (forthcoming Nov. 1996). invidious judgments, social norms have a healthy vicious or "laundering effect."5 The existence of social sanctions can make people embarrassed about those judgments and eventually make them recede or even disappear. If "[h]ypocrisy is the homage that vice pays to virtue,"6 then social norms can identify both vice and virtue as such, and enable citizens to tell which is which. Hypocrisy can therefore have It can produce justice by valuable social uses. It has a civilizing effect making unjust behavior seem vicious or otherwise unacceptable. , On the other hand, social norms of the kind I am discussing can cause damage in two different ways. First, they may prevent people from offering arguments that are productive, reasonable, or even right. If prevailing norms are invidious or rooted in confusion, they may even perpetuate invidious or confused practices. Consider the many areas in the world where social norms strongly discourage advocacy of sex equality;' many women who indicate their belief in equality run enormous risks. Second, social norms may discourage the expression of doubt, even when doubt exists and when debate is, partly for that very In that way, prevailing reason, desirable and potentially productive. norms can damage processes of public deliberation. Even if prevailing norms are not invidious on their merits-even if they reflect clear thinking or hard won wisdom-their effects can be pernicious when they impair public deliberation. In a well-functioning democracy, facts and options are clarified through doubt, and people have a sense of what their fellow citizens think.. social norms impose sanctions on the public expression of those judgments. It is therefore important to take account of possible disparities between what is said and what is thought. It is also important to know how wide such disparities are, whether the disparities reflect biases, and whether some social institutions or practices facilitate or inhibit open discussion. It seems obvious to say that when the Supreme Court faces a constitutional attack on a law, it has three basic options: it might uphold the law, it might invalidate the law, or it might refuse to address the issue by denying certiorari or by taking advantage of various avoidance strategies. (discussing the Supreme Court's practice to withhold exercise of power of judical review). "constrained" by various social and cultural conditions, including public opinion). fourth option: it can issue a highly casuistical decision, one that resolves little beyond the single case, but that operates as a catalyst for public discussion. By assuming jurisdiction, by offering a ruling, but by issuing a ruling that is case-specific and along crucial dimensions not authoritative for the future, it can call public attention to a problem without foreclosing public judgment. This fourth option is especially appropriate when the Court is uncertain about whether general rules would be satisfactory, and when it believes that differences of fact and content are highly relevant to constitutional outcomes. work out well. 8 But when it does, the remand promotes better public deliberation by drawing attention to difficulties that had not yet received adequate attention, and by helping to produce better processes of deliberation for the future."' Much of constitutional law has a structure similar to the administrative law remand. 0 Sometimes the Court effectively "remands" issues for fresh deliberation.2 Many of the modem privacy cases involving sexual autonomy can be understood accordingly.' In these cases, the state defended laws restricting availability of contraception by reference to the goal of preventing premarital or extramarital activity. The Court did not deny that the state has a legitimate interest in preventing nonmarital sexual activity. We do not say that a law directly punishing such activity is unconstitutional. But, the state may not attempt to promote the underlying interest through the indirect means of preventing contraception. If the state is genuinely interested in preventing nonmarital sexual relations, it must pursue that policy in a way that receives meaningful democratic scrutiny and reflects actual democratic approval of the underlying judgment of policy and principle-through the criminal sanction. The more indirect and discriminatory route of preventing contraception is an unacceptable means of pursuing the relevant end. Because of its indirection, a ban on contraceptives does not accurately reflect a democratic judgment against extramarital relations. In fact, no such judgment followed the Court's cases because the public was unwilling to use the criminal sanction to punish extramarital relations directly. This is a controversial account of the privacy cases. But it helps make sense of rulings that are otherwise very puzzling. And at the very least, it suggests the possibility of a judicial role in catalyzing public debate through narrow rulings designed to focus public attention on the more fundamental questions. It is easy to be skeptical about the Supreme Court's affirmative action cases. From the standpoint of the rule of law, the cases are truly a mess. This was so from the very start. In Regents of the University of California v. Bakke,' the Court was badly divided and could not produce a majority opinion. Of course, the often-criticized "rule" of the case was that universities may use race "as a factor" in admissions, but may not create quotas.' While this rule has played a crucial role in American society and American debate, it represented the view of Justice Powell alone. The other eight participating justices explicitly rejected that rule. Ironically, the case stands for a proposition that only one justice thought sensible. -whether official findings of past discrimination had been made;' the relevant program was rigid or flexible;29 -whether the relevant program operated as a quota; 0 -whether for local public works be used by minority-owned businesses). -whether the relevant program had been issued by Congress, by another politically accountable body, by a court, or by some other institution;3 innocent victims were injured, and if so in a severe way;32 The use of these numerous factors led to surprising decisions in particular cases, and outcomes were hard to predict in advance. Notably, some of these factors relate to the nature of the deliberative process itself. The relevant cases received a good deal of public attention, but the constitutional position of affirmative action programs remained quite obscure 4 It was not until 1989 that the Court finally settled on a standard of In City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 35 a plurality of the review. Court held that affirmative action programs would be subject to "strict scrutiny," at least if they had not been enacted by the federal government.3 6 But even while announcing a standard of review, it did so in such a way as to leave the law exceptionally obscure, and to leave the many decisions that preceded Croson in an uncertain state.37 Hence, Croson did not reject the Court's casuistical approach to affirmative action. And in Adarand Constructors Inc. v. Pena,3 1 when the Court finally announced that the same standard of review applied to the nation that carefully designed race-conscious as to the states,39 it went out of its way to make clear that the standard would not lead to automatic invalidation, that outcomes would turn on particular facts,' and thus that we could not foresee certain results in future cases. A. The Constitutional Attack on Affirmative Action It seems reasonable to think that the question of affirmative action should be settled democratically, not judicially. Despite frequent prot under the strict scrutiny standard of review). estations to the contrary,43 the Constitution imposes no clear textual ban on affirmative action. In fact, the textual arguments are laughably inadequate. To be sure, the Constitution calls for "equal" protection of the laws; but this point is uninformative on the validity of affirmative action.' The term "equal" cannot possibly mean "the same," if "the same" is intended to suggest a ban on all classification. By their nature, laws classify. Even the law of equal protection classifies. Thus, it is no offense to the Equal Protection Clause if courts scrutinize sex-based classifications more skeptically than they scrutinize age-based classifications--even though this difference does not treat people "the same." The question is what the word "equal" requires in this context. Dictionaries are unhelpful here. The only way to make progress is to go outside of the text; we must look there to find possible understandings of the Constitution's equality principle. For example, suppose that Jones has been denied a government she has a right to make a complaint under the job. As a "person," Equal Protection Clause. But everything depends on the characteristic on which government has allegedly seized. For Jones to claim heightened scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause, she has to say something about the classification that the government has used; and she must say that the classification treats her, as a member of a certain group, in a "suspect" way. Thus she has a claim to careful scrutiny of laws disadvantaging her if those laws classify on the basis of sex. But if she invokes another characteristic, she has no such claim. The same plaintiff Jones has no right to heightened judicial scrutiny if those laws classify on the basis of age.47 She is thus entitled to a degree of scrutiny corresponding to the basis of the classification of which she complains. History need not be decisive. Perhaps a moral argument justifies the Court in reading the text to ban affirmative action. But no clear moral argument requires courts to treat affirmative action policies with rationality review, rather than strict scrutiny, was the proper standard for age-based classifications). great skepticism. Many critics of affirmative action claim that the moral argument lay at the heart of the work of Martin Luther King, Jr., and others in the civil rights movements of the 1960s; ° but this is an historical error. Asked in 1965 whether it was "fair to request a multibilliondollar program of preferential treatment for the Negro, or for any other minority group," King flatly replied, "I do indeed."51 In 1966, King wrote, It is impossible to create a formula for the future which does not take into account that our society has been doing something special against the Negro for hundreds of years. How then can he be absorbed into the mainstream of American life if we do not do something special for him now, in order to balance the equation and equip him to compete on a just and equal basis?"" In fact, King's 1964 book, Why We Can't Wait, criticized the idea that once African Americans had been granted simple equality before the law, no further action should be taken. He wrote, On the surface, this appears reasonable, but it is not realistic. For it is obvious that if a man is entered at the starting line in a race three hundred years after another man, the first would have to perform some impossible feat in order to catch up with his fellow runner.53 The views of Martin Luther King, Jr., need not be decisive. Perhaps a moral principle of color-blindness deserves constitutional recognition; certainly this is so if it is the only intelligible principle behind the constitutional concern for racial equality. But we can identify an alternative moral principle, one that has actually been responsible for most of the movement for racial change in America, both during the Civil War and thereafter. In the area of race, a large target of the Civil War Amendments was the preexisting system of racial caste: a system that turned the highly visible and morally irrelevant characteristic of race into a systemic basis for second-class citizenship.' The Fourteenth Amendment is best conceived of as opposing that caste system.5 5 And if this represents the best conception of the Fourteenth Amendment, then there is nothing fundamentally illegitimate about affirmative action programs. 56 Such programs are designed to overcome caste-like features of existing practice. This does not mean that they are a good idea, as they may not have this effect. It may be that they are bad on grounds of policy and should be rejected in democratic and administrative arenas. But that possibility does not make them constitutionally objectionable. Occasionally, the cases also suggest that racial classifications produce social division. See, e.g., City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469, 493 (1989) (O'Connor, J.) (plurality opinion); Fullilove v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448, 545 (1980) (Stevens, J., dissenting). This may well be true. But an absence of affirmative action programs would also produce social division. In any case, many government programs appear to promote social division, and they are not constitutionally suspect for that reason. Some examples include veterans' preference laws, laws supporting public education, as well as laws supporting art and culture. B. Democratic Debate and Affirmative Action These remarks certainly do not mean that affirmative action programs are a good idea. The range of such programs is very wide, and to make a judgment on them, it is important to have a sense of their variety and of their consequences. Such programs include relatively uncontroversial efforts to increase the pool of applicants by ensuring that the candidates are diverse; these efforts are certainly race-conscious, but at the stage of recruitment rather than actual appointment. It is hard to see why such efforts are objectionable. Other affirmative action programs include race as a factor among many others. Still other programs include rigid quota systems as well. Some programs give a minor boost to highly qualified candidates, and some allow people entry into programs for which they are ill-suited. Evaluation of such programs should depend partly on their content and their consequences, and the term "affirmative action programs" is far too imprecise to speak adequately on that score. Above all, We need to know how such programs are operating in the real world. Undoubtedly, many affirmative action programs are successful and perceived as such. In fact, it is plausible to think that some of the public backlash against affirmative action is attributable to the perception that the relevant programs have never been debated and defended publicly. It is not at all true to say, as many do, that affirmative action programs are a creation of federal courts;' many such programs have their origins in private decisions or in decisions of politically accountable bodies. But the widespread perception that affirmative action programs are courtgenerated is illuminating insofar as it suggests a belief that such programs have not been ratified publicly. We are now in a position to discuss the possible catalytic role of the Supreme Court insofar as that role bears on the affirmative action debate. Suppose that it is agreed that the issue of affirmative action should be decided democratically rather than judicially-but suppose, too, that institutions are operating in such a way as to ensure that any public decisions are taken in an unaccountable way, and are not really a product of democratic judgments. The Supreme Court's meandering, casuistical, rule-free path may well be a salutary way of signaling the existence of large questions of policy and principle, at least with constitutional dimensions, when those questions would otherwise receive far less attention than they deserve. Hence, the participants in Supreme Court cases have become familiar "characters" in the national debate, helping to frame discussion: people like Bakke," Weber,6 7 Johnson,68 minority construction contractors, 9 and others. widespread in private sector job hiring"). vate beliefs and judgments in favor of a shift in existing social norms. But official institutions can play a role as well. In particular, the Supreme Court can signal the existence of hard questions of political morality and public policy, by taking cases, drawing public attention to the underlying questions, and refusing to issue authoritative pronouncements. And if we examine the Court's practice in the area of affirmative action, we can see that the Court has operated in precisely this way. It has helped keep the affirmative action issue in the public domain without foreclosing public deliberation. In this way, the Court has served a valuable catalytic function. I cannot offer here a full discussion of when casuistry in the interest of public deliberation is a desirable strategy for the Court,75 but a few brief remarks may be helpful. The casuistical approach makes most sense when the Court is uncertain or divided about whether any broad rule is constitutionally sound. It follows that in the affirmative action context, the Court's approach is more attractive to those who are unsure about the constitutional status of affirmative action. For those who believe that it is per se invalid, or clearly acceptable in all circumstances, (defending the view that a casuistic approach by the Court is appropriate in this area of the law). judicial casuistry would be harder to defend. Casuistry will seem most sensible to those who believe that the relevant outcome should turn on particular facts. In the affirmative action context, we might think that a rigid quota system is worse than "race as a factor," or that universities have special reasons to engage in race-conscious programs. The suggestion that the Court has helped catalyze public debate should not by any means be taken as a claim that with respect to affirmative action, the democratic process has been or is now working well. With "norm cascades"-large shifts in current norms-there is a risk that outcomes will be based on sensationalistic anecdotes, on factual misperceptions, or, worse, on simple racism and hatred. Undoubtedly, objections to affirmative action programs are often well-motivated; it would be ludicrous to think that such objections are necessarily rooted in racial prejudice. But appeals to racism, usually tacit, are a large part of the debate. Some people might think that affirmative action is an unpromising area for public deliberation precisely because of the likelihood that racist motivations will be at work. If this is an unpromising area for public deliberation, the argument for a catalytic effort from the Court is of course weakened, and judges might attempt to resolve the problem on other grounds. Much national attention is now focused on a referendum proposal to eliminate preferential treatment based on in California designed race.8" Political processes in California on this issue do not appear to be deliberative. The American system is one of representative rather than direct democracy, partly because of a judgment that political deliberation can be best promoted through a representative system.8' If judicial decisions stimulate poorly functioning referendum processes, little will be gained. Neither the State of California nor any of its political subdivisions or agents shall use race, sex, color, ethnicity, or national origin as a criterion for either discriminating against, or granting preferential treatment to, any individual or group in the operation of the State's system of public employment, public education, or public contracting. danger in the context of race. It is not my purpose here to evaluate that risk. But if a catalytic role from the Court serves to intensify poorly functioning majoritarian processes, that role may be nothing to celebrate. Both exercises of statesmanship and institutional correctivesdisplacing the referendum process with more insulated bodies-may be in order. Hence, it is appropriate to assemble politically insulated groups to try to compile information about the actual effects of affirmative action programs.83 Unfortunately, it is unclear whether the Supreme Court can do a great deal to make things better. Some people have suggested that the Court might review the outcomes of referenda with an unusually high degree of skepticism.' There is some sense in this suggestion. An approach of this kind can find structural support in the Constitution, which is rooted in faith in representation, and in the Constitution's most fundamental underlying concerns. It is plausible to say that the Court should be mildly more receptive to a constitutional challenge when legislation has come through referenda. But no provision of the Constitution specifically authorizes judges to regard the outcomes of referenda as less legitimate than the outcomes of representative processes, and in any case it is not, under current law, easy to see how someone might challenge a ban on affirmative action on these constitutional grounds.85 In this essay, I have tried to connect two ideas. The first involves the disjunction between private beliefs and public statements-a disjunction that stems from social norms that can discourage honest public argument about public issues and in that way undermine values that animate the First Amendment itself. The second involves the catalytic Neither the State of Colorado, through any of its branches or departments, nor any of its agencies, political subdivisions, municipalities or school districts, shall enact, adopt or enforce any statute, regulation, ordinance or policy whereby homosexual, lesbian or bisexual orientation, conduct, practices or relationships shall constitute or otherwise be the basis of or entitle any person or class of persons to have or claim any minority status, quota preferences, protected status or claim of discrimination. animate the First Amendment itself. The second involves the catalytic role of the Supreme Court. This role is ordinarily thought to involve three principal powers: validating or invalidating laws, and refusing to hear cases. But the Court has a fourth power-the authority to issue highly casuistical rulings that do not settle much, but that operate as a kind of "remand" to the public, alerting people to the existence of hard issues of principle and policy. In the affirmative action context, the Court, whether or not intentionally, has done precisely this. It has said little that is authoritative. It has, however, helped trigger public debate, with, perhaps, an understanding on the part of some of the Justices that until recently, the debate was neither broadly inclusive nor properly deliberative-and that it did not honestly reflect people's underlying concerns. In other words, the Court can be taken to have responded to the fact that social norms have helped prevent open public discussion, and to have tried to promote such a discussion. catalyzed may be nothing to celebrate, at least in the context of race. But remedies for that large problem would take me well beyond the present discussion.