 Occasional Papers Law School Publications Constitutional Myth-Making: Lessons from the Dred Scott Case Cass R. Sunstein Follow this and additional works at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/occasional_papers Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Constitutional Myth-Making: Lessons from the Dred Scott Case," University of Chicago Law Occasional Paper, No. 37 (1996). "Constitutional Myth-Making: Lessons from the Dred Scott Case" was the basis for the Ryerson Lecture, delivered at the University of Chicago in May 1996. Copyright @ 1996 by Cass R. Sunstein. "[Olpinions were so various and at first so crude that it was necessary they should be long debated before any uniform system of opinion could be formed. Meantime the minds of the members were changing, and much was to be gained by a yielding and accommodating spirit ... [No man felt himself obliged to retain his opinion any longer than he was satisfied of their propriety and truth, and was open to the force of argument." -James Madison "The spirit of liberty [is that spirit which] is not too sure that it is right." -Learned Hand My topics in this lecture are the myths that the Dred Scott case created, the myths that Americans have created about it, and the true lessons of the case for three of the great constitutional issues of the current era: affirmative action, homosexuality, and the right to die. The Dred Scott case was probably the most important case in the history of the Supreme Court of the United States. Indeed, it was probably the most important constitutional case in the history of any nation and any court. But most of us have little if any sense of what it means or was even about. Even within the legal culture, the case is taught infrequently in constitutional law courses; outside of the legal culture, the case is pretty well forgotten, or at most a footnote in discussions of the Civil War. many remarkable facts about the case. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. since Marbury v. Madison invalidating a federal law. Since Marbury created judicial review in the context of a denial of jurisdiction, Dred Scott might plausibly be said to be the first real exercise of the power of judicial review. * Dred Scott was one of the first great cases unambiguously using the "intent of the framers" and in that sense it was the great precursor of the method of Justice Scalia and Judge Bork. Let me now identify the great myths involving Dred Scott. The first and perhaps most important one was created by the Dred Scott case itself: The myth is that the original Constitution protected, supported, and entrenched slavery. On this view, the Constitution was emphatically pro-slavery. As a legal matter, this is a myth in the simple sense that it is false: The Constitution does not support or entrench slavery.' But many people think the myth is true; in fact Justice Thurgood Marshall, in his remarks about the bicentennial, basically agreed with the Dred Scott Court. The third myth is a revisionist reading of the case, coming from Justice Scalia and others critical of the Warren Court. Here is myth #3: Dred Scott was wrong because the Court abandoned the "intentions of the framers" in favor of its own conception of social policy. On this view, Dred Scott was wrong because it was politics rather than law, and it was politics rather than law because it abandoned the Constitution, understood as a historical document. This myth has more than a kernel of truth in it, for Dred Scott cannot be said to have been an accurate reading of the original understanding of the framers. But myth #3 qualifies as a myth because Dred Scott was very much and very self-consciously an "originalist" opinion, that is, it purported to draw nearly all of its support from the views of the framers: "It is not the province of the court to decide upon the justice or injustice, the policy or impolicy, of these laws. The decision of that question belonged to the political or law-making power; to those who formed the sovereignty and framed the Constitution. The duty of the court is, to.interpret the instrument they have framed, with the best lights we can obtain on the subject, and to administer it as we find it, according to its true intent and meaning when it was adopted."2 To replace these myths, I suggest that the defect of Dred Scott lay largely in the Court's effort to resolve, once and for all time, an issue that was splitting the nation on political and moral grounds. More particularly, we should understand Dred Scott to suggest that in general and if it possibly can,' the Supreme Court should avoid political thickets. It should leave Great Questions to politics. This is because the Court may answer those questions incorrectly, and because it may well make things worse even if it answers correctly. Reasoning and Political Conflict (1996). mean concrete judgments on which people can converge from diverse foundations. In this way the Court can both model and promote a crucial goal of a liberal political system: to make it possible for people to agree when agreement is necessary, and to make it unnecessary for people to agree when agreement is impossible. I acknowledge that this is an unconventional view and I do not attempt to defend this belief here. ples as they are appropriately understood. I will suggest a form of incrementalism in support of a constitutional attack on discrimination against homosexuals. Even if courts believe that the attack is plausible on its merits, they should hesitate before entering this "political thicket." They should follow President Lincoln, not Chief Justice Taney. Every myth is filled with people, usually people of high drama. This is certainly true of the Dred Scott story. Let me tell you something about the people behind the Dred Scott case. free state of Illinois for more than two years, was living in a territory in which slavery was banned by the Missouri Compromise. There Scott met Harriet Robinson, a slave about twenty years old; Harriet was sold to Emerson and the two were married, a marriage that lasted until his death in 1858. Four children were born to them; the two sons died as infants, but two daughters (Eliza, born in 1838, and Lizzie, born in 1847) survived and became parties to the Dred Scott case. Scott stayed with Emerson until Emerson's death in 1943. These, then, are the people behind the case: Dred, Harriet, Eliza and Lizzie Scott, the plaintiffs; Peter and Blow, original owners; Taylor Blow; Irene Emerson and her brother-in-law, John Sanford. (It should be obvious at this point that a mystery in the Dred Scott case is its title: Why was the case styled Dred Scott v. Sanford? It could as easily have been called Harriet Scott v. Emerson. But as a woman, Harriet Scott was not supposed to be the lead plaintiff in a lawsuit, and the defendant was the executor of the estate rather than the real owner of Scott. But there should be no mistaking the fact that the legal interests of Emerson and Scott were emphatically at stake.) Now let us turn to the legal issues in the case. Scott noted that the state constitution of Illinois abolished slavery and that the Missouri Compromise banned slavery in the Louisiana territory. Hence Scott claimed that he was made a free man by virtue of his sustained stays in those places. Sanford responded that Scott was not free, because his former owner had a continuing property interest in him-that is what slavery meant-and because the federal government could not deprive an owner of property without due process of law. In any case, Sanford claimed that Scott could not sue in federal court, since Scott was not a citizen of Missouri, or indeed of any state. tutional? Third: What was the effect on Scott's status in Missouri of the transportation of Scott into nonslave states? The Supreme Court decided the case in 1857, a year in which the United States was profoundly split because of the issue of slavery. There can be no doubt that the Court attempted to take that issue "out of politics"-a point to which I will return. Justice Taney's opinion held first that Scott was not a citizen of Missouri. Therefore the federal courts had no jurisdiction over the case. tutional purposes. Under the constitution, "they are not included . . . under the word citizen and can therefore claim none of the rights and privileges of citizens. . . " It is here that Taney could not rely on constitutional text, which was ambiguous, but resorted explicitly and self-consciously to an understanding of original intentions. Thus he wrote: "On the contrary, [descendants of Africans] were at that time considered as a subordinate and inferior class of beings, who had been subjugated by the dominant race, and whether emancipated or not, yet remained subject to their authority, and had no rights or privileges but such as those who held the power and the Government might choose to grant them." As I have said, this was one of the first self-consciously "originalist" opinions from the Supreme Court. On this issue, the Court spoke for its understanding of what the framers believed. (We cannot indict a method on the ground that it has been misapplied. All I mean to suggest is that it is worth noting that the Court was attempting to speak for history and couched its decision explicitly in historical terms.) At first glance, the Court's jurisdictional conclusion should have been the end of the matter. If Scott was not a citizen of Missouri, the federal courts had no authority to hear Scott's complaint, and the case should have been at an end, at least for Chief Justice Taney. Chief Justice Taney offered several arguments. First, he said that Congress' authority to "make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the United States" did not extend to territories not owned in 1789. By itself this should have been sufficient, but perhaps it did not seem plausible even to Chief Justice Taney, so he offered a second point. Thus he said that slavery was constitutionally sacrosanct, so that even if Congress had authority over new territories, it could not ban slavery there. "[T]he right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly affirmed in the Constitution." But this too was an adventurous conclusion. Thus Justice Taney added a third point, to the effect that Congress' power over the territories could not collide with other constitutional limitations. Congress could not, for example, eliminate freedom of speech in the territories. And this point was decisive for the question at hand. A law that deprives someone of property because he has brought it into a particular place "could hardly be dignified with the name of due process of law." This was an exceptionally important moment in American law. It was the birthplace of the idea of "substantive due process," the idea used in the Lochner era cases, in Roe v. Wade, and in many of the most controversial decisions in the Court's history. It might appear to you at this point that the Court had a narrow route to resolution of the case. Perhaps a free slave could be deemed a citizen for purposes of jurisdiction. And perhaps the Court need not have assessed the constitutionality of the Missouri Compromise. Perhaps the crucial issue in the case was whether Missouri had to recognize any change in Scott's status from his visit into free areas. If Missouri did not have to recognize that change, the case was over. And if Scott's stay in Illinois produced a change in status that Missouri had to respect, the case was over as well. Now we are in a position to explore the question: What was wrong with the Dred Scott opinion? Let us divide potential answers into two categories: institutional and substantive. The substantive answers have to do with the best reading of the Constitution. The institutional answers have to do with the appropriate role of the Supreme Court in American government. The two are related, but it is both useful and important to try to separate them. 6 More particularly, there are three relevant provisions. (1) Article I section 9 prevents Congress from prohibiting the slave trade until 1808. This is hardly an endorsement of slavery. It gives slave states a relatively short period in which to import slaves, and then lets Congress do as it wishes. (2) Article IV section 3 requires nonslave states to return fugitive slaves to their owners. This provision is extremely limited; it does not say anything about the obligations of states to respect slave-owners who voluntarily come, with their slaves, into nonslave states. (3) The so-called three-fifths clause, Article 1, section 2, says that representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned by adding to the whole number of free persons "three fifths of all other persons." This provision is designed for purposes of allocating representatives and direct taxes. As not, it creates an incentive to free slaves, by giving slave states more political power if they become nonslave states. It certainly does not reflect any judgments that slaves are just 2/3 of "people." ing that God is just). Maybe a majority of them thought so. But they did not put that judgment in the Constitution itself. There was no reason to think that freed slaves should not qualify as citizens for constitutional purposes. is ludicrous to suppose that nine lawyers in Washington could lay this issue to rest by appeal to the Constitution. It is hubristic for nine lawyers charged with interpreting the Constitution to think that they know the right answer for the nation as a whole. In such cases the likelihood of error is very high, and the likelihood of success-a final resolution for a heterogeneous nation-is low even if there is no error. The Court should have proceeded with greatest caution unless it found the Constitution unambiguous on the point or unless it thought the moral principle so urgent and so plausibly constitutional in character as to require judicial endorsement. Neither of these could be said in Dred Scott. The Court should have decided the case narrowly by asking about the status of Missouri law. I want to say a word now about the nation's reaction to Dred Scott, and about the appropriate attitude of citizens and public officials to Supreme Court decisions. My basic point is this: The Supreme Court has the last word on cases that it decides. But interpretation of the Constitution is emphatically not only a judicial activity. Constitutional interpretation is for others as well. The Supreme Court is supreme but only in a limited way. It does not preclude constitutional complaints by others seeking change. Certainly this is so when issues of constitutional law are also issues of basic political principle. In such cases it is especially important to insist-as have Presidents Jefferson, Roosevelt, and Reagan, among others-that the Supreme Court has no monopoly on constitutional interpretation. established a settled doctrine for the country." And in 1858 Lincoln said: "If I were in Congress and a vote should come up on a question whether slavery should be prohibited in a new territory, in spite of that Dred Scott decision, I would vote that it should." Lincoln's simplest and most dramatic statement on the topic echoed the theme of democratic deliberation and a shared role in constitutional interpretation: "The candid citizen must confess that if the policy of the government, upon vital questions affecting the whole people, is to irrevocably fixed by decisions of the Supreme Court, the instant they are made, in ordinary litigation between parties in personal actions, the people will have ceased to be their own rulers, having to that extent practically resigned the government into the hands of that eminent tribunal." In this light we might see the Court as having a dialogic relation with others engaged in political and moral deliberation, and others thinking about the meaning of the Constitution. The Dred Scott Court fostered no such dialogue. In fact its whole goal was preclusive. But it is predictable in such circumstances that the Court will fail and that voices will be loudly raised against it. This is certainly so for the most invasive decisions in the Court's history-Dred Scott, Lochner v. New York, Roe v. Wade, Buckley v. Valeo. What the Court ought to do, generally and to the extent that it can, is act as a participant in democratic deliberation, not as the unique "forum of principle" in American government. I have said that Dred Scott was a blunder and an abuse because it purported to resolve many more issues than were before the Court, and in that way to It is emphatically not an argument for Bork-style "originalism." See Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict (1996). resolve issues of high principle that are fundamentally for the public, not for the judiciary. I mean, then, to approve of judicial casuistry. Let us take Dred Scott to suggest the following points. First, courts should generally not set forth broad theories of the good or the right; they should try to bracket those issues and leave them for other places. Second, they should, to the extent possible and in general, decide cases by reference to modest, low-level rationales on which diverse people can agree. Now let us try to apply these thoughts to some contemporary issues. The nation is in the midst of a large debate over color-conscious programs, and many people have vigorously urged the Supreme Court to foreclose such programs, whether deemed "affirmative action" or something else. And there are passages in Supreme Court decisions that read roughly like this: "In the Civil War, the nation decided on a principle of color-blindness. Whether this is a desirable or wise principle is not for us to say. But the issue has been foreclosed by our heritage." Or it might be said, as a court of appeals recently did, that equal protection clause has come to be understood to embody a principle of race neutrality that is violated by all affirmative action programs, including those in the educational system. Thus in its remarkable decision striking down an affirmative action plan for the University of Texas Law School, the court of appeals said that race-consciousness was acceptable only to remedy identified acts of past discrimination. Thus public universities must proceed on a race-neutral basis. (Through Title VI, this view may extend to private universities as well.) In this form, a court opinion outlawing affirmative action is closely analogous to Dred Scott, and defective-abusive, overreaching-for the same reason. It would be an amazing act of hubris. In one form, a supposed past historical judgment, itself not clearly embodied in the constitutional text,' is used to foreclose democratic experimentation. (Recall Dred Scott on citizenship and the Missouri Compromise.) In another form, a general principle ("color-blindness") is announced to foreclose such experimentation even though the principle covers a wide range of situations, some of which seem to draw the principle in some doubt (as where race is a minor factor used alongside many other minor factors). We might compare the narrower, fact-intensive, casuistical approaches characteristic of Justice Powell in the Bakke case and on occasion Justice O'Connor. There is no sufficiently clear constitutional commitment to color blindness to justify judicial intrusion. We are in the midst of a constitutional attack on laws that forbid state-assisted suicide. The right-todie debate is along one dimension significantly different from the debate over affirmative action. Here the relevant laws have been on the books for a long time, and they have not, as a general rule, been revisited by recently elected officials. making possible forms of euthanasia that would have been unimaginable when the laws were first enacted. The central point, for those interested in democratic deliberation, is that there has been no recent legislative engagement with the underlying moral and technological issues. In these circumstances, it is appropriate for a court to say that the state has not demonstrated an adequate reason to interfere with a private choice of this kind-unless and until a recent legislature is able to show that there is a sufficiently recent commitment to this effect to support fresh legislation. Now turn to claims that the Constitution forbids discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Here plaintiffs' lawyers are invoking a principle of human equality to invalidate democratic outcomes. Here some people insist that a properly capacious notion of constitutional equality adequately justifies an aggressive judicial role. take to see Lincoln's caution with respect to abolition as indicating uncertainty about the underlying principle. But it is equally mistaken to think that Lincoln's certainty about the principle entailed immediate implementation of racial equality. equal protection clause forbids state constitutional amendments that forbid ordinary democratic processes to outlaw discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. The Court might say that such amendments, of the sort that has been enacted (and invalidated judicially) in Colorado, do not merely discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation, but also disfavor a defined group in the political process, in a way that involves issues of both animus and political equality. A judicial ruling of this kind would be quite narrow. In fact the Court proceeded very much in this way in its laudable decision in Romer v. Evans. Armed with an understanding of Dred Scott, we can go much further. Constitutional law is not only for the courts; it is for all public officials. The original understanding was that deliberation about the Constitution's meaning would be part of the function of the President and legislators as well. The the post-Warren Court Constitution with the decisions of the Supreme Court has badly disserved the traditional American commitment to deliberative democracy. In that system, all officials-not only the judges-have a duty of fidelity to the founding document. And in that system, we should expect that elected officials will have a degree of interpretive independence from the judiciary. We should even expect that they will sometimes fill the institutional gap created by the courts' lack of fact-finding ability and policymaking competence. For this reason, they may conclude that practices are unconstitutional even if the Court would uphold them, or that practices are valid even if the Court would invalidate them. Lincoln is an important example here as well. Often he invoked constitutional principles to challenge chattel slavery, even though the Supreme Court had rejected that reading of the Constitution in the Dred Scott case. It is time to conclude. The Dred Scott opinion was an abomination, and it was an abomination in two different ways. The first has to do with substantive law: Freed slaves should have qualified as citizens. The Missouri Compromise was a legitimate exercise of legislative authority. The serious question in the case was whether Missouri's view about Scott's status was binding. That was a little question, not a big one, and the Court should have stayed with the little question. I have a coda. It consists of notes about what happened to the people in the case. A valuable discussion is Lea VanderVelde and Sandhya Subramanian, Mrs. Dred Scott (unpublished manuscript 1996). No. 12. "Making the Punishment Fit the Crime: A Consumers' Guide to Sentencing Reform" Franklin E. Zimring, January 24, 1977. No. 25. "The Twentieth-Century Revolution in Family Wealth Transmission" John H. Langbein, December 8, 1989.