 Cass R. Sunstein* On October 27, 1995, the Wake Forest University School of Law hosted the Oliver Wendell Holmes Devise Lecture Series. Professor Cass R. Sunstein, the Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence at the University of Chicago School of Law, delivered the following remarks as the lecture's keynote address. In addition, the lecture included four distinguished panelists who spoke in response to Professor Sunstein: A.E. Dick Howard, the White Burkett Miller Professor of Law and Public Affairs at the Virginia School of Law; Professor Sheri Lynn Johnson from Cornell Law School; and Professor Michael Kent Curtis and Professor Ronald F. Wright from the Wake Forest University School of Law. The remarks of these panelists are presented following the text of Professor Sunstein's speech. In this lecture I discuss two phenomena of special importance for law. The first involves agreement on an abstraction, unaccompanied by agreement on what the abstraction specifically entails. The second involves agreement on a judgment in a concrete case, unaccompanied by agreement about what sorts of considerations ultimately account for the judgment. These agreements are incompletely theorized, though in differ * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. This essay is the written version of the 1995 Oliver Wendell Holmes Lecture, delivered at Wake Forest University on October 27, 1995. For this lecture I have drawn on Cass R. Sunstein, LEGAL REASONING AND POLrICAL CONFLICT (forthcoming Mar. 1996); Incompletely Theorized Agreements, 108 HARv. L. REv. 1733 (1995); Problems with Rules, 83 CAL. L. REv. 953 (1995). Incompletely theorized agreements play a pervasive role in law and society. It is quite rare for a person or group completely to theorize any subject, that is, to accept both a general theory and a series of steps connecting that theory to concrete conclusions. Thus we often have, in law, an incompletely theorized agreement on a general proposition-incompletely theorized in the sense that people who accept the principle need not agree on what it entails in particular cases. I have referred to Holmes' suggestion that "General propositions do not decide concrete cases."' I believe that this is the greatest of Holmes' many great aphorisms. But like most aphorisms, it needs a good deal of unpacking. Much of law seems to consist of general propositions. How can law fail to decide concrete cases? What, most simply, does the statement mean? I think that Holmes' central point is that general propositions are incompletely specified. It is for this reason that they do not resolve particular cases, which turn on the specification. The Equal Protection Clause is an obvious example. To know whether a law denies someone "the equal protection of the laws," a great deal of supplemental detail is necessary. The Equal Protection Clause does not say whether a law discriminating on the basis of disability is violative of the equality norm. It does not say whether sex discrimination is acceptable. It does not tell us whether affirmative action is or is not constitutionally permissible. 4. See Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 115 S. Ct. 2097, 2113 (1995) (holding all racial classifications imposed by government actors to be subject to strict scrutiny); City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469, 511 (1989) (holding that a city plan which required contractors who were awarded city construction projects to subcontract specified amount to minority-owned businesses violated the Equal Protection Clause); Regents of the Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265, 319-20 (1978) (holding that a medical school's admissions policy requiring a certain percentage of minority students violated the Fourteenth Amendment). Amendment is an "absolute"; the counterexamples-perjury, treason, bribery, fraud-are too insistent. But the use of the general proposition puts people on the defensive in arguing for particular restrictions on the speech. Following Justice Black, many people act as if the general proposition in the text resolves the hard cases.10 This phenomenon may be useful as a social matter, since it helps reduce the regulation of speech. But it is not helpful for clear thinking, and it is also dishonest, for the outcome in the concrete cases will depend on something other than the general proposition. I turn now to how judges settle concrete cases-and, more specifically, to incompletely theorized agreements on particular outcomes, accompanied by agreements on the narrow or low-level principles that account for them. These terms contain some ambiguities. We might consider, as conspicuous examples of high-level theories, Kantianism and utilitarianism, and see legal illustrations in the many distinguished (academic) efforts to understand such areas as tort law, contract law, free speech, and the law of equality as undergirded by highly abstract theories of the right or the good." By contrast, we might think of low-level principles as including most of the ordinary material of legal "doctrine"-the general class of principles and justifications that are not said to derive from any particular large theories of the right or the good, that have ambiguous relations to large theories, and that are compatible with more than one such theory. ual expression but that the Court has consistently and often inexplicably created such exceptions in the area of pornography). apply unambiguous principles in the area of sexual speech). What might be said on behalf of incompletely theorized agreements, or incompletely theorized judgments, about particular cases? It is tempting to think of incomplete theorization as quite unfortunate-as embarrassing or reflective of some important problem or defect. Perhaps people have not yet thought deeply enough. When people theorize, by raising the level of abstraction, they do so to reveal bias, or confusion, or inconsistency. Surely participants in a legal system should not abandon this effort. Begin with the special problem of public justification on a multimember body. The first and most obvious point is that incompletely theorized agreements are well-suited legal world-containing social dissensus on large-scale issues. By definition, such agreements have the large advantage of allowing a convergence on particular outcomes by people unable to reach anything like an accord on general principles. This advantage is associated not only with the simple to a world-and especially a need to decide cases, but also with social stability, which could not exist if fundamental disagreements broke out in every case of public or private dispute.13 In the area of equality, it may be much easier to decide whether a particular practice is legitimate than to decide on a broad theory of human equality. To be sure, some fundamental commitments might appropriately be challenged in the legal system or within other multimember bodies. Some such commitments are ruled off-limits by the authoritative legal materials. Many provisions involving basic rights have this function. Of course, it is not always disrespectful to disagree with someone in a fundamental way; on the contrary, such disagreements may sometimes reflect profound respect. When defining commitments are based on demonstrable errors of fact or logic, it is appropriate to contest them. So, too, when those commitments are rooted in a rejection of the basic dignity of all human beings, or when it is necessary to undertake the contest to resolve a genuine problem. But many cases can be resolved in an incompletely theorized 13. Of course, concurring opinions are common, sometimes because an incompletely theorized agreement is possible on a result without being possible on a rationale, and sometimes because one judge wants to theorize an issue more (or less) deeply than do others. Sometimes the existence of a concurring opinion can compromise rule of law values by making it hard to form expectations; sometimes concurring opinions raise issues of collegiality, since authors of majority opinions are not thrilled to find separate concurrences. Turn now to reasons that call for incompletely theorized agreements whether or not we are dealing with a multimember body. The first consideration here is that incompletely theorized agreements have the crucial function of reducing the political cost of enduring disagreements. If judges disavow large-scale theories, then losers in particular cases lose much less. They lose a decision, but not the world. They may win on another occasion. Their own theory has not been rejected or ruled inadmissible. When the authoritative rationale for the result is disconnected from abstract theories of the good or the right, the losers can submit to legal obligations, even if reluctantly, without being forced to renounce their largest ideals. I have said that some theories should be rejected or ruled inadmissible. But it is an advantage, from the standpoint of freedom and stability, for a legal system to be able to tell most losers-many of whom are operating from foundations that have something to offer, or that cannot be ruled out a priori-that their own deepest convictions may play a role elsewhere in the law. both of facts and of values. Consider ordinary life. At a certain time, you may well refuse to make decisions that seem foundational in character-about, for example, whether to get married within the next year, or whether to have two, three, or four children, or whether to live in San Francisco or New York. Part of the reason for this refusal is knowledge that your understandings of both facts and values may well change. Indeed, your identity may itself change in important and relevant ways, and for this reason a set of commitments in advance-something like a fully theorized conception of your life course-would make no sense. Legal argument is often weakened by the pretense that general propositions decide concrete cases. From the fact that the Constitution protects freedom of speech, it is often said that a particular conclusion follows with respect to (say) libel or commercial advertising. From the fact that the Constitution bars states from denying any person the equal protection of the laws, it is said that particular conclusions follow for affirmative action. These are species of bad formalism-a practice with continuing influence on the legal culture, and a practice against which Holmes frequently railed. The Supreme Court's performance in affirmative action cases has suffered by virtue of the Court's disregard of Holmes' suggestion, and this is a point that remains true whatever we think, in the end, of affirmative action. And the popular culture's treatment of free speech issues has suffered from a similar pathology, as people derive, from a general proposition, concrete results in hard cases. I read Aristotle's Ethics with some pleasure. The eternal, universal, wise, good man. He is much in advance of ordinary Christian morality with its slapdash universals (Never tell a lie. Sell all thou hast and give to the poor[,] etc.). He has the ideals of altruism, and yet understands that life is painting a picture not doing a sum, that specific cases can't be decided by general rules, and that everything is a question of degree