 Congress, Constitutional Moments, and the Cost-Benefit State Cass R. Sunstein* In this article, Cass Sunstein explores the 104th Congress' attempts at regulatory reform. Professor Sunstein believes that the election of this Congress, with its distinctive approach to government, signals the dawning of a "constitutional moment" in which the role of government at all levels will be reexamined. Without full public support for sweeping changes in government, this moment has not yet materialized. When and if it does, regulatory reform will be one of its aspects. Indeed the nation has already begun to examine regulation to determine if the benefits justify the costs. Unfortunately, the 104th Congress has, thus far, failed adequately to address this burgeoning cost-benefit state. Sunstein claims that Congress'failure reflects its inability to redesign the massive federal regulatory scheme. He suggests that the executive branch should oversee regulatory reform, with Congress relegated to providing broad policy direction. Sunstein also suggests that Congress adopt an Administrative Substance Act, building upon the recent learning about the performance of regulation and modeled after the Administrative Procedure Act. Sunstein further calls for the enactment of a "substantive supermandate" requiring a general background rule of cost-benefit balancing for all federal regulation; but he contends that any description of costs and benefits should reflect the full range of diverse values expressed by the public at large. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Law, The University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Bruce Ackerman and Susan Rose-Ackerman for helpful discussions; to Ackerman, Elizabeth Garrett, Richard Pierre, Richard Posner, Richard Stewart, Peter Strauss, and Jonathan Wiener for valuable comments; to Keith Sharfman for outstanding and indispensable research assistance; and to many participants in the legislative debates for helpful background. 2. Allow plans from the private sector that show greater A. A Stalled Constitutional Moment The 104th Congress promised to change the national government in fundamental ways. Spurred by widespread popular dissatisfaction with government, the House of Representatives attempted to rethink national institutions more deeply than at any time since the New Deal; in fact the New Deal itself was a central target of the process of rethinking. America may be on the verge of a constitutional moment in which Americans answer foundational questions in novel ways.' The election of the 104th Congress signalled the transformation of America into a genuinely post-New Deal regulatory state. This emerging nation remains in a process of development; but it may be described as a cost-benefit state, one whose performance will be assessed, both in particular and in general, by comparing the costs of government action with its benefits. This idea requires a good deal of specification, but it unites developments not only in the national legislature, but in the executive branch, the judiciary, and state government as well. 2 My purpose here is to evaluate the efforts of the 104th Congress to give legal form to this constitutional moment. My particular interest is Congress' effort to reform the modem regulatory state. Charged by a popular mandate for reform and a high level of ambition, Congress debated both substantive and procedural "supermandates" cutting across all federal regulation. 3 Thus the 104th Congress devoted a large part of its agenda to "rethinking the regulatory state." The Contract With America also promised to address basic regulatory issues.4 In large-scale hearings, Congress examined problems of overregula 1. I borrow the idea of a constitutional moment from Bruce Ackerman, who proposes a "dualist" approach to constitutional interpretation-an approach that claims that America has witnessed two types of decisions: foundational ones made by the American people and more ordinary ones made by their representatives. 1 BRUCE AcKEImsAN, WE Ta PEOPLE: FoUNDATIONS 6 (1991). A constitutional moment is a period of popular development of principles that results in revolutionary reform. Id. at 21. Ackerman identifies three such moments in American history: the Founding, Reconstruction, and the New Deal. Id. at 58; see also text accompanying notes 16-34 infra. tion and the prospects for cost-benefit balancing.5 Finally, the House passed and the Senate debated measures that, if enacted, would have represented the largest changes to the Administrative Procedure Act6 since its enactment in 1946. All in all, there was a great deal of noise and bluster-a great deal of signalling-but surprisingly little in the way of concrete results. In the end, the enacted measures proved modest and mostly procedural. The apparently more ambitious proposals contained some good features. But many of their provisions were crude, unimaginative, and far more procedural than advertised. Rather than reflecting new and better thinking about substantive regulation, these provisions represented an effort to clog the administrative process with paperwork. In fact, members of Congress sometimes appeared to misunderstand the content of the very legislation they were debating. Congress revealed only a partial awareness of the recent outpouring of research on regulationresearch that could have produced the basis not only for fundamental change, but also for a consensus cutting (more or less) across partisan lines. Congress' report projecting the costs to the private sector of compliance with federal regulations, and a regulatory impact analysis for each new rule, and promising to reform unfunded mandates, reduce regulatory paperwork, and protect against regulatory abuses by agencies). discrimination and fair labor standards applicable to Congress itself). targeted tax benefits contained in revenue acts). impose a burden on the private sector or on state or local governments of more than $100 million). Both institutional and substantive lessons will emerge from this article. On the institutional side, I claim that Congress is quite ill-equipped to produce sensible, constitution-like reform, at least if it tries to offer details. With respect to regulation, a group of generalist representatives-all with numerous issues to address, few with particular expertise in regulatory law, and many beholden to special interests-is not in a position to produce desirable, largescale reforms, unless it restricts itself to generalities. Such a group is prone to sharp internal divisions that are not subject to reasonable mediation without a good deal of specialization in regulation. Indeed, the task of producing constitution-like change in the modem state is far more difficult than it was in the New Deal era. It is easier to create a regulatory state than it is to dismantle one, especially in an era in which every industrialized nation is committed to controlling the operation of the marketplace. 12. For example, Vice President Gore's task force, which is currently conducting the National Performance Review, has produced a series of reports on "reinventing government.' See, e.g., BILL CLINTON & AL GORE., REINvENTNr, WORKER SAFETY AND HEALTH (May 1995) (detailing reforms of OSHA); BILt CLINTON & AL GoRE, REvENTINrG RGULATION OF DRuGs AND MEDICAL DEVICES (April 1995) (detailing reforms of FDA); BILL CLINTON & At GORE, REINvENTING ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION (March 1995) (detailing reforms of EPA). See also Exec. Order No. 12,898, 3 C.F.R. 859 (1995), reprinted as amended in 42 U.S.C. ยง 4321 (1995) (requiring agencies to make achieving environmental justice part of their missions); Exec. Order No. 12,866, supra note 2 (defining principles of regulation including examining the effectiveness of existing regulation, encouraging flexibility in method of compliance, and assigning costs and benefits of new regulations); Memorandum on Regulatory Reform, 31 WEEKt.Y Coam. PREs. Doc. 695, 695-96 (Apr. 21, 1995) (directing agencies to waive penalties in certain cases and to reduce the frequency of required reports); Memorandum on Customer Service, 31 WEEKLY CoM. PREs. Doc. 456, 456 (March 22, 1995) (directing agencies to implement steps to ensure better customer service); Memorandum on Regulatory Reform, 31 WEmKLY Comp'. PREs. Doc. 363, 364 (Mar. 4, 1995) (calling on agencies to cut obsolete regulations). trations of Presidents Reagan and Bush. 13) The executive branch has been highly attuned to the need to compare costs and benefits, to attend to results rather than processes, and to enlist the private sector in engineering least-cost solutions. Improvements in regulatory performance are more likely to come from the executive than from a Congress saddled with its institutional deficiencies. Perhaps Congress should give substantial discretion to administrators, allowing them to design appropriate regulatory tools and perhaps to set priorities as well.14 Indeed many current problems result from statutes that either produce poor incentives or forbid more imaginative, cheaper, and more effective solutions-or that ban cost-benefit balancing altogether.' 5 On the substantive side, a cost-benefit state may well be better than what we now have: a system containing both economic and democratic failures, where priorities are not set carefully and where interest groups wield excessive power over government. Certainly it is important to provide methods for assessing regulatory performance. At least in principle, some form of cost-benefit analysis could simultaneously promote political accountability and regulatory efficiency. In this way, it could be part of a system of deliberative democracy. But any movement toward a cost-benefit state should be accompanied by an understanding of the importance of public judgments in regulatory law, the limits of the criterion of private willingness to pay, and the need to 1995 (press release), available in WESTLAW, Pres-Daily Database. The initiative to reform EPA will: (1) simplify reporting burdens; (2) allow grace periods for small business violations; (3) provide incentives for self-disclosure and correction; (4) increase the use of emissions trading; (5) consolidate air pollution rules; (6) give greater flexibility to recipients of grants; and (7) create a faster self-certification program for minor changes to pesticides. Id. The initiative to reform OSHA will: (1) switch from command-and-control to partnerships with business (which means negotiated, rather than dictated, regulations); (2) update obsolete and confusing standards; and (3) identify priorities sensibly (i.e., a ranking a hazards in order of danger). White House Office of Communications, President and Vice President Announce OSHA Reform. May 16, 1995 (press release), available in WESTLAW, Pres-Daily Database. See also Regulation: EPA, DOE, DOI Reform and Eliminate Rules, GRE Nwm, Aug. 3, 1995, available in LEXIS, News Library, Gmwre File (reporting Clinton administration announcement of reforms of twenty-eight federal agencies). A. A New Constitutional Moment? The New Deal was of course a substantial reformation of the original constitutional structure. 16 It qualifies as a substantial reformation above all because it refashioned the three basic cornerstones of that structure: federalism, checks and balances, and individual rights. 17 In the 1930s the powers of the national government were expanded in an extraordinary way, in favor of a system that exercised something close to general police powers.' 8 The original understanding of a sharply constrained cen of the tripartite system). the brief period from 1932 through 1936, and were clearly supported and ratified by the public. Such rapid change was possible partly because it is a relatively simple step for a legislature to create a range of new bureaucratic institutions, at least if the legislature does not specify each agency's duties in advance. In fact, the New Deal entities operated with little statutory guidance; Congress usually contented itself with open-ended delegations of authority. 24 As we shall see, the relative simplicity of the New Dealers' task contrasts dramatically with the complexity of the task faced by the 104th Congress. 25 Moreover, in the early 1930s the public's support for the New Deal was broader and deeper than public support for fundamental change in the 1990s-though the public may unite behind such change before long. One of the most striking features of the period since 1980 has been sustained national criticism of the New Deal reformation. In light of the election of the 104th Congress, this criticism may well be signalling the first genuinely foundational challenge to American government since the New Deal itself. The Contract with America clearly suggested that large-scale change was at issue. It is worthwhile to pause over the constitution-like character of recent challenges to the current governmental structure. Critics often suggest that the na ienced a constitutional moment. If the term is seen as a metaphor, rather than a legal term of art, it is sufficient to work from more abstract and intuitive ideas of the sort described in the text. In this way there is a wholesale attack on the existing allocation of authority between the national government and the states. But "horizontal" issues of government structure are receiving similar attention. Concerned about the extent of policymaking discretion given to regulatory agencies, many suggest that Congress should reassert its constitutional prerogatives by narrowing administrative discretion. 30 It is urged that the New Deal's enthusiasm for independent bureaucracy, and for a large lawmaking role for executive agencies, should be revisited, and that Congress should make the fundamental choices of policy. Finally, and perhaps most fundamentally, pre-New Deal principles of private right have enjoyed a rebirth with the suggestion that modem regulatory programs violate liberty, rightly conceived. 31 These principles play a significant part in current debates, as reflected in arguments in favor of removing constraints from the marketplace and imposing new compensation obligations on government. 32 Thus the movement for deregulation has become far more sweeping than it was in the Reagan period. The Takings Clause has become a rallying cry for a new enthusiasm for the protection of private property-challenging such well-established federal programs as the Endangered Species Act and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act's protection of wetlands. 27. See CoNTRAcr WIrH AMERICA, supra note 4, at 125 (criticizing government efforts to legislate solutions to social problems); Richard A. Epstein, The Proper Scope of the Commerce Power, 73 VA. L. REv. 1387, 1388 (arguing that the Commerce Clause should not be used as a vehicle for expansive government powers). programs). compensation requirements in current bills). view, there is no suggestion that markets are ideal; but often markets work better than the regulatory programs designed as solutions. Increasingly, assessment of regulatory performance has taken the form of cost-benefit analysis. 34 If we are indeed in the midst of a constitutional moment, it began with the election of President Ronald Reagan and was spurred by the dramatic and largely unanticipated shift in the direction and composition of the Congress in the 1994 elections. The Contract With America presented the electorate with a set of promises for fundamental reform. The importance of the Contract should not be understated, for it helped to organize a formerly unruly House of Representatives and provided public benchmarks against which the House would be measured. It is clear that in the 104th Congress, the House of Representatives acted in a remarkably rapid and sweeping fashion, offering the Senate a chance to make the most significant changes in the national government since the New Deal. The Senate declined the opportunity, largely because the public showed its uncertainty about such far-reaching change. If the nation follows the Senate's course, the effort at constitutional revision will have failed. But any predictions on this count are premature. Let us turn, then, away from theory and toward more pragmatic issues involving the performance of the regulatory state. In the last decade, something very close to a consensus has emerged on some of the most important problems in existing government regulation. If government were to act on this consensus, it would introduce important changes. Those changes need not amount to anything like a constitutional moment; here we are not speaking of the most basic constitutional commitments. But the changes would be far from a mere matter of tinkering. The consensus has the following features. (claiming that the mattress flammability standard resulted in a substantial increase in costs, but no statistically significant increases in consumer safety); Sam Peltzman, Toward a More General Theory of Regualtion, in CHICAGO Srtmms N PoLmcAL EcoNoMY, supra, at 234 (explaining the problem of diffuse interests that allows small groups to exert control over regulatory agencies); George J. Stigler, The Theory of Economic Regulation, in CHICAGO STUins iN POLITICAL EcONoMY, supra, at 209 (arguing that regulatory agencies created to protect the public often succumb to interest group pressures). This overall spending pattern includes serious and apparently unjustified 39 asymmetries in life-saving expenditures among the areas of regulation. For example, compare transportation safety regulation, which costs a median of $56,000 per life-year saved, to occupational safety regulation, costing a median of $350,000 per life-year saved, and environmental regulation, costing a median of $4,200,000 per life-year saved. 40 These variations are compounded by variations in the effectiveness of safety standards within each area. 41 Annual lives saved are highly variable. In transportation, the Federal Aviation Administration's seat cushion flammability regulation saves thirty-seven lives each year, while the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's passive restraints/belts regulation saves no fewer than 1,850 lives annually; in occupational safety, OSHA's hazard communication regulation saves 200 lives per year, OSHA's oil and gas well service regulation saves fifty lives per year, OSHA's grain dust regulation saves four lives per year, and OSHA's formaldehyde regulation saves 0.010 lives per year; and in environmental safety, EPA's asbestos regulation saves ten lives each year, while EPA's land disposal regulation saves 2.5 lives per year.42 Of course calculations of costs and benefits are somewhat speculative, and these numbers are only estimates. But with better allocation of resources and more deliberative judgments, much could be improved. Consider Table 1, which certainly does not capture all relevant factors-it does not even describe total benefits-but which is at least highly suggestive of poor resource allocations. 43 In addition to this apparently inconsistent structure, the goal of achieving sensible priority-setting is undermined by the fact that agencies have substantially different standards for deciding when risks are large enough to require 37. Paul R. Portney & Robert N. Stavins, Regulatory Review of Environmental Policy: The Poten Regulation Unvented Space Heater Ban Aircraft Cabin Fire Protection Standard Auto Passive Restraint/Seat Belt Standards Steering Column Protection Standard Underground Construction Standards Trihalomethane Drinking Water Standards Aircraft Seat Cushion Flammability Standard Alcohol and Drug Control Standards Auto Fuel-System Integrity Standard Standards for Servicing Auto Wheel Rims Aircraft Floor Emergency Lighting Standard Concrete & Masonry Construction Standards Crane Suspended Personnel Platform Standard Passive Restraints for Trucks & Buses (Proposed) Side-Impact Standards for Autos (Dynamic) Children's Sleepwear Flammability Ban Auto Side Door Support Standards Low-Altitude Windshear Equipment & Training Standards Electrical Equipment Standards (Metal Mines) Trenching and Excavation Standards Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance (TCAS) Systems Hazard Communication Standard Side-Impact Standards for Trucks, Buses, and MPVs (Proposed) Grain Dust Explosion Prevention Standards Rear Lap/Shoulder Belts for Autos Standards for Radionuclides in Uranium Mines Benzine NESHAP (Original: Fugitive Emissions) Ethylene Dibromide Drinking Water Standard Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Coke By-products) Asbestos Occupational Exposure Limit Benzene Occupational Exposure Limit Electrical Equipment Standards (Coal Mines) Arsenic Emission Standards for Glass Plants Ethylene Oxide Occupational Exposure Limit Arsenic/Copper NESHAP Hazardous Waste Listing for Petroleum Refining Sludge Cover/Move Uranium Mill Tailings (Inactive Sites) Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Transfer Operations) Cover/Move Uranium Mill Tailings (Active Sites) Acrylonitrile Occupational Exposure Limit Coke Ovens Occupational Exposure Limit Lockout/Tagout Asbestos Occupational Exposure Limit Arsenic Occupational Exposure Limit Asbestos Ban Diethylstilbestrol (DES) Cattlefeed Ban Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Waste Operations) 1,2-Dichloropropane Drinking Water Standard Hazardous Waste Land Disposal Ban (1st 3rd) Municipal Solid Waste Landfill Standards (Proposed) Formaldehyde Occupational Exposure Limit Atrazine/Alachlor Drinking Water Standard Hazardous Waste Listing for Wood Preserving Chemicals Cost per Premature Death Averted ($ Millions 1990) Agency any regulation at all.44 For example, the International Commission on Radiological Protection recommends that environmental factors be regulated when calculated to cause an incremental cancer risk of about 3 in 1000, for those exposed over a lifetime. American agencies do not follow this recommendation, and national practices are highly variable. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission mandates regulation where incremental cancer risks exceed 1 in 1000; the EPA does so when the risk exceeds an acceptable range that varies from 1 in 10,000 to 1 in 1,000,000.4 5 The FDA set its standard at 1 in 1,000,000, but courts have interpreted the Delaney Clause to require a standard of essentially zero.46 OSHA interprets the "significant risk" requirement in its governing statute to mean that an incremental cancer risk of 1 in 1000 will initiate regulation;4 7 labor groups have sought to require regulation when the risk is 1 in 1,000,000. As we will see, a single number may not make sense in light of different contextual judgments. 48 But in the face of these variations, good priority-setting is unlikely. than rigid commands. 44. See generally March Sadowitz & John D. Graham, A Survey of Residual Cancer Risks Permit ted by Health, Safety and Environmental Policy, 6 RISK: HEMTH, SAFEvY & EtNviRoNmENT 17 (1995) (documenting differences in agencies' standards for acceptable risk levels from hazardous substances). tifying and describing the significant risk requirement). 48. See text accompanying notes 74-88 infra. 49. Cf Whitman Administration Report Urges Revamped Regulatory Procedures, St. Env't Daily (3NA), Aug. 4, 1995, available in LEXIS, Environ Library, BNASED File (summarizing New Jersey's regulatory reform plan which advocates flexible standards and moves away from rigid command-andcontrol regulation). EiMssiONs TRADINo 38-59 (1985) (estimating the potential savings arising from emissions trading regulation); Paul R. Portney, Katherine N. Probst & Adam M. Finkel, The EPA at "Thirtysomething, "21 ENrL. L. 1461, 1463-64 (1991) (noting savings of up to $3 million through the system of marketable emissions allowances contained in the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990). Encouraging companies to disclose information is an especially valuable incentive-based approach to risk regulation. If companies offer information about risk, consumer and worker behavior will probably be affected.5 6 The national government has offered many initiatives in this direction. Consider in particular the Toxic Release Inventory of the Superfund Amendments, which requires companies to publish annual reports detailing the amount of toxics they release into the environment. This program has been highly successful, spurring voluntary reductions at relatively low costs. Reacting to public concern about the information in these mandatory disclosures, many companies have voluntarily pledged to reduce toxic releases. 57 A great deal of work remains to be done in conceiving and designing appropriate informational approaches to risk.5 8 3. Government should recognize and counteract harmful unintended consequences of regulations. (1990) (exploring some unintended consequences of several regulations). In a concurring opinion in a 1991 D.C. Circuit case involving an occupational safety and health regulation, Judge Williams invoked this evidence to suggest that OSHA's refusal to engage in cost-benefit analysis might not be beneficial for workers. 66 Judge Williams reasoned that if a fatality results from an expenditure of $12 million, some regulations might produce more fatalities than they prevent. 67 As Table I illustrates, many regulations do cost more than $12 million per life saved. In Judge Williams' view, an agency that fails to measure the overall social costs against benefits falls accurately to measure mortality gains against losses. normative judgments. See text accompanying notes 74-88 infra. TABLE 2 Summary of Selected Studies on Income and Health Implicit income gains Comments necessary to avert one death (millions) Joint Economic Committee (1984) Chapman and Hariharan (1993) Graham, HungChang, and Evans mortality and income (1992) data for the U.S. Older workers aged 58-63. Measured effects of wages and of value of one's home on mortality Controls for prior disability, and educational attainment Finds income effects at all income levels Controls for prior disability, educational attainment, and exposure to occupational hazards Investigates longevity rather than mortality. Finds income effects at highest quintiles of income Estimate reflects effect of income changes on family mortality. Study does not use multiple regression, does not control for prior health status or education Uses two measures of health endowments Uses four distinct controls for prior health conditions Distinguishes effects of permanent income from those of transitional income likely to translate into significant, aggregate health impacts). regulating risks. because the theoretical limitations of health-health analysis make it less useful in practice). information about hazardous products because the information may reduce sales). tween experts and laypersons). Public Ranking of Risks Industrial air pollution Industrial pollution of waterways 1. Hazardous waste sites 2. Exposure to worksite chemicals 3. 4. Nuclear accident radiation 5. Radioactive waste 6. Chemical leaks from underground storage tanks 7. Pesticides 8. Pollution from industrial accidents 9. Water pollution from farm runoff 10. Tap water contamination 11. 12. Ozone layer destruction 13. Coastal water contamination 14. Sewage-plant water pollution 15. Vehicle exhaust 16. Oil spills 17. Acid rain 18. Water pollution from urban runoff 19. Damaged wetlands 20. Genetic alteration 21. Non-hazardous waste sites 22. Greenhouse effect 23. 24. X-ray radiation 25. 26. Microwave oven radiation Indoor air pollution Indoor radon Medium-to-low High Low Not ranked Not ranked Medium-to-low High Medium-to-low Medium High High High Low Medium-to-low High Medium-to-low High Medium Low Low Medium-to-low Low High Not ranked High Not ranked A recent study in Canada shows similar results.77 It reveals that the Canadian public sees cigarette smoking and motor vehicle accidents as far less dangerous than do Canadian toxicologists. It also shows that the public ranks many risks higher than do toxicologists; the most dramatic disparities along this dimension involve chemical pollution, ozone depletion, nuclear waste, food additives, pesticides in goods, and PCBs. supra note 14, at 33-39 (discussing differences in perceived risks between the public and experts); Paul Slovic, Perception of Risk: Reflections on the Psychometric Paradigm, in SOCIAL THEoRIEs OF RISK 117, 150 (Sheldon Krimsky & Dominic Golding eds., 1992) (explaining that expert risk assessments are based on technical analysis, while public risk assessments are based on qualitative values). When citizens are misinformed, government should not base regulatory decisions on their judgments.8 3 Instead, government should act on the basis of scientific realities. Public judgments should dictate regulatory policy only when they are undergirded by sound science, as opposed to sensationalist anecdotes or scare tactics. 84 This is part of the defining creed of a deliberative democracy. Too often, however, the scare tactics have prevailed. 85 But the misguided fears of citizens provide only part of the story. Some of the differences between citizens' and experts' assessments of risks involve value judgments rather than factual misunderstandings. Experts focus principally on aggregate lives at stake. By contrast, citizens consider a range of other variables: whether risks are equitably distributed, likely to be faced by future generations, especially dreaded, well-understood, or voluntarily incurred.8 6 Table 4 summarizes psychological research on the effect of value judgments on risk perceptions. Risk Characteristic Aggravating Factor Mitigating Factor nature of risk permanence duration equity source of risk freedom existing understanding reflection to status quo dreaded irreversible/uncontrollable faced by future generations unfairly distributed man-made voluntarily incurred known to science new acceptable reversible/controllable faced only by those now living fairly distributed natural forced exposure unknown old Qualitative distinctions of this kind do not play a role in most expert assessments. But citizen judgments on these points are entirely reasonable. So long as those judgments are both reflective and informed,8 7 they deserve respect. 88 Any regulatory reform should reflect these qualitative public judgments about which risks are most severe. and should use performance standards rather than design standards. 87. See Paul Slovic, Perception of Risk ScL, Apr. 17, 1987, at 280, 285 (concluding that both public and expert risk assessments should contribute to the regulatory process); Letter from Paul Slovic, President, Decision Research & Professor of Psychology, U. of Oregon, to Sen. William V. Roth, Jr. (Mar. 6, 1995) (on file with the Stanford Law Review) (criticizing risk assessment for failure to take account of "many other dimensions of risk that are important psychologically, ethically, and politically"). coal producers in favor of mandating scrubber installation and against clean coal requirements). 91. Recent initiatives in the area of occupational safety and health reflect this point. See Remarks on the National Performance Review, 31 WEEKLY Comp. PRES. Doc. 838, 840 (May 16, 1995) (urging modification of detailed regulatory standards in favor of greater flexibility); see also Memorandum on Regulatory Reform, 31 WEEKLY CoMp. PREs. Doc. 363, 363-65 (Mar. 4, 1995) (directing agencies to discard detailed regulations that undermine regulatory objectives). See generally PnLIP K. HoWARD, THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE: How LAW Is SUFFocATING AMERICA (1994) (criticizing regulations that do not permit common sense judgment). 93. This account is based on the following sources: official government documents, including the Congressional Record; newspaper accounts; my own participation as a witness before the Senate Judiciary Committee and the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works; and informal, offthe-record conversations with people involved in the legislative process. I have provided documentation wherever possible. A. The Contract and Two Kinds of Supermandates The Contract with America expressly addresses government regulation, and it promises prompt action. In an especially good paragraph, one that deserves bipartisan endorsement, the Contract states: Congress is never forced to ensure that the benefits of regulation, better health and productivity, outweigh the costs, lost jobs, and lower wages. Nor does Congress pursue integrated health and safety goals. Instead, Congress and federal regulators often attack whatever health risk has caught the public's attention, even if its regulatory solution exacerbates other health risks.102 The Contract promised several concrete steps, including: (a) risk assessment for expensive regulations; (b) a statement of the costs accompanying regulatory initiatives; (c) a comparison of costs and benefits to accompany regulations; (d) an independent peer review panel to certify the risk assessment; and (e) an annual report detailing a regulatory budget, to be capped below the current level. This cap would require agencies to find cost-effective mechanisms and identify policies whose benefits exceed their costs. 10 3 Taken together, these steps may or may not qualify as constitutional in character; but they certainly would amount to a large-scale revision of current practice. Of course the technocratic and reactionary strands could make some alliances. Good technocrats believe that overregulation is indeed a problem, and good reactionaries understand that technical tools can limit unjustified regulatory interventions. But the alliance was bound to produce difficulties, since those interested in technical improvements are unlikely to support measures that would drown agencies in paperwork requirements or increase their vulnerability to special interests. 1. Unfunded mandates. This provision is largely procedural; it counts as a modest kind of procedural supermandate. It probably will not make much of a difference. President Clinton's Executive Order on Federal Regulation' 0 9 imposes nearly identical requirements, and while the Order is not subject to judicial review, the "hard look" doctrine imposes requirements roughly parallel to those of the Act." 0 The second noteworthy provision is more ambitious. It requires that agencies "identify and consider a reasonable number of regulatory alternatives and from those alternatives select the least costly, most cost-effective or least burdensome alternative that achieves the objectives of the rule."' 1 The Act exempts agencies from these requirements if compliance would be inconsistent with the law or if the agency explains its reason for not selecting the least burdensome alternative." 2 (requiring agency to articulate a reasoned basis for regulatory action). regulations). In the Senate, however, the prospects for House Bill 450 were poor, and for good reason. Though popular in recent years,' 17 a general moratorium on federal regulation is reactionary in the worst way-a crude, lazy, and pandering response to current problems. Its blunderbuss quality ensures that it will stop measures that are otherwise required by law, or that would do a lot of good, as well as measures that warrant reconsideration (which a moratorium by itself fails to provide). A special problem is that the moratorium would apply to measures designed to relieve businesses of expenses and obligations; from the standpoint of business, a moratorium is only a mixed blessing.11 8 In short, a moratorium falls to make distinctions that public officials ought to make. Thus the moratorium idea never received sustained attention in the Senate. tory burdens). On the other hand, reformers might urge, with some justification, that generic reform would have some of the virtues of across-the-board tax reform, base-closing legislation, and the Gramm-Rudman Act. That is, generic reform might prevent well-organized interest groups from mobilizing in the intense way they can on specific statutes, thus defeating reform. Generic reform would I am deeply committed to regulatory reform that cuts redtape without undercutting the health and safety of the American people. Giving the Congress 45 days to consider regulations before they take effect would let lawmakers focus on the specifics of these issues and address real problems as they come up, without delaying necessary public protections. This approach, not the blunt instrument of a moratorium, is the right way to reform regulation. It's common sense. (1) a requirement of careful risk assessment to accompany new regulations; (2) a system of peer review for risk assessments, with a specific provision allowing "peers" with a potential financial stake to participate on peer review panels; (3) a codification of President Reagan's Executive Order on federal regulation, including the requirement that regulations be cost-effective and favor least restrictive alternatives;1 2 6 (4) a general, ambiguous but apparent requirement of cost-benefit balancing, including perhaps a substantive supermandate to amend all statutes that do not require or permit cost-benefit balancing;' 2 7 (5) a compensation requirement for any government action that reduces the value of property by more than ten percent; and (6) a regulatory budget. This was a remarkably ambitious piece of legislation, with many ambiguities and many provisions that warranted and continue to warrant sustained discussion. For example, a general requirement of cost-benefit balancing would amend many substantive statutes. Certainly it would be wise to explore the precise consequences of these amendments. As we will see, the issue became a central subject of dispute in the Senate. 125. 141 CONG. REc. H2176 (daily ed. Feb. 23, 1995). 126. Exec. Order No. 12,291, supra note 2. 127. H.R. 1022 incorporated by reference President Reagan's Executive Order on Federal Regulation, Exec. Order No. 12,291, supra note 2. The ambiguity stems, in part, from the fact that the requirements of that executive order-including the requirement that cost-benefit analysis be the basis for decision-applied only "to the extent permitted by law." Id. This qualification recognizes that some statutes prohibit cost-benefit analysis. Since H.R. 1022, if enacted, would be a statute, the effect of the "to the extent permitted by law" qualification is unclear. Remarkably, the House held no hearings on these and other questions, passing House Bill 1022 on February 28, 1995-just five days after its reference to committees-by the overwhelming vote of 286 to 141.129 This was irresponsible; it reflected the power of forces of reaction in the House, which had promised to act in one hundred days. The only possible justification for the speedy passage would be to spur the Senate to act in a more deliberative fashion. On April 7, 1995, President Clinton said that he would veto the compensation requirement. 130 On March 9, the House referred to the Senate House Bill 9,131 a closely overlapping bill.132 Perhaps its key provision was section 422, which outlined the criteria to be satisfied before a final rule is promulgated. The most important of these criteria included requirements (a) "[t]hat the incremental risk reduction or other benefits of any strategy chosen will be likely to justify, and be reasonably related to, the incremental costs incurred" 133 and (b) "[t]hat other alternative strategies identified by the agency were found either (A) to be less cost-effective.., or (B) to provide less flexibility." 134 These decisional criteria are supposed to "supplement and, to the extent there is a conflict, supersede" the otherwise applicable decision criteria.' 35 H.R. 9 also contains the "Private Property Protection Act of 1995," requiring compensation for any diminution of the fair market value of property by 20% or more, 136 and the "Regulatory Reform and Relief Act," requiring a complex regulatory impact analysis-including discussions of costs and benefits and market-based alternatives-and increased hearing requirements in notice and comment rulemaking. 137 It would include as well the "Risk Management 4. Generic reform: the Senate. The second bill, Senate Bill 343, championed by Senator Dole, was more ambitious. It received far more attention and became the focal point for legislative debate. The Dole bill--obviously connected with issues of presidential politics-was introduced on February 2, 1995.141 Unlike the Roth proposal, this bill contained no specific provision requiring agencies to use economic incentives. It did, however, contain several controversial provisions. Three in particular deserve mention here. First, the bill would have banned agencies from acting unless a federal statute explicitly required them to do so.142 Second, the bill included a complex supermandate requiring agencies to apply costbenefit analysis to all regulations unless "explicit textual language" of the authorizing statute required otherwise. 143 Finally, the Dole bill would impose several layers of procedural scrutiny, including peer, congressional, and judicial review. Echoing House Bill 1022, the Dole bill's peer review provision did not disqualify "peers" with potential financial interests. 144 In addition, the Dole bill allowed any person affected by a regulation to petition agencies for review of existing rules, under the new cost-benefit criteria, and seek judicial review of the denial of any such petition. The Dole bill also called for judicial review of any risk-assessment or costbenefit analysis. Finally, the bill provided for congressional review of major By late June, the Dole bill had undergone four major revisions. The first was the "Grassley" substitute, which eliminated some of the most extreme proposals, including the provision saying that agencies should not act unless required to do so and the judicial review provisions, which were clarified and softened. The informally named Grassley substitute-so-called after Senator Grassley became a co-sponsor on March 22, 1995-responded to many of the sharpest criticisms of the original Dole bill. On May 26, the second revision of the Dole bill was introduced. The revision eliminated interlocutory judicial review of agency determinations that a regulation was major and therefore subject to a risk assessment.' 47 The revision also added a provision that would preclude agencies from regulating "insignificant" risks, and would thereby repeal the well-known and highly controversial Delaney Clause, which forbids the use of carcinogens in food additives. 148 Proponents of this provision rejected the zero risk standard established by the Delaney Clause as inflexible and outdated. Apparently at the behest of lobbyists, a new provision was added to alter the requirements for the Toxic Substances Inventory under the Superfund statute. Under current law, all toxic chemical releases must be disclosed to the public.' 5 l Under the proposed provision, disclosure would be required only if ministrative Procedure Act by adding ยง 625). The Dole-Johnston bill also maintained the basic requirements of risk assessment and the judicial review provisions. Importantly, the bill restored interlocutory review an agency's determination that a rule is not "major" or that a risk assessment is not required. 156 The bill also restated the law governing review of agency action, though it probably would not change the law in any material way.1 57 federal courts jurisdiction the to to The debate intensified with Senator Glenn's introduction of the Democratic alternative, Senate Bill 1001, on June 29.158 President Clinton endorsed the Glenn bill in mid-July.1 59 Senator Glenn self-consciously built on Senator Roth's bill, which had received enthusiastic bipartisan support in the Governmental Affairs Committee.160 In fact the Glenn bill differed from the Roth bill in only a few particulars. Like Roth's bill, the Glenn bill clearly would not override the substantive requirements of existing laws. Responding to some of the sharpest criticisms of the Dole bill, the Glenn bill limited judicial review. It allowed agencies to review existing rules, but did not call for automatic termination of those rules that were not reviewed; and it eliminated any petition On behalf of his proposal, Senator Glenn emphasized five central points. First, his proposal contained more limited judicial review of cost-benefit analysis and risk assessment than the Dole bill. Second, his proposal would be procedural rather than substantive; thus it would not affect the Delaney Clause or the Toxic Release Inventory. Third, it would not include a petition process. Fourth, it would not include a supermandate and hence would not affect existing statutory requirements. Fifth, its "sunshine" provision would ensure public disclosure of communications between agencies and the Office of Management and Budget and of information relating to the status of regulatory review.162 From June 30 through July 20, the Senate vigorously debated the DoleJohnston and Glenn proposals. The debate centered on several issues, including the scope of judicial review, the petition process, the supermandate issue, amendments to the Delaney Clause, 163 and the Toxic Release Inventory. 164 Consider the following much-disputed language from a late draft of the Dole bill: supersede, any other decisional criteria otherwise provided by law. head publishes in the Federal Register a finding that (1) the benefits from the rule justify the costs of the rule; (2) the rule employs to the extent practicable flexible reasonable alterna (3) (A) the rule adopts the least cost alternative... (B) if scientific, technical, or economic uncertainties or nonquantifiable benefits ... make a more costly alternative ... appropriate and in the public interest and the agency head provides an explanation of those considerations, the rule adopts the least cost alternative of the reasonable alternatives necessary to take into account such uncertainties or benefits; and (4) if a risk assessment is required .... (A) the rule is likely to significantly reduce the human health, safety, and environmental risks to be addressed; or Levin, Hatch, and Glenn over merits of the Dole bill and the Glenn bill). In this period, issues about food safety became central to the debate. Several cases of E. coli poisoning-heavily publicized in the key primary state of New Hampshire-threatened to turn the issue of regulatory reform into an obstacle to Senator Dole's presidential hopes. Advertisements in New Hampshire included accusations by a group of parents of children sickened or killed by contaminated meat that Dole was "trying to please his big contributors instead of protecting kids."'1 7 1 Nonetheless, Senate Republicans, supported by medical experts, refused to amend the Dole bill's repeal of the Delaney Clause. 172 On July 18, the Senate narrowly rejected the Glenn bill by a margin of 52 to 48.173 The same day, the Senate rejected cloture on the Dole bill by a vote of 53 to 47.174 And two days later, the Dole-Johnston forces again failed to close further debate, this time by only two votes. 175 This last vote effectively killed Of particular importance was an appropriations bill containing provisions designed to limit the power of the EPA.18 2 The bill proposed, among other 176. Hope for Regulatory Reform Passage in Senate Dims As Compromise Fails, WASH. Bavaw things, to halt enforcement of the Great Lakes water quality standards; prohibit enforcement of "raw sewage" rules governing beaches; prevent enforcement of a ban on illegal filling of wetlands; eliminate EPA's ability to set standards to prevent industrial water pollution; block use of funds to limit urban air pollution through commuter trip reduction; curtail regulation of toxic air pollutants from oil refineries; prohibit EPA from gathering health risk information about oil and gas releases; forbid EPA from finalizing any proposals for drinking water protections against radon and arsenic; protect chemical manufacturers from having to report uses of chemicals; restrict EPA from setting standards for pesticides in food; and ban the addition of new species to the list of endangered species under the Endangered Species Act.18 3 The prospects for these provisions were dim in the Senate. Moreover, it was clear that President Clinton would veto the appropriations bill whether or not it included these provisions. 184 The proposed appropriations cuts were notable (and disturbing) insofar as they suggested a desire both to reduce environmental regulation through a relatively less visible mechanism and to prevent agencies from developing the analytical capacity that would enable them to engage in good policy analysis. Of course appropriations issues in general became, in October 1995, a central feature of the attempted revision of American government. I cannot discuss the resulting debate in detail here. But it is important to identify the most striking fact of the debate: Many diverse substantive issues-involving welfare reform, Medicaid, environmental issues, and much more-were dealt with all at once under the single heading of appropriations. BNA File. Also included was a controversial proposal to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling. See id. 6. A note on the politics of regulatory reform. More generally, the Senate acted-as it historically has-as a "cooler" for House bills, operating in a slower and more deliberative manner. 19' Recall that the House passed its generic reform bill just five days after it was introduced. 192 This pattern was widely noticed in the 104th Congress. The House acted rapidly and sloppily; the Senate held hearings and took its time. ing text. A. Procedure and Paperwork: Less Is More Part of the 104th Congress' attempt at regulatory reform involved not substantive criteria but paperwork requirements designed to delay and thwart the issuance of regulations.1 99 This strategy resembles the "moratorium" ideanot an effort to design good regulations and to prevent bad ones, but instead an indiscriminate strategy to stultify agencies, even though agencies might be trying to reduce regulatory burdens. 197. See note 12 supra (discussing the "reinventing govemmenf' material). 198. See text accompanying notes 228-229 infra. 199. These efforts would thus aggravate the problem of "ossification" of rulemaking. See generally Thomas 0. MeGarity, Some Thoughts on "Deossifying" the Rulemaking Process, 41 DKnE LJ. 1385 (identifying and analyzing the "ossification" of informal rulemaking). Section 640 of Senate Bill 343 should be eliminated. Certainly people with a potential financial interest should not be allowed to participate on peer review panels. Agencies should be encouraged to experiment with such panels, but any generic requirement should await the outcomes of these experiments. 204. HARVARD GRoUP ON RISK MANAGEMENT REFORM, supra note 38, at 22-30 (calling for Congress to centralize "leadership of the assessment and ranking of risks in the Office of Science and Technology Policy of the Executive Office of the President"); see text accompanying notes 44-47 supra. It is unclear, however, how much this provision would add, since Congress can already enact legislation to prevent any and all regulations from becoming law. There are risks as well. A serious problem with congressional review is that it might, in practice, give well-organized interest groups a chance to bring pressure to bear on hundreds or even thousands of regulations. In this way it might increase rather than decrease the problem of factional influence. 20 9 Section 801 would also require Congress to expend limited resources reviewing a wide range of agency rules, many of which should be uncontroversial. How might Congress improve the proposals mentioned above? I begin with some modest changes designed to accomplish Congress' apparent goals in a more effective manner. Two criticisms can be made of a proposed framework (or supermandate) for evaluating governmental performance. The first is that the framework is wrong because it ignores certain important variables, or is founded on an indefensible theory of value. The second criticism is that the framework is incompletely specified, in the sense that its meaning depends on further subsidiary judgments that have yet to be offered. Cost-benefit analysis is properly subject to the first kind of criticism to the extent that it purports to align values along the single metric of aggregated private willingness to pay-and evaluates regulation by reference to that criterion alone. Indeed, regulation might be founded on citizen judgments that have no clear parallel in aggregated willingness to pay.2 12 Or it may be rooted in distributive rather than allocative goals; consider the antidiscrimination laws as possible examples. To the extent that cost-benefit analysis is rooted in the technical economists' understanding, it has a great deal to offer, but it cannot capture many appropriate goals of regulation. 211. The use of a single metric does, however, raise some difficulties. See Pildes & Sunstein, supra note 35, at 46 (recognizing problem posed by valuation requirement of cost-benefit analysis where benefit is not easily quantified); Cass R. Sunstein, Incommensurability and Valuation in Lmv, 92 MicH. L. REv. 779, 782-85 (1994) (noting difficulty of reducing varying notions of value to a single descriptive metric). There is a vast literature on cost-benefit analysis. See generally E.J. MisHAN, CosT-BENEFfr ANALYsis: AN INFoRMAL INTRODUCTION (2d ed. 1975); STEVmE KELMAN, WHAT PtucE INcETIVEs?: ECONOMIsTS AND = ENVIRoNMENT (1981). The most basic point here is that the modem state includes a diverse array of regulatory statutes, with diverse legitimate purposes, including but not at all limited to economic efficiency. Consider the following: " Many important regulatory states are plausibly understood in terms of economic efficiency; 2 15 they can be seen as efforts to counteract market failures. The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act 2 16 and the Toxic Substances Control Act2 17 are examples. Such statutes may be designed to overcome an absence of sufficient information; harms to third parties; or collective action problems of various sorts.218 " Some statutes are designed to eliminate illegitimate discrimination or what might be understood as caste-like features in modem society.2 19 Though some people think that such statutes can be defended on efficiency grounds, 22 0 their animating impulse has little to do with economic efficiency. " Some statutes are designed to protect cultural aspirations. 2 21 Examples include measures safeguarding the national parks, encouraging high-quality programming, and protecting endangered species. 3. Theory and practice. The House and Senate bills offered almost no guidance for characterizing costs and benefits, and no guidance at all on the crucial issue of how to value 224. EPsTrEN, supra note 31, at 30 (asserting that the efficiency approach to justice "offer[s] the best justificatory apparatus for demarcating the scope of state power from the area of individual choice"). Even when economic efficiency is not the basis for the statute, or when benefits cannot be quantified, it makes sense to require agencies to quantify costs to the extent that this is possible. It is possible to conclude that Congress should restrict itself to a call for cost-benefit analysis and leave the details to agencies.228 Perhaps Congress lacks the detailed understanding that would enable it to answer the more specific questions. But if we are at all concemed about administrative discretion, we should urge greater guidance from the national legislature.2 29 In any case the generic bills introduced in the House and Senate would be much improved if they offered more direction to agencies. I offer two suggestions here. identifying qualitatively different effects, and taking account of effects on diverse groups"). I have suggested that regulatory statutes have legitimate and diverse functions and that some of those functions do not involve economic efficiency. For this reason, the efficiency criterion is inadequate as a complete guide to the regulatory state. It is therefore best for Congress to understand costs and benefits in the economic fashion only for statutes that are designed to overcome market failures. And even here, there is room for qualifying the economic analysis-when, for example, the risk at issue is inequitably distributed, and when political actors believe that it deserves special attention for that reason.2 4 When the statute does not involve market failure, Congress would still require cost-benefit balancing as the general background rule; but it should understand the definition of costs and benefits to be sufficiently broad as to allow administrators to depart from purely economic criteria. Judicial review should be available to police administrative decisions for reasonableness and consistency.2 35 In the long run, it might be hoped, a common law of regulatory practice might emerge to create rationality and reasonableness where there is now a high degree of arbitrariness. sis fails to account for "the diversity of people's values"). ing whether the EPA regulatory decision had a "reasonable basis"). supra. 1994) (discussing the diversity of valuations suggested in contingent valuation studies). this problem. Congress should consider a new provision to this effect: "(1) Agencies shall ensure, to the extent feasible, that regulations do not create countervailing risks that are greater than those of regulated risks. (2) This section shall not apply if it is inconsistent with the provisions of the enabling statute pursuant to which the agency is acting." Such a provision would require agencies to ensure that overall risks are not increased. It would not fundamentally change current law. But it would be a modest step toward a more coordinated treatment of risk.244 C. Ambitious Goals Thus far I have offered modest suggestions that build on existing proposals. OSHA also exaggerated the number of lives likely to be saved by the rule by ignoring lives likely to be sacrificed by it, since the increased cost of medical care, to the extent passed on to consumers, will reduce the demand for medical care, and some people may lose their lives as a result. Id. at 826. increase the executive's role in priority setting. 2. Allow plans from the private sector that show greater and more cost-effective reductions. environmental law "proved to be especially fertile ground" for agency experimentation). Under most federal statutes, however, the EPA cannot approve private plans as substitutes for public mandates, even if the plans promise better results for less money. Congress should move in the direction of allowing private substitutes, so long as government monitoring is maintained.2 52 A provision of the June discussion draft of the Dole bill endorsed this strategy, but because its relationship to other statutes was quite ambiguous, it was unclear whether the provision would enable agencies to waive existing statutory requirements. 2 53 3. Regulate with incentives. We have seen that command-and-control regulation can be highly dysfunctional. Sometimes relevant statutes forbid agencies from choosing incentivebased strategies even where such strategies would be more effective. Congress might move away from command-and-control regulation by enacting a statute stating: "Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an agency shall be permitted to use economic incentives to induce industries to eliminate or reduce risks, if it can show that these methods will produce at least equivalent benefits in a more cost-effective manner."2 54 Of course, such a provision could increase the risk of litigation initiated by self-interested private groups seeking to stall desirable regulation.2 55 It could also allow agencies unenthusiastic about regulatory mandates to proceed with less effective means of achieving compliance. But despite the potential for abuse, the problems with existing command-andcontrol processes-excessive costs and insufficient regulatory benefits25 6-are probably sufficient to make it worthwhile to move in this direction. In the area of regulatory reform, and particularly in the context of health, safety, and the environment, a number of creative ideas are percolating throughout the nation. These ideas have already had effects on legislation; they will have increasingly significant consequences in the coming years. Using 1970s Environmentalism Cost-Benefit Analysis Pollution Preven- Free Market tion Environmentalism Environmentalism Democratic Perceived Problems excessive pollution; power of industry refusal to balance; absolutism absence of welltechnological defined property fixes; end of the pipe controls; rights; environpower of industry mentalism as a form of socialism; factionalism command-andcontrol; poor priority-setting; absence of public deliberation; interest group power Approved Measures national ambient Toxic Substances elimination of air quality stanControl Act; dards; technologi- FIFRA cal requirements Disapproved Measures common law Preferred Soluions command-andcontrol; best available technology; technology forcing hostility tinkering with current cars; tech- especially unholy nological fixes for water pollution Delaney Clause; national ambient air quality standards; technology-based regulation balancing require- solar energy; ments electric cars; clean fuels; elimi- market work nating "root cause" suspicion, since CBA need not produce pollution prevention create property rights; watch the of course favorable Attitude Toward hostility Economic Inentives favorable insofar as they minimize costs suspicion common law; the Emergency Plantakings approach ning and Consumer Right to to environmental Know Act; regulation; ef. wetlands protec- National Environion and endan- mental Policy gered species act Act; acid deposition provisions of reform CBA best available technology in CAA and CWVA; Superfund; common law coalitions economic incenives in the form of "polluters pay" and emissions trading favorable, but better than status potentially quo, but worse than real markets; emphasizes that analysis should threatens to be government dicta- be based on judgtion of outcomes ments, not just based on inadeaggregated willquate information ingness to pay; points to differences between lay and expert judgments favorable insofar as they limit factional power, focus democracy on right questions, and put a favorable, but tany questions, since there is a large government role in setting prices and/or quantities; under- premium on stands "economic" incentives mation as creation of real markets consumer sover- well-informed acquiring infor Normative Ideal strict enforcement good balancing of clean pollutionof statutory mandates relevant variables; free technologies, eignity, based on public judgments maximizing social with "deep" ecol- maximizing wel- based on people's ideals and convicwelfare tions fare through ogy and spiritual values as possible aggregating prianimating ideals; vate preferences nature as a source for environmental of value and other goods A. Cost-Benefit Balancing One possibility, captured in many of the current proposals, is to shift in the direction of cost-benefit balancing for all statutes. Many current statutes forbid balancing and call for absolutism. Such an approach is not easy to justify.257 Thus the various statutes that are defined in terms of health or technology might be amended to call for cost-benefit analysis.2 58 As we have seen, this shift-in the direction of a cost-benefit state-responds to several current problems with regulation. Moreover, it is important to offer some criteria by which to monitor regulatory performance, and cost-benefit analysis is probably the best available technique for embarking on a form of "national performance review." By itself, however, a shift towards cost-benefit analysis would be only a modest improvement over the status quo. We have seen that, as an abstraction, cost-benefit analysis lacks a theory of value. If this defect is remedied in the economist's fashion, by rooting cost-benefit analysis in the economic criterion of private willingness to pay, it becomes quite controversial and indeed hard to defend as a global approach. Environmental amenities are not best valued by aggregating private willingness to pay.259 Apart from the question of valuation, engrafting a cost-benefit requirement onto current law is only a modest shift; it does not represent a sufficiently fundamental change from the system of command-and-control regulation. Because the calculation of both costs and benefits can be enormously difficult, requiring agencies to make the necessary inquiries will impose large informational burdens on government. A general requirement of cost-benefit analysis allows legislators to take credit for "getting the regulators under control" without making the hard choices. Such a credit-claiming device hardly substitutes for reinvented government. In the last decade many people have enthusiastically embraced "pollution prevention" as the regulatory strategy of choice. 261 On this view, government should eliminate pollutants from the market rather than require pretreatment or impose technological requirements to reduce the harmful effects of pollutants. Prominent examples of pollution prevention include the elimination of lead from gasoline; the phaseout of chlorofluorocarbons; government bans on DDT, 260. This is a Hayekian point based on the government's informational limitations. Thus markets can be justified partly on the ground that individuals have far better relevant information than does government. See F.A. HAYEK, Tim CoNsTuToN oF LmERTY 106-120 (1960). Often the answer to this question is affirmative; often pollution prevention is both feasible and appropriate. 264 But as a global approach, pollution prevention is inadequate. 265 In some cases pollution prevention would impose extremely high costs-including environmental costs-for little environmental or other gain. Recall here that a federal court of appeals invalidated one of the most ambitious of the recent pollution prevention strategies-the ban on the manufacture and use of asbestos--on the ground that: (a) the benefits of the ban could not, in many sectors, be shown to justify the costs and (b) the ban on asbestos could itself produce a variety of environmental and health-related problems stemming from the use of environmentally inferior substitutes.266 This example can be duplicated in many other contexts. Indeed the goal of pollution prevention, if taken literally, would be a social disaster. For example, an immediate and wholesale shift to electric cars might seem the best way to prevent air pollution from motor vehicles. But electric cars are now extremely expensive, and the costs, for workers and consumers, of a ban on contemporary automobiles would plainly be excessive. In fact, electric cars produce environ ing EPA ban on "for all practical purposes, all present and future uses of asbestos"). achieved by pollution prevention rather than control technologies). prevention). presented insufficient evidence to justify asbestos ban). Much creative thought has been dedicated to using "free markets" as a mechanism for promoting environmental and other goals. 268 To free market advocates, the problem of environmental degradation stems from a simple fact: the absence of secure property rights in environmental amenities.2 69 The creation of secure property rights tends to reduce environmental problems. 34 (doubting the ability of low emission vehicles to improve air quality and energy security). (1991) (proposing an approach to environmental protection based on property rights). For two reasons, however, free market environmentalism is an incomplete solution. First, it is not always possible to assign ownership rights. Consider, for example, the problems posed by acid deposition, the greenhouse effect, and the destruction of the ozone layer. Economic incentives, based on market thinking, may be preferable to command-and-control measures; but it is difficult to imagine a system in which private ownership rights are fully allocated. The second reason is more theoretical. Free market environmentalism depends on the view that the market paradigm should be deemed normative for purposes of environmental protection. Thus the key question becomes how much people, as consumers, would pay for environmental amenities. 272 The answer to that question defines people's "choices" and "values." Indeed, for free market environmentalists it is hard to imagine how choices and values might otherwise be understood. Hearings Before the Subcomm. On Environment and Natural Resources of the House Comm. on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. (1993) available in LEXIS, Legis Library, Cngtst File [hereinafter Hearings] (statement of Robert Thornton, attorney, Nossaman, Guthner, Knox & Elliot) (advocating a "Habitat Transaction Method" that awards conservation credits to landowners who preserve or enhance habitats). (exploring private willingness to pay as a method of valuation). best addresses environmental evaluation). A final approach would base regulatory law on people's reflective judgments, as citizens, about their basic goals. On this view, the most significant problems in the current system consist of interest-group power, myopic responses to sensationalist anecdotes, and inadequate information. A market-oriented understanding of the regulation is inadequate because it fails to provide a forum for public deliberation. Similarly, a purely technocratic conception is inadequate because it devalues the need to rely on people's reflective judgments.2 77 More specifically, the technocratic approach fails to reflect the various qualitative factors that influence public judgments about risk-whether a risk is voluntarily incurred, equitably distributed, potentially catastrophic, especially dreaded, and so forth.2 78 And as we have seen, there is a difference between the judgments people make as citizens and those they make as consnmers; in principle, the former are the relevant judgments with respect to public policy. solution" to the problem of risk regulation. BREYEPR, supra note 14, at 59 Of course these are stylized discussions of abstractions that must be applied to complex policy initiatives. It is best to approach particular problems in a pragmatic and experimental manner. All four approaches have something to offer, and they can be combined in different ways to arrive at the best solution. In cases involving dangerous substances with good substitutes, the argument for pollution prevention is overwhelming. Where private ownership is possible, free market environmentalism may well be preferable to the alternatives, notwithstanding the theoretical objections offered above. In some situations, cost-benefit balancing at the government level is unavoidable. We may believe that for reasons associated with democratic environmentalism, a strong commitment to the protection of endangered species makes sense. But even if this is so, it may be best to use market-like instruments to accomplish democratic goals-through, for example, "habitat credits" that reward rather than punish landowners who discover that their land supports the continued existence of an endangered species. 2 89 Some of the most promising modem initiatives are rooted in democratic judgments, but at the same attempt time to harness private initiative and market forces in the interest of those veryjudgments. In this way it may be possible to The election of the 104th Congress, together with the Contract with America, signals that the nation may be in the midst of a constitutional moment. At the very least the 104th Congress raised more fundamental questions about the national government than at any time since the New Deal. Most of the key initiatives were passed by the House but floundered in the Senate. The public never authoritatively committed itself to such fundamental change, and hence the constitutional moment, though signalled, failed to occur. Whether it will happen in the future depends on the judgments of the American peopleon whether those judgments will be made with the firmness that American institutions require. 290. See for example, the Glenn bill, which preserved the EPA's Toxic Release Inventory program in its entirety; this bill was defeated by Senate Republicans. Ronald Begley, Frustrations Mount in Effort to Scale Back Regulations, CHEMIcAL WL-, July 26, 1995, at 9. See also Proposal to Revive Regulatory Bill Gets Cool Reception from Dole, Industry, Daily Lab. Rep. (BNA) No. 152, at D-16 (Aug. 8, 1995).