University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1996 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Constitutional Caution The Law of Cyberspace 
Constitutional Caution The Law of Cyberspace 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Constitutional Caution The Law of Cyberspace," 1996 University of Chicago Legal 
Forum 361 (1996). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Constitutional Caution

Cass R.  Sunsteint

I.  GOVERNMENT  FAILURE  AND  CONSTITUTIONAL  FALURE

Begin  with  a  platitude:  When  government  attempts  to  regu-
late  the  market,  many  things  may  go  wrong.  In  the  familiar
litany,  regulation  may  be  counterproductive,  producing  outcomes
that defeat  the aspirations  of well-meaning  reformers.  Or, regula-
tion  may  be  futile,  as  the  market  adapts  to  the  relevant  initia-
tives.  Or,  regulation  may  produce  unanticipated  harmful  conse-
quences.  All  of  these  results  may  follow  from  the  regulators'
incomplete  understanding  of the  system  into  which  they  are  at-
tempting  to  intervene.  This  is  not an  argument  that government
should  never  intervene  in  markets.  But  it  is  certainly  a  reason
for  caution,  for  attempting to  acquire  a  good  deal  of information,
and for  proceeding  in an  experimental,  nondogmatic  way.

It  is  less  often  recognized  that  constitutional  law  can  have
similar  problems.  Supreme  Court  decisions  may  be  counterpro-
ductive.  If it  is understood  as  a case  about gender  equality,  Roe v
Wade'  is  a  possible  example  since  the  Court's  decision  may  well
have  damaged  the  effort  to  produce  gender  equality.2  Or  Su-
preme  Court  decisions  may  be  futile.  Sometimes  Fourth Amend-
ment  decisions  seem  to have  this feature;  it  is  far  from  clear that
police  officers  comply  as  a  matter  of  course  with  Supreme  Court
pronouncements  about  Fourth  Amendment  requirements.  Su-
preme  Court  decisions  may  also  have  harmful  unanticipated
consequences.  This  is  true,  for  example,  of  many  efforts  in  the
area  of judge-led  social  reform.'

t  Karl N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  University  of

Chicago.

410  US 113  (1973).

2  See  Gerald  N.  Rosenberg,  The  Hollow  Hope:  Can  Courts  Bring  About  Social
Change?  339-41  (University  of  Chicago  Press,  1993);  Ruth  Bader  Ginsburg,  Some
Thoughts on Autonomy  and Equality in Relation to Roe  v.  Wade,  63 NC  L Rev 373,  381-83
(1985).

'  See  Donald  L.  Horowitz,  The  Courts and  Social  Policy  (Brookings  Institution,

1977).

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 361 1996

362 

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF CHICAGO LEGAL FORUM 

[1996:

Justice  Holmes's  work on  constitutional  law  was  built largely
on  seeing  the  political  process  as  a  kind  of  market,  subject,  like
other markets,  to  forces  of supply  and  demand."  As  a regulator  of
the political  market, the  Supreme  Court  may reach  decisions  that
reflect  ignorance  of  relevant  factors.  Because  they  interfere  with
the  political  market,  Supreme  Court  decisions  may  also  disturb
some  kind  of  social  equilibrium.  It  is  ironic  but  true  that  many
people  alert  to  the  problems  with  government  interference  with
economic  markets are  quite sanguine  about  Supreme  Court  inter-
ference  with political  markets.'  This  was  true  in  the  1920s  when
constitutional  law  assumed  center  stage  in  debates  over  regula-
tion  of new  and  old  markets.6  It  is  true  as  the  twenty-first  cen-
tury  approaches,  as  constitutional  law  takes  center  stage  in  de-
bates  over  new  communications  markets,  prominently  including
the Internet.

In  some  areas,  the  Supreme  Court,  firmly  aware  of its  own
limitations  and  perhaps  aware  of the  marketlike  nature  of  poli-
tics,  operates  casuistically. It  avoids  broad  rules.  It  is  aware  of
underlying  complexities  of  both  fact  and  value.  In  the  area  of
affirmative  action,  this  has  been  the  Court's  preferred  course
The Court has  avoided  simple  rules.  Its decisions  have  been  high-
ly  case  specific.  The  democratic  process  has  been  given  a  lot  of
room  to maneuver.

I  suggest  that  this  casuistical  model  makes  sense 
for
cyberspace.'  This  is  so  for  two  reasons.  First,  underlying  values
are  in  flux  and  not  simple  to  sort  out.  There  is,  for  example,  a
large  debate  over  the  regulation  of pornography,  especially  por-
nography  about  and for  children,  on  the Internet.  There  is  also  a
large  debate  about  the  relationships  among  the  Internet,  chil-
dren,  and  parental  control.'  It  is  also  unclear  that  the  Court's

See  Yosal Rogat,  The Judge as Spectator, 31  U  Chi  L Rev  213  (1964).
See  Richard  A.  Epstein,  Takings:  Private Property and  the  Power  of  Eminent
Domain (Harvard  University Press,  1985).  See also  Bernard  H. Siegan, Economic Liberties
and the Constitution (University of Chicago  Press,  1980).

6  See Geoffrey  R. Stone, et  al,  Constitutional Law  167  (Little  Brown,  2d ed  1991).

See Cass  R.  Sunstein, Political Deliberation and the Supreme  Court, 84 Cal  L Rev
(forthcoming, July  1996);  Cass  R.  Sunstein, Foreword: Leaving Things  Undecided, Harv  L
Rev (forthcoming,  Nov  1996).

'  As  the  Court  concluded  in Denver Area Educational Telecommunications Consor-
tium, Inc. v  FCC, 116  S  Ct 2374  (1996),  a  decision  reached  after  this  essay  was  initially
written.

See  Robert  A.  Sirico, Don't  Censor The Internet, Forbes  48  (July  29,  1996);  James
Coates,  Firms Can Clean Up By  Blocking  Web's  Smut; Parents First Target of Censoring
Software, Chi  Tribune  1,  sec 4  (July 29,  1996);  Zoe  Lofgren,  Free For All: Parents Against
Surfing, Wash  Post A17  (July 20,  1996)  (op/ed  piece).

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 362 1996

361]

CONSTITUTIONAL  CAUTION

free  speech  doctrine-founded  on  the  categories  of  viewpoint-
based,  content-based,  and  content-neutral  regulation-makes
complete  sense.  If, for  example,  the  government  attempts  to  pro-
mote  educational  and  public-affairs  programming,  it  is  acting  on
a  content-discriminatory  basis, but are  its  actions for that reason
illegitimate?

The  problem  is  not  limited  to  values.  On  the  underlying
facts,  things  are  changing very  rapidly,  and courts  know relative-
ly little;  but  the  facts  are  crucial  to  the  analysis.  The  new  com-
munications  technologies  in general  are  a  good  example.  If cable
television  flourishes,  will  ordinary  broadcasters  be  at  risk  in  a
way that  threatens  free  programming?"  Courts  are  not likely  to
be  in  a  good  position  to  answer  this  question.  This  was  the  key
problem  in the  Turner case,1  and  while  there  is  reason  to  think
that interest-group  pressures  underlay  the relevant  statute,  pre-
dictive  issues  are  not,  in  general,  well-suited  to  judicial  resolu-
tion.  In  such  circumstances  the  Court  does  best  if  it  proceeds
cautiously  and  with  humility,  allowing  some  room  for  political
judgment  and  maneuvering  in  a setting  that is in such  flux. 2

In the  area of cyberspace,  there  is a related  but more  general
issue.  I  believe  that  the  First  Amendment  is  sometimes  playing
substantially  the  same  role  with  respect  to  the  communications
market  as  did  the  Fourteenth  Amendment  with  respect  to  the
labor  market  in  the  period  from  1905  through  1936.13  In  that
period,  questions  about minimum-wage  and maximum-hour  laws,
or  efforts  to  protect  labor  unions,  were  answered  in  significant
part  by  asking:  What  does  the  Due  Process  Clause  say  on  such
questions? 4  In  retrospect  we  can  see  that this  was  a  bad  way  to
proceed-that  it  would  have  been  much  better  to  dispense  with
lawyers  and cases  and to focus  instead on  underlying  questions  of
fact  and  value,  questions  for  which  purely  legal  tools  are  inade-
quate.  The  problems  of  policy  should  be  solved  by  people  who
understand  problems  of policy,  not by  lawyers  skilled  in reading
Supreme  Court  opinions.

See  Turner Broadcasting System,  Inc. v  FCC, 512  US  622  (1994),  reh'g  denied  115

S Ct 30  (1994).

"  Id  (holding that government  may regulate  cable  operators  with must-carry  obliga-
tions  provided  such  regulations  do  not  suppress substantially  more  speech  than necessary
to  make  television broadcast  viable).

12  See  Lawrence  Lessig, The Path of Cyberlaw, 104  Yale  L  J  1743  (1995),  suggesting
an  approach  quite similar  to  what  I am  suggesting here.  I am indebted  to Professor  Lessig
for  valuable  discussion.

"  Stone,  et  al,  Constitutional Law at  786 (cited  in note  6).
14  Id.

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 363 1996

364 

THE UNIVERSITY  OF CHICAGO LEGAL  FORUM 

[1996:

To  some  extent,  the  same  is  true  for  cyberspace.  Too  often,
hard  questions  are  answered  by  consulting  previous  cases,  as  if
the  First Amendment, judicially  understood,  supplies  the founda-
tions  for choosing  regulatory  policy  for  the emerging  speech  mar-
ket.  Of course  the  First Amendment  has  a  good  deal to  say  about
legitimate  regulatory  strategies.  Obviously,  some  such  strategies
would  violate  the  First  Amendment.  But  the  relevant  questions
are  first  and  foremost  ones  of  policy  rather  than  constitutional
law;  courts  and judges  would  do  well  to remember  this point.

II.  EXAMPLES  OF  POTENTIAL  AREAS  OF  REGULATION

A.  Child  Pornography,  Obscenity,  Parental  Control

Consider  a  few  examples.  With  the  touch  of a  button,  it  is
now  possible  to  reach  millions  of  people,  whether  or  not  they
want  to  be  reached.  Libelous  statements,  commercial  messages,
hate  speech,  child  pornography,  threats-the  cost  of  sending  all
of  these  to  millions  is  very  low.  This  simple  fact  may  make  it
necessary  to  rethink  constitutional  categories.  There  has  been
particular  concern  recently  about  the free  availability  of sexually
explicit  materials  on  the  Internet,  especially  in  the  context  of
materials  soliciting,  involving,  or  available  to  children."5  Per-
haps  the government  should  be  allowed  to  regulate not only  child
pornography,  and  not  only  obscenity,  but  a  somewhat  broader
range  of materials  because  of the  distinctive  interest  in  protect-
ing  children.16  At  least  the  Court's  obscenity  doctrine  bears  un-
certainly  on  this  question,  and  mechanical  use  of  that  doctrine
may  produce  error.  It is  important  to get  a  sense  of the  nature  of
the underlying  problem  before  reaching  confident  conclusions. 7

5  The  increasing  attention  being  given  to  pornography  on  the  Internet  is  evidenced
by  the fact  that  from Spring  1991  to January  24,  1994,  Lexis-Nexis  listed  only 69  articles
on  this subject,  as  contrasted  with  3,451  articles  on  this  subject entered  from January  24,
1994  to January 24,  1996.

'"  See  S  314,  104th  Cong,  1st  Sess  (Jan 30,  1995)  in  141  Cong  Rec  S  1953  (Feb  1,
1995).  Popularly  known  as  the  Communications  Decency  Act  of 1995,  was  introduced  by
Senator Jim  Exon  (D-Neb) in  the  United  States  Senate  and enacted  into law January  31,
1996 as  the Communications  Decency Act  of 1996.  Pub L  No  104-104,  110  Stat  133  (1996),
amending  47  USC  § 223.  Its  definition  of  "harm to  children,"  goes  beyond  obscenity  to
include,  for  example,  materials  that contain  "indecency  or nudity."  Id,  amending 47  USC
§ 223(a)(1)(A)(ii).  This  provision  extends  far beyond  current  law. Portions  of the  Commu-
nications  Decency  Act  of  1996  were  declared  unconstitutional  in ACLU  v  Reno,  929  F
Supp 824  (ED  Pa  1996)  and  in  Shea v Reno,  930  F  Supp  916  (SD  NY  1996).  In  my view
these  decisions were  correct. See  notes  61-63  and  accompanying  text.

17  A narrow,  and  in  my view  correct, decision  is Denver Area Educational Telecommu-
nications Consortium, Inc.  v  FCC,  116  S  Ct  2374,  2390  (1996)  (upholding  a  grant  of

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 364 1996

3611

CONSTITUTIONAL  CAUTION

365

Related  issues  are  raised  by  the use  of the  Internet  to  circu-
late  libelous,  threatening,  or  sexually  violent  material  about  an
identifiable  person.  It may  well  be  that the  easy  transmission  of
such  material  to  millions  of  people  will  justify  deference  to  rea-
sonable  legislative judgments.18

Suppose  that  the  government  intends  to  assist parental  con-
trol  by  allowing  families  to  "block"  certain  material  and  to  pre-
vent  it  from  entering  the  home. This  idea  would  bear  an obvious
resemblance  to  the  controversial  "v-chip"  proposal  that  was  re-
cently  enacted  by  Congress. 9  Through  this  enactment,  Congress
is  requiring  new  televisions  to  be  equipped  with  technology  en-
abling  parents  to  block  certain  programming.  The  requirement
may  substantially  affect  programming  because  of  anticipated
parental  blocking;  but  this  by  itself is  not  constitutionally  deci-
sive.  The  existence  of  such  an  effect  resulting  from  anticipated
viewer  behavior  is part of a  well-functioning  market.  Proposals  of
this  sort  would  facilitate  parental  control,  but  would  not  involve
federal  content  regulation;  they  would not  involve  direct  govern-
mental  control  or  censorship  of  the  speech  market."0  Because
they  are  noncensorial  and  facilitative,  courts  should  treat  them
more  leniently.

The only  serious  questions  include  selectivity  and bias:  Is the
government  facilitating  the  exclusion  of  material  of  which  the
government  disapproves?  If so,  the  fact that  no  direct  regulation
is  involved  is  not  enough;  impermissible  selectivity  would  be
objectionable  by  itself.  Certainly  it  would  be  troublesome  if the
government  enabled  people  to  screen  out  material  of  a  certain,
governmentally  disapproved  content;  imagine  a  governmentally
mandated  "Democrat  chip"  or  "Gingrich  chip"  or  "liberal  chip."
But  the  "v-chip"  is  best  seen  as  lacking  this  feature.  It  would
discriminate  on  the  basis  of  content,  not  on  the  basis  of  view-

permission  to exclude  "indecent" programming),

"  But  see  United States v  Baker, 890  F  Supp  1375  (1995).  In  that  case,  the  defen-
dants  sent sexually  explicit e-mail  to one  another which  contained the  graphic description
of the  torture,  rape, and  murder  of a  classmate  of one  of the  defendants.  The  government
charged  the  defendants  with  transmitting  threats  to injure  or kidnap  another.  The  court
dismissed  the  charges,  finding  that  the  descriptions  contained  in the  e-mail  were  fiction
and did not  constitute  a  "true threat" under the  statute.

Pub  L  No  104-104,  110  Stat  at  141-42  amending  47  USC  §  223  (cited  in note  16).
See Newton  N.  Minow  and  Craig  L.  Lamay, Abandoned in  the  Wasteland (Hill  and Wang,
1994).

0  See  Denver Area,  116  S  Ct  at  2390,  which  is  strong  support  for  the  validity  of the
v-chip,  especially  insofar  as  it  upholds  §  10(a)  of  the Cable  Television  Consumer  Protec-
tion and Competition Act of 1992,  §  10(a),  Pub  L No  102-385,  106  Stat 1486,  codified  at 47
USC  §  532(h)  (1994).

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 365 1996

366 

THE UNIVERSITY  OF CHICAGO LEGAL  FORUM 

[1996:

point.  For  this  reason  it  should  probably  be  upheld,  at  least  on
an appropriate  factual  record  demonstrating  that the government
is  attempting  to  combat  harm  rather  than  content  or  view-
point.2  What  I  am  emphasizing  here  is  that  preexisting  catego-
ries  do  not give  clear guidance  and  that it  is best  for  the courts  to
proceed  in  a  cautious  manner.

B.  Violence  and  the  Internet

Let me  turn now  to  a question  that has received  considerable
public  attention  and  that  particularly  shows  the  need  for  a  de-
gree  of judicial  caution  in  using  the  First Amendment:  the  ques-
tion  of violent  speech  on  the  Internet."  Applying  ordinary  stan-
dards,  constitutional  lawyers  may  well believe  that this is  a  sim-
ple  issue,  settled  by  Brandenburg v  Ohio.2  But  things  are  more
complex.

The  controversy  arose  last  spring  when  talk-show  host  G.
Gordon  Liddy,  speaking  on  the  radio  to  millions  of  people,  ex-
plained  how  to  shoot  agents  of  the  Bureau  of  Alcohol,  Tobacco,
and  Firearms:  "Head  shots,  head  shots ....  Kill  the  sons  of
bitches."24  Later  he  said,  "[s]hoot  twice  to  the  belly  and  if that
does  not  work,  shoot  to  the  groin  area."25  On  March  23,  the  full
text  of  the  Terrorist's Handbook  was  posted  on  the  Internet,
including  instructions  on  how  to  make  a  bomb  (the  same  bomb,
as  it  happens,  that  was  used  in  Oklahoma  City)."  By  the  time
of  the  Oklahoma  bombing  on  April  19,  three  more  people  had
posted  bomb-making  instructions,  which  could  also  be  found  on
the  Internet  in  the  Anarchist's Cookbook.2 7  On  the  National  Ri-
fle  Association's  Internet  "Bullet  'N'  Board,"  someone  calling
himself  "Warmaster" explained  how  to  make  bombs  using  baby-
food  jars.28  Warmaster  wrote,  "These  simple,  powerful  bombs

21  Denver Area, 116  S Ct  at 2385-87.
22  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Is  Violent Speech a  Right?, American  Prospect  34-35  (Sum-

mer  1995).

23  395  US  444,  449  (1969)  (holding  that the  First and  Fourteenth  Amendment  con-

demn  a  statute  which  purports  to  punish  mere  advocacy  and  to  forbid  assembly  with
others merely  to  advocate  the described  type  of action).

24  See James  Coates  and  Mike  Doming,  On the Internet, Extremists Spread Hate with
Every Keystroke, Chi  Tribune  1-14  (Apr 26,  1995);  Cass R.  Sunstein,  What To Do  With  G.
Gordon Liddy: Is  Violent Speech a Right?, Current  21  (Nov  1995).

25  Id.
26  Sunstein,  Current  at  21  (cited  in  note  24);  Lawless,  The  Economist  S15  (July  1,

1995).

21  Sunstein,  Current at 21  (cited in  note  24).
'  1d;  Guy  Gugliotta, NRA,  Backers Have Focused in on ATF;  Gun Group's Ad  Charg-

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 366 1996

361]

CONSTITUTIONAL  CAUTION

are  not  very  well  known  even  though  all  the  materials  can  be
easily  obtained  by  anyone  (including  minors)."29  After  the  Okla-
homa  bombing,  an  anonymous  notice  was  posted  to  dozens  of
Usenet  news  groups  listing  all  the  materials  in  the  Oklahoma
City  bomb,  explaining  why  the  bomb  allegedly  did  not  fully  ex-
plode  and exploring  how to  improve  future bombs.30

Fifty  hate  groups  are  reported  to  be  communicating  on  the
Internet,  sometimes  about  conspiracies  and  (by  now  this  will
for  making  bombs.3   On
come  as  no  surprise)  formulas 
shortwave  radio,  people  talk  about  bizarre  United  Nations  plots
and  urge  that  "the American  people  ought to  go  there  bodily,  rip
down  the  United  Nations  building and  kick those  bastards  right
off  our  soil.""2  In  fact,  last  year  Rush  Limbaugh,  who  does  not
advocate  violence,  said  to  his  audience,  "The  second  violent
American revolution  is just about,  I  got my fingers  about a  fourth
of  an inch  apart,  is just  about  that far  away.  Because  these  peo-
ple  are  sick  and  tired  of  a  bunch  of  bureaucrats  in  Washington
driving  into  town  and  telling  them  what  they  can  and  can't
do. 33

In  the  wake  of  the  Oklahoma  City  bombing,  a  national  de-
bate  has  erupted  about  speech  over  the  Internet  counseling  vio-
lence  or  inciting  hatred  of  public  officials. 4  Of  course  it  is  un-
clear  whether  such  speech  has  had  a  causal  role  in  any  act  of
bombing.  But  new  technologies,  and  particularly  the  Internet,
have  put the  problem  of incitement  into  sharp  relief. It  is likely,
perhaps  inevitable,  that  hateful  and  violent  messages  carried
over  the  airwaves  and  the  Internet  will  someday  be  responsible

es  'Rogue Agency' With  Misconduct, Abuse and 'Con tempt for Civil Rights', Wash Post  A16
(April  26,  1995).  See  also  Mark  Sauer  and  Jim Okerblom,  Patriotism or Paranoia?, San
Diego  Union-Tribune  El, E4 (May  4,  1995).

Sauer  & Okerblom,  San  Diego  Union-Tribune  at E4  (cited  in  note 28).

30  Sunstein, Current  at 21  (cited in note 24);  See also Steve Marlowe,  Cops Get Copies
of Napalm Recipe; Kids Had Formula on Computer Disk, The  Record  Al  (Apr  20,  1995);
Matthew  Mosk, Bomb  Manual Ready,  Waiting, The  Record  NJ1  (May 5,  1995).

"  Joseph  P.  Shapiro,  Extremism  in America: An  epidemic of fear and loathing, US
News  &  World  Report  37,  39  (May  8,  1995).  See  also  Nathaniel  Sheppard,  Jr.,  Hate
Groups Embrace Cyberspace as Weapon, Chi  Tribune  1-1  (Dec  12,  1995).

'  All  Things  Considered: Hate Groups  Use Short  Wave  to  Rant, Rave  and Recruit,
(National  Public Radio,  May  4,  1995)  (transcript  of show  1837,  segment  7,  on  file  at the
Legal Forum office).

Robert Wright,  Did Newt Do It?, The  New  Republic 4,  45  (May  15,  1995).
See  Eric Lichtblau  & Jim Newton, Internet Blamed for Steep Rise  in Bomb Reports,
LA  Times B1  (June  27,  1996);  Debra  Gersh  Hernandez,  Mayhem  Online, Editor  & Pub-
lisher  34  (June 24,  1995);  Charles  V.  Zehren,  The Debate to Limit Cyberhate, Newsday  A7
(May  12,  1995);  Kelly  Owen, Hate Speech on Internet Called Protected by  Constitution, LA
Times A17  (May  12,  1995).

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 367 1996

368 

THE UNIVERSITY  OF CHICAGO LEGAL FORUM 

[1996:

for  acts of violence.  This  is  simply  a  statement  of probability.  The
questions  raised  for  constitutional  lawyers  are  these:  Is  that
probability  grounds  for  restricting  such  speech?  Would  restric-
tions  on  speech  advocating  violence  or  showing  how  to engage  in
violent  acts be  acceptable  under the  First  Amendment?  And  how
do preexisting  categories  bear  on  the  current  issue?

1.  The  clear and present danger doctrine and its evolution.
It  should  go  without  saying that  recent  events  should not  be
a pretext  for  allowing  the  government  to control  political  dissent,
including  extremist  speech  and  legitimate  hyperbole  (a large  and
important  category).  But  the  new  and  unanswered  question  has
to  do  with  the  constitutionality  of  restrictions  on  speech  that
expressly  advocates  illegal,  murderous  violence  in  messages  to
mass  audiences.  For  most  of  American  history,  the  courts  held
that  no  one  has  a  right  to  advocate  violations  of the  law."5  They
ruled  that  advocacy  of  crime  is  wholly  outside  of  the  First
Amendment-akin  to  a  criminal  attempt  and  punishable  as
such. 6  Indeed,  many  of  the  judges  .revered  as  the  strongest
champions  of free  speech  believed  that  express  advocacy  of crime
was  punishable.  Judge  Learned  Hand,  in  his  great  1917  opinion
in  Masses  Publishing Co.  v  Patten,37  established  himself  as  a
true hero  of free  speech  when  he  said  that  even  dangerous  dissi-
dent  speech  was  generally  protected  against  government  regula-
tion.  But  Hand  himself  agreed  that  government  could  regulate
any  speaker  who  would  "counsel  or  advise  a  man"  to  commit  an
unlawful  act.3"

In  the  same  period  the  Supreme  Court  concluded  that  gov-
ernment  could  punish  all  speech,  including  advocacy  of illegality,
that  had  a  "tendency"  to  produce  illegality.3 9  Justices  Holmes
and  Brandeis,  the  dissenters  from  this  conclusion,  took  a  differ-
ent approach,  saying that speech  could  be  subjected  to  regulation
only if it  was  likely  to  produce  imminent  harm;"  thus  they  origi-

"  See  Geoffrey  R.  Stone,  et  al,  Constitutional Law  1025  (Little Brown,  2d  ed  1991)
(cited  in note  6).  See  also  Masses Publishing Co.  v  Patten, 244  F 535  (SD NY  1917),  rev'd,
246 F  24 (2d  Cir  1917).

36  Stone, et  al,  Constitutional Law at  1031  (cited  in note 6);  Masses Publishing, 244  F

at 540.

17  Masses Publishing, 244 F at  539.

Id at 540.

9  See Stone,  et  al, Constitutional Law  at  1031  (cited  in note  6).
'0  See Abrams v  United States, 250  US  616  (1919)  (Holmes  and Brandeis  dissenting);
Whitney  v  California, 274  US  357  (1927)  (Brandeis  and  Holmes  concurring).  But  see
Brandenburg v  Ohio, 395  US 444  (1969)  (overruling  Whitney).

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 368 1996

3611

CONSTITUTIONAL  CAUTION

369

nated  the  famous  "clear  and  present  danger"  test.4'  But  even
Holmes  and  Brandeis  suggested  that the  government  could  pun-
ish  speakers  who  had  the  explicit  intention  of  encouraging
crime.42

For  many  years  thereafter,  the  Supreme  Court  tried  to  dis-
tinguish  between  speech  that  was  meant  as  a  contribution  to
democratic  deliberation  and speech  that was  designed  to  encour-
age  illegality. 3  The  former  was  protected;  the  latter was  not.  In
1951  the  Court  concluded  in  Dennis  v  United  States"  that  a
danger  need  not  be  so  "clear  and  present"  if the  ultimate  harm
was  very  grave.45  The  break  in  the  doctrine  did  not  come  until
the  Court's  1969  decision  in  Brandenburg v  Ohio."  There  the
Court  said the government  could  not take  action  against  a  mem-
ber  of the  Ku  Klux  Klan, who  said,  among  other  things,  "[W]e're
not  a  revengent  organization,  but if our  President,  our  Congress,
our  Supreme  Court,  continues  to  suppress  the white,  Caucasian
race,  it's  possible  that there  might  have  to  be  some  revengence
taken."47  The  speaker  did  not  explicitly  advocate  illegal  acts  or
illegal  violence.  But in its  decision,  the  Court  announced  a broad
principle,  ruling  that  the  right  to  free  speech  does  "not permit  a
State  to  forbid  or  proscribe  advocacy  of the use  of force  or  of law
violation  except  where  such  advocacy  is  directed  to  inciting  or
producing  imminent  lawless  action  and  is  likely  to  incite  or  pro-
duce  such action."48

Offering  extraordinarily  broad  protection  to  political  dissent,
the  Court  required  the  government  to  meet  three  different  crite-
ria  to  regulate  speech.49  First,  the  speaker  must  promote  not
just  any  lawless  action  but  "imminent"  lawless  action.5 °  Second,
the  imminent  lawless  action  must  be  "likely" to  occur.5  Third,
the  speaker  must  intend  to  produce  imminent  lawless  action.52

Abrams,  250  US  at  627  (Holmes  dissenting);  Whitney,  274  US  at  373  (Brandeis

42  Abrams,  250  US  at  627  (Holmes  dissenting);  Whitney,  274  US  at  374  (Brandeis

concurring).

concurring).

41 Stone, et  al,  Constitutional Law  at  1070  (cited  in  note 6).

341  US  494  (1951).
Id  at 510-11.
46 395  US  at 444.
47 Id  at 446.
41 Id  at 447.
49 Id.
'  Brandenberg, 395  US  at 447.
s' Id.
52  Id  (stating  that  the  speech  must  be  "directed  to  inciting  or  producing  imminent

lawless action").

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 369 1996

370 

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF CHICAGO LEGAL  FORUM 

[1996:

The  Brandenburg test  borrows  something  from  Hand  and  some-
thing from  Holmes  and  produces  a standard even  more  protective
of speech  than  either  of theirs.

2.  Old standards, new  technology.
Applied  straightforwardly,  the  Brandenburg test  seems  to
protect  most  speech  that can  be  heard  on  the  airwaves  or  found
on  the  Internet.  It  suggests  that  there  is  no  need  for  casuistry
and  that  a  simple  rule  can  resolve  all  cases.  And  in  general,  the
Brandenburg test  makes  a  great  deal  of  sense.  Remarks  like
those  quoted  from  Rush  Limbaugh  unquestionably  qualify  for
protection;  such  remarks  are  not  likely  to  incite  imminent  law-
less  action,  and  in  any  case  they  are  not  "directed  to"  producing
such  action.  They  should  also  qualify  as  legitimate  hyperbole,  a
category  recognized  in  a  1969  decision  allowing  a  war  protester
to say, "If they ever  make  me  carry  a  rifle  the  first man  I want  to
get  in  my  sights  is  L.  B.  J."5 3  Even  Liddy's  irresponsible  state-
ments  might  receive  protection  insofar  as they  could  be  viewed as
unlikely  to  produce  imminent  illegality.  A  high  degree  of protec-
tion  and  breathing  space  makes  a  great  deal  of  sense  whenever
the  speech  at  issue  is  political  protest,  which  lies  at  the  core  of
the First Amendment.

But  there  is  some  ambiguity  in  the Brandenburg test,  espe-
cially  in the  context  of modern  technologies,  and  it  is  here  that  a
high  degree  of judicial  caution  is  appropriate.  Suppose  that  an
incendiary  speech,  expressly  advocating  illegal  violence,  is  not
likely to  produce  lawlessness in  any  particular  listener  or  viewer.
But  suppose  too  that  it  is  believed  that  of the  millions  of listen-
ers,  one  or  two,  or ten, may  well  be  provoked  to  act,  and perhaps
to imminent,  illegal violence.  Might  the government  ban advocacy
of  criminal  violence  in  mass  communications  when  it  is  reason-
able  to  think  that  one  person,  or  a  few,  will  take  action?
Brandenburg  offers  a  reasonable  approach  to  the  somewhat
vague  speech  in  question  in  that case,  which  was  made  in  a  set-
ting  where  relatively  few  people  were  in  earshot.  But  the  case
offers  unclear  guidance  on  the  express  advocacy  of  criminal  vio-
lence  via  the  airwaves  or  the  Internet.

When  messages  advocating  murderous  violence  are  sent  to
large  numbers  of  people, 
to  think  that  the
Brandenburg calculus  changes:  Government  may  well  have  the
authority  to  stop  speakers  from  expressly  advocating  the  illegal

is  possible 

it 

5-  Watts v  United States, 394  US  705,  706  (1969).

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 370 1996

361]

CONSTITUTIONAL  CAUTION

use  of force,  at least  if it  is  designed  to  kill  people.  The  calculus
changes  when  the  risk  of  harm  increases  because  of  the  sheer
number  of  people  exposed.  Hence  the  requirement  of  causation
might  be  loosened,  at least for  explicit  advocacy  of murder.  There
is  little  democratic  value  in  protecting  simple  counsels  of  mur-
der, 4  and  the  ordinary  Brandenburg requirements  might  be
loosened  where  the  risks  are  great.  Consider,  for  example,  the
fact that  Congress has  made  it  a crime  to threaten  to  assassinate
the President,  and the  Court  has cast no  doubt on  that restriction
of  speech.5 5  It  would  be  a  short  step,  not  threatening  legitimate
public  dissent,  for  the  Federal  Communications  Commission  to
impose  civil  sanctions  on  those  who  expressly  advocate  illegal
acts  aimed  at killing  people.  Courts  might  well  conclude  that  the
government  may  use  its  power  over  the  airwaves  to  ensure  that
this  sort of advocacy  does  not occur.

Of  course,  there  are  serious  problems  in  drawing  the  line
between  counsels  of violence  that  should  be  subject  to regulation
and  those  that  should  not.  We  might  begin  (and  perhaps  we
should  end)  with  restrictions  on  express  advocacy  of  unlawful
killing;  this  is  the  clearest  case.  I  am  not trying  to  draw  conclu-
sions  so  much  as  I  am trying  to  suggest  reasons  for  courts  to  be
cautious  in  invoking  the  Constitution.  In  any  case,  we  can  now
see  that  existing  doctrine  does  not justify a  simple  conclusion.  It
was  built  on  different  factual  circumstances;  it  was  designed  for
what  was,  with  respect  to  communications,  a  quite  different
world.  The  degree  of  danger  from  counsels  of  murder  has  in-
creased  with  the  rise  of the  Internet.

Authorizing  the  restriction  of  any  speech,  even  counsels  of
violent  crime,  creates  serious  risks.  It  is  unnecessary  to  empha-
size  that  government  often  overreacts  to  short-term  events,  and
the  1995  Oklahoma  City  tragedy,  for  example,  should  not  be  the
occasion  for  an  attack  on  extremist  political  dissent.  Vigorous,
even  hateful, criticism  of government  is very  much  at the heart of
the  right  to  free  speech.  Certainly  advocacy  of  law  violation  can

'  The  case  might  be  different,  however,  if the  counsel  of violence  is  made  part of an
actual  political  argument.  See  Cohen  v  California, 403  US  15  (1971)  (holding that  a  state
could  not,  consistently  with  the  First  and  Fourteenth  Amendments,  make  wearing  a
jacket with the  words  "Fuck the Draft"  a  criminal offense).

5'  See  Watts, 394  US  at  707  (upholding  the  facial  validity  of a  statute  criminalizing
threats  of violence  directed  against the  President  because  of the  "overwhelmin[g]  interest
in  protecting  the safety  of [the]  Chief Executive  and  in allowing  him to  perform  his duties
without  interference  from  threats  of physical  violence").  See  also  R.A. 
v  St.  Paul, 505
US  377  (1992)  (stating "the  Federal  Government  can  criminalize  only  those  threats  of
violence  that are  directed  against  the President").

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 371 1996

372 

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF CHICAGO LEGAL  FORUM 

[1996:

be  an  appropriate  part  of  democratic  debate.  As  the  example  of
Martin  Luther  King, Jr. testifies,  there  is  an honorable  tradition
of  civil  disobedience.  We  should  sharply  distinguish,  however,
King's  form  of nonviolent  civil  disobedience  from  counsels  or  acts
of  murder.  The  principle  condemning  government  regulation  of
political  opinions,  including  the  advocacy  of illegal  acts,  need  not
be interpreted  to bar  the government  from  restricting advocacy  of
unlawful  killing  on  the  mass  media.  These  are  hard  cases,  and
courts  should  be  reluctant  to  conclude  that the  First Amendment
forbids  well-designed  legislative  initiatives.

3.  Bombs.
Does  the  government  have the  power  to limit  speech  contain-
ing  instructions  on  how  to  build  weapons  of  mass  destruction?
The Brandenburg test  was  designed  mostly  to  protect  unpopular
points  of view  from  government  controls;  it  need  not protect  the
publication  of bomb  manuals,  at least if these  manuals  are  being
transmitted  to millions  of people.  Instructions  for  building bombs
are  not  a  point  of  view,  and  if government  wants  to  stop  the
mass  dissemination  of  this  material,  it  should  probably  be  al-
lowed to  do  so.  A  lower  court  so ruled  in  a  1979  case  involving  an
article  in The  Progressive that described  how to make  a  hydrogen
bomb.56  The  court's  argument  is  even  stronger  as  applied  to  the
speech  on  the  Internet, where  so  many  people  can  be  reached  so
easily.5 7  In  such  a  case,  the  potential  harm  from  the  relevant
materials  is  significantly  increased.  And  bomb  manuals,  qua
bomb  manuals,  do  not deserve  the  highest degree  of constitution-

56  See  United States v  Progressive, Inc.,  467  F Supp  990  (WD Wis  1979),  dismissed  by

610 F2d  819  (7th  Cir 1979)  (unpublished  order).

17  It  is  worth  observing  here  that  the  nation's  leaders  can  do  a  good  deal  short  of
regulation. The  President and other  public officials  should  exercise  their own rights  of free
speech  to challenge  hateful,  incendiary speech.  Although  public  officials  could  abuse  these
rights so  as to  chill legitimate  protest,  President  Clinton's  statements  condemning  hatred
on  the  radio  and  on  the  Internet  were  entirely  on  the  mark.  Public  disapproval  may
ultimately have  a salutary  effect  (as it recently  did in the case  of violent  television  shows),
even without  the  force  of law.

In  addition,  private  institutions,  such as  broadcasting  stations,  should  think  careful-
ly about their own  civic responsibilities.  An  owner  of a  station or a  programming manager
is  under  no  constitutional  obligation  to  air speakers  who  encourage  illegal  violence.  Sta-
tions  that  deny  airtime  for  such  views  do  no  harm  to  the  First  Amendment  but  on  the
contrary exercise  their own rights,  and in just the  right way. In  recent months,  public and
private  concern  about hate-mongering  has  encouraged  some  stations  to  cancel  G.  Gordon
Liddy's  show;  this is  not  a  threat  to  free  speech  but  an exercise  of civic  duties. Similarly,
private  online  networks,  such  as  Prodigy  and America  Online,  have  not only  a  right  but  a
moral  obligation  to discourage  speech  that expressly counsels  illegal killing.

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 372 1996

361]

CONSTITUTIONAL  CAUTION

al  protection. Regulation  of instructions  on how  to commit  terror-
ist acts  does  not place  the  government  in  a position  where  it  does
not belong.5"

III.  QUALIFICATIONS

None  of this  suggests  that the  First  Amendment  has  no  role
in cyberspace.  I  suggest that  the  Court should  proceed  confident-
ly  in  three  kinds  of  cases.  The  first  involves  those  in  which  the
government  is  discriminating  on  the  basis  of viewpoint.  The  pro-
hibition  on  viewpoint  discrimination  is  a  natural  inference  from
the  First  Amendment's  ban  on  governmental  favoritism.  If  the
government  regulates  the  Internet  so  as  to  preclude  or  prefer
viewpoints  of  the  government's  liking,  the  First  Amendment
requires  invalidation.

The  second  category  includes  cases  in  which  government  is
regulating  political  speech.  The  heart  of  the  First  Amendment
lies  in  democratic  self-governance,5 9  and  when  the  government
regulates  political  speech,  there  is  special basis for  suspicion.  The
only  qualification  is  that  courts  should  probably  uphold  view-
point-neutral  efforts  to  promote  education  and  greater  attention
to public  issues."0

Finally,  courts  should  strike  down  palpably  vague  or
overbroad  statutes."1  Nonpolitical  speech  may  certainly  be  regu-

50  Progressive, 467  F  Supp  at  990,  however,  involved  a  distinctive  issue:  an effort  to

show  how  easy it  is  to learn  how  to  make  a bomb.

"9 See Alexander  Meiklejohn, Free Speech and its Relation to Self-Government (Harp-
er  &  Row,  1948);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Democracy and  the  Problem of  Free Speech  (Free
Press,  1993).

o  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  The  First Amendment  in  Cyberspace, 104  Yale  L  J  1757

(1995).

",  For key  cases  on the  overbreadth  doctrine,  see  Gooding v  Wilson,  405  US  518,  519
(1972)  (holding a  Georgia  statute to  be  on its  face  unconstitutionally  vague  and  overbroad
in  providing  that  any  person  using  to  another  "opprobrious  words  or  abusive  language,
tending  to cause  a breach  of the  peace..,  shall be  guilty of a  misdemeanor,"  when  Geor-
gia  courts  had  held  that  the  statute  did  not  only  apply  to  "fighting words");  Broadrick v
Oklahoma, 413  US  601  (1973)  (holding  that  an  Oklahoma  statute  which  prohibited  any
employee  in the  classified  service  from receiving  or  soliciting  any  assessment  or  contribu-
tion  for  any  political  organization  or candidacy,  did  not  set  out  sufficiently  explicit  stan-
dards,  although  it  was  not unconstitutionally  vague  or overbroad  on its  face);  City Council
of the  City of Los  Angeles  v  Taxpayers for  Vincent,  466  US  789  (1984)  (holding  that  an
ordinance  prohibiting  posting  of  signs  on  public  property  was  not  unconstitutional  as
applied  to  expressive  activities  of a  group  of supporters  of a  political  candidate);  Board of
Airport Commissioners of the City of Los Angeles v  Jews for Jesus, Inc.,  482  US 569  (1987)
(holding  that a  regulation  banning  all  'First  Amendment  activities"  within  the  airport's
"Central  Terminal  Area" was  facially unconstitutional  under  the  overbreadth doctrine  be-
cause  no  conceivable  governmental  interest  could  justify  this  absolute  prohibition  of

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 373 1996

374 

THE UNIVERSITY  OF CHICAGO LEGAL  FORUM 

[1996:

lated  in  a  constitutionally  unacceptable  manner.  Statutes  that
produce  guessing  games  for  regulated  parties create  an unaccept-
able  risk. Congress  should  be  expected  to  regulate  with  at least  a
reasonable  degree  of  clarity.62  Thus  lower  courts  were  correct  to
invalidate  a  vague  and  broad  statute  banning  "indecent"  speech
on the  Internet. 3

CONCLUSION

When  values  and  institutions  are  in flux,  it is appropriate  for
the Court  to proceed  casuistically  and to  avoid broad rulings.  The
constitutional  issues  raised by  cyberspace  will  turn on issues  that
cannot  be  fully  resolved  in  1995,  1996,  or  even  1999.  In  some
ways,  the  First Amendment  is,  with respect  to modern  communi-
cations  markets,  playing  the  same  pernicious  role  as  did  the  Due
Process  Clause  in  the  early  part  of  the  twentieth  century  with
respect to labor  markets.  Hard issues  of value  and fact-issues  of
policy  in  which  policy  analysts  should  play  a  large  role-are
displaced  by  reference  to  constitutional  categories,  some  of them
quite  arcane,  and  some  of  them  likely  to  be  ill-suited  to  a  good
understanding  of the  underlying phenomena.  In  a period  of rapid
change  and  technological  uncertainty,  in  which  those  schooled  in
law  are  likely  to  be  ignorant,  there  is  much  room  for  tentative,

speech);  Brockett  v  Spokane  Arcades,  Inc.,  472  US  491  (1985)  (deferring  to  Court  of
Appeal's  conclusion  that a  Washington  statute  which  included  "lust" within  its definition
of "prurient" was  unconstitutionally  overbroad,  but reversing  the  decision  on  the ground
that the lower court  should  have  partially invalidated  the  statute  as to  the portion  includ-
ing "lust" rather  than entirely  invalidating  it).  But  see  New  York  v Ferber, 458  US  747
(1982)  (holding  that a child pornography  statute  which  prohibited  "lewd  exhibition  of the
genitals" was not  overbroad).

For  key  cases  on  the  vagueness  doctrine,  see  Connally v  General Construction Co.,
269  US  385,  391  (1926)  (holding  that  a  law  is  facially  void  if  it  is  vague  enough  that
people  "of common  intelligence  must necessarily  guess  at its  meaning  and  differ  as to  its
application");  Grayned v Rockford,  408  US  104  (1972)  (stating that it  is  a  basic  principle
that  a  law  which  fails  to  clearly  define  the  conduct  it  proscribes  is  unconstitutional);
Kolender v Lawson, 461  US  352,  361  (1983)  (holding that  an  antiloitering  statute  requir-
ing  people  to  carry  identification" and  to  account  for  their  presence  if questioned  by  a
police officer was  unconstitutionally  vague  because  the. law  reached  "a substantial  amount
of [protected  First  Amendment]  conduct").

6  An  example  of a  law  that  could  (and  should)  be  held  to  be  overbroad  is  the Com-
munications  Decency  Act  of  1996.  Pub L  No  104-104,  110  Stat  133  (1996),  amending  47
USC  § 223  (cited  in  note  16).  This  Act  makes  all  telecommunications  providers  doing
business  in the United  States  potentially  liable  for  the content  of anything sent over  their
networks  including  "indecent"  or "filthy"  speech.  Id,  amending  47  USC  § 223(a)(1)(A)(ii)
(cited  in  note  16):

'  Shea  v Reno,  930  F  Supp  916 (SD  NY  1996)  (holding  that portions  of the  Commu-
nications  Decency  Act  of 1996  were  unconstitutionally  overbroad);  ACLU  v Reno,  929  F
Supp  824 (ED  Pa  1996)  (holding the  same portions  of the Act  unconstitutional).

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 374 1996

361] 

CONSTITUTIONAL  CAUTION 

375

narrow  judgments.  In  cyberspace,  constitutional  lawyers  should
be  (at least  relatively) cautious.

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 375 1996

HeinOnline  -- 1996 U. Chi. Legal F. 376 1996

