University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1996 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Social Norms and Social Roles 
Social Norms and Social Roles 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Social Norms and Social Roles," 96 Columbia Law Review 903 (1996). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

SOCIAL  NORMS  AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

Cass R.  Sunstein*

I.  Tales  of Rationality  and  Choice  ........................... 
A.  Ultimatums  and  Fairness  .............................. 
B.  Littering  .............................................. 
C.  Smoking,  Rationality,  and Race ........................ 
D.  Recycling  in  the Hamptons ............................ 
E.  John Jones  ............................................ 
F.  The Point  of this  Article  ............................... 
G.  An  Insufficiently  Charted  Domain  ..................... 
II.  Definitions  and  Concepts  ................................. 
A.  Social  Norms .......................................... 
1.  In  General ......................................... 
2.  Intrinsic Value,  Reputational  Value,  and Self-

conception ........................................ 
3.  Norms and Freedom  ............................... 
4.  Exit  and  Entry ..................................... 
5.  Norms  and  Nonfingible  Cash ...................... 
B.  Social  Roles  ........................................... 
1.  In  General ......................................... 
2.  Roles  and  Freedom  ................................ 
3.  Roles  and  Law  ..................................... 
4.  Citizens  and Consumers ............................ 
C.  Social  Meanings  ....................................... 
D.  Social  Norms,  Social  Roles,  and  Social  Meanings  ....... 
E.  Divisions  in  the Self and Norm Bandwagons  ........... 
F.  Beliefs About Facts  .................................... 
III.  Choices  and Preferences  .................................. 
A.  Preferences  as  Choices  ................................ 
B.  Preferences  Behind  Choices  ........................... 
C.  Against  the Idea  of Preferences ........................ 
IV.  Choices,  Norms,  Roles,  and Meanings  ..................... 

904
904
905
905
906
906
907
910
914
914
914

916
917
919
920
921
921
922
923
923
925
928
929
930
931
932
935
938
939

*  Karl N.  Llewellyn Distinguished  Service  Professor, Law  School and Department  of
Political  Science,  University  of Chicago.  This  is a written  version  of the Goase  Lecture,
delivered  at  the  University  of Chicago  on  November  28,  1995.  I am  grateful  to  Bruce
Ackerman,  Richard  Craswell,  Gertrud Fremling, Elizabeth  Garrett,  Daniel Kahan,  William
Landes,  Larry  Lessig,  John  Lott,  Martha  Nussbaum,  Susan  Moller  Okin,  Eric  Posner,
Richard  Posner, Joseph  Raz,  David  Strauss,  and Richard  Thaler  for valuable  discussions
and  comments.  I  am  also  grateful  to  participants  in  very  helpful  workshops  at  the
University of Chicago  and at New York  University.

This article  is  dedicated  to the  memory  of Jean  Hampton,  an  extraordinary  friend,
colleague,  and  philosopher  who  was  also  one  of the  nicest  people  in  the world.  Jean
warmly  encouraged  my efforts  to  grapple  with  these  problems  and in  particular with  the
expressive function  of law,  a topic that she did much  to illuminate.  Her premature  death
is an  unfathomable  loss  for  many  people;  her  brilliant  and  humane  work  will  provide
enduring  illumination  for lawyers  as  well  as political  theorists  and philosophers.

903

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 903 1996

904 

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW 

[Vol.  96:903

A.  In  General  ............................................  939
1.  Choices  and Norms  ................................  939
2.  Choices  and  Roles  .................................  940
3.  Choices  and  Meanings  .............................  940
4.  Preferences  ........................................  941

B.  Willingness  to  Pay vs.  Willingness  to Accept:  The  Place

of Sham e  .............................................  941
C.  Anomalies,  Shame,  Altruism,  and  Free-Riding .......... 
944
V.  Government  Action:  On Autonomy  and  Tools  ............  947
A.  Norms  and  Paternalism ................................  947
B.  Tools  .................................................  948
C.  Levels  and  Institutions .................................  952
VI.  Government  Action:  Five  Grounds  ........................  953
A.  Some  Unusual  Collective Action  Problems  .............  955
1.  Standard  Accounts  .................................  955
2.  Puzzles  ............................................ 
955
3.  Legal  Responses  ...................................  958
B.  Citizens  and  Consumers  ...............................  959
C.  Risk, Autonomy,  and Well-Being .......................  961
D . Caste  .................................................  962
E.  The  Expressive  Function  of Law  .......................  964
VII.  Blocked' Grounds  ......................................... 
965
Conclusion  .....................................................  967

I.  TALES  OF RATIONALrIY  AND  CHOICE

A.  Ultimatums and Fairness1

Economists have invented  a game:  the ultimatum  game.  The people
who  run the game  give  some  money,  on a provisional  basis, to  the first of
two  players.  The  first player is  told to offer some  part of the  money to the
second  player.  If  the  second  player  accepts  that  amount,  he  can  keep
what  is offered,  and  the  first player  gets  to  keep  the  rest.  But if the  sec-
ond  player  rejects  the  offer,  neither  player  gets  anything.  Both  players
are  informed  that  these  are  the  rules.  No  bargaining  is allowed.  Using
standard  assumptions  about  rationality,  self-interest,  and  choice,  econo-
mists  predict  that  the  first-player  should  offer  a  penny  and  the  second
player should  accept.

This  is  not what happens.  Offers  usually  average  between  30%  and
40%  of the total.  Offers  of less than  20%  are  often rejected.  Often  there

1. See  Alvin  E.  Roth,  Bargaining  Experiments,  in The Handbook  of Experimental
Economics  253,  270-74,  282-88,  298-302  (John  H.  Kagel  & Alvin  E.  Roth  eds.,  1995)
(exploring concept of fairness in ultimatum games);  Colin Camerer  & Richard H. Thaler,
Ultimatums,  Dictators  and  Manners,  J.  Econ.  Persp.,  Spring  1995,  at  209,  216-18
(discussing impact  of fairness  on  ultimatum games).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 904 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS  AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

is  a  50-50  division.  These  results  cut  across  the  level  of the  stakes  and
across  diverse  cultures. 2

B.  Littering

Why do people  litter?  Why don't they throw  things out instead?  So-
cial  psychologist  Robert  Cialdini  tried  to  find  out.3  He  placed  flyers
under  the windshield  wipers of cars and waited to  see what drivers would
do with  them.  Cialdini made arrangements  so  that before  reaching  their
cars,  some  people  would  see  someone  (a  Cialdini  associate)  walk  past
them,  pick  up  from  the  street  a  bag  from  a  fast-food  restaurant,  and
throw  it  in  the  trash  can.  Of the  group  who  both  saw  the  responsible
behavior  and  noticed  the  flyers,  almost  none  threw  them  on  the  street.
In  the  control  experiment,  with  no  one  showing  responsible  behavior,
over  1/3  of the  drivers  threw  the  flyers  on  the  street.4

C.  Smoking, Rationality, and Race

About  400,000  Americans  die  each  year  from  smoking-related
causes.5  Government  has  tried  to  reduce  smoking  through  educational
campaigns  designed  to  inform  people  of  the  risks.  Indeed  the  govern-
ment has  now  initiated  a  large-scale  program  to  reduce  smoking,  espe-
cially  among teenagers. 6  Despite  this fact,  about  one million Americans
begin  smoking  each  year,  many  of them  teenagers, 7  and  people  worry
that educational  campaigns  will  succeed,  if at all,  only with  well-educated
people.

But consider  this.  Nationally,  22.9%  of white  teenagers  smoked  in
1993,  a  number  that  basically  has  been  unchanged  in  the  last  decade.
But  in  the  same  year,  only  about  4.4%  of African-American  teenagers
smoked,  a  number  that is  four  times smaller  than  the  number  a decade
before.8  What  accounts  for this  difference?  Part of the  explanation  ap-

2.  See  Camerer & Thaler, supra note  1, at 210-11.  In December  1995,  the ultimatum
game  was  played  in  a  law  school  classroom  (consisting  of  about  70  students)  in  an
experiment  run by Richard  Thaler and me.  The  results-consistent with the usual  ones-
will  be discussed  in Christine  M.Jolls & Richard H. Thaler, Behavioral Law  and Economics
(1996)  (unpublished  manuscript).

3.  See  Robert B.  Cialdini  et al.,  24 Advances  Experimental  Soc. Psychol.  201  (1991).
4.  See  id. at 221-23.
5.  SeeJ.  Michael  McGinnis & William  H. Foege, Actual Causes  of Death in the United

States, JAMA,  Nov.  10,  1993,  at 2207,  2208.

6.  See  Excerpts From  Clinton News  Conference  on  His Tobacco  Order,  N.Y.  Times,

7.  See  Michelle  Ingrassia  &  Karen  Springen,  Waiting  to  Exhale,  Newsweek,  May  1,

Aug. 11,  1995,  at A18.

1995,  at 76,  76.

8.  See  id.  It  is  notable  that  the  reduction  in  smoking  among  African-American
teenagers  was  50%  between  1984  and  1992,  whereas  the  reduction  among  African-
American  adults  was 25%,  a difference  that suggests  a substantial  effect from social  norms
among  teenagers.  See  U.S. Department  of Commerce,  Statistical  Abstract of the United
States 1995,  at 144  (1995).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 905 1996

906

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

pears  to lie  in  differing understandings  of what  is fashionable.  And part
of  that  difference  may  lie  in  a  private  antismoking  campaign  in  the
African-American  community, symbolized most dramatically  by posters  in
Harlem  subways  showing  a  skeleton  resembling  the  Marlboro  man  and
lighting  a  cigarette  for a  black  child.  The caption  reads:  "They used  to
make  us  pick it.  Now they want us  to smoke  it."9

D.  Recycling in the Hamptons

In  East  Hampton,  New  York-part  of  the  famous  and  wealthy
"Hamptons"-what  used to be  called  the East Hampton Dump is now  the
East  Hampton  Recycling  and  Disposal  Center.  At  the  East  Hampton
Recycling  and  Disposal  Center,  there  are  separate  bins  for  green  glass,
clear  glass,  newspapers,  tin  cans, paper other than  newspaper, and  more.
Almost  every  day  in  August  (the  most  popular  period  in  the
Hamptons),  residents  can be found patiently separating their garbage for
placement  in  the relevant  bins.  Sometimes  this  takes  a  long  time.  The
people  at  the  Center  tend  to  own  expensive  cars-Mercedes  Benzes,
BMWs-that  are  parked  near  the  bins.  As  they  separate  their  garbage,
they look happy.

E. JohnJones

of his behavior.

house.

John Jones lives  in  California.  Here is  a description  of some  aspects

1.  He  buys  smoke  alarms  and  installs  them  in  three  rooms  in  his

2.  He loves  chocolate  and ice  cream, and  eats a lot of both.  He  also
eats  a  fair  amount  of frozen  foods;  he  makes  sure  that  they  are  "lean"
whenever  he has a choice.  According  to his doctor, he  is slightly  over his
ideal weight.

3.  On warm  days, he likes  to  ride his  bicycle to  and from  work,  and
he enjoys riding his bicycle on busy  city streets, even  though  he has heard
about a number  of collisions  there.

4.  He  is  happily  married.  He  tries  to  share  the  work  around  the
house,  but he  doesn't much  like  domestic  labor.  He  does less  than  his
share.  He  acknowledges  that  this  is  both  true  and  unfair,  and  he  sup-
ports  many policies  that are  conventionally  described  as  "feminist."

5.  He buckles  his seat belt whenever  he  is  in  a car.  His  own  car is  a
Volvo,  and  he  bought it partly  because  it is  said  to  be  an  especially  safe
car.

6.  He  is  not worried  about  the risk  of an  earthquake  in  California.
On  some  days, he  says  that  he  doesn't  think  that  an  earthquake  is  very
likely;  on  other  days,  he  claims  to be  "fatalistic  about  earthquakes."

9.  Ingrassia  & Springen,  supra  note 7,  at 76.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 906 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

7.  He  does  not  recycle.  He  considers  recycling  a  personal  "irrita-
don."  He  is mildly  embarrassed  about  this, but he  has  not changed  his
behavior.

8.  He  considers  himself an environmentalist;  his votes  reflect his  en-
thusiasm  for  environmentalism.  He  supports  aggressive  regulation
designed  to encourage  conservation  and  to protect  people  from risks  to
their  life  and  health.  In  fact  he  is  in  favor  of  mandatory  recycling,
notwithstanding  his  own  failure  to  recycle.

9.  In  his  own  mind,  his  resources  fall  in  various  mental  "compart-
ments."  Some  money  is  reserved  for  retirement.  Some  money  is  saved
for charitable  donations.  Some  money is  kept for vacation.  Some  money
is for monthly bills.  His forms  of mental  accounting  are very diverse.  He
is fully  aware  of this.

Is  Jones  inconsistent  or  irrational? 

Is Jones  risk-averse  or  risk-in-
clined?  What  is Jones's  dollar  valuation  of a human  life,  or  of his  own
life?

F.  The Point of this Article

My goal  in  this  article  is  to  challenge  some  widely held understand-
ings  of rationality,  choice,  and freedom,  and  to use  that challenge  to  de-
velop some  conclusions  about  human behavior  and  the appropriate  uses
and  domain  of  law.  I  particularly  seek  to  understand  and  defend  the
place  of law  in  "norm management."

I  urge  that  behavior  is  pervasively  a  function  of  norms;  that  norms
account  for  many apparent  oddities  or anomalies' 0  in  human  behavior;
that changes  in norms might be  the best way  to improve social well-being;
and  that  government  deserves  to  have,  and  in  any  case  inevitably  does
have,  a large  role in  norm  management. 1'  As I will  suggest,  norm  man-
agement is an important  strategy for accomplishing  the objectives  of law,
whatever those  objectives  may be.  One of my goals is  to show how  this is
SO.

10.  I  understand anomalies  by reference  to  economic  understandings  of rationality,

see  infra Parts  IV.B-C.

11.  Objections  to  norm management  from  the standpoint  of liberty would  overlap  a
great  deal  with  objections  to  the  use  of  "external  preferences"  as  a  basis  for  law.  See
Ronald Dworkin, Taking Rights Seriously  240-55  (1977).  I believe that there is no  general
objection to the  use  of external preferences-the  use of people's  beliefs about what other
people's beliefs  should  be-and also  that  there is  no  objection  to  government's  effort  to
change  norms.  When  government  attempts  to  inculcate  an  anti-littering  norm,  or  to
inculcate a norm  in favor of paying taxes, its behavior  is not objectionable  merely because
norms  are being managed.  Any objection,  to be persuasive,  depends  on an argument that
government  is  invading  fights.  A  robust  set  of rights  should  be  in  place  to  limit  norm
management,  see infra Part VII;  but so long as  it is, there should be no  objection  to norm
management  itself.  Cf. Joseph  Raz,  Liberalism,  Scepticism,  and Democracy,  in Ethics  in
the Public  Domain:  Essays  in  the Morality  of Law  and Politics  82,  94-98  (1994)  (arguing
that  "external  preferences"  should  not  be  automatically  excluded  from  the  political
domain).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 907 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW  RV1EW 

[Vol.  96:903
[

Part  of my motivation  is  therefore  practical.  Consider the following

908

2

table:'

Deaths  from Preventable  Risks  in  the  United States

Percent  of
Total  Deaths 

(Range) 

Total  Deaths/yr

Risk 

Tobacco 
Diet/activity 
Alcohol 
Microbial 
Toxic  agents 
Firearms 
Sexual  behavior 
Motor vehicles 
Illicit  drugs 

19 
14 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
1 
<1 

14-19 
14-27 
3-10 
-
3-6 
-
-
-
-

400,000
300,000
100,000
90,000
60,000
35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000

Existing social  norms  encourage  much  risk-taking  behavior;  and  al-
most  all  of these  risks  of death  could  be  much  reduced  with  different
norms.  Consider  smoking, diet/activity,  alcohol,  firearms,  sexual  behav-
ior, motor vehicles,  and illicit drugs  as causes of death.  In all  these  cases,
new  norms  could  save  lives.' 3  A  regulatory  policy  that  targets  social
norms  may well be  the cheapest  and most  effective strategy available  to  a
government  seeking to  discourage  risky behavior.  It may complement  or
work  more  efficiently  than  existing regulatory  approaches.

Social  norms  are  also  part  and  parcel  of  systems  of  race  and  sex
equality.  If norms  changed,  existing  inequalities  would  be  greatly  re-
duced.14  It is thus  transparently  important  to see whether shifts  in social
norms, brought about through law, might operate  to save lives and other-
wise  improve  human  well-being.15

But part of my motivation  is theoretical.  It involves a conceptual  puz-
zle.  In  the  last  decade  there  has been  an  intense debate  about whether
and  to  what  extent  law  should  try  to  change  people's  "preferences.' u 6
But  the term  "preferences" is  highly ambiguous,  and  it is  not clear what

12.  Adapted  from McGinnis  & Foege, supra  note 5,  at 2208.
13.  See Marilyn  Chase, Besides  Saving  Lives,  Wearing Helmet  When  Cycling Is Cool,
Wall St. J., Sept.  18,  1995,  at B1  (noting dramatically shifting  social norms with  respect  to
bicycle  helmets);  see  also  Richard  E.  Nisbett  &  Dov  Cohen,  Culture  of  Honor:  The
Psychology  of Violence  in the  South  (1996)  (discussing  role of social norms  in producing
violence  as  a result  ofjudgments  about "honor").

14.  See  United  Nations  Development  Programme,  Human  Development  Report
1995,  at 11-28,  99-124  (1995);  Susan  M.  Okin, A Clash  of Basic Rights?  Women's Human
Rights,  Identity  Formation  and  Cultural  Difference  (1995)  (unpublished  manuscript).

15.  I  give  this  idea more  content below, see  infra Parts V.A,  VI.C.  For the  moment I

use it as a placeholder  for the  reader's  preferred  account.

16.  See, e.g.,  Richard  A.  Epstein,  Simple Rules  for a Complex World 308-12  (1995);
Robin West, Authority,  Autonomy,  and  Choice:  The  Role  of Consent  in  the  Moral  and
Political Visions of Franz  Kafka and  Richard  Posner, 99  Harv. L. Rev.  385  (1985);  Richard

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 908 1996

19961

SOCIAL  NORMS AND SOCIAL  ROLES

the  participants  in  this  debate  are  actually  disputing when  they  say  that
"preferences" should or should not be respected  by law.  I attempt to clar-
ify possible  meanings  of the  term.  I also  suggest  that when  the idea  of a
"preference"  is unpacked,  it becomes  plain  that the term  is  often  too  ab-
stract and coarse-grained  to be  a reliable foundation for either normative
or positive  work.  We will thus  find reason  to doubt  the elaborate  edifice
of social  science  based  on the  notion  of "preference."  The ultimate  task
is to  separate  positive,  descriptive,  and  normative  inquiries  more sharply
and,  in  the process,  to  try  to  untangle  different  motivational  states  and
their influences  on choices.

More  particularly,  I  aim  to  make  a  set of conceptual  or  descriptive

points:

1.  Existing  social  conditions  are  often  more  fragile  than  might  be
supposed, because they depend on social norms to which-and  this is the
key  point-people  may  not have  much  allegiance.  What I will  call  norm
entrepreneurs-people  interested  in  changing  social  norms-can  exploit
this fact.  If successful,  they produce what I will call  norm bandwagons and
norm cascades.17  Norm  bandwagons  occur when small shifts  lead  to large
ones, as  people join  the "bandwagon";  norm  cascades  occur when  there
are  rapid shifts  in norms.  Successful law and policy  try to take advantage
of learning  about  norms  and  norm  change.

2.  Sometimes  people  do  not behave  as  economists  predict.  Many
important  and  well-known  anomalies  in  human  behavior  are  best  ex-
plained  by  reference  to  social  norms  and  to  the  fact  that  people  feel
shame  when  they violate those  norms.1 8  Thus when people  deviate from
economic  predictions-when  they  appear  not  to  maximize  their  "ex-
pected  utility"-it is  often  because  of norms.

3.  There is no  simple contrast between  "rationality" or "rational self-
interest"  and social  norms.' 9  Individual  rationality is  a function  of social
norms.  The costs  and benefits of action,  from the standpoint  of individ-
ual agents,  include  the consequences  of acting inconsistently  with social
norms.  Many  efforts  to  drive  a  wedge  between  rationality  and  social
norms  rest  on  obscure  "state  of  nature"  thinking,  that  is,  on  efforts  to
discern  what  people  would  like  or  prefer  if social  norms  did  not  exist.
Those  efforts  are  doomed  to failure. 20

A. Posner, The  Ethical Significance of Free Choice:  A Reply  to Professor West, 99  Harv. L.
Rev.  1431  (1986).

17.  A valuable  discussion,  one  that  has  much  influenced  the  presentation  here,  is
Timur  Kuran,  Private  Truths,  Public  Lies  71-73  (1995).  Kuran  is,  however,  principally
interested in the concealment or falsification  of preferences; I am interested in norms that
alter  behavior as well  as  talk  and hence in  a somewhat more  general  phenomenon.

18.  See  infra Part  V.B.
19.  See  infra Part  V.C.
20.  A  qualification  is  necessary  if  the  definition  of  rationality  is  normative  and
defended  as such.  In  that case  it would  be possible to say  that a certain norm is  irrational
because  (for example)  it makes  lives worse.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 909 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

4.  For many purposes,  it would  be best to  dispense with  the idea  of
"preferences,"2 1  despite  the  pervasiveness  of that  idea  in  positive  social
science  and  in arguments  about  the  appropriate  domains  of law  and the
state.  In  normative work,  the idea of "preferences" elides  morally impor-
tant  distinctions  among  the  motivations  and  mental  states  of  human
agents.  In positive  work,  the idea is  too coarse-grained,  in  the sense  that
it  disregards  contextual  factors  that  produce  diverse  choices  in  diverse
settings.  People's  choices  are  a  function  of  norms,  which  operate  as
"taxes" or  "subsidies"; and  the content of norms  depends on  the context.
Instead of speaking  of "preferences,"  we  might  assess  choice  in  terms  of
(1)  intrinsic  value,  (2)  reputational  effects,  and  (3)  effects  on  self-
conception.

I  also  aim  to  make  two  normative  claims  involving  the  appropriate
domain of law.  These  claims have  a great deal to do with law's  expressive
function,  by which  I mean  the function  of law in expressing  social values
with  the particular  goal  of shifting social  norms.

1.  There  can  be  a serious  obstacle  to  freedom  in  the fact  that indi-
vidual choices  are  a function of social  norms,  social meanings,  and social
roles,  which  individual  agents  may  deplore,  and  over  which  individual
agents  have little or no  control.  Norms can  tax or subsidize  choice.  Col-
lective  action-in  the  form  of  information  campaigns,  persuasion,  eco-
nomic  incentives,  or legal  coercion-may be  necessary  to enable  people
to  change  norms  that  they  do not like.

2.  Some norms are obstacles  to human well-being  and autonomy.  It
is  appropriate  for  law  to  alter  norms  if they  diminish well-being  by, for
example,  encouraging  people  to  shorten  their  lives  by  driving  very fast,
using  firearms,  or  taking  dangerous  drugs.  It is  appropriate  for  law  to
alter norms if they diminish autonomy by, for example, discouraging  peo-
ple  from  becoming  educated  or  exposed  to  diverse  conceptions  of  the
good.

G.  An  Insufficiently  Charted Domain

Libertarians,  some economic analysts of law,  and many liberals22  give
inadequate  attention  to  the  pervasive  functions  of  social  norms,  social
meanings,  and  social  roles.  Often  it is  said that in  a free  society, govern-
ments  should respect both  choices  and  preferences.  But  the case  for re-

21.  See  infra Part Im. I think that  Gary  Becker moves  in  the  direction  of dispensing
with  the idea  in  Gary  S.  Becker,  Accounting For  Taste  (forthcoming  1996),  because  he
disaggregates 
I  am  not  sure,  however,  that  Becker  would  accept  my
characterization.

the  term. 

22.  The liberal tradition  is very  complex on this count, and I will not try to sort out its
various strands  here.  I believe that all  of the  arguments  made  here  fit well  within  central
strands  of  that  tradition.  For  relevant  discussion,  see  Stephen  Holmes,  Passions  and
Constraint:  On  the Theory  of Liberal  Democracy  13-41  (1995).  On  autonomy, see, e.g.,
Thomas  Nagel,  The View  From  Nowhere  113-20  (1986); Joseph  Raz,  The  Morality  of
Freedom  369-99  (1986).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 910 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

specting  these  things  depends  partly on  their consequences  and  genesis,
and  as  I  have  indicated,  the  determinants  of  choices  (indeed  the  very
meaning  of the  term  "preference")  remain  obscure. 23  We  should  agree
that  social  norms  play  a  part  in  determining  choices;  that  people's
choices are a function  of their particular social role;  and that the social  or
expressive  meaning of acts  is  an ingredient in choice.2 4  Of course  norms
vary a great deal across  cultures,  and sometimes even within cultures.  We
should try  to see when  social  norms, social roles,  and  social meanings  are
obstacles  to human well-being,  and whether something might be  done  to
change  them,  even  if  people  are  making  "choices,"  even  if  there  is
neither force  nor fraud,  and whether  or not  there is  "harm to  others."

One  of my  central  points  here  is  that  individual  agents  have  little
control  over  social  norms,  social  meanings,  and  social  roles,  even when
they wish  these  to be very  different from what  they are. 25  This  is not an
argument  against norms,  meanings,  and  roles.  Human  beings  can  live,
and  human  liberty  can  exist,  only within  a  system  of norms,  meanings,
and  roles;  but in  any particular form,  these  things  can  impose severe  re-
strictions  on well-being  and autonomy.

As I have suggested,  agents  who seek to make  changes  in norms face
a  collective  action  problem.  For  example, it is  impossible  for an  individ-
ual to alter norms determining whether the act of smoking seems daring,
or  the act of recycling  seems  exotic, or the act  of opposing sexual  harass-
ment seems humorless.  This is so even though  the relevant norms greatly
influence  behavior.  If,  for  example,  smokers  seem  like  pitiful  dupes
rather than exciting daredevils, the incidence of smoking will go down.  If
people who  fail  to recycle  are  seen as  oddballs, more  people will recycle.
If the  role  of secretary  is  not  associated  with  susceptibility  to  unwanted
sexual  attention,  there will be  less  unwanted  sexual  attention.  The point
bears very much  on current  public disputes.  If single  parenthood is stig-
matized,  social  practices  will  change  accordingly;  if homosexual  mar-
riages  are  consistent  with  social  norms,  social  practices  will be  much  al-
tered.  In all of these cases,  individual actors need to act together in order
to  produce  the  relevant  shifts.

More  particularly,  I hope  to  draw attention  to the fact that  people's
conception  of  appropriate  action  and  even  of  their  "interest"  is  very

23.  Illuminating  discussions 

include  Elizabeth  Anderson,  Value 

in  Ethics  and
Economics  1-90  (1993); Amartya Sen, Behavior and the Concept of Preference,  in Choice,
Welfare  and  Measurement  54  (1982);  Jean  Hampton,  The  Failure  of  Expected-Utility
Theory  as  a  Theory  of Reason,  10  Econ.  & Phil.  195  (1994);  Amartya  Sen,  Internal
[hereinafter  Sen,  Internal
Consistency  of  Choice,  61  Econometrica  495 
Consistency].

(1993) 

24.  For  especially  instructive  discussion,  see  Lawrence  Lessig,  The  Regulation  of
Social  Meaning,  62  U. Chi.  L.  Rev.  943  (1995).  Though  I  have  referred  to this  paper at
various  points,  my  presentation  here  owes  a  general  debt  to  Lessig's  argument  and  in
particular  to his emphasis  on  the collective  action  problem presented  by social meanings.
See  id.  at 991-1016.

25.  See  id. at 1000-07.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 911 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REEW

[Vol.  96:903

much  a  function  of the  particular  social  role  in  which  they  find  them-
selves.  This  is  true  of  (for  example)  judges,  lawyers,  doctors,  parents,
children,  waiters,  wives,  husbands,  colleagues,  friends,  and  law  school
deans.  Attention to the place of social role shows that for many purposes,
the contrast between  "rationality" and  social norms 26 is  unhelpful.  What
is rational  for an agent is a function  of, and mediated  by, social  roles and
associated  norms. 27  And when  social  norms appear  not  to be present,  it
is  only because  they  are  so  taken  for granted  that  they seem  invisible.

At  the  same  time,  norms and  roles-operating  as taxes  on  or subsi-
dies  to  action-can  create  a division  between  the judgments  and  desires
that  are  displayed  publicly  and  the judgments  and  desires  that would  be
displayed  without current norms and roles. 28  People's private judgments
and desires diverge greatly from public  appearances.  For  this reason cur-
rent social states  can  be far more fragile  than is  generally  thought-small
shocks to publicly  endorsed norms and  roles decrease  the cost of display-
ing deviant norms and rapidly bring about large-scale  changes in publicly
displayed judgments  and desires.  Hence  societies  experience  norm band-
wagons  and  norm  cascades.  Norm  bandwagons  occur  when  the  lowered
cost  of expressing  new  norms  encourages  an  ever-increasing  number  of
people to reject previously popular norms,  to a "tipping point" where it is
adherence  to  the  old  norms  that  produces  social  disapproval. 29  Norm
cascades  occur  when  societies  experience  rapid  shifts  toward  new
norms.3 0  Something  of this kind happened with  the attack  on apartheid
in  South Africa,  the fall  of Communism,  the election  of Ronald  Reagan,
the use  of the term  "liberal" as  one  of opprobrium,  the rise  of the femi-
nist movement,  and  the current  assault  on affirmative  action.

26.  See  Jon  Elster,  The  Cement  of  Society  1-16  (1989)  [hereinafter  Elster,  The
Cement of Society].  It might be  possible to define  rationality in a way  that abstracts from
social norms, seeJon  Elster, Norms  of Revenge,  100 Ethics 862, 872-76  (1990)  [hereinafter
EIster, Norms  of Revenge],  but it would be hard to  make robust predictions on the basis of
any  such  definition.  The  problem  lies  in  a  norm-free  specification  of  the  "ends"  that
rational  actors  pursue.  If we  understand  rationality  in purely  instrumental  terms,  we  will
be unable to make  any predictions at all;  if we understand  it in purely  economic  terms, we
will  find much  social  irrationality  and  hence  make  bad  predictions,  and  in  any  case  the
pursuit of wealth  will  inevitably  have some  relation  to  social  norms.  (Elster sees  revenge
behavior  as  inconsistent  with  rationality,  but  individuals  who  seek  revenge  get  hedonic
benefit  from  getting  revenge.  Hence  Elster's  conception  of  rationality  is  normatively
invested  in a way  that seems plausible  but needs defense,  and that in any  case  is  designed
for normative  rather  than  positive  purposes.)  See  also  infra  Part IV.C.

27.  See Viviana  A.  Zelizer, Morals  and Markets:  The Development  of Life Insurance
(discussing  conflicts  between  social  norms  and  the

in  the  United  States  41-89  (1983) 
purchase  of life  insurance).

28.  See  Kuran,  supra note  17,  at 3-5, 22-44.
29.  See  id. at 71-73.
30.  Cf. Viviana  A.  Zelizer,  Pricing the  Priceless Child:  The  Changing Social  Value of
Children  (1985)  (describing changing  economic  and sentimental  valuation  of children);
Sushil  Bikhchandani  et al.,  A Theory  of Fads,  Fashion,  Custom,  and  Cultural  Change  as
Informational  Cascades,  100  J.  Pol.  Econ.  992  (1992) 
(explaining  how  informational
cascades  can  contribute  to  the  rapid spread  of new  behaviors).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 912 1996

19961

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

To  spell  out the  most  general  point  emerging  from the  discussion:
The notion of a "preference"  can be  deeply confusing,  and in many  of its
uses,  it impairs  both  positive  and  normative  analysis  of law.  In  its  stan-
dard  form,  a preference  is  supposed  to  be  something  that  lies  behind
choices  and  that  is  more  abstract  and  general  than  choices  are.3 1  But
what  lies  behind  choices  is  not  a  thing  but  an  unruly  amalgam  of
things3 2-aspirations, 
tastes,  physical  states,  responses  to  existing  roles
and norms,  values, judgments,  emotions,  drives,  beliefs,  whims.  The  in-
teraction  of  these  forces  will  produce  outcomes  of  a  particular  sort  in
accordance  with  the  particular  context.  Hence  we  might  say  that prefer-
ences  are constructed, rather than elicited, by  social situations,3 3  in  the  sense
that  they  are  very  much  a  function  of  the  setting  and  the  prevailing
norms.

This point bears  on  the role  of government, which  cannot  avoid  af-
fecting  social norms.  A market economy will,  for  example, have  predict-
able  effects  on norms, 3 4  and historically  it has  been justified  on just this
ground, as a way of softening  social divisions  by allowing people  to  inter-
act  with  one  another  on  a  mutually  beneficial  basis.3 5  A  good  deal  of
governmental  action is  self-consciously  designed  to change  norms, mean-
ings,  or  roles,  and  in  that way  to  increase  the  individual  benefits  or  de-
crease the individual  costs associated with certain  acts.  Thus  government
might try to inculcate or to remove shame, fear of which can  be a powerful
deterrent  to  behavior.  The  inculcation  of shame  operates  as  a  kind  of
tax;  the  removal  of shame  might  be  seen  as  the  elimination  of a tax  or
even  as  a kind  of subsidy.

There is  a  thin line  between  education  and provision of information
on  the one  hand  and  attempted  norm-change  on  the  other.  In fact we
will  see  that  in  the  process  of  norm  management,  government  has  a

31.  This is  the  idea behind much  of Gary  Becker's work.  See,  e.g.,  Gary  S.  Becker,  A
Treatise  on  the Family  (enI.  ed.  1991).  For  Becker's  most recent  statement-which  is,  I
believe,  in a somewhat  different spirit-see Becker,  supra note  21.

32.  See  Gary  S. Becker,  Nobel Lecture:  The  Economic  Way of Looking at Behavior,
in The Essence  of Becker 633,  633  (Ram6n Febrero  & Pedro S. Schwartz  eds.,  1995)  ("An
important step  in  extending  the traditional  theory  of individual  rational  choice..,  is  to
theory  a  much  richer  class  of  attitudes,  preferences,  and
incorporate  into  the 
calculations.").

33.  Cf.  Paul  Slovic,  The  Construction  of Preference,  50  Am.  Psychol.  364  (1995)
(arguing that preferences  are shaped by situation-specific  cognitive  processes).  I mean  to
use  the  idea  of  construction  somewhat  more  broadly  than  does  Slovic.  Note  in  this
connection the striking study by Samuels  and Ross,  showing  that people cooperate when  a
certain  game  is  denominated  "Community" but not when  the same  game  is denominated
"Wall  Street."  See  S.M.  Samuels  & L.  Ross,  Reputations  Versus  Labels:  The  Power  of
Situational  Effects in the Prisoner's Dilemma  Game  (1993)  (unpublished  manuscript); see
also  Lee  Ross  &  Andrew  Ward,  Naive  Realism:  Implications  for  Social  Conflicts  and
Misunderstandings  in Values  and  Knowledge  (Terrance  Brown  et  al.  eds.,  forthcoming
1996).

34.  See generally  Albert  0.  Hirschman,  The Passions  and The Interests  (1977).
35.  See id.  at 69-93.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 913 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

number  of  tools.  In  a  democratic  society,  it  ought  to  be  willing  to  use
them.

This  Article  comes  in  seven  parts.  Part  II  discusses  the  basic  con-
cepts:  social  norms,  social  roles,  and  social  meanings.  Part III  explores
the relationship  between  preferences  and  choices;  it explains  the  limited
usefulness  of the idea  of "preferences."  Part IV  places special  emphasis
on  the role  of pride  and shame  in  human  behavior.  Part V offers  some
general  comments  on  the  role of government in altering  norms.  Part VI
explores  more particular bases for governmental  or legal action.  It shows
how  government  might  overcome  collective  action  problems,  diminish
risk,  and enhance  autonomy  through  managing  norms.  Part VII  briefly
describes  when  and  why  government  action  may  be  illegitimate  or  ill-
advised.

II.  DEMNITIONS  AND  CONCEPTS

In  this  section  I  discuss three  ideas  that will  play an  important  part
throughout this  Article:  social  norms, social  roles,  and  social  meanings.
Social  norms are  the most central of these, since they provide  the founda-
tion for both social  roles and social  meanings.  I  also  connect  these  ideas
to problems  of collective  action,  movements  for legal and  social  change,
and  some issues  about  the  goals and  functions  of law.

A.  Social Norms

1. In  general. - The  term  "social  norms"  might  be  understood  in
many  different ways.3 6  For present  purposes  the  differences  among  the
possible  definitions  are  not very  important,  and  we  can  rely  on  conven-
tional understandings.  If a definition is  thought necessary, we  might, very
roughly, understand  "norms" to be social attitudes  of approval and  disap-
proval, specifying what ought to be done  and what ought not to be done.
Some  norms  set good  manners,  for  example,  about  how  to  hold  one's
fork;  others reflect morally abhorrent views,  as in  the taboo  on interracial
relations;  others  reflect  hard-won  moral  commitments,  as  in  the  norm
against racial  epithets.  In fact  there  are social  norms  about  nearly  every
aspect  of  human  behavior.  There  are  norms  about  littering,  dating,
smoking, singing, when  to stand, when  to sit, when  to show anger, when,
how,  and  with  whom  to  express  affection,  when  to  talk,  when  to  listen,
when  to  discuss  personal  matters,  when  to  use  contractions,  when  (and
with  respect  to  what)  to purchase  insurance.

36.  I am understanding  norms in an unusually broad sense.  Narrower  definitions are
possible and many useful distinctions  might be drawn.  See,  e.g., Elster, Norms of Revenge,
supra note  26, at 863-66;  Philip Pettit, Vius Normativa: Rational Choice  Perspectives,  100
Ethics 725,  728-32  (1990);  see also  H.LA. Hart, The Concept  of Law  82-91  (2d ed.  1994)
(discussing rules  of obligation,  a subclass  of norms);  David K.  Lewis,  Convention  99-100
(1969)  (dealing with  the relation  between  conventions  and norms).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 914 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND SOCIAL  ROLES

"It isn't  done"  is  a  frequent  reaction  to  certain  disapproved  con-
duct37-even 
though  the relevant  "it" is  indeed  done.  The governing at-
titudes  span an  exceptionally wide range.  They may  or may not begin or
maintain  themselves  as  a result  of reflective judgments  about, for  exam-
ple,  fairness  and  utility.38  They may be  based  on  simple,  intuitive judg-
ments  about  what  is  healthy  behavior;  these judgments  may  eventually
turn  into  moral commitments  unmoored from health judgments.  Social
norms  may  or  may not promote liberty  and  well-being;  they  may or may
not be  easily  malleable  or  go  very  deep  into  people's  understandings.
Sometimes  norms  are  codified  in  law.3 9  This  is  true,  for  example,  with
norms  governing  littering, respecting  private property, and  banning  dis-
crimination  on  the basis  of race  or sex.

Whether  or  not  law  is  also  at  work,  social  norms  are  enforced
through  social  sanctions  that  are,  to  say  the  least,  pervasive.  "Political
correctness"  is  no  isolated  phenomenon.  It  is  ubiquitous. 40  It  occurs
whenever  reputational  incentives impose  high costs  on  deviant  behavior.
The  relevant  sanctions  create  a  range  of  unpleasant  (but  sometimes
pleasant)  emotional  states  in people  who  have  violated  norms.  If some-
one  behaves  in  a  way  inconsistent  with  social  norms,  public  disapproval
may  produce  embarrassment  or  perhaps  shame  and  a  desire  to  hide.
Sometimes  the  unpleasant feelings  brought  about  by violations  of social
norms  are  intense,  and  the  social  consequences  of these  feelings,  and
(perhaps  even  more)  of anticipating  them,  can  be  substantial.4'

37.  See  Elster, The  Cement of Society,  supra note  26,  at  132-33.
38.  I  do  not  offer  an  account  here  of  the  emergence  of  norms.  For  relevant
discussion,  see Elster, The Cement of Society, supra note  26; Allan  Gibbard,  Wise Choices,
Apt  Feelings:  A  Theory  of  Normative Judgment  (1990);  Cristina  Bicchieri,  Norms  of
Cooperation,  100  Ethics  838  (1990).  Nor  do  I  discuss  the relationship  between  social
norms  and  moral judgments  about,  for  example,  fairness.  Social  norms  are  sometimes
supported  by such judgments, but sometimes  not.  Social  norms are  sometimes  a product
of such judgments,  but sometimes not.  On  the relation  between  behavior and judgments
about fairness-more  precisely, in my view, social norms rooted in judgments of fairness-
see  Daniel Kahneman  et al.,  Fairness  and the Assumptions  of Economics,  in Richard  H.
Thaler, Quasi  Rational  Economics  220  (1991).

39.  For  discussions  of  law,  norms,  and  insurance,  see  Zelizer,  supra  note  30,  at

113-37;  Zelizer, supra note  27,  at 27-39.

40.  In  fact the  term itself is  an  exercise  in  norm management.  It brands people with
certain  views as  weak followers  of convention,  rather  than people who are following moral
convictions  of their own.  If one  believes  that one's own  views are  "politically correct,"  one
is  likely  to  feel  a  bit embarrassed  by  them;  if  one  thinks  that  one  is  avoiding  "political
correctness," one  is  likely to  be proud  of one's independence  and fortitude.  Consider the
suggestion  that  "[a]  lot of young  women  don't want  to  be  called feminists  because,  hey,
listen to Rush Limbaugh,  and you've heard it all.  It's equated with being lesbian,  fat, ugly."
Karen  De Witt, Feminists Gather to Affirm  Relevancy  of Their Movement,  N.Y. Times,  Feb.
3,  1996,  at 9.

41.  The persistent urge  to conform to social norms  has been  demonstrated  in a good
deal  of work  in social psychology.  The classic study is S.E. Asch,  Effects of Group  Pressure
upon the Modification  and Distortion  ofJudgments,  in Groups,  Leadership,  and Men  177
(Harold Guetzkow  ed.,  1951).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 915 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVEW

[Vol.  96:903

Much socially  desirable  behavior  is  attributable  to social  norms.  For
example,  lack  of  education  produces  a  good  deal  of shame  in  certain
communities;  so  too with  the decision  to  be  promiscuous,  or to use  alco-
hol,  cigarettes,  or unlawful  drugs.  The  result  can  be  salutary  incentives.
But  social  norms  can  produce  undesirable  incentives  as  well.  Thus,  in
some communities,  norms encourage  a lack  of education,  promiscuity, or
abuse  of alcohol  or unlawful  drugs.

2.  Intrinsic value, reputational value, and self-conception. - From  these
points  we  might  conclude  that  choice  among  options  is  a function  not
only of (a)  the intrinsic  value of the option-a book, ajob, a  drink-but
also  of (b)  the  reputational  benefit  or  cost of the  choice  and  of  (c)  the
effects  of the choice on one's self-conception. 42  The intrinsic value refers
to whether,  apart from reputational  effects  or effects  on the agent's  self-
conception,  the  option  is  fun, illuminating,  pleasant,  interesting,  and  so
forth.  You  may watch  a television  show on  public  broadcasting  not  only
because  it is fun or  illuminating, but also  because  there  are  reputational
advantages from  doing so  and  advantages  as well  from  the standpoint  of
enhancing your self-conception.  Someone  may buy a certain book  (say, a
book about Shakespeare)  and  not another book  (say,  a book by Stephen
King)  largely  because  she wants  to  think of herself as  the sort  of person
who  reads about Shakespeare.  Someone  may buy and wear an expensive
piece  of clothing  not only  or not mostly  because  he  thinks it looks  nice,
but also  or mostly because he wants  other people to see him wearing  that
piece  of  clothing.  Social  norms  are  a  key  determinant  in  reputational
benefit or  cost.  They  can much affect  (though  they need not determine)
self-conception  as well. 

I

Changes  in  social  norms  can  influence  choices  if intrinsic  value  is
held constant, by altering  the effects  of reputational  incentives and conse-
quences  for  self-conception. 43 
If  littering  produces  shame  or  disap-
proval,  behavior  will  shift;  if race  discrimination  produces  reputational
cost  rather  than  benefit,  fewer  people  will  discriminate  on  the  basis  of
race;  if parenthood  out  of wedlock  is  stigmatized,  there  should  be  less
parenthood  out of wedlock.44  Indeed,  obedience  of law is  built in  large

42.  Cf. Kuran,  supra  note  17,  at 24-38,  which  has  much  influenced  my  presentation
here.  Kuran  discusses  reputational  and  intrinsic  utility;  he  also  refers  to  what  he  calls
"expressive  utility,"  by which  he means  the  expressive  value  of the  act.  See  id.  at 30-35.
Some  people  may,  for  example,  want  to  deviate  from  existing  norms  because  of  the
expressive  value of deviation.  But I think it is better to speak of effects  on  the agent's self-
conception;  this is a more general idea that includes, but is not limited to, what Kuran  calls
expressive  value.

43.  See  id.  at 35-38.
44.  See  Elijah  Anderson,  Streetwise:  Race,  Class,  and  Change 

in  an  Urban
Community  112-37  (1990)  (describing  impact of social  norms on  patterns  of childbirth
and parenting).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 916 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

part  on  the perceived  reputational  consequences  of law violation. 45  Of
course  those  consequences  might be favorable  rather  than  unfavorable.
The  three-part  division  is  a  bit crude,  since perceptions  of intrinsic
value will  be  often a function  of social  norms.  Those  perceptions  do not
exist  in  a vacuum.  Perceived  intrinsic  value  is  emphatically  a  result  of
social forces-consider  responses to opera, rock music, rap-and reputa-
tional  pressures  can  interact in  complex ways  with beliefs  about intrinsic
value.  People's self-conceptions  are  very divergent, and  each  of our self-
conceptions  has many dimensions; for example, many of us may want not
to be conformists,  but also want not to diverge too much from what other
people  do  and  think.  I  offer  the  three-part  division  as a  place  to  start.

3.  Norms and freedom. -

In a  way social  norms reduce  freedom,  un-
derstood very broadly as the power to do whatever  one would like  to do.46
Certainly  norms stop  people  from  doing  things  that  (if the  norms  were
different)  they  would  like  to  do,  and  people  sometimes  would  like  the
norms  to  change.  In  particular,  norms  can  drive  a  wedge  between  peo-
ple's  public  actions  or  statements  and  their  private  judgments  or
desires. 47  Some  people  very  much  want  norms  to  be  something  other
than what they are, and they regret the fact  (if they recognize  it) that they
have no power  to change  them.  Thus a  teenager  might lament the exist-
ence  of social  norms  in favor  of  (say)  carrying  a firearm  or using  drugs;
but while  the norms  are  in  place, he  might well  carry  a firearm  and use
drugs,  and  in  a sense  feel  compelled  to do  so.

It would, however,  be quite ludicrous  to  deplore social  norms, to see
them  only as constraints  on freedom, or to wish for them  to disappear.  In
fact  norms  make  freedom  possible.  Social  life  is  not feasible-not  even
imaginable-without  them.48  In  the  absence  of social  norms, we  would
be  unable  to  understand  one  another.4 9  Norms  establish  conventions
about the meanings  of actions.  Social  norms are thus facilitative as well  as
constraining.5 0  If everyone  knows the  norms concerning a raised voice  or
wearing  bluejeans,  then  people  can  raise  their voices  or  wear  bluejeans
without  having to  decide what  these  actions  mean.

45.  See  Tom  R.  Tyler,  Why  People  Obey  the  Law  45  (1990)  (showing  a  significant

correlation  between  fear  of peer  disapproval  and compliance).

46.  I do not mean  to endorse this  odd conception  of freedom.  Many unobjectionable
things-like  speed  limit laws  or high  prices-reduce  freedom,  thus  understood.  I  seek
only  to  draw  attention  to  the  fact  that  norms  can  constrain  behavior  and  choice  even
though some  or many people would  like  them  to  be  otherwise.

47.  See Kuran,  supra note  17,  at 3-12.
48.  This  is a theme  of Elster, The Cement of Society,  supra note  26.
49.  Hence cross-cultural  understandings  are sometimes made difficult  by the fact  that
social norms are different in different cultures, so  that meanings have  to be  translated, and
people may  be unaware  of that fact.  Consider the example of whistling at sporting events:
In America,  whistling connotes  approval;  in Europe,  it is a form  of "booing."

50.  Cf.  Holmes,  supra  note  22  (arguing  that  constitutional  constraints  improve

governance).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 917 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903?

There  is a further and, for present purposes,  an  especially important
point.  Good  social  norms  solve  collective  action  problems  by  encourag-
ing  people  to  do useful  things  that  they would  not  do without  the  rele-
vant  norms.5 1  Consider voting,  littering,  behaving  courteously,  keeping
promises,  cleaning up  after  one's  dog, writing  tenure  letters,  and  doing
one's  share  of administrative  work.  Without  social  norms,  coercion  or
economic  incentives-perhaps  with  large  financial  investments-would
be  required  to  solve  collective  action  problems.  Norms  can  be  an  espe-
cially  cheap  way  of  ensuring  against  the  unfortunate  consequences  of
prisoner's  dilemmas.

On the other hand,  social norms may be ineffective.  This is so partly
because some people  like to incur the disapproval  that follows  norm-viola-
tion, and hence  some people  like  to  "flout convention"  by rejecting pre-
vailing norms by, for  example, smoking,  playing loud music in public,  or
wearing  unusual  clothes.  Of course  people  who  violate  generally  held
social  norms  might  be  behaving  consistently  with  particular  norms  in  a
relevant  subculture.  This  is  true when  people  in  a  certain  group  wear
clothing  of a  certain  kind, or when  people who  smoke  cigarettes  receive
peer group  approval  simply  by  virtue  of the  fact  that  they  are  violating
more broadly held norms.  (Hence  those who reject generally held norms
may be  the most  committed of conformists;  they are following  the norms
of a  subcommunity,  as  when  teenagers  choose  a  form  of dress  that  vio-
lates  generally  held  norms  but  imposes  a  rigid  orthodoxy  on  the
subgroup.)

There  are  many  possible  reasons  for  rejecting  prevailing  norms.
Some  people  depart from  the  prevailing  norm because  of their  reflective
judgments.  Such  people think,  on reflection,  that  the  norm  is  too silly  or
too unworthy to affect behavior, or that relevant  roles diminish autonomy
or well-being.  Marrying  someone of a different race may reflect thisjudg-

51.  See  Edna Ullmann-Margalit,  The  Emergence  of Norms  18-133  (1977).  For an
important  discussion  of  how  norms  produce  social  order,  and  solve  collective  action
problems, in  the absence  of legal  constraints,  see Robert C. Ellickson,  Order Without Law
(1991).  But norm changes  need not produce Pareto  improvements;  there can be  losers as
well  as  winners  even  in the face  of a solution  to  a collective  action  problem,  as when,  for
example, some  members  of a small  group reject  a ban  on  littering.  Moreover,  there  is a
crucial question  about which  norms are taken  as given,  and which  are put up for grabs,  in
the sort of analysis  that celebrates certain  norms as solving collective  action problems.  See
infra Part VI.A.  For an illuminating discussion  of why norms might be inefficient,  see Eric
A. Posner, Law, Economics, and Inefficient Norms,  144 U. Pa. L. Rev. (forthcoming  1996).
A growing literature discusses  the place of norms in ordering behavior  entirely outside
of law.  See, e.g.,  Lisa Bernstein,  Opting  Out of the Legal  System:  Extralegal  Contractual
Relations  in  the  Diamond  Industry,  21  J. Legal  Stud.  115  (1992);  Robert  D.  Cooter,
Structural  Adjudication  and  the New  Law  Merchant:  A Model  of Decentralized  Law,  14
Int'l  Rev.  L.  & Econ.  215  (1994).  This  literature  raises  interesting  questions  about  the
extralegal  development  of norms  and  the  extent  to  which  law  should  build  on  those
norms.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 918 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

919

ment;  sharing  domestic  labor  on  an  equal  basis  almost  certainly  does. 52
In  other cases,  as  discussed  above,  the  departure  simply expresses  defiance,
and  the real  desire  is  to flout  convention, whatever  the norm  is.5 3  Many
apparently  odd  practices  involving  dress and  manners  are  rooted in  this
phenomenon;  some  people  find  defiance  an  intrinsic  good,  and  what
they  are  defying  is  more  or  less  incidental.m  In  still other  cases,  the  de-
parture  is  the  expression  of an individual  desire or taste, which  the  person
would  pursue  whether  or  not it is  inconsistent  with  social  roles  and  ac-
companying  norms.  Consider  the  view  that  Coca-Cola  actually  is  better
than  all  other  drinks,  a  view  that  might  be  reflected  in  unconventional
drink  selections  in  many imaginable  places.

The  fact  that some  people  like  to reject  social  norms  is  highly  rele-
vant to law.  For example,  a serious  problem with  legal efforts  to inculcate
social  norms  is  that  the  source  of the  effort  may be  disqualifying.  Such
efforts  may  be  futile  or  even  counterproductive.  If  Nancy  Reagan  tells
teenagers  to  "just say  no" to  drugs,  many  teenagers  may  think  that  it is
very good  to say  "yes."5 5  It is  said  that propaganda  efforts  in  the former
Soviet Union failed simply because  the  source  of the  propaganda was not
trusted;  hence  the government's  effort to inculcate norms  of its choosing
fell on  deaf ears. 56  These points bear on the regulation  of social  risks-a
principal  concern  of  this  article-particularly  in  the  areas  of  teenage
smoking and  potentially  dangerous  sexual  activity.  Efforts  by private  or
public authorities  to stigmatize  certain  acts  may have the  opposite  effect.
4.  Exit and entry. - The fact that norms are contested  within a heter-
ogeneous  society  can  lead to  the  creation  of many  diverse  norm communi-

52.  See  Susan  M.  Okin, Justice,  Gender,  and  the  Family  149-55  (1989)  (discussing

gender  inequality  in  domestic  labor).

53.  Consider the scene  in The  Wild  One in  which  Marlon  Brando,  teenage  rebel,  is
asked,  "Johnny, what are you rebelling against?"  and responds,  "Whaddaya got?"  described
by  David Hinckley,  The "W" Word,  Chi.  Trib.,  Sept.  6,  1990,  at 17C.

54.  SeeJames  Miller, "Democracy is in the Streets":  From Port Huron to  the Siege  of
Chicago  59  (1987)  (reporting revealing statements made by Tom Hayden describing some
1960s  civil  rights  leaders  as  seeking  to  make  a personal  statement  rather  than  to  protect
civil  rights  for their own  sake).

55.  Compare  President  Clinton's remarks  on teenage  smoking, which  are very much

in  the spirit  of what I am suggesting  here:

[I]t's simply  not true that cultural  changes  and legal  bars, together, cannot work
to  reduce consumption  .... 
If you make  it clearly  illegal,  more inaccessible,  you
reduce  the  lure  of advertising,  and  then  you  have  an  affirmative  campaign,  a
positive  campaign,  so  that you  don't say,  "Just Say No."  You  give young  people
information  and you make  it the smart, the  cool, the  hip thing  to  do to take care
of yourself and  keep  yourself healthy  and alive.

Excerpts  from Clinton  News  Conference  on His Tobacco  Order, supra  note 6, at A18.

56.  Hence a great deal of attention has been  paid in recent years to the role of trust in
regulatory  policy.  See  Paul  Slovic,  Perception  of Risk:  Reflections  on  the  Psychometric
Paradigm,  in Social  Theories  of Risk  117,  151-52  (Sheldon  Krimsky  & Dominic  Golding
eds.,  1992);  Richard  H. Pildes  & Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing  the Regulatory  State, 62 U.
Chi. L. Rev.  1, 40-43,  107-12  (1995);  Chauncey Starr,  Risk Management, Assessment, and
Acceptability,  5  Risk Analysis  97  (1985).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 919 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

ties.  People who are  dissatisfied with  prevailing norms  can vote with  their
feet,  using  the  power  of  "exit" to  leave  norm  communities  they  dislike
and to enter  into groups built on more congenial norms.  They may even
create,  or  seek  to  enter, self-consciously  deviant  subcommunities.  Many
American high  schools reflect this phenomenon,  as students  find groups
that are  defined  in a relatively  crisp  way, and  as groups  intermingle  only
on  occasion.  The most  conspicuous  norm  communities  are  private;  but
in  a system  with  state  and local  governments  and  free mobility,  there are
public norm  communities  too,  as  people sort themselves  by choosing lo-
calities  with  congenial  norms.  The  norms  of such  communities  may  be
reflected  in  supportive  state  or local  laws  in  which,  for example,  homo-
sexual  relations  are  permitted,  or  traditional  morality  is  enforced.  And
once  sorting  has  begun,  processes  of "voice"  can  increase  the  intensity
and  uniformity  of  governing  norms.  Homogenous  local  communities
may  insist  on  their  own  norms.  National  rights  are  often  a  safeguard
against  the possibly injurious  character  of this  process.

To  the extent that  people can  freely  enter  and  exit norm  communi-
ties,  such  communities  offer  important  protection  against  oppressive
norms.  On  the  other hand,  it  can  be  very  costly  to  exit from  the  norm
community  in  which  one  finds  oneself,  and the  fact  that  one  has  been
raised  in  that  community  may make  other  options  seem  unthinkable,5 7
even  though  they  might  be  much better.58

5.  Norms and nonfungible cash. - Because  of prevailing  social  norms
within  relevant  communities,  money  itself is  not fungible.5 9  The  point
deserves  separate  discussion,  for it has particular  importance  for law and
legal  policy,  and it has  not received  the attention  it deserves.

Consider, for  example,  the fact that money  is  often  compartmental-
ized. 60  Some  money  is  specially  reserved  for  the  support  of  children.
Some  money is for gifts.  Some is for one's own  special fun.  Some money
is for  summer vacation.  Some  money is  for a  rainy day.  Thus  a study  of
practices  in  Orange  County,  California, says  that  residents keep

a variety  of domestic  "cash stashes"-"generally  one  in  the bill-
fold  of  each  adult,  children's  allowances  and  piggy  banks,  a
'petty  cash'  fund  in  a  teapot-equivalent,  a  dish  of change  for
parking meters  or laundry"-or  "banked stashes  of money," in-
cluding Christmas  club savings  and accounts  designated for spe-

57.  See  Kuran,  supra  note  17,  at  176-95  (describing  "the  unthinkable  and  the

unthought").

58.  Apparently dissident communities may  be based on norms that are highly  reactive
to and even  defined  by reference  to more  generally held  norms; it might be  better if the
community as  a whole  could do  something about those  norms.  These points  bear on  the
legitimate  role of government

59.  See generally Viviana A. Zelizer, The Social Meaning of Money  (1994)  (proposing
differentiated  model  of  money  that  recognizes  certain  monies  as  nonfungible,
nonportable,  subjective,  and heterogeneous).

60.  See  Richard  H.  Thaler,  Mental  Accounting  Matters  (Dec.  1993)  (unpublished

manuscript,  on  file  with  the Columbia  Law  Review).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 920 1996

19961

SOCTAL  NORMS  AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

cial  expenditures  such  as  property  or  other  taxes, vacations,  or
home  and  car insurance  payments. 6'

Social  theorists  have  often  feared  that  the use  of money  would  "flatten"
social  life,  by  erasing  qualitative  distinctions  among  goods.  Ironically,
however,  social  life,  pervaded  as  it is  by social  norms,  has  "unflattened"
money by insisting on qualitative  distinctions. 62  "There is  no single,  uni-
form, generalized  money, but multiple monies:  people  earmark different
currencies  for many  or perhaps  all  types  of social  interactions  ....  And
people will  in fact  respond with  anger, shock,  or ridicule  to  the  'misuse'
of monies for  the wrong  circumstances  or  social  relations  .... 

,,63

The  existence  of norms involvng money  suggests  that it may not be
possible  to  infer  global judgments  from  particular  consumption  choices
that are dependent on context-specific  norms.  Of course  a wide  range of
norms ban  the use  of dollars  as  a  reason for  action,  and  sometimes  law
fortifies  such  norms;  consider prohibitions  on  prostitution,  vote-trading,
and surrogate  parenthood. 64  Here, however,  I am concerned with norms
that  "subsidize"  or  "tax"  certain  uses  of money.  The point  is  important
because  economists  often  claim  that  particular  choices  demonstrate  or
reveal  general valuations. 65  But this may be  a mistake,  because particular
choices are  a function of social  norms that may be  limited  to the particu-
lar  context.  In  a  different  context,  the  governing  norms  may  be  quite
different.  Thus, for example,  the refusal to insure certain  goods may be a
product of social norms that are limited to the particular  context of insur-
ance.  If so, it may be wrong to draw from insurance  choices  general  con-
clusions  about  (say)  the  appropriate  domain  of tort  law.66

B.  Social Roles

1.  In  general. - Many  norms  are  intensely  role-specific,  and  law  is
often self-consciously  concerned with  social  roles.  Because  the subject  of
roles  raises  distinctive  issues,  I  now  discuss  some  of  the  relationships
among roles,  norms, and  law.

Consider  the  following  social  roles:  doctor,  employee,  waiter,  law
school  dean,  wife,  friend,  pet-owner,  colleague,  student.  Each  of  these
roles  is  accompanied  by a  remarkably  complex  network  of appropriate
norms.  The  network  is  not  easily  reduced  to  rules,  but  people  know,

61.  Zelizer,  supra  note  59,  at  5  (citing  Jean  Lave,  Cognition  in  Practice  132-33

(1988)).

(forthcoming  1996).

Risk  34-74  (1992).

62.  For an  impressive  argument  to  this  effect, see  Thaler,  supra note  60.
63.  Zelizer, supra  note 59,  at  18-19.
64.  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  On  the  Expressive  Function  of  Law,  144  U.  Pa.  L.  Rev.

65.  See, e.g.,  W. Kip  Viscusi,  Fatal  Tradeoffs:  Public  and Private Responsibilities  for

66.  See  Steven  P.  Croley  & Jon  D.  Hanson,  The  Nonpecuniary  Costs  of Accidents:
Pain-and-Suffering  Damages  in  Tort Law,  108  Harv. L. Rev.  1787,  1851-53  (1995).  For a
more  detailed  discussion,  see  Sunstein,  supra note  64.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 921 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

often very well, what they are.6 7  If you are a waiter,  and treat your restau-
rant's  patrons  the  way you  treat your friends, you  probably will  not be  a
waiter  for very long  (except perhaps  in  California).  If you  are  a student,
and  treat  a  teacher  as  if he were  your  employee  at the  local  factory,  you
will  be  perceived  as  misbehaving  very  badly.  If you  treat friends  the  way
doctors  treat  patients,  or  lawyers  treat  clients,  you  probably  won't  have
many  friends.  People  rapidly  internalize  social  norms  about  what  their
roles  entail.  Violations  of role-specific  norms  can  seem jarring  and  pro-
duce  prompt social  punishment  (or reward).

Roles  are  accompanied  by  a  wide  range  of included  and  excluded
reasons for action.68  These  may or may not be a product  of law;  they are
certainly  a  product  of social  norms.  In your  capacity  as  lawyer,  you  can
act  only  on  the  basis  of  certain  reasons.  For  example,  you  may  reveal
something  told to you in confidence  only  to prevent a crime;  you cannot
breach  a confidence  on  the  ground  that it would  be  economically profit-
able to do so.  In your capacity as judge, you  may look only  at a restricted
set  of  considerations,  a  set far  more  restricted  than  those  you  may  ex-
amine  if you are  a legislator.  In your capacity  as friend,  you  are not per-
mitted  to  violate  a  confidence  on  the  ground  that  it  would  be  fun  to
gossip about what you have been  told.  Confusion of roles-is X speaking
as  a friend  or as  a colleague?  is  the judge  a closet legislator?  what exactly
is my relationship  to my employer?-can  cause uncertainty,  awkwardness,
or much  worse.

2.  Roles and freedom. - Are social  roles an obstacle  to freedom? 69  In
a  way  the  answer  is yes,  since  people  often  would  like  to  do  things  that
their role forbids, and since people often would like  to change  the nature
of their  roles.  But  this  would  be  a  far  too  simple  conclusion.  Without
roles,  life would be very hard to negotiate.  Like social  norms,  social roles
are  facilitating  as  well  as  constraining.  The  existence  of  a  clear  role
makes  communication  much easier.  By sharply constraining  the  domain
of permissible  actions,  roles  simplify  things  and,  in  that  sense,  increase
personal  freedom.

Of course  some  of the norms  associated with  certain  social  roles  are
silly  or even  oppressive,  and  some  people  deplore  them  for  this  reason.
What can  they do?  Large-scale  changes  in social  definitions  of roles nor-
mally  require  collective  action,  whether  private  or  public-a  point with
considerable  importance  for  those  interested  in  the appropriate  domain
of law.  But sometimes  individual  people  act  in  ways  inconsistent  with
their roles precisely in  order to  draw attention to  their silly or oppressive
character.  Thus a slave in  the pre-civil War South might decide  not to act

67.  Cf.John  R. Searle,  The Construction  of Social  Reality  127-47  (1995)  (describing
the  "background"  knowledge  which  is  necessary  to  constitute  a  role  as  I  understand  it
here).

68.  Cf.  Joseph  Raz,  Practical  Reason  and  Norms  35-48 

(1975) 

(discussing

exclusionary  reasons).

69.  The same  qualification  is necessary  here  as  in supra note  46.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 922 1996

19961

SOCIAL  NORMS  AND SOCIAL  ROLES

deferentially;70  a student might raise his voice  against an abusive  teacher;
a woman  in an unequal society might insist that domestic  labor be  shared;
a  homosexual  man  might  "flaunt it"; a  teacher in  business  school  might
wear bluejeans.  In fact attacks  on norms  associated  with  particular  roles
often  have  a great  deal  to  do with  perceptions  of injustice.

Many  roles are  ascriptive  and  not chosen,  even in  post-feudal  socie-
ties.  We  cannot fully  control the roles in which we find ourselves.  To be
sure, people have power to assume  or not to assume  some roles.  You  can
decide whether  to be  a spouse,  a parent, a  teacher,  a dean,  and  so forth.
And within limits,  you can decide what it means  to be any of these things;
people  certainly can  alter  the  roles  associated with  parent, wife,  and  hus-
band,  even  if they  cannot  do a great  deal  about the  meanings  associated
with  their  choices.  But  many roles  are  assigned  rather  than voluntarily
assumed-child,  man,  African-American,  old  person,  short person,  and
more.  A role  that is  assigned might be  described as  a  status,  a distinctive
kind  of  role  that,  if  surrounded  by  objectionable  norms,  raises  special
problems. 7 1  And many roles  cannot easily be rejected  in most societies-
driver,  employee,  student,  citizen,  family  member.

3.  Roles  and law.  -

Prevailing  roles  and  norms  can  be  fortified  by
legal  requirements;  they may  even  owe  their existence  to law.  There  are
many specific  legal  provisions  for people  occupying  different roles-par-
ents, spouses,  employers,  employees,  home-owners,  nuclear  power  plant
operators,  animal  owners,  doctors,  stock  brokers,  landlords,  automobile
sellers,  and  others.  Law can  help  constitute  roles.  Much  of the law relat-
ing  to  families,  employer-employee  relations,  and  professional  obliga-
tions  (lawyers,  doctors,  architects,  and  others)  has  this  feature.  In  fact
many  roles  seem  "natural" even  though  they  owe  their  origin  to  social
and  even  legal  conventions.7 2

Often  law tries  to redefine  roles.  In  recent years,  this  has happened
with  respect  to  the roles  of employee,  husband, father, disabled  person,
and judge.  Thus,  for  example,  the  law  has  said  that  husbands  may  not
rape  their wives;  that  absent  fathers  owe  duties  of support  to  their  chil-
dren;  that disabled  people have  certain rights  of access  to the  workplace.
All  of  these  measures  can  be  seen  as  attempts  to  create  new  or  better
norms  to  define  the  relevant  roles.

4.  Citizens and consumers. - Of course  each of us  occupies many  dif-
ferent  roles,  and  there is much  to be  said about  the constraints  imposed

70.  Cf. infra note  226.
71.  See  infra Part VI.D.  An  illuminating  discussion  in  the  context  of gender is  Mary
Anne C.  Case,  Disaggregating  Gender from Sex  and Sexual  Orientation:  The Effeminate
Man  in  The Law  and FeministJurisprudence,  105 Yale  LJ.  1 (1995).

72.  See  Lessig,  supra  note  24,  at 949-51  (discussing  constructed  character  of social
meanings);  cf. Elster,  Norms  of  Revenge,  supra  note  26,  at  871-72  (The  urge  for
vengeance  "is not a spontaneous,  presocial  anger directed at another person  (or, for that
matter,  a  material  object)  that  has  harmed  or  hurt  us.  The  passion  for  revenge  is
embedded in a way of life that  revolves around  the notion of honor, and in which  'boiling
blood'  is  a socially recognized  category.").

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 923 1996

924

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

by these diverse  roles.  But for present  purposes,  an  especially  important
and  pervasive  difference  involves  the  relationship  between  citizen  and
consumer.

Return  to John Jones in  the fifth  tale a3  The  example  shows  that in
your  capacity  as a citizen,  you  might urge  a result-with  respect to  (say)
the  duties  of polluters  or  commercial  broadcasters-that  is  quite  differ-
ent from what you seek through your market behavior in your capacity as
a consumer. 7 4  Acting as citizens,  many people  try  to change  social  prac-
tices,  and  they often  try  to  do  this by  changing  social  norms  associated
with a  particular  role.  Sometimes  these  efforts  are  a function  of the role
of citizen  and associated  norms.  Sometimes  these  efforts  are  undertaken
via  law.  In  their  private  capacity-as  consumers,  employers,  or  family
members-people  may do something  that they believe,  on balance,  to be
unjust, and as citizens, they may support measures that better reflect their
convictions. 75  Sometimes  efforts  to  change  norms  and  roles  reflect  an
understanding  that human  beings are selfish or have weakness of will and
that  measures should be  taken  to ensure  behavior that, on reflection,  we
would  like  to follow.7 6

In  addition,  citizens  do  or say  things just because  of existing  social
norms, which  impose  sanctions on  publicly expressed  dissident  behavior
or judgments;  in  their private  capacity, people  may be  freer  to  do  or say
as they (in a sense, and subject to the prevailing norms)  wish.  In all cases
the difference  is connected  to  the fact that a citizen  is helping to  make  a
judgment  not  simply  for  himself  but  for  a  collectivity. 7"  In  this  sense
there are  important contextual  differences  between  market behavior and
voting  behavior.  The former  does  not affect  the collectivity  in  the same
way,  and  hence  those  concerned, for  example,  with  protecting  the envi-
ronment may believe  that their own behavior is largely irrelevant, whereas

73.  See  supra Part I.E.
74.  See  Mark  Sagoff,  The  Economy  of  the  Earth  7-28  (1988)  (describing  the

distinction  between  citizen  and consumer).

75.  This  is the central  topic of a poem  by Vachel  Lindsay, "Why I Voted  the Socialist

Ticket."  Unfortunately,  the poem  is  truly  horrible:

I am  unjust, but I  can strive  for justice.
My  life's unkind, but I  can vote for kindness.
I,  the unloving, say  life should be  lovely.
I,  that am  blind,  cry out  against my  blindness.

Vachel  Lindsay,  Why I Voted  the  Socialist  Ticket,  in 1 The  Poetry  of Vachel  Lindsay  64
(Dennis  Camp  ed.,  1984).  Of  course  it  is  possible,  too,  that  in  their  private  behavior
people  will  be  unselfish,  whereas  people  might  be  motivated  by  greed  in  their  public
arena.  I am discussing possibilities only,  not making general  suggestions  about the realms
in which  people are  most likely to be  motivated  by norms  of fairness.

76.  SeeJon  Elster,  Ulysses  and the  Sirens  36-111  (1979);  Holmes,  supra  note  22,  at

134-77.

77.  People  appear to  behave accordingly  even  though a single vote  probably matters

no  more  than  a single  market decision.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 924 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AD  SOCIAL  ROLES

laws  can  make  a  great  deal  of difference.7 8  Largely for  this  reason,  the
role  of citizen  is  accompanied  by  norms  that  can  discourage  selfishness
and  encourage  attention  to  the  public good. 79

In fact many efforts to  change law are  at least partly an outgrowth  of
the  difference  between  citizens  and  consumers.8 0  Consider laws  outlaw-
ing sexual harassment, providing  incentives to share  domestic labor,8'  or
granting workers  a right to unionize.  It should be clear that in such cases,
there  is  no simple  relationship  among  choices,  preferences,  norms, and
roles.  There  may be  conflict  or  tension between  two  or  more  of these.

C.  Social Meanings

Social  norms help  people  assign  "social  meaning"  to "human behav-
ior.  With  this  term  I  refer  to  the  expressive  dimension  of conduct  (not
excluding  speech)  in  the  relevant  community.8 2  Social  meaning  is  a
product  of social  norms.8 3

The expressive  dimension of conduct  is, very simply,  the attitudes and
commitments that the conduct signals. A complex body  of First Amendment
doctrine  deals with the problem  of "expressive  conduct," that is,  acts that
carry  an  expressive  purpose  and  effect,  such  as  flag-burning  and  draft
card-burning.84  But  most  conduct  (including  words)  has  an  expressive
function-not in the sense  that the actor necessarily intends to communi-
cate  a message,  but in  the  sense that  people  will take  the  conduct  to be
expressing  certain  attitudes  and  commitments.8 5  Advertisers  are,  of
course, well aware  of this point, and much advertising  is an effort to affect
the social  meaning  of a product or of a purchasing  decision.86  Thus ad-

78.  The very  idea  that I treat the prevention  of environmental  damage just like
buying a private good  is itself quite absurd.  The amount I am ready  to pay for my
toothpaste is typically not affected by the  amount you pay  for yours.  But it would
be  amazing  if  the  payment  I  am  ready  to  make  to  save  nature  is  totally
independent of what others  are ready  to pay  for it, since  it is specifically  a social
concern.  The  'lone  ranger'  model  of environmental  evaluation  confounds  the
nature of the  problem at hand.

Amartya  Sen, Environmental  Evaluation and Social Choice:  Contingent Valuation and the
Market Analogy,  46 Japanese  Econ.  Rev.  23,  29  (1995).

79.  1 am describing a possibility, not a certainty.  Political behavior  is very often selfish.
80.  See  Sen, supra  note 78,  at 26-31,  34 (distinguishing  consumer willingness  to pay

from  citizen judgments).

81.  See  Okn, supra note  52,  at 149-55.
82.  See  Lessig, supra  note  24, at 949-58.
83.  Cf  Thomas  C.  Schelling,  Micromotives  and  Macrobehavior  213-14  (1978)
(explaining how hockey players's  reluctance to wear helmets is a product  of social  norms);
Lessig,  supra  note  24,  at  1014-16  (discussing  factors  that  control  or  manage  social
meaning).

84.  See  generally  Geoffrey  R.  Stone  et  al.,  Constitutional  Law  1101-1403  (2d  ed.

1991).

85.  See  Lessig,  supra note  24,  at 951-55.
86.  Consider  an  advertisement  in  the  Atlanta  airport,  "Remember  those  nerds  you
hated  in  high  school?  Now you  can  hire  them."  The advertisement  is for an  accounting
firm.  Its goal is  to change the social meaning of a hire, so that people will not feel that they

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 925 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW RVEW[9

[Vol.  96:903

vertisements  often  focus  not  on  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  product, but
instead  on  its  reputational  value  and  (equally  important)  its  conse-
quences for self-conception-making  the purchaser  seem smart, sophisti-
cated,  and  in  control  of the  situation.  Political  advertisements  can  have
similar  functions.  They  often  attempt  to  alter  the  social  meaning  of  a
vote  by  making  the  opponent's  supporters  seem  like  whiners  or  dupes
and voters  for  the advertised  candidate  seem  decent  and  good.

The meaning  of acts  is very much  a function  of context and  culture.
Consider some examples.  If  I  light up a  cigarette,  I will,  in  certain  parts
of the United  States,  be  signalling  something  relatively  precise  and very
bad  about  myself,  my  self-conception,  and  my  concern  for  others.  In
other parts of the  United States,  the  signals are very different.  In France,
a  smoker  gives  still  different signals.  If you fail  to  attend  church-or  if
you  do  attend  church,  and  tell  everyone  about  it 87 -your  act  will  have
particular  meanings, and  these have  everything to do with  the community
in which you  find yourself.  If I decide not to get married,  or  not to have
children, my act will convey  a restricted range of possible meanings,  and I
will not have much  control over  those meanings.  (If I were  a woman,  my
decisions  to this  effect would have a quite  different set of meanings.  The
meaning  of a woman's not marrying or having  children  is  quite different
from  a man's.)  If you buy insurance  on your  children's lives,  you will  be
signalling  something  about  your  conception  of your  child,  and  in  some
times  and  places,  the  signal  is  very bad.8 8

Language  also  has  social meanings,  extending  far beyond  the words
themselves  and  reflected  in  the  attitudes  and  commitments  signalled  by
how  people  talk.  Context  determines  those  meanings.  The  words,  'You
look  great  today,"  can  have  many  different  possible  social  meanings.
Consider  their use  from a  mother  to  a fifteen-year-old  daughter,  from a
male  employer  to  a  female  employee,  from  a  doctor  to  a  convalescent
patient,  from a homosexual  male  student to  a male  classmate.  If you re-
fer to women  as  "ladies,"  you are  also making  (whatever your intentions)
a certain  set of statements  about yourself and about your views on gender
issues.  A description of certain Americans  as  "blacks" will  have a different
meaning  in  1996  (after  the  rise  of the  term  "African-American")  from
what  it was in  (say)  1976.

As with social  norms and  social roles,  the social meanings  of acts are
something  about  which  individuals  can  do  relatively  little  (most  of  the
time),89  If a  lawyer  drives  a  Harley-Davidson  motorcycle  to Wall  Street,
his  own attitude  toward  his act will have  little relation  to what  other peo-

are  confused and need a superior mind, but instead feel superior in their capacity  to hire a
servant.

87.  See Stephen  L. Carter, The Culture of Disbelief:  How American  Law and Politics
Trivialize  Religious  Devotion  (1993),  which  can  be  understood  as  an  attack  on,  and  an
effort  to alter, the social  meaning of being  religious in  certain  parts  of the  United States.

88.  See  Zelizer, supra note  30,  at  121-24.
89.  See Lessig, supra note  24, at 993-1007  (exploring the collective  action problem).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 926 1996

19961

SOCIAL NORMS  AND SOCIAL  ROLES

ple take  his  act  to  mean.  If a European  visitor  to  the  United  States  ad-
dresses  women  as  "Miss"  or "Mrs.,"  the social  meaning  of his  choice  will
have little to do with his intentions  (unless, perhaps,  people know that he
is  a visitor).  If a nonsmoker asks someone not to smoke,  the social  mean-
ing of the act will be quite  different in New York in  1996 from what it was
in  the same  city  in 1966,  and different as well  from what it is in  Germany
in  1996.  This  is  a  pervasive  characteristic  of  social  meanings.  If you
buckle  your  seat  belt in  Boston,  you will  communicate  no  insult  to  the
driver;  but things  would  have  been  very  different  twenty  years  ago,  and
within  certain  subgroups  the buckling  of a belt still  connotes  cowardice
or accusation. 90  In fact  in California,  it is a  passenger's  failure to  buckle
that is  an  act  of disrespect  to  the driver, who,  under  California  law,  may
be  held  liable if you have  not buckled.

To  take  a  science  fiction-ish  example:  If you  lived  in  a  society  of
vegetarians,  the  act  of  eating  meat-at, let  us  suppose,  specially  desig-
nated animal flesh restaurants-would  be very different from what it is in
a society  of meat-eaters. 9 1  And if you lived in  a society of vegetarians, you
might well  choose not to eat meat, because  social meaning would impose
a decisive cost  on meat-eating.  The meanings  of actions are  set by forces
that are emphatically  human but that are largely  outside of the control of
the individual  agent.

The  expressive  dimension  of  action  has  everything  to  do  with  the
actor's  particular  social  role-with  the way  in which  acts  conform  to, or
violate, expectations  associated with the role.  Because  of the social  mean-
ing  of action,  a lawyer  acting as a lawyer  may not make jokes  that would
be  perfectly  acceptable  with  her  family  or friends.  If a law  school dean
wears  shorts  to  teach  contracts,  or  calls  students  by  their first  name, he
will  be  signalling  something important  and  a bit radical,  certainly  at the
University  of Chicago Law  School; at a small college, the signals would be
altogether  different.  If a President  endorses  atheism,  or if an  American
judge speaks  critically about  the drafters  of the American  Constitution, 92
people  will  be  outraged, very  much  because  of the  role  in  which  presi-
dents and judges find themselves.  What can  be said and  done-in  terms
of social  meanings  and  social  norms-is  a function  of roles.

On  the other hand,  there  are  contexts  in which  a  person  or  a small
group of people may make  inroads on social meanings.  In a household, a
woman  may be  able  to  alter, a  little  or  a  lot,  the  social  meaning  to  her
family  of her refusal to do dishes or to make  dinner, or her decision  to go
out with  colleagues  at night.  In  a  company,  a  single  person  or  a  small
group may be able  to alter the social  meaning of discourteous  or aggres-
sive  behavior formerly taken as natural  or as good, or even as definitive of

90.  See  id. at 952.
91.  I  am grateful  to  Thomas  Nagel  for this  example.
92.  See  Thurgood  Marshall,  Commentary,  Reflections  on  the  Bicentennial  of  the
United States Constitution,  101 Harv. L. Rev.  1 (1987); William B. Reynolds, Another View.
Our  Magnificent Constitution,  40 Vand.  L.  Rev.  1343  (1987).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 927 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

membership  in  a  certain  group.  With  communication  over  time, signifi-
cant changes may occur.  But the most entrenched  social meanings  are-
by  definition-not  movable  without  concerted  action  on  the  part  of
many  people.  Hence  private  groups  often  attempt  to  bring  about
changes  in  meanings  and  the norms  that produce  them.9 3  Religious  or-
ganizations,  feminist  groups, animal rights activists,  and  groups  challeng-
ing  "political  correctness"  are  prominent  recent  examples.  Often  they
have been  highly successful;  sometimes  they produce  norm  cascades.

D.  Social Norms, Social Roles,  and Social Meanings

What is  the relationship  among social norms, social  roles,  and social
meanings?  As  I have said,  social  norms determine  the social  meaning  of
action.  Social  roles  are  similarly  a product  of social  norms.  But social
norms  can  also  be an  artifact  of social  meaning.  Suppose  that the social
meaning  of condom  use  is a confession,  an  accusation, 94  or a statement,
"I am  not a spontaneous  person."  If so,  there  will  be  a  social  norm  dis-
couraging  condom use.95  There  are  many public  efforts  to  change  this
norm.9 6  Social  norms  can  also  be produced  by social  roles.  A university
teacher has  a certain  role,  and the social  norms governing  acts by such  a
teacher-use  of a  first  name,  informal  clothing,  references  to  popular
music-are an  outgrowth  of that role.  Of course  roles have  no  content
apart from social norms.  Suppose  that the social  meaning of a male teen-
ager's  refusal  to  fight when  insulted  is,  "I  am  cowardly."  The  norm  in
favor  of fighting, in such circumstances,  is a product of the role.  There is
now  a  public  effort  to  change  this  very  norm.97

93.  See  Zelizer, supra  note  27, at 41-89  (describing changing  social  meaning  of life
insurance).  Life 
insurance  companies  engaged  in  self-conscious  efforts  at  norm
management, from the view that life should not be commodified  or an  object of gamble, to
the  view  that  good  fathers  and  husbands,  at  least,  protect  their  families  in  this  fashion:
"'The  necessity  that  exists  for  every  head  of family  to  make  proper  provision  for  the
sustenance  of those  dear  to  him  after  his death,  is  freely acknowledged  and  there  is  no
contingency  whereby  a man can  stand  excused  from making  such a provision.'" 
Id. at 56
(quoting Manhattan  Life  Insurance  Co.,  Life Insurance  19  (1852)).

94.  SeeJennifer Steinhauer, At a Clinic, Young Men Talk  of Sex, N.Y. Times,  Sept. 6,
1995,  at C7  (describing men's failure to wear condoms as a product of a fear that such  use
will  be  taken  as  evidence  of infidelity).

95.  See  Elliot Aronson,  The  Social Animal  89-90  (6th  ed.  1992);  Lessig,  supra  note

24,  at 1019-25.

use).

96.  See,  e.g.,  Steinhauer,  supra  note  94  (describing  efforts  to  encourage  condom

97.  Thus  there is an  effort to publicize  a new  symbol:  a fist covered  by  a hand.  The
meaning of this symbol is:  Though I am offended, I will not fight.  The publicity campaign
is designed  to  change  the  meaning  of a refusal  to fight back.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 928 1996

19961

SOCIAL  NORMS AND SOCTAL  ROLES

E.  Divisions in the Self 98  and Norm Bandwagons

I have noted that social norms can make people  act and talk publicly
in ways  that are  different from how they  actually think,  or from  how they
act and  talk privately.  It is  time  to  explore  this  point.

People  often  act in accordance with  norms that they wish were  other-
wise or even  despise.  Under the  apartheid regime  in South Africa, public
criticism  of apartheid-at  least  within  South  Africa-much  understated
private  opposition  to  apartheid.  The  same was  true  for  Communist  re-
gimes.99  In a social group  that punishes  atheists  or agnostics, few people
may  confess  their  uncertainty  about  whether  God  exists;  in  a  group  of
atheists,  few people  may  talk  about  their  religious faith.  Even  in democ-
racies,  the  deterrent  effect  of social  norms  on acts  and  beliefs  creates  a
sharp  disjunction  between  public  acts  (including  speech)  and  private
0 0  Hence  a  state  of  affairs  may  persist  even  though  there  is
thought.
widespread  opposition  to it.  And eventually  the  norms may affect private
thought itself'10 '  When,  for example, social  norms discourage  pollution,
smoking,  or acts  of sexual harassment,  people  may  come  in  their private
thoughts  to  see  such  things  as  unacceptable.  Of course  this  might  not
happen.  But over the  long run, behavior  that is inconsistent  with existing
social norms  might not be  defended  publicly,  and  for this reason  people
may  come  not  to  accept  that  behavior  even  in  their  most  private
moments

a02

Political  actors  might  be  able  to  exploit  private  dissatisfaction  with
existing  norms in  order  to bring about  large-scale  social  change.  In fact
many  political  participants  can  be  described  as  norm  entrepreneurs; con-
sider Martin  Luther  King, Jr., William  Bennett,  Louis Farrakhan,  Catha-
rine MacKinnon,  Ronald Reagan,  and Jerry  Falwell.  As we  have seen,  in-
dividuals who  favor  changes  in  norms  face  a  free  rider  problem;  norm
entrepreneurs  can  alert  people  to  the  existence  of a  shared  complaint
and can suggest  a collective  solution.  Thus political actors, whether  pub-
lic or  private,  can  exploit widespread  dissatisfaction  with  existing  norms
by  (a)  signalling  their  own  commitment  to  change,  (b)  creating  coali-
tions,  (c)  making  defiance  of the  norms  seem  or be  less  costly,  and  (d)
making  compliance  with  new  norms  seem  or  be  more  beneficial.  We
might  say  that  the intrinsic  value  of some  option  may be  held  constant,
but  the  reputational  and  self-conception  values  may  shift  dramatically.

98.  Cf.  Kuran,  supra note  17,  at 43-44  (discussing  the  "divided  self").
99.  See  id. at  118-27.
100.  Thus  the  idea of a "silent majority"  is  used  to allow people  to voice  their  private
views  by  assuring  them  that  there  are  many  more  people  who  share  their  views  than
appears;  this is an  effort  to  reduce the perceived  reputational  costs  associated  with  stating
seemingly  unpopular views.

101.  This  is because  of the desire  to reduce  cognitive dissonance,  seeJon Elster, Sour
Grapes  109-40  (1983),  or  because  the  privately held  thoughts  disappear  through  lack  of
public use, see  Kuran,  supra note  17,  at 176-95.

102.  For an  intriguing  discussion,  see Kuran,  supra note  17,  at 176-95.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 929 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

Thus  there  can  be  a  "tipping  point" when  norms  start  to  push  in  new
directions.

When  the free  rider problem  begins  to be  solved,  through  reducing
the  cost  of acting inconsistently  with  prevailing  norms, private  thoughts
will  be  stated  publicly,  and  things  can  shift  very  quickly.  Something  of
this  sort happened  in  both  South Africa  and  Eastern  Europe, producing
more rapid  and more peaceful  changes  than  anyone  anticipated.' 0 3  Part
of the reason is  that hostility to the regimes was widespread  and intense-
but  inconsistent  with  existing  social  norms  and  hence  much  underesti-
mated.  When  the norms  began  to  collapse,  the regimes  collapsed  too.

The  point bears  on  norm  bandwagons.  People  may  support an  ex-
isting norm  publicly  not because  they are  genuinely  committed  to it, but
because  they  fear  social  sanctions.  As  I  have said,  there  is a  bandwagon
effect when  those  sanctions  diminish  or disappear,  as  many  people join
the group  opposing the  existing norm and  urging a new  one.  The  result
can  be  astonishingly  rapid  change. 10 4  An  effect  of  this  kind  occurred
with two  opposing  and  recent  movements-the  feminist  movement  and
the  recent  opposition  to  "political correctness"  in  the university.

F.  Beliefs About Facts

Choices,  meanings,  roles, and  norms are  commonly based  on beliefs
about relevant  facts.  Someone  may  believe,  for  example,  that  cigarette
smoking is  not dangerous,  and he  may smoke partly for that reason.  If he
really  believed  that  smoking  was  dangerous,  perhaps  he  would  not
smoke.'0 5  Choices  are  pervasively  a function  of beliefs.  The same is  true
for social norms.  Consider the dramatic recent shifts  in social  norms gov-
erning  smoking.  Such  norms  have a great  deal  to do with  prevailing  be-
liefs  about whether smoking  causes harm  to nonsmokers.  When  the be-
lief shifts,  the  norm  shifts  as well.10 6

Norms  about  behavior  are  interpenetrated  with beliefs  about  harm
and risk.  Thus  many religiously-grounded  norms  about personal  cleanli-
ness  and hygiene  owe  their  origins  to  beliefs  about  what is  healthy;  but
the norms  often outstrip  the beliefs  and  receive  a kind  of moral ground-
ing that is  not simply  reducible  to an instrumental judgment about  likely
risks.  When  someone violates  a norm  relating  to hygiene,  people's  reac-
tion is different-more  stern  and more deeply moralized-than  it would
be  if the reaction  were  based  solely  on  the incremental  increase  in  risk.

103.  See  id. at 261-88  (discussing fall  of Communism).
104.  See  id.  at  288  ("A  specific  law,  regulation,  policy,  norm,  or  custom  can  be
abruptly abandoned when  people who have  helped sustain  it suddenly discover  a common
desire  for  change.").

105.  See Slovic, supra note 56, at 139 (discussing  teenagers's  misperception of risks  of

smoking).

106.  Cf.  Mary  Douglas  & Aaron  Wildavsky,  Risk  and  Culture  (1982) 

(exploring

perceptions  of and reactions  to risk).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 930 1996

19961

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

There are complex interactions  between understandings  of facts  and
social  roles.  Certainly  beliefs  about facts  help  generate  roles.  Thus  be-
liefs  about natural  differences  between  men  and  women,  or  blacks  and
whites,  affect  social  understandings  about  the  appropriate  roles  of men
and women  or blacks and whites.  When  people  see  that apparent  differ-
ences  between  social  groups  are  not grounded  in  fact,  the  roles  associ-
ated with group  members may shift accordingly.  Thus attacks  on claimed
natural  differences  have  affected  perceptions  of  appropriate  roles.  But
the  process  of change  is  often  delayed  because  of the  collective  action
problems  faced  by people  in  changing  norms  that  have  outstripped  the
beliefs  on which  they were  originally  based.

The converse is  also  true:  Understandings  of facts may be a function
of  roles  and  accompanying  norms.  There  are  complex  scientific  litera-
tures  on the differences between  men  and women;  much of the relevant
work,  even  in its  most  scientistic  forms,  rests palpably  on  conceptions  of
roles  and  of  surrounding  norms.' 0 7  When  the  social  role  of  a  certain
group  is to be laborers,  or wives,  it may be hard for most people  to believe
that  all  people  are  (in  some  relevant  sense)  equal.

Judgments  about  fact  are  similarly  entangled  with  social  norms.
When most people smoke, it is hard for most people to believe  that smok-
ing  is  dangerous;  in  particular,  smokers  may  not  want  to  believe  that
smoking  is  dangerous.  The norm  affects  the belief, just as  the belief af-
fects the norm.  In fact norms and judgments about risk are  hard to sepa-
rate.  When  people  are asked  to judge risks  in terms  of their seriousness,
they  respond  not simply  in  terms  of aggregate  expected  death  rates but
also  with reference  to moral judgments,  connected  with  prevailing  social
norms,  about  the voluntariness  of  the risk,  its  distribution,  its  dreaded-
ness,  its  potentially  catastrophic  character,  and  so  forth.' 0 8  And  norms
and  roles  pervasively  influence judgments  about  facts. 10 9

III.  CHOICES  AND  PREFERENCES

If we attend to  the functions  of norms, meanings,  and roles,  how will
we  understand  the  relationship  between  choices  and  preferences?  How
will we understand the notion  of "preference" itself?  My proposition  here
is  that  attention  to  the  functions  of  norms,  meanings,  and  roles  chal-
lenges  our  understanding  of notions  like  "choice"  and  "preference"  in
much  of modem  social  science.

An  initial  and  important  problem  is  that  the  term  "preference"  is
quite  ambiguous.  Suppose  someone  takes  a job  as  a  welder,  recycles
newspapers,  or buys aspirin rather than chocolate  bars.  When we say that

107.  See  Helen  E.  Longino,  Science  as  Social  Knowledge:  Values  and Objectivity  in

Scientific  Inquiry  103-32  (1990).

108.  See  Slovic,  supra note  56, at 120;  Pildes  & Sunstein,  supra note  56, at 57-58.
109.  See  Kuran,  supra  note  17, at  176-95.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 931 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

someone  "prefers" to do as he  chose, what exactly do we  mean?' 10  There
are  two  major  possibilities.  First,  preferences  may  be  choices.  Second,
preferences  may be  the  mental  states  that stand  behind  choices.  Atten-
tion to the place of norms, meanings,  and roles complicates both of these
ideas;  it suggests that for many purposes,  it would be best to dispense with
the  term  "preference"  altogether,  and  to  work  with  more  fine-grained
ideas.  It follows  that much  of legal  and  political  debate-about whether
the  state  should  respect  "preferences"-is  based  on  a  confusion  stem-
ming from inadequate specification  of what "preferences" are.  The point
very  much bears  on the  continuing puzzle  of paternalistic  government.

A.  Preferences As  Choices

The  idea  of a "preference" might be understood  as  simply  a choice,
as  in  the  idea,  influential  within  economics  from  the  work  of  Paul
Samuelson,  of the "revealed preference."''  On  this view, preferences  are
choices.  This  approach  seems  promising,  because  it makes  it unneces-
sary  to  inquire  into  the  mental  states  that accompany  choices.  Perhaps
we  can work from behavior  alone,  and  make  predictions  on  the  basis  of
behavior  alone.  Perhaps  behavior itself will  show valuations  that  can  be
used not only for positive  but also  for normative  purposes." 2  And  there
is no  doubt  that it is  illuminating  to  catalogue  choices.

If, however,  this is  what we  are  doing, it is  unnecessary  and  perhaps
misleading  to  use  the  notion  of a  "preference,"  which  seems  to  be  in-
tended  to  explain  or  to back  something  called  choices.  If we  are  really
talking  about  choices,  we  can  dispense  with  the  idea  of preferences  en-
tirely.  We will have  a list of choices and should speak only in terms  of that
list.

Perhaps  this  is  merely  a  semantic  quibble.  Perhaps  social  theorists
can work with  the list for positive or  normative  purposes.  But if they  are
really  working  just  with  choices,  they  will  encounter  many  problems.
Choices  are  inarticulate,  and  hence  imperfect  predictors  of  behavior
without  an  account  of what lies  behind  them."13  From  the  bare  fact  of
(particular)  choices, it is  not always  possible  to make  robust claims  about
future choices.  This is  because  particular  choices depend  on  the context
and on  the norms, meanings,  and roles prevailing  in that context.  When

110.  The question is not adequately sorted  out in  the legal  literature  on both  sides  of
current debates about government  respecting "preferences."  Thus-to take a not entirely
random  example-Cass  R. Sunstein,  Legal  Interference  With  Private Preferences,  53  U.
Chi.  L  Rev.  1129  (1986),  takes  the  term  "preferences"  as  if it  is  clear;  the  analysis  is
weakened  by  the failure  to discuss  the  ambiguities  in the  term.

111.  Paul A.  Samuelson,  Consumption  Theory  in Terms  of Revealed  Preference,  15
Economica  243,  243  (1948).  I do not deal  here with  formal  models of the  sort described
and criticized  in  Hampton, supra  note  23.
112.  See, e.g.,  Viscusi,  supra  note  65.
113.  See Aronson, supra note 95,  at 187-89;  Sen, Internal  Consistency, supra note 23,
at 496-98;  Amos  Tversky  & Itamar Simonson,  Context-Dependent  Preferences,  39  Mgmt.
Science  1179,  1187  (1993).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 932 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS  AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

933

changes  occur  in  the context,  new  norms  may come  into  play.  And be-
cause  of norms,  even  the  weakest  axioms  of revealed  preference  theory
can  fail. 114  John Jones,  in  the  fifth  tale,1 15  presents  an  illustration;  his
particular  choices  do  not  allow  observers  to  offer  general  predictions.
But for the present let us take  a simpler  example.  IfJones  prefers X over
Y, we might think that the mere introduction  of an  undesired third alter-
native,  Z,  ought not to  change  this preference.  After all, Jones prefers  X
to Y,  and he  would  have  to  be  an  odd  person  to  prefer  Y to  X  simply
because  of the introduction  of Z.

But we  can  readily imagine  cases  in  which  the new alternative  Z has
precisely  this  effect.  Jones  might, for  example,  always  select  the  second
largest piece  of cake, or he might want to be  a person of relative  modera-
tion.  If Z is an  especially  large  piece  of cake, his  preference  for X  (once
the second  largest, now  the third)  over Y (once the largest,  now the sec-
ond),  will  shift.  Empirical  work  has  encountered  an  effect  called  "ex-
tremeness  aversion,"  in  which  people  make  choices  that  avoid  the  ex-
tremes. 116  Extremeness  aversion  is  at  least  partly  a  product  of  social
norms.  People  are  generally  taught to  avoid  extremes,  and  people  who
make  extreme  choices  seem like malcontents,  oddballs,  or  (never a word
of praise)  extremists. 117  There  are  many  examples.  A voter  might,  for
example,  choose  a  Republican  candidate  over  a  Democratic  candidate;
but the introduction  of some  third candidate  (say,  Ross  Perot)  may lead
him  to  choose  the  Democrat, because  it  makes  some  new characteristic
salient to voters," 8  or because  it shifts the outcome produced  by the deci-
sion,  making  it  moderate  when  it  would  otherwise  be  extreme.  Barry
Goldwater's  famous  slogan-"extremism  in  the  defense  of liberty  is  no
vice...  and moderation  in  the pursuit ofjustice  is no virtue"" 9 -was  an
(unsuccessful)  effort  to alter  the social  meaning  of a vote  for Goldwater.

114.  See  Tversky  & Simonson,  supra  note  113,  at  1187-88.  Perhaps  the  weakest  of
these  is the  idea  that if A prefers  X  to Y, the  introduction  of a third alternative,  Z,  ought
not to  make  A prefer Y to X.
115.  See  supra Part I.E.
116.  See  Tversky  & Simonson, supra  note  113,  at 1183.
117.  Cf. R.W. AppleJr.,Judge  is Witness:  His Burden  of Proof, N.Y. Times, Sept.  24,
1987,  at A26  (describing confirmation  strategy  of avoiding extremist-sounding  testimony);
In  re  Bork.  Ex-Chief Justice,  Law  Professor and  Carter Aide  Present Views,  N.Y.  Times,
Sept.  24,  1987,  at A20  (excerpt  of Bork  hearings  addressing  question  of whether  Bork
deserved  the  term "extremist").

118.  Cf. Jonathan  W.  Leland,  Generalized  Similarity  Judgments:  An  Alternative
Explanation  for  Choice Anomalies,  9 J. Risk  & Uncertainty  151,  169  (1994)  (presenting
model  of  "generalized  similarity  judgments"  that  "predicts  violations  of  tenets  of
rationality");  Itamar Simonson & Amos Tversky, Choice  in Context:  Tradeoff Contrast and
Extremeness  Aversion,  29  J.  Marketing  Res.  281,  289-92  (1992) 
(arguing  that  the
importance  to  consumers  of  certain  product  characteristics  varies  with  the  number  of
product choices);  Slovic,  supra note  33,  at 364  (discussing  dimensions  of choice).

119.  William Saire, What's an Extremist, N.Y. Times,Jan.  14, 1996,    6  (Magazine),  at

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 933 1996

934

COLUMBIA  LAW REV1EW

[Vol.  96:903

In  fact  extremeness  aversion  is  itself  a  contextual  "taste,"  one  that
varies with  both setting and  governing  norms.  In  a society  or subculture
in which  extremeness is  prized,  there may be no such aversion  (assuming
the idea  would be  intelligible).  All  of us have  seen  subcultures  in which
extremeness  is  a virtue  (and  does  not  quite  count  as  extremeness). 
In
fact  many  people  who  are  generally  averse  to  extremeness  are,  in  one
setting or  another,  quite willing  or even  delighted  to  be  extreme;  a  per-
son who dresses  in ordinary ways may be delighted to wear  loud ties,  or to
make  odd  dessert  choices.  This  is  partly  because  the  social  meaning  of
extremeness  in that context is different from what it usually is.  It may, for
example,  signal  boldness and  confidence  rather  than self-destructiveness
and peculiarity.

More broadly,  the social  meaning of action  can  encourage  people  to
make  a  certain  choice,  by  taxing  or  subsidizing  it;  the  meaning,  and
hence the choice, very much depends  on the context and  the norms  that
accompany it.  If you are in  a certain  social group, you may well  choose  a
drink of brandy or wine over  Coca-Cola simply because  of local practices.
The  choice  of Coca-Cola  may  signal  excessive  informality,  an  unwilling-
ness  to unwind  and  enjoy  oneself, or  even  disrespect.  But in  a different
group, your  choice  may be  different  (and all  this  regardless  of what you
would  choose  if you were  in your house  alone 120).  You may purchase  an
American  car,  or  display  the  flag  on July  4,  or  engage  in  risky behavior
because  of existing norms in your community.  Perhaps your purchase  of
a non-American  car would  signal  a  lack  of patriotism;  perhaps  your fail-
ure to display the flag would be  taken as a political protest whether or not
you meant  it that way.  If you run a local television  station, your decision
whether to allow violent programming is very much a function  of prevail-
ing  norms,  even  if such  programming  would attract  a  large  audience.

Role is,  of course,  an  especially important  determinant of choice.  A
teacher  may  refuse  an  alcoholic  drink  at a party  with  students, just be-
cause  he is  a teacher;  students  may  choose  a  certain  kind  of music just
because  they are  students and their  teachers  are  there.  A teacher's will-
ingness  to have a drink with students  signals a host of characteristics  with
which  the teacher may not want to be associated.  A student group's  deci-
sion  to  play  rap  music  at a  party  with  teachers  may  signal  disrespect  or
(what may be  the same  thing)  excessive  friendliness.  Because  of the im-
portance  of context and  surrounding  norms, a  choice  of one good  over
another may tell us little about further choices unless we know a lot about
the motivations  and  context  of the  choice.

These  points suggest  that to explain  or predict behavior,  it is impor-
tant  not  only  to  know  about  choices  but  also  to  have  some  account  of
what underlies choices, or of what choices are for, and in this way to intro-

120.  I do not suggest that that choice would be norm-free or that it should be taken as

definitive  of what preferences  "really" are.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 934 1996

1996]

SOCLAL  NORMS  AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

duce  an  account  of  motivation. 12 1  Here  social  norms,  meanings,  and
roles will be crucial.  And if this  is right, it is impossible  to  explain  behav-
ior by reference  to choices,  without using the very apparatus  that the "re-
vealed  preference"  idea  was  intended  to  eliminate.' 2 2

Normative  arguments  on the  basis  of choices  alone 12  will  also run
into  serious trouble.  After finding that  a person  or group  makes  certain
choices,  we  may  think we  can  infer  what  or  how  much  that person  or
group values,  and from this make  policy recommendations  about, for ex-
ample, workplace  safety or  environmental  protection.  But this  is hazard-
ous.  Choices  are  a function  of norms,  which  may be  limited  to  certain
settings.  Choices  need not suggest acontextual  valuation of social  goods,
and  thus  even  if we  want  to  respect  people's valuations,  we  will  have  to
look not at, but behind,  choices.

B.  Preferences Behind Choices

Let us turn, then, to another, more promising conception  of a "pref-
erence."  The  term is often meant to refer not to  choices themselves,  but
to something  that  lies behind,  and  accounts  for, choices.  Gary  Becker's
work is  in  this  tradition.' 24  The  idea  has  obvious advantages.  It seeks  to
provide  the  motivational  story  behind  choices,  and  if the  motivational
story is  uncovered  (and sufficiently simple),  positive work should  be  pos-
sible.  And if we can  identify what lies behind choices, perhaps we  can get
a sense  of  people's  own  conception  of what  promotes  their  well-being.
Knowledge  of this conception  is surely relevant  for purposes  of both  eth-
ics  and  politics.' 2 5  Hence  an  emphasis  on  social  norms  should  not be
seen  as  an  attack  on  rational  choice  approaches  to  social  and  political
problems.  From the standpoint  of an individual  agent, norms  provide  a
part  of  the  background  against  which  costs  and  benefits  are  assessed;
more  specifically,  they help  identify some  of the costs  and  benefits  of ac-
tion.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  individual  agent,  this  is  hardly  irra-
tional,  and  it  is  hardly  inconsistent  with  self-interest.  (Whether  certain
norms  are  rational  for  society  as  a  whole  is  a  different  question.  Un-
doubtedly some  of them  are  not.)

121.  See  Sen,  Internal  Consistency,  supra note  23,  at 496-98.
122.  See  Samuelson,  supra  note  111,  at 243.
123.  See Viscusi,  supra  note  65.
124.  See, e.g.,  GeorgeJ. Stigler & Gary S. Becker, De Gustibus  Non Est Disputandum,

67 Am. Econ.  Rev. 76  (1977).

125.  There are, however, problems with so using preferences.  First, some preferences
are  adaptive  to  an  unjust  status  quo;  when  an  unjust  status  quo  is  responsible  for
preferences,  the status quo  cannot be justified by reference  to the preferences.  See  Elster,
supra  note  101,  at  133-40.  Second,  the  preference  may well  take  the  form  it does  for
highly contextual  reasons, and should not be  thought to be the agent's  preference  in some
abstract or global way.  In  another context,  the preference  may take a different form.  See
supra Part I.E.  Third, the preference  may be an artifact  of social pressures  directed against
public  statements  or  acts of a certain  kind.  See  Kuran,  supra note  17,  at 22-44.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 935 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

I think that  positive  and  normative  work can  and  should  operate  in
this way.  But the idea introduces difficulties  of its own-indeed, the diffi-
culties  that the  "revealed  preference"  notion  was  intended  to  overcome.
These  difficulties  make  the  idea  of  "preference,"  as  the  agent  behind
choice,  too crude.  Recall John Jones,  the protagonist  of the fifth  tale.126
Can  we  provide  an  account  of Jones's  motivation  or  "preferences"?  No
simple  answer  would  make  sense.  Several  possibilities  do present  them-
selves.  From  the fact  that Jones  pays  a  certain  premium  for  automobile
safety,  we  might judge  that  he  is  risk-averse-someone  who  prefers  to
avoid  danger-and  we  might  even  attempt  to  generate  numbers  captur-
ing his  own  conception  of the value  of his life. 127  But  when  it comes  to
bicycle-riding, Jones  is  somewhat  reckless.  And  in  his  capacity  as  voter,
Jones's valuations appear still more complex.  To get a full  account  of his
motivation, we  need to know many details-something  like a personality
profile.

This  point raises  some  larger  issues.  If we  think  of a  preference  as
something  that lies behind choice, what is  it exactly?  Plainly it is  a dispo-
sition  or a  mental state of some kind.' 2 8  And plainly people  do have dis-
positions  of  various  sorts.  But  internal  mental  states  can  be  extraordi-
narily  complex.  People's  decisions  are  based  on  a  complex  of whims,
responses  to  norms,  second-order  preferences,  aspirations,  judgments,
emotions,  drives  of various kinds,  conceptions  of role, and more, with all
these  producing  particular  results  depending  on  the  context.  What lies
behind  a choice  in  one setting  may be  quite  different from what  lies be-
hind a choice  in  a different time  and  place.

In  this light, it can be  hard to make  predictions  about individuals  or
groups  without  knowing  a  great  deal.  Of  course  the  value  of  positive
work lies  in  what  the  evidence  shows.  If predictions  can  be  made  with
simple  accounts  of preference,  so  much the better.  Of course  there  are
regularities in people's  behavior, and  these regularities  can be  connected
to  people's  dispositions.  But  general  dispositions  of various  kinds-to
avoid  extremes,  to  comply  with  (or  violate)  norms,  to  fit with  expecta-
tions  associated  with  role,  to  drink  beer  rather  than  wine-manifest
themselves in particular choices  only in accordance  with context.  No sim-
ple  thing called  a "preference"  accounts  for choice.  Preferences  are  not
the building-blocks for a theory  of decision;  if positive work is to be  done
very well,  whatever we  call  a  "preference"  needs  to be  unpacked further.
Of course  an excessively  detailed  account of the ingredients  of "pref-
erence" may make  predictions  impossible.  A  standard  that relies  on too
many factors  will not be  a basis  for social science.  We might, then, begin
by  distinguishing  among  intrinsic value,  reputational  effects,  and  effects
on  self-conception,  and  by  seeing  whether  changes  in,  for  example,

126.  See  supra Part I.E.
127.  This is  the basic  project in Viscusi,  supra  note  65, at 34-74.
128.  Of course  mental  states  have  relations  to  physical  entities.  For a  controversial

account, see  Paul M.  Churchland,  The Engine  of Reason,  The Seat  of the  Soul  (1995).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 936 1996

19961

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

reputational  effects  induce  changes  in  choice. 129  This  might  well  be  a
productive  direction  in  which social  science  will  eventually  move.

Shifting from  positive  to normative,  we  can  see  that  the  complexity
of mental  states  also  makes  it hard  for governments  to  know  how  to  re-
spond  to people's  choices.  Take an  important and  contested  issue in  de-
velopment policy.  To what extent should a national  government or inter-
national  institutions  take people's  "preferences" as  given?  Perhaps  more
important:  What does  this idea even  mean?  For example,  a poor woman
in  India  may  in some  sense not wish  to be literate,  especially  if she faces
severe  sanctions from trying  to do  so.13
0  Because  of those  sanctions,  she
may  "prefer" not to go  to school,  or fail to "choose"  to go  to  school,  and
she  may  resist  certain  efforts  to  teach  her to  read.  We  might  call  these
her  "conventional"  preferences,  and  they  are  certainly  real.

But in what sense is  it helpful to say,  in such a case,-that she "prefers"
the  status  quo?  She  may  also  have  certain  aspirations-to  have  self-re-
spect,  to be  capable  of doing a range  of things,  not  to be  wholly depen-
dent on others.  We may call  these her "fundamental" preferences  (in the
sense  that  she  probably  will  consider  them  deeper  than  her  particular
choices),  and  they are  real  too.  In  these  circumstances,  her  decision  not
to learn  to  read is  a function  of social norms  directly connected with  her
role,  and  with  the  social  meaning  of  her  education  for  people  in  her
group.  Norms and roles impose  costs  on choice,  and as  the situation has
been  described,  those  costs  are  decisive  for  her.  But  on  reflection  she
may wish  both  roles  and  meanings  to  be  different.  Her  general  aspira-
tions may  conflict with  her more  particular  choices.

She  may  well  see  all  of this  already,  or  at least  under  appropriate
conditions.  If she  does, and  if she  is  taught to read and  delighted by that
fact,  should we  say  that her  preference  has been  changed?  The  answer
depends  on how her preference  is specified.  In some ways  the process  of
learning  is  consistent  with  her  deeper  or  more  fundamental  "prefer-
ences."  (Of course  there are  complex  issues  of interpretation  in  the de-
scription  of some  preferences  as fundamental  and others as conventional.
Any such  description  will  have  large  evaluative  dimensions.)

The  example  is  merely  illustrative.  The  same  questions  might  be
asked  about  smoking, drug  use,  single  parenthood,  risky  sexual  activity,
recycling, and  much  more.  Collective  efforts  to discourage  damaging  or
risky  behavior,  or  to  encourage  norms  that  promote  well-being  or solve
collective  action  problems, might well be  consistent with  people's  under-
lying  aspirations  and judgments.

It may be  tempting to  think that in  cases  of this kind, there  is a con-
flict between  preferences  and  metapreferences,  or between  preferences

129.  See  Kuran,  supra  note  17,  at 24-38.
130.  See  the  accounts  in  Amartya  Sen,  Inequality  Reexamined  117-28  (1994);
Amartya  Sen,  Commodities  and Capabilities 73-83  (1985)  [hereinafter  Sen,  Commodities
and Capabilities];  Martha Nussbaum, Aristotelian  Social Democracy,  in Liberalism and the
Good  203,  216  (R. Bruce  Douglass  et al.  eds.,  1990).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 937 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVEW

[Vol.  96:903

and preferences  about preferences.13'  This is  indeed  an important  phe-
nomenon,  one  that also  complicates  certain  antipaternalistic  arguments.
But  it is  different  from what  I  am  now  describing.  People  have  prefer-
ences  about their preferences,  but they also have  preferences  at different
levels  of  precision  and  generality. 8 2  Sometimes  people  are  indeed
forced  to  do  things  that  (it makes  sense  to say)  they  do not wish  to  do.
But  it  is  far  from  simple  to  identify  a  "preference"  as  something  that
stands  behind  choices  and  explains  them.

This  is  not  to say  that the idea  is  entirely unhelpful.  For some  pur-
poses  it may aid analysis.  We  may be  able  to  posit  that a  legislator  "pre-
fers"  to  be  reelected  and  we  may  use  that  preference  for  positive  pur-
poses.  Social  scientists  may be  able  to  posit  that  most  people  prefer  to
obey  social  norms  most  of the  time,  and  make  predictions  accordingly.
Of  course  some  people  regularly  like  some  foods  better  than  others
merely  on  grounds  of taste, and  they choose  accordingly.  But these  are
the  simplest  cases,  and  even  here  there  are  complexities.  And in  other
cases,  things  are  far more  difficult.

C.  Against the Idea of Preferences

From all  this we  might  conclude  that for  many purposes,  the  whole
idea of a "preference" is  confused  and misleading because it is ambiguous
between  choices  and  underlying  psychological  forces,  and  because  the
mental  operations  that  produce  choices  are  a function  of a  great  many
factors,  prominently  including social  norms  and  social  roles.  For  many
purposes,  it  might  well  be  best  to  dispense  altogether  with  the  idea  of
preference  and  to work  instead  with  choices  on  the  one  hand  and with
complex  and  somewhat  unruly  mental  states  on  the  other-or to  relate
choices  to  more  concrete  sources  of  subjective  value  (intrinsic  value,
reputational  effects,  and  effects  on  self-conception)  or  to  a  wide  set  of
influences  (norms, roles,  price  changes, increases  in  leisure  time).  I be-
lieve that this point gives us reason to doubt the elaborate  edifice  of social

131.  See  Gary  S.  Becker,  Habits,  Addictions,  and  Traditions,  in  The  Essence  of
Becker,  supra note  32,  at 218,  232  (referring  to metapreferences);  cf. Harry G. Frankfurt,
Freedom  of the Will  and  the  Concept of a Person,  in The  Importance  of What We  Care
About  11, 11-25  (1988)  (distinguishing  between  first order  and second  order desires).

132.  Human  motivation  includes  many  ingredients:  bodily  appetites,  emotions,
reasoned judgments,  and more.  Social  norms  do not play the  same  role  in  all  of these.
Hunger and thirst certainly are affected by social norms; one's attitude toward these  things
is  hardly  unmediated  by  learning.  But  hunger  and  thirst  are  connected  with  physical
states,  and in  extreme  forms  they are likely to be  unpleasant no  matter what  the prevailing
norms  may  be-even  if  the  unpleasantness  can  be  counteracted  by  attitudes  of certain
sorts.  The  case  of racial  attitudes  should  be  analyzed  quite  differently.  The  emotions
present a special  case:  Early  childhood  experiences  affect  fear and jealousy  in  a way that
they may not some other attitudes.  A serious problem with the idea of "preference" is that
it runs all these together.  As we will see, the conflation  makes  it harder  to understand  how
governmental  practices  might shape attitudes  in  different contexts.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 938 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

science  based  on  notions  of  "preference"  or  "metapreference"13 3
(though  much  of  the  edifice  can  remain  if reconstructed  on  different
4  The  eventual  task  is  to  separate  positive,  descriptive,
foundations). 1
and normative  inquiries more sharply, and  in the process to  try to untan-
gle  relevant  mental  states  and  their influences  on  choices.' 3 5

IV.  CHOICES,  NoRms,  RoLF.S,  AND  MEANINGS

In  this  section  I discuss  in  more  detail  how social  norms,  roles,  and
meanings  affect  choice.  I  also deal with  the place  of shame  and pride in
explaining  certain  anomalies  in  human  behavior.  In  the  process  I  offer
some notations on how this point bears on law and legal policy, especially
by showing  how  law  can  affect  choice  by affecting  the sources  of shame
and pride and  associated  norms.

A.  In General

What is  the relationship  between  choices  and social  norms, between

choices  and social  roles,  and  between  choices  and  social  meanings?

1.  Choices and norms.  - Choices  are,  of  course,  affected  by  social
norms.  As  I  have  said,  we  can  understand  a  norm-with  respect  to
choices-as a subsidy or a tax.  If you would otherwise  like to  dress color-
fully, and if the relevant  norm fortifies  that choice,  the norm is  a subsidy;
but norms  governing  dress  can  operate  as a tax  too, as  they do in  many
professional  (and nonprofessional)  settings.

The mere  fact that a norm is as it is  need not be decisive with respect
to  choices.  Any  particular  social  norm  is only  a relevant factor.  The  ex-
tent of its  effect will depend on five factors:  (1)  the intensity of the norm
(exactly  how much  opprobrium  attaches  to  a violation?);  (2)  the  nature
of the norm  (what kind of attitude is signalled by a violation? what kind of

133.  This  is  the approach  defended  by Gary  Becker.  See Becker,  supra note  131.  In
Becker's  view,  preferences  change,  but  metapreferences  stay  constant.  There  are  many
puzzles  here.  Metapreferences  may  change  too.  Someone  may  want  to  be  the  sort  of
person who has many friends  and goes to many parties  (whether or not one is that  sort of
person); but this metapreference  may shift.  Someone may want to be  the sort  of person
who  likes classical  music  (even  if one prefers  rock and roll);  but this  may shift.  It may be
possible to posit a human motivation  of some sort-to have a good life,  or to have  a lot of
money-and see how far we can get with the assumption.  Perhaps some of the  motivations
that  it  is  helpful  to  posit  can  be  described  as  metapreferences.  But  certainly  one's
preferences  about one's preferences  shift over  time, and it may even  be possible  to model
those shifts.  Note  that metapreferences,  like  preferences,  are  a product  of social  norms.
Becker has, however, recently recast his approach to place emphasis on "social capital"
rather than metapreferences,  and this  recasting fits well with much  of what I am suggesting
here.  See Becker,  supra  note 21.

134.  Cf. Gary S. Becker, Irrational  Behavior and Economic Theory, in The Essence  of
Becker,  supra  note  32,  at  18  (discussing  dispensability  of  the  economic  assumption  of
rational  behavior  by  individuals).

135.  Becker,  supra  note  32,  and  Kuran,  supra  note  17,  at  326-48,  make  some

movement  in that  direction.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 939 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

attitude  is  provoked  by  violators?);  (3)  the  agent's  attitude  toward  the
norm  and  the  opprobrium  occasioned  by  its  violation  (does  the  agent
like  to  be  seen  as  a  defiant  person?  how  does  the  agent  react  to  social
opprobrium?);  (4)  the possibility  of social approval  or forgiveness  among
relevant  subgroups  (will  the  agent's  peer group  support  the norm-defy-
ing  act?);  and  (5)  the  nature  and  weight  of  the  other  ingredients  in
choice,  including  competing  norms,  intrinsic  value,  and  effects  on  self-
conception  (what must  a norm-complier  sacrifice?).

Some  people  like  to  make  choices  that  violate  social  norms,  or  do
not much  mind doing so.  Some people  are willing to ask whether some,
many, or all norms really make  sense.  Some people  are willing to choose
in such a way so as to violate norms if the "price" of compliance is  high, as
it is, perhaps, for some people who  are asked  to refrain from smoking, or
for  others who  are  asked  to  clean  up  after  their dogs.  If norm  violators
are  viewed  in  relevant  places  as  somewhat  courageous-or  as  freedom
fighters engaged  in a form of civil  disobedience-norm  violation  will not
be terribly  uncommon.  This is  true for smokers in some  places, and  also
for  people  engaged  in  homosexual  relations.  With  respect  to  both,
whether  to  be  "in the  closet" is  partly a function  of social  norms.

2.  Choices and roles. - Choices  are  pervasively  a  function  of  social
role.  A teacher might  dress a  certain way,  take  a  certain salary,  or  refuse
to  talk  about  the  current  President  in  class,  because  of what  is  (under-
stood  to  be)  entailed by  the social  role  of teacher.  A  teacher  might  do
some  of this  even  though  she  would  greatly wish  that  the  social  role  of
"teacher" had  different  implications.  A patient  might  act  a  certain  way
toward her doctorjust because of the nature of norms associated with  the
doctor-patient  relationship,  even  if the  patient  would  like  that  relation-
ship  to  be  different.

In  some  cultures,  a  social  role  entails  a  great  deal  of  gift-giving  to
hierarchical  superiors.13 6  Social  inferiors who do not give gifts are signal-
ling something bad or dangerous  about themselves,  to the effect that they
are  disrespectful,  rebellious,  or  angry at their superiors.  The  "choice"  to
offer gifts is a function  of role.  This is  pervasively  true of human  choices,
and if it is  not visible,  it is  only because  the particular  role  is  so  deeply
internalized.  The  practice  of  giving  gifts  to  hierarchical  superiors  may
seem  exotic  to  most  Westerners;  but  it has  parallels  in  a  wide  range  of
social  gestures  signalling  an  understanding  of  social  hierarchies  and
roles.

3.  Choices and meanings. - Like a social  norm, the social meaning  of
an  act can  operate  as a subsidy  to choices  or as a  tax on  them.  Suppose
that the social  meaning  of listening carefully  to others,  and  not talking a
great  deal  of the  time,  is  to  reveal  yourself  as  a  good  person  who  cares

136.  Consider,  for example,  contemporary China.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 940 1996

19961

SOCIAL  NORMS AND SOCIAL  ROLES

about others and  about what other people have to say.  If so, the act1 37 of
listening  carefully  to  others  is  "subsidized"  by its  social  meaning,  in  the
sense  that  the benefits  of listening  carefully are  increased,  by  the social
meaning, over  what they would  otherwise  be.  If, by contrast, the relevant
social  norm  is  that  talking a lot, interrupting,  and claiming  the spotlight
reveals  strength of character,  confidence,  and  an understanding  of one's
general  importance-whereas  listening  reveals  weakness,  low status,  and
confusion-the  social  meaning  of  listening  carefully  is  a  "tax"  on  the
choice  of doing so.138  Thus  courtesy  can  be made  more  or less  costly by
social  meaning.  There are  many examples  in  social life, with  the amount
of the subsidy  or  the tax varying  with  context.

4.  Preferences. - What  is  the  relationship  between  social  norms,  so-
cial  meanings,  and  social  roles  on  the  one  hand,  and  "preferences"  on
the other?  If preferences  are what lie behind choices, then norms, mean-
ings, and  roles are part of the complex and unruly set of factors  that help
produce  choices.  People usually do not want to  feel shame,  and for  this
reason  they  may act  consistently  with  a  social  norm,  even  if they  believe
the norm  is wrong and wish the norm were  otherwise.  Some  people may
not want  to face  the hostility  of others  and  may obey  the  norm  for  that
reason.  Some  people may do things to counter the social  norm, perhaps
to  show  a  reflective judgment  that  the  norm  is  wrong,  perhaps  for  the
sake  of defiance.  We might say, then, that any preference for an action  is
partly  a  function  of social  norms  and  the  agent's  attitude  toward  those
norms.

B.  Willingness  To  Pay vs. Willingness  To Accept:  The Place  of Shame

Once  we  incorporate  social  norms  into  our  account  of  choice,  we
can  explain  some  anomalies  in  common  theories  of rationality.  As  the
five  tales  at  the  beginning  of the  Article  show,139  seemingly  anomalous
behavior  can  result from anticipated  shame  or  pride.  My  goal  here  is to
explain  how social norms help  account for anomalies in ways that bear on
positive  social science  in  general.  Many such anomalies  qualify as such at
least partly because  of social  norms.  In particular,  behavior  is  a product
of shame and pride,  or anticipated  shame  and  pride,  and  changes  in be-
havior  often reflect  anticipations  of shame  and  pride  (as  seen in  all five
tales  in  Part  I).

137.  Not  the  preference,  which  is  a  confusing  concept  in  this  setting,  for  reasons

discussed  above.

138.  See  generally  Diego  Gambetta,  "Clarol":  How  to  Get  Deliberative  Democracy
Wrong  (1995) 
(unpublished  manuscript,  on  file  with  the  Columbia  Law  Review).
Gambetta  describes  the  culture  of  "claro"  in  Italy  and  South  American  countries,  in
accordance  with  which  any  statement  of any  kind  is  greeted  with  the  word  "claro"-
signalling,  "of course;  I knew that"-and in which  any statement of ignorance  is treated as
an  admission  of weakness.  See  id.  at  1,  6-13.  In  such  a  culture,  the  social  meaning  of
surprise  and learning is different  from  what it is  elsewhere.

139.  See  supra Parts IA-E.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 941 1996

COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

Recent  empirical  work  suggests  that  many  claims  in  economics 140
rest on  an  intriguingly  false  assumption,  one  that indicates  that it some-
times  may  be  impossible  for  government  to  take  preferences  "as  they
are."14 1  The basic  finding is  this:  The initial  grant  of an  entitlement  of
some  good  X  to  some  person  A  can  make  A  value  X far  more  than  he
would  if X had been  initially allocated  to B.  (It also  makes B  value it less
than  he  otherwise  would.)  The  initial  allocation-the  legal  rule  saying
who owns what before people begin to contract with  one another-serves
to create,  to legitimate,  and to reinforce  social understandings  about pre-
sumptive  rights  of  ownership.  The  effect  of  the  initial  allocation  of  a
commodity or  an entitlement is  commonly  described  as  the "endowment
effect."142

This  point  has  received  considerable  empirical  confirmation,  often
in the context  of environmental  amenities.  One study found  that people
would demand about five  times as much to allow destruction  of trees in a
park as  they would  pay to prevent the destruction  of those  same trees.1 43
When  hunters were  questioned  about the potential  loss  of their hunting
licenses, they said  that they would be willing to  pay an average  of $247  to
prevent  the loss-but would  demand  no  less  than  $1044  to  accept  it. 4 4
In  another study,  participants  required  payments  to  accept  degradation
of visibility  ranging  from  five  to  more  than  sixteen  times  higher  than
their valuations  based  on  how much  they were  willing  to pay  to  prevent
the  same  degradation. 14 5  A  related  experiment  tried  to  ascertain  the
"existence  value"  of a  tree-like  houseplant.  The subjects  were  told  that
any trees not sold  or kept would be  killed  at the  end  of the  experiment.
The  mean willingness  to pay  (WTP)  to avoid  the  "kill"  option  was $7.81.
The  mean  willingness  to  accept  (WTA)  payment  to  allow  a  tree  to  be
killed was  $18.43.146

140.  Including  the  Coase  theorem.
141.  See  Richard  H. Thaler, Toward a Positive Theory  of Consumer Choice,  in Quasi
Rational  Economics,  supra  note  38,  at 3,  7-10.  A  good  overview  is Elizabeth  Hoffman  &
Matthew  L.  Spitzer,  Willingness  to  Pay  vs.  Willingness  to  Accept:  Legal  and  Economic
Implications,  71  Wash.  U.  L.Q.  59  (1993).  See  also  W.R.  Dubourg  et  al.,  Imprecise
Preferences  and the WTP-WTA Disparity, 9J. Risk & Uncertainty  115,  116  (1994)  (arguing
that  imprecision  of people's  preferences  is a factor  explaining WTP-WTA  disparities).

142.  It was  first so-called  in  Richard  Thaler, Toward  a Positive  Theory  of Consumer
Choice,  1 J. Econ.  Behav.  & Org.  39  (1980).  This  essay,  along  with  others  of  similar
interest,  can be found  in Quasi  Rational  Economics,  supra note  38.

143.  See  David  S.  Brookshire  & Don  L.  Coursey,  Measuring  the  Value  of a  Public
Good:  An Empirical  Comparison of Elicitation Procedures,  77 Am. Econ.  Rev. 554, 562-63
(1987).

144.  SeeJudd Hammack & Gardner M. Brown,Jr., Waterfowl  and Wetlands:  Towards

Bioeconomic  Analysis 26-27  (1974).

J. Envtl.  Econ.  & Mgmt.  1,  10  (1980).

145.  See Robert D.  Rowe et al., An  Experiment on  the Economic Value of Visibility,  7

146.  See  Rebecca R.  Boyce  et al., An Experimental  Examination  of Intrinsic Values  as

a  Source of the  WTA-WTP  Disparity,  82 Am.  Econ.  Rev.  1366,  1370  (1992).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 942 1996

19961

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

In  general, the range  of the disparity  appears  to vary from slight dis-
parities  to a ratio  of more  than  four  to  one, with  WTA usually  doubling
WTP.  Environmental goods tend to reflect a disparity of factors from two
to  over  ten. 147  In some  environmental  experiments  involving  trees,  the
WTA/WTP  ratio  is extraordinarily  high, averaging  around  75/1.148

What  explains  this phenomenon?  There  are  many  possibilities,  and
none is likely  to be  exhaustive.1 49  My  suggestion  is  that some  of the  dif-
ference  between  WTP and WTA has  a great  deal to  do with  social norms
and social  meanings.  If someone  says  that she  is  willing  to accept $X  to
allow the extinction  of a  species, the meaning  of her  action is  altogether
different from what it is  if she  says  that she  is willing  to pay  $X  (and no
more)  to  prevent  the  extinction.  Under  prevailing  social  norms,  one
ought not to accept even a great deal  of money to allow destruction of an
environmental  amenity-partly  because  the  good  at  issue  is  collectively
owned,  partly because its loss  may be  irreversible,  and partly because  it is
not  thought to be  commensurable  with  its  cash  equivalent  (in the  sense
that it is  not valued  in  the  same  way  or  along a  single  metric).

In  these  circumstances,  people  who  announce  their  willingness  to
accept  cash  for  the loss  of a  pond  or  a  species  feel  shame.  They  believe
that  they are assuming  responsibility for the destruction  of something  in-
trinsically valuable,  not replaceable,  and owned by many people.  Because
of the risk of shame, people will  demand a  great deal, and they may even
refuse  any amount that is offered.' 50  By contrast, those who refuse  to pay
an enormous or infinite amount to save an environmental  amenity do not
feel  the  same  degree  of  shame  (if they  feel  shame  at  all).  5  They are
confronted with  a different set of social  norms.

Take an  analogy.  If someone  is  asked  how  much  she would  be will-
ing to  accept  to  allow  her dog's  life  to be  shortened  by six  months-or
how much  she would be willing to accept to allow her dog to suffer severe

147.  See  id.  at 1366.
148.  See  Brookshire  & Coursey,  supra note  143,  at 561-62.
149.  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Endogenous  Preferences,  Environmental  Law,  22J. Legal

Stud.  217, 227-30,  242-53  (1993).

See  Rowe  et al.,  supra  note  145,  at 9.

150.  Thus  in  surveys  nearly  50% of people  sometimes  refuse  to  name  any amount.

151.  There  is a  background  issue here  about  the  relation  between  shame  and guilt.
Sometimes  shame  is  described  as  a  result  of violations  of a  widely  shared  standard  of
proper  behavior;  by contrast,  guilt is  described  as a transgression  of other people's rights.
See  John  Rawls,  A  Theory  of Justice  483-84  (1971).  Sometimes  guilt is  described  as  a
feeling  of wrongdoing  experienced  by  individuals  consulting  their  own  conscience  in  an
individualistic  culture,  whereas  shame  reflects  violation  of a  community's  widely  shared
norms.  See  Smart  Schneiderman,  Saving  Face:  America  and the Politics  of Shame  5-6
(1995).  On  this view,  America is  sometimes  described as  a  "guilt culture" and Japan  as a
"shame culture."  See id.  at 5.  But these  descriptions  are  controversial.

There is also an underlying question about the extent to which people actually  believe
that  the  norm  is right.  Of  course  people  may  comply  with  norms  (because  of  the.
reputational  cost of violating  them)  that they reject in principle;  their compliance  may be
more likely  if they  approve  of the  norm for articulable  or firmly  held  reasons.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 943 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW RVEW 

[9
[Vol.  96:903

pain  for  (say)  one week-she  might well  say:  "No amount is sufficient."
The question is very different if a veterinarian  is  asking someone whether
unusual and expensive  medical  procedures  should  be  used  to prolong  a
dog's  life  or  to  reduce  its  pain.  Here  the  answer  need  not  be:  "No
amount is  too high."

Some intriguing work  suggests  that  the  disparity  between  WTA  and
WTP is connected  with  the assignment of moral responsibility for  the de-
struction  of environmental  assets,  which are  perceived  as intrinsic  goods.
The  WTA  measure  assigns  responsibility  to  the  individual.  The  WTP
measure  does  so  more  ambiguously.' 5 2  These  findings  are  consistent
with  the  norm-based  explanation  I  am  offering  here.  People  want  to
avoid  or  minimize  the feeling  that  they  have  been  morally culpable  for
producing  the  loss  of  an  environmental  amenity. 153  Feelings  of  moral
culpability  are  tightly connected  with  prevailing  social  norms.

C.  Anomalies, Shame, Altruism,  and Free-Riding

The  general  point-that  choices  are  a  function  of  norms  and  the
sentiments  they  produce-relates  to the first, second,  and fourth  tales in
Part I;154  we are now in a position  to explain  these  apparent anomalies  as
well.  When two  people are  to divide  an amount given to them  under the
stated  conditions,  the  offeror  in  the  ultimatum  game  feels  shame  given
prevailing  norms' 5 5-that  he  is  demonstrating  that  he  is  a  greedy  and
even  horrible person-if he offers  a penny or a dollar from a sum of (say)
$200.  If a sum  is given  to two  people  under  the conditions of the game,
good  people  share;  they  do  not try  to  keep  almost  all  of the money  for
themselves.  For  his part,  the offeree  feels  mistreated-treated  in  a  con-
temptuous  way-if a  small  or  token  amount is  suggested.' 5 6  The  social
meaning  of the  statement,  "How about  five  cents  for you?"  is  contempt;
the  social  meaning  of  responding,  "Great!" 
is  a  willingness  to  be
dishonored.'

5 7

152.  This is an  apparently  pervasive  social judgment about responsibility,  but it must
of course  be  defended;  it is not self-evident.  Consider  the  distinction  between  acts  and
omissions,  of which  this is an example;  the line between  the two has a great deal to do with
ascriptions  of moral  responsibility.  I am trying to  describe  the  norm, not to  defend  it.

153.  See  Boyce  et al., supra  note  146,  at 1371.
154.  See  supra Parts IA-B, D.
155.  He may well feel  guilt as well;  he  may accept  the  prevailing  norm in  principle.
156.  See  Roth,  supra note  1, at 270-74,  298-302.
157.  Cf. Richard  H.  Thaler,  The  Psychology  of  Choice  and  the  Assumptions  of
Economics,  in Quasi  Rational  Economics, supra  note  38,  at  137  (describing  fallibility  of
rational  choice  theory);  Daniel  Kahneman  et  al.,  Fairness  as  a  Constraint  on  Profit
Seeking-  Entitlements  in the  Market,  in Quasi Rational  Economics,  supra note  38, at  199
(discussing role of fairness in commercial settings).  Of course feelings of dishonor may be
based  on  bad  norms,  and  it may  be  appropriate  for  people  to  try  to  change  them.  Cf.
Elster, The Cement  of Society,  supra note  26,  at 116-21  (discussing  feuding);  supra note
97  (describing current  efforts  to stop people  from fighting when  insulted).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 944 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

So, too, even  affluent people may recycle  if prevailing norms  make  it
shameful  to refuse  to do so,  or if prevailing norms  make  it seem wonder-
ful  to  engage  in  menial  labor.  Those  who  separate  their  garbage  may
enjoy the reputational  benefits of doing so.  Or they may enjoy the effects
on  their  self-conception  of contributing  to  what  is  perceived  as  a  social
good.  Hence  it should come  as no surprise  that people in East Hampton
are  willing  to  recycle,  and  even  to  separate,  their  garbage  in  a  public
space.' 58

Experimental  work  shows  that  people  contribute  to  a shared  good,
and refuse  to free ride, far more  often  than economists  predict.' 5 9  It also
shows  that agents  are  willing to  cooperate,  and hence  to  solve  collective
action problems without coercion, if most people are seen as cooperators;
in  such  circumstances  the social  meaning  of noncooperation  is  greed  or
selfishness.  When  a  number  of  people  free  ride,  and  are  seen  to  free
ride, cooperation  breaks down;  in such circumstances  the social meaning
of cooperation  is a willingness  to be  a "dupe" or a "sucker."  The desire  to
contribute  to a  collective  good is  palpably a function  of social  norms.  If
social  norms  do  not  lead  most  people  to  contribute,  contributions  de-
crease  steadily and dramatically.16 0  The second  tale' 6 1-involving 
litter-
ing and cooperation-should  therefore be taken  as a metaphor for many
social  outcomes.

My suggestion,  then, is  that apparent  puzzles  of rationality  are  often
a product of social norms and  moral judgments  that are intertwined  with
those  norms.  When  people  appear  to  behave  irrationally,  in  the  sense
that  they violate  predictions  based  on  economic  assumptions,  it is  often
because  social  norms are  at work.  In such  circumstances,  nothing need
be  irrational  in  the normative  sense about  the underlying  behavior;  such
people  are  not  confused  or  inconsistent;  they  see  existing  norms  (and
associated meanings)  as imposing  costs on choice.  Of course a full expla-
nation  of these  matters  would  have  to  include  an  account  of norms  as
well-why  are  they  as  they are?-and  there  is  a risk  that  a  reference  to
social  norms will become  a conclusory  response to any apparently anoma-
lous  results.  But  once we  identify prevailing  norms,  we  may  be  able  to
make  robust predictions about behavior and  also to test those predictions

158.  See  supra Part I.D.
159.  See  Charles A.  Holt, Industrial  Organization:  A Survey of Laboratory Research,
in The  Handbook  of Experimental  Economics,  supra  note  1,  at  349,  409-11; John  0.
Ledyard,  Public  Goods:  A  Survey  of  Experimental  Research,  in  The  Handbook  of
Experimental  Economics,  supra note  1, at 111,  141-69;John  M.  Orbell et al.,  Explaining
Discussion-Induced  Cooperation,  54J. Personality  & Soc. Psychol.  811,  811  (1988).  Note
also  that  cooperation  increases  when  people  can  talk  with  one  another;  discussion
significantly raises  contribution  rates,  perhaps because it increases empathy  and the shame
associated  with noncooperation.  See id. at 811-12,  818.  Of course  discussion  may increase
cooperation  because  it  can  introduce  more  assurance  of  compliance;  but  the  greater
assurance  itself comes  from norms.

160.  See  Kuran,  supra  note  17, at 48-49.
161.  See  supra Part I.B.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 945 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

by asking, for example, whether the  anomalous behavior  continues when
it is  not observed publicly.  We  also may know something  about the pros-
pects for social change  through law.  If we  know how laws  affect behavior,
we  can  more  accurately generate  laws  that target  norms.  And if law  gen-
erates  a change  in  norms, behavior  may change  too.  (Consider  the  sec-
ond,  third and fourth  tales. 16 2)

These  points  suggest  a  more  complex  and  adventurous  one:  For
many purposes,  it is  not sensible  to oppose  "rationality" and social norms.
Of  course  we  could  define  "rationality" in  many  ways,  and  economists
have  offered  restricted  definitions  that are  useful  for many  purposes. 163
Such definitions, whether or not abstracted from  norms, may be valuable
for positive  purposes.  The  test of a positive  theory lies in its usefulness  in
making  predictions.  My central point here is that norms will create many
of the  costs  and  benefits  that  enter  into  an  agent's  decision.  It follows
that from the standpoint  of the individual agent,  rational  decision  is very
much  a function  of social  norms.  Norms  help  show what  it makes sense
to  do;  norms  even  help  identify costs  and  benefits  as such.

It might seem natural to suppose  that it is in  people's interest not to
pick  up  their  garbage  (see  the  second  tale'6)  and  that  social  norms
against  littering  add  a  new  or  artificial  factor  to  the  individual  calculus.
But if we  make  this supposition,  we are  saying something  about the indi-
vidual's  calculus without the anti-littering norm.  What is  the basis for any
particular  conception  of how  the  calculus  will  come  out?  No  such  con-
ception  will  be  free  of an  array  of ends,  seen  as  such  partly  because  of
social  influences,  including social  norms.  Why,  for  example,  is  picking
up  garbage a  cost rather  than  a benefit?  Why, for that matter,  is  voting,
cooperating,  seeking  revenge,  putting  one's fork  on  the  right-hand  side
of the  plate,  covering  up  one's  nose  as  one  sneezes,  or  for  that  matter
violating rather  than  complying with  norms, best treated  as  a  cost rather
than a  benefit?

An  implicit  (but undefended  and  obscure)  state  of nature  theory
seems  to lie  at the  heart  of many distinctions  between  social  norms and
rationality,  or between  social norms and rational self-interest.  That is, the
distinction  seems  to  make  sense  only  on  the  basis  of some  supposition
about what people  would  do in  some  natural  state lacking  social  norms.
But we  are  not likely to be  able to make  much progress  in  that way.  As  I
have suggested,  a positive  theory of human rationality will  likely do best if

162.  See  supra Parts  I.B-D.
163.  See,  e.g.,  Douglas  G.  Baird  et  al.,  Game  Theory  and  the  Law  6-46  (1994);
Graham  Loomes  & Robert  Sugden,  Regret  Theory:  An  Alternative  Theory  of Rational
Choice  Under  Uncertainty,  92  Econ. J.  805  (1982);  Amos Tversky  & Daniel  Kahneman,
Advances  in  Prospect  Theory:  Cumulative  Representation  of  Uncertainty,  5  J.  Risk  &
Uncertainty  297  (1992).

164.  See  supra  Part I.B.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 946 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS  AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

947

it sees norms  as  taxes  on or subsidies  to  choice, and  hence  as  part of the
array  of considerations  that people  face  in  making decisions. 16 5

V.  GOVERNMENT  AcTION:  ON  AUTONOMY  AND  TooLs

Sometimes  it seems  desirable  for  individuals  or  societies  to  change
choices.  Government  might  attempt  to  change,  or  help  people  to
change,  choices  by  changing  social  norms,  social  meanings,  and  social
roles.  In fact  changes  in  norms may  be  the  cheapest  and  most effective
way to make things  better, whatever  are our criteria for assessing that mat-
ter.  The  relation  between  behavior  and  norms  has  yet  to  receive  sus-
tained  attention; when  we attend to that relation, we see that government
has a policy instrument of great potential value.  In this section I deal with
some  general  points.  I  turn  to more  specific  grounds,  and  more specific
objections,  in  Parts VI  and VII.

To  be  sure,  private  power  to  create  norm  communities  may  make
government  action less  necessary  or less desirable.  Often  the best step is
to  allow  those  communities  to be formed  and  to see  how  they work  out.
But sometimes  it is  too  costly for individuals  to create  or join those  com-
munities,  and  sometimes  the  generally  held  norm  is  too  damaging  to
human  well-being.  These  issues  cannot  be  solved  in  the  abstract;  the
judgment  depends  on  the  details.  But it  is  clear  that  norms  can  create
problems  of various  sorts  and  that  collective  action  may  be  required  in
some  cases.

A.  Norms and Paternalism

Common  objections  to  "paternalism"  or  "meddling" are  not easy  to
sustain in such contexts.  Recall  that people usually  do not choose  norms,
meanings,  and  roles;  all  of these  are  (within limits)  imposed.  As  I have
said,  it would be ludicrous  to deplore  norms,  meanings,  and  roles.  They
make life  possible and  they much facilitate  social  engagement.  They pro-
vide  the  context within  which  free  interaction  is  possible.  Nonetheless,
some  of  them  operate  as  severe  limits  on  autonomy  or well-being,  and
certainly  they  should not be  treated  as  fixed or  given  regardless  of their
content  or  consequences.

Private groups  can test or even  change norms.  Indeed, the  testing  of
current  norms,  meanings,  and  roles  is  a  crucial  function  of groups  that
are  intermediate  between  citizens  and  the  state.  Religious  groups  are  in
this  sense  norm  entrepreneurs;  the  same  is  true  for  environmental  and
civil  rights  organizations.  But  sometimes  private  groups  are  unable  to
produce  desirable  change  on  their  own.  This  is  a  point missed  by  the
idea that the sole  basis for government action  is  to avoid force, fraud, and

165.  See  Kuran,  supra  note  17;  Becker,  supra note  32.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 947 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVEW

[Vol.  96:903

"harm  to  others."166  Obstacles  to  autonomy  and  to  good  lives  can  also
come  from bad  roles,  norms,  and  meanings.

Changes  in  norms  and  meanings  can  promote  human  well-being.
Often  all  or  most people  would,  on reflection,  like  to see  a  change  in  a
particular norm; 167 and  yet they cannot bring  about the change  on their
own,  because in his individual  capacity,  each  person  has limited power  to
alter  meanings,  norms,  or  roles.  The  case  of  mandatory  helmets  for
hockey  players  is  a familiar  example.  Hockey  players  may  prefer  not  to
wear  helmets  if  the  meaning  of helmet-wearing  is  cowardice;  but  their
preferred  solution, available  only  through a  league  mandate,  is  a system
in  which  all  are  required  to  wear  helmets,  and  hence  players  wear  hel-
mets  without  signalling  cowardice.' 68  Of  course  shifts  in  norms,  mean-
ings,  and  roles  are  pervasive.  Consider,  for  example,  changing  norms
with  respect  to smoking,  littering,  drug use,  polluting,  racial  discrimina-
tion,  sexual  relations  outside  of marriage,  the roles  of women  and  men,
and interracial  relationships.

In fact  it is  often hard  to  know what  people  would  "like"  or prefer,
because  their judgments  and  desires  are  entangled  with  norms,  mean-
ings, and  roles,  and  because  once  one  or more  of these is  changed,  they
may  be  better  off,  either  objectively  or  subjectively.  If  government
changes  the  social  meaning  of smoking  (see  the  third tale169),  has  it ac-
ted illegitimately?  What  if most people,  or  most  smokers, would,  on  re-
flection, want smoking to have  a different meaning?  Or suppose  that gov-
ernment  tries  to  change  an  aspect  of  a  certain  social  role,  like  that  of
unwed fathers, high school  teachers, homosexuals,  or workers.  Surely the
consequences  of the change  matter; surely it matters if the change  is  sup-
ported by  (most or  all)  unwed fathers,  high  school  teachers,  homosexu-
als,  or workers,  and  if members  of  each  group  face  a  collective  action
problem.  The justification  for government  action is  firm  if all  or almost
all people  support it as  a means  of solving  a  collective  action  problem.

B.  Tools

Suppose  that  government  wants  to  change  norms,  meanings,  or
roles.  It has  many  different  tools for  doing so;  some of these  are  mildly
intrusive while  others  may foreclose  choice.  Government  may restrict it-
self to  education, understood  as  simple statements  of fact  designed to  en-

166.  See  Epstein,  supra note  16,  at 37-49;  Richard  A.  Posner,  Sex  and  Reason  2-4
(1992).  I  think  that  both  Epstein  and  Posner  give  inadequate  attention  to  the  liberty-
limiting effects  of norms,  roles, and  meanings.  The  classic  source  of the "harm to others"
idea,  Mill,  offers  subtle  arguments  on  the  point.  See  John  S.  Mill,  The  Subjection  of
Women  (1869);  John  S.  Mill,  On  Liberty  (1859)  (developing  a  complex  discussion  of
pressures  to  conform).

167.  Their  desire  to  this  effect is  likely to  be a product  of norms that are  being  held

constant.  See  infra Part VIA2.

168.  See  Schelling, supra  note 83,tat  213-14;  Lessig, supra  note 24,  at 967-68.
169.  See supra  Part I.0.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 948 1996

1996]

SOCIAL NORMS  AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

sure  accurate  beliefs.  We have seen  that norms, meanings,  and roles  can
be  a function  of beliefs  and  that beliefs  are  mutable. 170  Perhaps prevail-
ing beliefs  are false  and warrant  correction.  People may  think that AIDS
is  a  disease  limited  to  homosexuals,  that  smoking  does  not hurt  non-
smokers,  or  that  there  is  no  relation  between  cholesterol  and  heart  dis-
ease  or between diet and  cancer.  Changing norms  with  respect to smok-
ing  are  almost  certainly a  result-at least in  part-of information  from
the  government  about  health risks. t7 1

Of course  government  may  try to ensure  accurate beliefs  in  order to
persuade  people  to  do  something  new  or  different.  It may  seek  to  in-
crease  or decrease  shame;  or it may not be  thinking much  about  norms.
But so  long as government  restricts  itself to  the provision  of accurate  in-
formation,  there should  be  no  objection  to  governmental  efforts  to cor-
rect  false  beliefs,  even  if  the  correction  affects  norms,  meanings,  and
roles.  In  fact  the  change  along this  dimension  may  be  the  most impor-
tant consequence  of education,  which  may, for  example,  remove  certain
kinds  of shame  on the part of people  who want to buckle  their seat belts
or  abstain from  premarital  sex.

Government may also attempt to engage  in persuasion, understood  as
a self-conscious  effort to alter attitudes and  choices  rather  than simply to
offer information. 172  Consider  the  third tale; 173  assume  that some  such
advertisement  had been  issued  by state  officials.  Perhaps  it would  have
been effective  (though its social meaning would have been altogether dif-
ferent if issued by officials rather  than by members  of the private African-
American  community).  The "just say no" policy for drugs falls in  the cate-
gory  of  attempted  persuasion;  so,  too,  with  efforts  to  control  AIDS  by
strongly  encouraging  the  use  of condoms  or  abstinence  from sex.  Here
government  does  not  restrict  itself to  provision  of information,  but  in-
stead uses rhetoric and vivid images to change  norms, meanings,  or roles,
and in this way attempts to persuade people to choose a certain  course. 174

170.  Beliefs,  however,  are  not  easily  mutable  because  of cognitive  dissonance.  See
George  A.  Akerlof  & William  T.  Dickens,  The  Economic  Consequences  of  Cognitive
Dissonance,  in George  A.  Akerlof, An  Economic  Theorist's  Book  of Tales  123  (1984);
Aronson, supra  note 95,  at 171-239.

171.  See W. Kip Viscusi,  Smoking:  Making the Risky Decision  47-60  (1992)  (relating

smoking  trends  and public  information).

172.  Cf.  id.  at  144-46  (criticizing  persuasion  as  "propaganda"  in  the  context  of
smoking,  and  arguing  for  information  instead).  Viscusi  treats  norms  and  meaning  as
exogenous  givens  and  as  some  ineradicable  part  of  the  guiding  normative  criterion,
"choice."  If these  are not fixed and  not chosen,  the  attack  on persuasion  is  much  weaker
because  the  background  contains  limits  on  liberty that government  and citizens  may seek
to  overcome.  See,  e.g.,  Excerpts  from Clinton  News  Conference  on  His Tobacco  Order,
supra note  6,  at A18.

173.  See supra  Part I.C.
174.  This  kind of approach  is  much  more  effective  than  the mere provision  of facts.
See Aronson,  supra  note  95, at  89-90.  Part of the  reason  is status  quo  bias.  See  William
Samuelson  &  Richard  Zeckhauser,  Status  Quo  Bias  in  Decision  Making,  1 J.  Risk  &
Uncertainty  7,  8  (1988)  (describing how people sometimes retain  their  particular  choices

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 949 1996

950

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

If government is interested  in persuasion,  it will understand  that "ref-
erence  states"  matter  a  great  deal,  and  it will  use  this  understanding  to
lead people in the right direction.  People are  generally loss averse,  in the
sense  that  they  are  made  more  unhappy  by a  loss  of a  certain  amount
than they are  made  happy  by an  equivalent  gain. 175  Hence  reactions  to
information  turn  a good deal on how the information  is framed.  A claim
that breast  cancer  examinations  will  increase  the  number  of lives  saved
(over what it would otherwise be)  is far less effective  than  a claim  that the
failure  to  examine  one's  breast will  decrease  the  number  of lives  saved
(over what it would otherwise  be). 176  Similarly,  energy conservation  pro-
grams are  far more  effective  if they point to  the dollars  lost  through fail-
ure  to conserve  than  if they point to  the dollars saved  through  conserva-
tion. 177  The  difference  has  a  great  deal  to  do  with  social  norms  and
social  meanings  and  in  particular  with  shame.  If government  is  inter-
ested  in changing behavior,  it will  take advantage  of the phenomenon  of
loss  aversion.

Some  people  think  that  although  the  provision  of information  can
be justified,  government  should  rarely  or  never attempt  to  persuade. 178
But  if norms,  roles,  and  meanings  are  beyond  individual  control,  and
sometimes  bad,  this  thought  is  hard  to sustain,  at least  if government  is
subject  to  democratic  controls.

Consider in  this connection  the  problem  of smoking and the lessons
of the  third  tale.179  Among  African-Americans  between  18  and  24,  the
smoking rate has  fallen from 37.1%  in  1965,  to  31.8% in  1979,  to 20.4%
in  1987,  to  10.3%  in  1992.180  Among whites  in  the  same age  group,  the
rate fell from 38.4% in  1965 to 27.8%  in 1987-but it has remained more
or less  constant  since that time.' 8'  The  change  among African-American
teenagers  is universally described  as a"  'public  health success  story,'  "but
one  that  government  officials  cannot  explain.' 8 2  Though  no  one  has  a
full  account  of  this  phenomenon,  changing  social  norms  appear  to  be

instead  of changing to a preferred  alternative);  see also Dubourg et al.,  supra note  141,  at
128  (discussing  overwhelming  importance  of  the  "reference  state"  in  determining
reactions  to  changes  in risks).

175.  See  Daniel  Kahneman  et al.,  Experimental  Tests  of the Endowment  Effect  and

the  Coase Theorem,  in Quasi  Rational  Economics, supra  note  88,  at 167,  182-86.

176.  See  Beth  E.  Meyerowitz  & Shelly Chaiken,  The Effect  of Message  Framing  on
Breast  Self-Examination  Attitudes,  Intentions,  and  Behavior,  52 J.  Personality  &  Soc.
Psychol.  500,  506-09  (1987).

177.  See  Marti H. Gonzales  et al.,  Using Social  Cognition and Persuasion  to Promote
Energy  Conservation:  A Quasi-Experiment,  18J. Applied  Soc. Psychol.  1049,  1062  (1988).

178.  See  Viscusi,  supra  note  65,  at  149-59.
179.  See  supra Part I.C.
180.  See  U.S. Department  of Commerce,  supra  note  8, at  144.
181.  See  id.
182.  Donald  Bradley,  Few  Black  Teens  Smoke,  But  Why?,  Kan.  City  Star, Aug.  12,
1995, atAl  (quoting Michael  Eriksen, Director of the Office on Smoking and Health  at the
Centers  for Disease  Control  and Prevention).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 950 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

playing  a  substantial  role. 183  Smoking does  not have  the same  cachet in
the  African-American  community  that  it  has  among  whites.  If govern-
ment  could bring about  a general  change  in  social  norms-through,  for
example,  attempts  at persuasion-it  is  hardly clear  that there would  be a
good  objection  to its behavior.  Consider related  findings  about the close
relation  between  norms  and  alcohol  abuse.'8

Government  also might use  economic  instruments  to  tax or subsidize
choices.  Of course  education  is  assisted  publicly, as  are  day  care,  muse-
ums,  and  public  broadcasting  (at  least  as  of  this  writing).  Alcoholic
drinks,  tobacco  products, generation  of waste, and some  polluting  activi-
ties are  met with  taxes  (although some  of these  are  subsidized  too).  We
can understand  some economic  incentives as efforts in part to counteract
social  meanings,  social  norms,  or  social  roles  with  financial  benefits  or
penalties  designed  to  produce  a  good  "equilibrium."  A  social  meaning
that is  perceived to be  bad might be  "matched" with  a financial  disincen-
tive.  Some such incentives  may amount to efforts to  change  social norms
or social  meanings.  If a  good becomes  more  expensive,  the social  mean-
ing  of choosing  it may change.  Cigarette  smoking, for example,  may be-
come less popular  if most people  cannot afford  to smoke.  Of course  it is
hard  to predict  the  effects  of changes  in  price  on norms.

Government  also  might impose  time, place, and manner restrictions. It
might  ban  smoking  in  public  places.  It  might  say  that  television  shows
containing  violence  may  be  shown  only in  certain  time  slots.  It  might
require  government  itself  to  choose  low-polluting  motor  vehicles.  It
might  ban  affirmative  action  in  the  public  sector  but allow  it  in  the pri-
vate  sector.  Strategies  of this kind might affect the social  meaning of the

183.  See  id. at A19.  It might be speculated  that there has  been  a shift from cigarettes
to  some  other  harmful  substance,  such  as  illicit  drugs.  But  it  is  notable  that African-
Americans  have  lower  lifetime  rates  of reported  use  of illicit  drugs  (especially  cocaine)
than  whites.  The  1990  National  Household  Survey  on  Drug Abuse  finds  that 40  to  50
percent  fewer  African-Americans  than  whites  under  age  35  report  any  lifetime  use  of
cocaine.  (About  20%  more  African-Americans  than  whites  over  age  35  report  lifetime
cocaine  experience.)  For use in the last year, African-Americans  between  12 and  17 report
the lowest rates  of use of cocane-1.7% compared  to 2.3% for whites.  African-Americans
in  the  12  to  17  age  group  consistently  posted  lower  prevalence  rates  than  whites  for
lifetime,  past year,  and past  month  use.  (Surveys  in  1985,  1988  and  1990.)  All  of these
data  suggest that young  African-Americans  use illicit  drugs at a lower  rate than  do young
white people.  These data  do not address  directly the substitution of cocaine for cigarettes.
But it appears  that while African-Americans  between  12  and  17  use  cocaine  at lower rates
than  whites  (according  to  1985,  1988,  and  1990  surveys),  rates  for  both  groups  have
decreased  from  1985  to  1990.  The white  rate  has  decreased  from  4.2%  to 2.3%  and the
African-American  rate has  gone from  2.4%  to  1.7%.  Thus it seems  that  the public  health
success story regarding  African-American  teenagers  and cigarette  smoking also extends  to
cocaine  use.  And  there may  be another public  health  success  story to be  told with respect
to  cocaine  use  among  white  teenagers.  All  data  is  from  Denise  B.  Kandel,  The  Social
Demography  of  Drug  Use,  69  Milbank  Q. 365,  395-99  (1991). 
I  am  grateful  to  Tracy
Meares  for help on  this  point.

184.  See  William  J.  Sonenstuhl,  Working  Sober  The  Transformation  of  an

Occupational  Drinking  Culture  (forthcoming  1996).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 951 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

relevant activity very generally.  But they  do not foreclose  choice  entirely;
they  channel  it  instead.  Of course  in  cases  of this  sort,  government  is
directly affecting behavior.  What I am suggesting is that it may be seeking
as  well  to  affect  social  norms  and  social  meanings  by  affecting  the  well-
springs  of shame  and pride.  The social  meaning of smoking is, for exam-
ple,  affected by virtue of the existence  of time, place,  and manner restric-
tions,  even in  places  lacking  those  restrictions.

The most intrusive  kind of government action  is  of course  straightfor-

ward coercion.  Thus  government  might prohibit  the use  of certain  drugs;
require  everyone  to  recycle  or buckle  their seat belts;  or make  education
mandatory for  people  under  a certain  age.

C.  Levels  and Institutions

A  polity concerned  to  change  norms  could  proceed  through  differ-
ent  levels  and  with  different  institutional  arrangements.  Should  it  en-
courage  private  behavior  through  creative  public-private  partnerships?
Should it, for  example,  fund private  groups  that are  engaged  in  discour-
aging  teenage  pregnancy,  drug  use,  and  promiscuity?  There  is  also  a
question  about whether  national  action  or  local  action  is better.  Norm
management  could  occur in  towns;  it  could  happen  at the  state  level;  it
could be  a self-conscious  effort  of the national government.

The  question  about  appropriate  levels  of government  is hard  to an-
swer  in  the  abstract.  Much  depends  on  the  details.  But  two  notations
may be  appropriate.  First, public-private  partnerships  are often  the most
fruitful  of all possible  approaches.  Purely  governmental  efforts  at norm
management  may fail  for  lack  of trust;  imagine,  for  example,  if the  na-
tional  government  had engaged  in  the  anti-smoking  campaign  that  was
apparently so successful  among African-American  teenagers.  Often  a gov-
ernment concerned  with bad  norms does best by working with charitable
and  religious  organizations  which  can  have  a high  level  of competence,
experience,  and  trust.

Second,  it  is  probably  best  to  have  a  presumption  in  favor  of  the
lowest  possible  level  of government.'8 5  The  lowest level  is closest  to  the
people,  and  in  that  sense  most  responsive  to  it,  and  most  likely  to  be
trusted  by it.  The  risk of futility  or  positive  harm  is  accordingly  dimin-
ished.  Of  course  there  are  familiar  counterarguments,  and  sometimes
national efforts  at norm management  are welljustified.  But a nation  that
is  concerned  about  existing  norms  should  exploit  the  possibilities  that
exist  in  a system  committed  to  federalism.

185.  See Michael  W. McConnell, Federalism:  Evaluating the  Founders'  Design, 54 U.
Chi. L  Rev.  1484, 1491-1511  (1987)  (reviewing  Raoul  Berger, Federalism:  The Founders'
Design  (1987)); Andrzej  Rapaczynski,  From Sovereignty  to Process:  TheJurisprudence  of
Federalism  after Garcia,  1985  Sup. Ct. Rev.  841,  400,  402-03,  407-08;  Charles M. Tiebout,
A Pure  Theory of Local Expenditures,  64J. Pol.  Econ.  416  (1956).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 952 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

953

VI.  GovERNmENT  ACTION:  FIVE  GROUNDS

In  this  section  I  discuss  several  grounds for  governmental  efforts  to
change  norms, meanings,  and  roles.  The unifying  theme is  the  expressive
function of law-a term that I use  to identify the function  of law in expres-
sing social values  and in  encouraging  social  norms  to  move  in particular
directions.18 6

My discussion will  not by any means  exhaust law's  expressive  uses,' 8 7
and I do not discuss  any of these  grounds in much  detail.  I offer instead
a brief sketch  of some possibilities.  An  account of legitimate grounds for
changes  in norms will overlap  a great deal with-and may even be reduc-
ible  to-an account  of the legitimate  bases for governmental  action.  My
purpose  here  is  hardly to  offer such  an  account, but  instead  to  see  how
some  fairly  standard  ideas  might  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  particular
subjects  under  discussion.  In  none  of  these  cases  do  I  urge  that  social
norms  should be  free  from scrutiny  on  the merits  by individual  citizens.
Government  ought not to inculcate  norms  that cannot be  supported and
evaluated  publicly,  and  on  the  basis  of reasons.  Like  rules,  norms  will
typically have a degree  of crudeness  and rigidity,  and it is entirely appro-
priate for citizens  to conclude  that there are contexts  in which  even good
norms make  no  sense  if they  are  mandated.' 8 8

Nor do I urge that the mere fact that behavior is a function  of norms
provides  some warrant for governmental  action.  To  defend  governmen-
tal  action, some claim  has to  be offered  about how such action  will make
things  better.  A reference  to norms  helps  undermine  the view  that gov-
ernment  should  restrict  itself  to  the  satisfaction  of  "preferences."  We
have  seen  that  this  term  is  highly  ambiguous  and  that  norms  can  often
undermine  human  well-being.  But to defend  a  change,  the idea  of well-
being has  to be  specified,  and  it has  to be  shown  that the  change  would
improve  matters  under the relevant  criteria.

To  introduce  the analysis,  we  might make  a few  initial  distinctions.
1.  In  some  cases,  all  or  almost  all  people  will  support  an  effort  to
change  a norm,  a meaning, or  a role.  In the case  of hockey helmets,  for

186.  For more  discussion,  see  Sunstein,  supra note  64.
187.  In  particular  there  is  an  intriguing  set  of  laws  designed  to  fortify  norms

regulating  the  use  of money as  a reason  for action.  See  id.

188.  There is a currently prominent and controversial  example:  governmental  efforts
to stigmatize  unwed parenthood.  At first glance,  it seems  legitimate for public and private
institutions  to  try  to  inculcate  norms  that  make  people  feel  ashamed  if they  produce
children who will  have  horrible life prospects.  For this reason,  efforts  to inculcate  norms
against unwed  parenthood-in cases  in which  the children  who result will  have miserable
lives-are fully supportable.  But there are several  questions that might be raised about this
conclusion:  (a)  In  some  cases,  unwed  parents  will  not have  done  anything  wrong, and
hence  they  are  entitled  not  to  feel  ashamed;  (b)  The  fact  that  the  children  will  have
miserable  lives  may  be  a  result  of a  background  of social  injustice;  (c)  Shame  is  heavy
medicine,  and some  people  might  think  that government  should  feel  free  to  inculcate
norms  but  not the  particular  norm  of shame  in  this  setting.  These  are  merely  questions
about the project of shame inculcation  in this context;  they do not purport to be answers.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 953 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

example,  there  may be  near-unanimous  agreement  that  things would  be
better if the meaning of helmet-wearing  were  not cowardice.  In  the case
of  cleaning  up  after  one's  dog, almost  everyone  may  agree  that  things
would  be  better if there  was  a norm  in  favor  of  cleaning  up.  Of course
any  such  agreement  may  depend  on  norms  that  should  themselves  be
brought  into  question. 189  We  might say  that  the  agreement  can  be  "im-
peached"  by  showing  that  people  do  not,  on  reflection,  endorse  the
norms  that produce  agreement,  or  that  there  are  problems  with  those
norms.

2.  In some  cases,  all or almost all people will agree  that behavior  is a
function  not of intrinsic  value,  and not of effects  on  people's  (well-con-
sidered) judgments about  their self-conception,  but instead a function  of
the reputational  consequences  of  choice;  and they will  agree  too  that  it
would  be  better  if the  reputational  consequences  were  different.  All  or
almost  all people might  agree, for example,  that use  of drugs  in a certain
community  stems  from  the reputational  benefits  of using  drugs  and  the
reputational  costs  of refusing  to do so.  They  also might agree  that things
would  be  better if using  drugs  produced  reputational  harm  rather  than
benefit;  they  might  act  accordingly  via  law  (with  education,  attempted
persuasion,  economic incentives,  or coercion).  In this kind of case,  there
is  also  a possibility  of "impeachment"  of the  agreement  along  lines  sug-
gested  above.

3.  In  some  cases,  existing  norms  may  be  part  and  parcel  of a  caste
system.  They may turn a morally  irrelevant  characteristic-race  and gen-
der are  the most obvious  examples-into  a signalling device  with  respect
to social  role and associated  norms.  If a caste system  is  unjust, it is  appro-
priate  to  alter norms,  roles,  and  meanings  that  perpetuate  it.

4.  In  some  cases,  existing  norms  undermine  people's  well-being  or
autonomy, by discouraging  them  from being exposed  to diverse  concep-
tions  of  the good  and  from  giving  critical  scrutiny  to  their  own  concep-
tions, in  such a way as to make  it impossible for them  to be, in any sense,
masters  of the  narratives  of their  own  lives.19 0

These  are  brief  notations  on  some  highly  controversial  subjects.
Needless to say, I cannot attempt here to defend an  account of the appro-
priate role  of the state;  my purpose  is  more modestly to  connect  the pro-
ject of norm  management with  some  familiar ideas  about what  the state
legitimately  does.  Notably,  there  are  cases  in which  it is  unnecessary  to
choose  among  two  or  more  of  the general  grounds for  government  ac-
tion;  people  with  varying  theoretical  commitments  might  believe  that  a
particular action makes sense.  Hence political  participants  might achieve

189.  See  infra  Part VIA.
190.  On  this  conception of autonomy, see Raz,  supra note 22,  at 400-29.  This idea  is
very  controversial  as  a  foundational  norm.  See,  e.g.,  John  Rawls,  Political  Liberalism
134-35  (1994).  But  political  liberals  might well  favor  an  effort  to  ensure  against  norms
that prevent people  from being or acquiring  the  capacities  to  be  free and  equal citizens.
See  id.  at 174-76.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 954 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

955

an  incompletely theorized agreemet on a particular  outcome-an  agreement
on what steps  make  best sense,  unaccompanied  by a shared  understand-
ing of why, exactly, they make  the best sense. 1 91  Those interested in  pos-
sible  changes  in  norms  would  do  well  to  take  advantage  of  such
agreements.

A.  Some  Unusual Collective Action Problems

1.  Standard accounts. -

In a now-standard  account, offered  by many
economists,  lawyers,  and political  scientists,' 9 2  social  practices  would  be
inefficient were  it not for  certain  social  norms;  such  norms  solve  collec-
tive action  problems.  They do the work of law.193  They may provide con-
ventions  on which  everyone  voluntarily  settles;  table  manners  are  exam-
ples.  Or  they  may  solve  prisoner's  dilemmas  through  social  sanctions
imposed  on deviants;  this  is true of the idea that people  should  clean up
after  their  dogs.  And  the  absence  of such  norms  makes  some  existing
practices  highly  inefficient.

Let us begin here with  the simple and  conventional  case  of littering,
captured  in  the  second  tale.' 94  Under  ordinary  assumptions,  each  per-
son  may well  litter-if  the  costs  of  throwing  things  in  the  garbage  are
wholly internalized,  whereas  the benefits  of doing so are  spread  across  a
wide  range  of  people.  In  the  standard  account,  "rational"  individuals,
acting  in  their  "self-interest,"  will  produce  a  great  deal  of litter, perhaps
so  much  that  legal regulation ultimately  is  required.  This  idea helps ex-
plain  legal  responses  to  environmental  degradation,  as  in  the  cases  of
mandatory recycling,  taxes on or fees for polluting activity, and command
and control  regulation.

2.  Puzzles. -

It is illuminating  to see things  this way,  but many  ques-
tions might be raised  by the standard  account.  The relevant  changes  do
not bring  about  Pareto  improvements,  which  occur only when  everyone
gains  or  at least some  gain  and  no  one  loses.  But in  the  cases  at hand,
some  people  are  losers;  in  fact  many  people  may  be  losers.  With  a
mandatory  seat  belt  law,  for  example,  there  will  be  people  who  dislike
wearing seat belts  and resent the  coercion, no  matter the number of peo-
ple  who  wear  them.  Their  objection  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  social
meaning  of wearing belts; it involves the intrinsic  inconvenience  of doing
SO.

We should, in this light, distinguish  the very simplest cases-in which
all  or  nearly  all  people  favor  a  change  in  norms-from  cases  in  which

191.  See  Cass  R. Sunstein,  Incompletely  Theorized  Agreements,  108  Harv.  L.  Rev.
1733,  1735-36  (1995);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Legal  Reasoning  and  Political  Conflict  ch.  2
(1996)  [hereinafter  Sunstein,  Legal  Reasoning].

192.  See, e.g., Ellickson, supra note 51,  at 123-36;  Ullmann-Margalit, supra note 51, at

18-133.

193.  See  Ellickson,  supra  note  51,  at 123;  Elster, The  Cement of Society,  supra note

26, at  125-40;  Ullmann-Margalit,  supra note  51,  at 89-93.

194.  See  supra Part  I.B.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 955 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

there  are  bare  majorities  in  favor  of such  a  change.  If everyone  would
favor a situation  in  which  people pick  up after their  dogs, but this  result
cannot  be  brought  about  without  government  action,  the  case  is  easy:
Government  action should be  initiated.  But if 65% of people would favor
the change, and  35% like  the status quo, we  have  a harder case.  Perhaps
the  change  would  be favored  under the  Kaldor-Hicks  criterion;  but  that
criterion  is  highly  controversial. 19 5  To  decide  whether  government  ac-
tion is appropriate,  it is thus necessary  to take a stand on a large question
in  political theory;  the fact  that norm-change  is  involved  means  that  the
setting is unusual,  but the basic  analysis  is not.196

Even more fundamentally, the words "rational" and  "self-interest" ob-
scure  a great deal, since  they  take  so much  for granted.  At  first glance  it
appears  that  there  is  no  sharp  dichotomy  between  rationality  and social
norms  or between self-interest and social  norms;  taking the words in their
ordinary sense, what  is  rational  and what is in  an  agent's  self-interest are
functions  of social  norms. 19 7  Return  to  our second story1 9 8 and  suppose
that  there  is  a social  norm  that everyone  should pick up litter. 19 9  If the
norm  is  in  place,  people  who  act  in  their  rational  self-interest  will  not
litter.  In  the  second  tale, were  the non-litterers  or members  of the con-
trol group acting in their rational  self-interest?  What is rational, and what
promotes self-interest,  depends on many exogenous factors, including  ex-
isting norms. 200

There  is  a further  point,20 1 and  it raises  serious  difficulties  for  the
traditional  account  of the  relationship  between  norms and  collective  ac-

. 195.  See  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Economics  of Justice  91-92  (1981);  cf.  Ronald
Dworkin,  Is Wealth  a Value?,  in A Matter of Principle  237 (1985)  (criticizing  using "social
wealth"  maximization  as  a basis for social  action).

196.  To know whether government action  is appropriate, we also  need to  ask whether
government is pursuing legitimate ends and also whether the action is  likely to  be effective.
See  infra Part VII.

197.  See  the  qualification  in  supra  pp.  946-47.  Of  course  nothing  I  have  said  is
inconsistent  with  the view  that  we  should  adopt  a  tractable  definition  of rationality  for
positive  purposes  and see how that definition  helps in predicting behavior.  What might be
adapted  to this kind of approach  is an understanding  that the incentives  created  by norms
will  play a role  in  an  individual's judgment about what  is  the  rational  thing  to  do.

198.  See  supra  Part I.B.
199.  Cf.  Carol  M.  Rose,  Introduction:  Approaching  Property,  in  Property  and
Persuasion:  Essays  on  the  History,  Theory,  and  Rhetoric  of  Ownership  1,  2-3  (1994)
(discussing  role  of norms  in providing  environmental  protection).

200.  For  an  interesting  qualification,  see  Holmes,  supra  note  22,  at  42-68.  Self-
interest might be self-consciously  defined  in  narrowly  economic  terms,  in which  case  it is
not  formal  but,  on  the  contrary,  has  a point-the  defeat  of sometimes  corrosive  social
norms  such  as  honor,  which  can  in  some  circumstances  cause  people  to  fight.  Hence
Holmes  argues  that  the  early  liberal  enthusiasm  for  self-interest  was  designed  not  to
disparage  altruism  but  instead  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  if people  are  pursuing
economic  goals  in a  self-interested way,  they  may not do  the  sorts  of mischief associated
with  fanatics  and dogmatists  of various  stripes.  See  id. at 53-62.

201.  I  am grateful  to  Ronald  Dworkin for raising  this  problem.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 956 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

957

tion problems. 20 2  The difficulty is  that any collective  action problem  can
be  characterized  as  such only because of a wide  range  of norms,  and not
only because of the particular  norm that is said to be producing the prob-
lem.  The traditional  account  focuses  on one  norm, but the problem  is a
product  of a wide  range  of them.

Suppose,  for  example,  that  there  is  no  norm  against  littering;  that
people  think  that  there  is  too  much  litter;  and  that  they  would  like  to
create  a  new,  anti-littering  norm.  Would  it be  right  to  say  that this  is  a
case  involving a collective  action problem  that would be  served best with
the aid  of a  new social  norm, that is,  a norm  against littering?  The state-
ment  would  not  be  false,  but  it  would  be  misleading  and  incomplete.
What  gives  rise  to  the  collective  action  problem  is  an  array  of individual
judgments  and  desires  that  are  themselves  (in all  likelihood)  a  function
of social  norms.  There  are,  for  example,  norms  against  clutter,  norms
involving certain conceptions  of aesthetics,  norms about public spaces.  If
people  "want"  a  new  norm-the  norm  against  littering-their  desire
probably  stems  from  many  other  norms,  such  as  norms  favoring  clean
rather  than  dirty  parks,  norms  in  favor  of  shared  rather  than  maldis-
tributed burdens, norms  in favor of solutions through  norms rather  than
coercion  or fines.

When  a  situation  is  supposed  to  create  a  prisoner's  dilemma  that
would be  satisfied  by some norm  Z,  the situation  presupposes  a range  of
norms  A through Y which  are being  held constant  and not  being put  in
contention.  Then  the question  becomes:  Why is  it that norm  Z  (say,  the
norm  with  respect  to  littering)  is  put  into  question,  rather  than  some
other norm  (say, the norm favoring clean parks)?  Why should a norm be
established  in  favor  of cleaning  up  after  one's  dog, instead  of changing
the  norm  producing unwillingness  to be  exposed  to  the  relevant  mess?
This question has yet to be addressed in  existing work on collective  action
and  social  norms.  And  the  question  has  a  powerful  Coasian  dimen-
sion.203  The  traditional  account  takes  a  set  of norms  as  given,  without
seeing that they themselves might be altered, rather than altering the par-
ticular  norm  that  has been  put into  question.2 0 4

Several answers  might be offered.  On the Coasian view, we might ask
which  norms  can  be changed  most  cheaply.  Just as one person  in a legal
controversy  might be  the cheapest  cost avoider,  so  one  norm  in  a collec-
tive  action  problem  might  be the  cheapest  target  of norm  management.

202.  See  Ellickson,  supra note  51,  at  149.
203.  See  R.H. Coase,  The Problem  of Social  Cost,  3J.L. & Econ.  1, 42-43  (1960).
204.  Hence  the  traditional  view  is,  roughly  speaking,  Pigouvian.  In  describing
pollution  as  a problem  of externalities,  Pigou did  not see  that the pollution  problem is a
function notjust of the polluter's most recent act, but also of something that is being taken
for granted, that is the numerous  acts and omissions of both polluters  and pollutees.  See
id. at 34.  In seeing a certain norm  Z as creating  or solving  collective  action  problems,  the
traditional  view  does  not see  that  norms A  through  Y are  also  important sources  of the
problems.  Perhaps norm A,  B or C might be altered more  cheaply  than norm Z  could be.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 957 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

It  is  plausible,  for  example,  to  think  that  it  is  much  more  efficient  to
create  a norm  in favor of cleaning up than  to create  a norm making peo-
ple approve  of clutter and mess.  On  this view, we would not inquire  into
the  merits  or  basis  of existing norms,  but ask  more  simply  which  norms
can be altered at the lowest cost.  I speculate  that an  implicitjudgment of
this  kind lies  behind  the traditional  approach  to  this  problem.

Alternatively, and  departing from economic criteria, we  might put at
issue  those  norms  that are  not part of the relevant  agents's  own  deepest
convictions  and  self-understandings.  Typically  the  norms  thought  to
solve  collective action problems  seem  to be a form of "tinkering," encour-
aging  conduct  that  preserves  what  people  believe  most  deeply,  have
thought through,  or most take  for granted.  Finally, we  might not look to
agents's  convictions  but venture  instead  an  objective  account  of human
needs  and  human  interests.  On  this  view,  we  should  create  a  norm
against littering, rather than  a norm in favor of clutter and  mess, because
lives  are  objectively  better with  the  first norm  than with  the second.  On
such  an  approach,  a  collective  action  problem  exists  because  if reason-
able agents  could agree on  the norm in  question, things would be  better
rather than worse.  It is  not clear,  however,  that  this way of seeing  things
can  coexist with  ordinary understandings  of collective  action  problems,
which  are  rooted  in  subjective  desires.  A possible  conclusion  of what  I
have  said  thus  far  is  that  in  the  context  of norms,  the  ordinary  under-
standings  face  a serious  conceptual  problem.

3.  Legal responses. - A well-functioning  society  needs  many  norms
that make  it rational for people,  acting in  their self-interest,  to avoid  col-
lective  action  problems.  When  such  problems  exist,  it is  because  of the
social  norms  that  make  rational  self-interest  take  a  certain  form-in
favor, for example, of refusing  to clean up or otherwise failing to contrib-
ute to shared projects. 2 05  If we draw back from the  puzzles just discussed,
we can  make  a simple point for simple  cases:  A large task for society and'
for law is  to try  to inculcate  the relevant  norms.  Effective  responses  pro-
mote  efficiency 20 6 and simultaneously enhance  a form of freedom by pro-
ducing outcomes  that citizens reflectively judge best but cannot obtain on
their  own.

Much  legal  regulation  has  this  goal.  Such  regulation  might  even
consist of direct coercion,  designed  to generate  good norms or to pick up
the slack  in their  absence.  There  are laws  designed  to  ensure  that every-
one picks up after their dog; that people do not litter;  that people  do not
smoke  in  certain  places.  These  laws  are  rarely if ever  enforced  through
criminal  prosecutions.  But  they  have  an  effect  in  shaping  social  norms
and social meanings.  They do this in large  part because there is  a general

205.  Of course it may be  possible to create  property rights  as a way of diminishing  or
eliminating  the collective  action problem.  See Terry L. Anderson  & Donald R. Leal,  Free
Market  Environmentalism  3  (1991).

206.  The complications  from  the  immediately preceding discussion  should be kept in

mind.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 958 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

norm  in  favor  of obeying  the  law.  The  relevant  laws  help  to  inculcate
both shame  and pride;  they help  define  the appropriate  sources of these
things.  (Of  course  people  have  to  be  brought  up  to  have  a  sense  of
shame,  and  to  have  a certain  understanding  of what sorts  of things  call
for shame,  notably  including  certain  paradigm  cases  from  which  analo-
gies appear. 20 7)  They  readjust  the personal  calculation,  making what  is
rational,  and what  is  in  one's self-interest,  different from what  they were
before.

The key point is  that such a change  may be supported by the  reflec-
tive judgments  of  all  or  most  people.  When  it is,  there  should  be  no
objection  in  principle.208  The point very  much  bears  on  the  phenome-
non of norm  bandwagons.  People may actually  reject existing norms but
fail  to  state  their  opposition  publicly,  and  once  public  opposition  be-
comes  less  costly, new  norms  may rapidly come  into  place.

B.  Citizens and Consumers

John Jones,  the protagonist  of the  fifth  tale,20 9  is  in  one  way  quite
usual:  There  is  an  evident  and  pervasive  difference  between  people's
choices  as  consumers  and  their  choices  as  citizens.  This  is  because  peo-
ple  are  choosing quite  different  things.2 1 0  In  their private  capacity, peo-
ple  may watch  silly situation  comedies;  but they may also  support, as  citi-
zens,  the  use  of  government  resources  to  assist  public  broadcasting.
Some  people  seek  stringent  laws  protecting  the  environment  or  endan-
gered  species  even  though  they  do  not  use  the  public  parks  or  derive
material  benefits  from  protection  of  endangered  species-and  even
though  in  their  private  behavior, they  are  unwilling  to  do  much  to  pro-
tect  environmental  amenities.  The  mere  existence  of certain  environ-
mental goods  seems  to be  highly valued by political  participants,  even  if
they are  not willing to  back up the valuation with  dollars in  private  mar-
kets.  Of course  many people  give  to organizations  that  support environ-
mental protection.  But what people favor  as  political participants  can be
different  from what  they favor  as consumers.  It is in  part for  this reason
that  democratic  outcomes  are  distinct  from  those  that  emerge  from
markets.2 1'

In fact a  good deal  of empirical  work shows that people's judgments
about  politics  are  not  a  product  of  their  self-interest,  narrowly  under-

207.  See Churchland, supra note  128, at 272-78  (describing role of paradigm cases  in
mental  functioning);  Charles  E.  Larmore,  Patterns  of  Moral  Complexity  1-5  (1987)
(discussing moral  examples).  Creativity  in  politics and law  usually consists  of assimilating
new  cases  to the  paradigm  ones.  See  Sunstein, Legal Reasoning,  supra note 191,  at ch.  3.
208.  Some  cases  can  be  imagined  in which  the response  would  be invasive  of rights

and therefore,  by hypothesis,  unacceptable.  See  infra Part VII.

209.  See  supra  Part I.E.
210.  See  Sen, supra  note  78,  at 26-31,  34.
211.  Of  course  there  are  other  reasons,  including  the  free-rider  problem,  since

citizens may support laws  for whose  costs  other people are  responsible.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 959 1996

COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

stood.  People  without  health  care  are  not  more  likely  to  support  laws
creating a  right to  health  care;  people  recently  victimized  by  crime  are
not more  likely to  support aggressive  policies  against  crime.  Norms  and
values  are  instead  the principal  determinant  of political judgment.2 12

The disjunction  between  political and consumption  choices presents
a puzzle.  Would  it make  sense  to  say  that consumer behavior  is a better
or more realistic  reflection of "actual" preferences than is  political behav-
ior?2 18  In  light  of the fact  that  choices  depend  on  context,  and  do  not
exist  in  the  abstract,  the very  notion  of a  "better reflection"  of  "actual"
preferences  is  a  confusing one;  there  is  no such  thing as  an  "actual"  (in
the  sense  of unitary  or  acontextual)  preference  in  these  settings.  The
difference  might  be  explained  by  the fact  that political  behavior  reflects
judgments made for a collectivity.2 14  For this reason  it reflects a variety of
social  norms  that are  distinctive  to  the  context  of politics.

Because  of the  governing norms, citizens  may seek to implement  in-
dividual  and  collective  aspirations  in  political  behavior but not in private
consumption. 215  As  citizens,  people may seek the aid  of the law to bring
about  a social  state  that  they  consider  to  be  higher  than  what  emerges
from  market  ordering.  People  may,  in  their  capacity  as  political  actors,
attempt  to  promote  altruistic  or  other-regarding  goals,  which  diverge
from  the self-interested  preferences  sometimes  characteristic  of markets.
Political  decisions might  also  vindicate metapreferences  or second-order
preferences.  People  have wishes  about  their wishes,  and sometimes  they
try  to  vindicate  those  second-order  wishes,  including  considered  judg-
ments about what is  best, through law.  And norms with respect  to public
discussion  may impose  "taxes" on public statements  of various  sorts-per-
haps  requiring  them  to be  "laundered,"21 6  perhaps  inducing  conformity
by  punishing  certain  dissident  views  that  might  be  reflected  in  other
spheres.

In all of these  ways,  the norms at work in democratic  arenas  can  pro-
duce  different  choices  from  those  produced  by  markets.  It  would  be
wrong  to say  that the market choices are  more "real" or "true."  The ques-
tion  of which  choices  should  govern for  purposes  of law  and  policy  de-
pends  on  a range  of contextual  issues  that  cannot  be  resolved  by refer-

212.  See  Dennis  Chong, Values,  Norms,  and  Interests  in  the  Explanation  of Social
Conflict, 144  U.  Pa. L. Rev.  (forthcoming  1996); David  0.  Sears  & Carolyn  L. Funk,  Self-
Interest  in  Americans'  Political  Opinions,  in Beyond  Self-Interest  147,  150-64,  168-70
(JaneJ. Mansbridge  ed.,  1990).

213.  As  suggested in Viscusi,  supra  note  65,  at 4-5.
214.  See  Sen,  supra note  78,  at 29.
215.  This is  a  possibility  and only  a  contingent  one.  We  could  imagine  a  society  in
which  people  were  self-interested  in  political  behavior  but  aspirational  in  markets  or  at
least civil  society.  What I  am discussing  here  is a function  of prevailing norms.

216.  See Robert E.  Goodin, Laundering  Preferences,  in Foundations  of Social  Choice
Theory  75,  86-91  (Jon  Ester  & Aanund  Hylland  eds.,  1986).  By  "laundering"  Goodin
means a  form of cleaning,  whereby  preferences,  expressed  in  public,  are stated  in  terms
that avoid  what speakers  consider  illegitimate  or invidious.  See  id. at 75-76.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 960 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS  AND SOCIAL  ROLES

ence  to  notions  of  "choice"  and  "preference"  alone.  Of  course  some
collective judgments might be wrong, productive  of inefficiency,  invasive
of rights, or  confused.  I take  up this  point below.

C.  Risk, Autonomy,  and Well-Being

Thus far I have tried to avoid the most  controversial questions  and to
build from common understandings.  Let us venture now into more  com-
plicated  territory,  connected  with  the  ideas of well-being  and  autonomy.
Outside  of the domain  of autonomy, we  might  think  that  there  are
obstacles  to well-being  in norms  that encourage  people  to take high  risks
simply  because  the  failure  to  do  so  signals-in  light  of  those  norms-
cowardice  or worse.  Suppose  that people  engage in  certain behavior  not
because  of its intrinsic  value  but because  of the reputational  cost  of fail-
ing  to  do  so.  We  are  dealing,  then,  with  classes  of cases  in  which  the
danger  accompanying  choice  means  that  intrinsic  utility is  not high  but
risk-taking  behavior  persists  because  of social  norms.  Suppose  too  that
people  dislike  the norms  that generate  that reputational  cost,  or  that on
reflection,  people  would  dislike  those  norms.  If  so,  norms  that  en-
courage  people  to  carry  guns,  use  dangerous  drugs,  drive  well  over  the
speed limit, engage  in unsafe  sex, and so  forth may properly be  an object
of governmental  attack, because  of their potentially  pernicious  effects  on
people's lives.  Information  and persuasion  are probably  the best tools for
government  to  use.  But  in  some  cases  economic  incentives  or  coercion
may  be justified.

Of course  a  liberal  society  might  also  want  to  ensure  that all  of its
citizens  are  autonomous. 2 1 7  For the  moment let us  understand  that no-
tion in  a way  that leaves  open  many questions but that will be  helpful for
our limited purposes  here.  A citizen  can  be  understood  as autonomous
insofar  as  she  is  able  to  choose  among  a set  of reasonably  good  options
and  to be  reflective  and  deliberative  about  her  choice.2 18  A society  can
be  understood  as  self-governing,  and  as  politically  autonomous,  to  the
extent  that its citizens  face  a range  of reasonably  good options  and exer-
cise  capacities  of reflection  and  deliberation  about their  choice.

It should be  clear that social norms, meanings,  and roles may under-
mine  individual  autonomy.  Above  all  this is  because  norms  can compro-
mise  autonomy  itself, by  stigmatizing  it.  People  may  believe,  on  reflec-
tion, that the act of being well-educated  should not be a source of shame;
but in some  communities,  a good  deal  of education  may be  inconsistent
with  prevailing  social  norms.2 1 9  Or exposure  to  diverse  options,  and  re-

217.  A form  of liberal  perfectionism  is defended  in  Raz, supra  note  22,  at 369-429.
218.  Cf.  Anderson,  supra  note  23,  at  141-43  (discussing  autonomy  and  market

choice).

219.  This is very much  true with respect to employment for women.  See,  e.g., Martha
Chen, A  Matter of Survival:  Women's  Right  to Employment  in India  and Bangladesh,  in
Women,  Culture, and Development:  A Study of Human Capabilities  37, 37-50  (Martha  C.
Nussbaum  &Jonathan  Glover  eds.,  1995).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 961 1996

COLUMBIA LAW REVEW

[Vol.  96:903

flection  about which  is best,  may seem  inconsistent  with  existing  norms.
In  such  cases  autonomy  cannot  easily220  exist  without  collective  assist-
ance;  people  are  able  to  produce  the  norms,  meanings,  and  roles  that
they  reflectively  endorse  only  with  governmental  involvement.  Some-
thing must be  done  collectively  if the situation  is  to  be  changed.

To promote  autonomy, a  society might seek  to ensure  that  everyone
has a minimal degree  of education,  a certain  level  of exposure  to  diverse
conceptions  of the good, and what  might be  considered  the material  ba-
ses  of autonomy:  food,  shelter,  and freedom  from  criminal  violence. 22 1
In  modest forms  this project  is  fully  compatible  with  political  liberalism;
perfectionist  liberals  might insist on  a good  deal  in  this  vein  in  order to
allow  people  to  be  (more  or less)  masters  of the narratives  of their own
lives. 222  In  either  case,  social  norms  can undermine  the  liberal  project,
and government  might try  to alter them  in order  to  promote  autonomy.
People  may have  adopted prevailing  norms rationally  in view  of limits  in
existing  opportunities,  as when  norms  discourage  schooling  for  people
whose prospects  are poor;2 23 but such norms are  nonetheless an  obstacle
to  autonomy.

A  government  that  seeks  to  promote  autonomy  might  well  work
against efforts  by subcommunities  to require  conformity to a single  defin-
ing  creed.  In  fact  conflicts  between  antidiscrimination  principles  and
religious  liberty  have  everything  to  do  with  perceived  limits  on  govern-
mental  ability  to  change  norms,  meanings,  and  roles  in  subgroups  that
deny  autonomy.  These  conflicts  are  generally  resolved  in  favor  of  the
latter,  especially in the area of sex equality.  But if we  attend to the auton-
omy-denying  effects  of norms and meanings,  it might well  make  sense  to
resolve  the  conflicts  against subgroups,  even  religious  ones.

D.  Caste

Social  norms,  social  meanings,  and  social  roles bear  very  much  on
problems  of  discrimination.  For someone  who  is  African-American,  fe-
male,  or handicapped,  existing meanings  are  possible  obstacles  to auton-
omy  or  well-being.  The  social  meaning  of being  female,  for  example,
may bear  on a  range  of choices  at home  and  in  the workforce.  So,  too,
for  the  social  meaning  of  particular  choices  by  women,  which  may  di-
verge  sharply  from  similar  choices  from  men:  not  to  have  children,  to

220.  Of course  some people may  be  able  to  defy existing  norms  against  autonomy.
221.  See  Raz,  supra note  22,  at 407-08.
222.  See  id. at 408.
223.  Cf. Elster,  supra  note  101,  at  109-40  (describing  adaptive  preferences);  Sen,
Commodities and Capabilities, supra note 130, at 81-83  (in India,  the "perception of relative
needs  of different members  of the family may be closely related to  social influences").  Just
as  preferences  can  be adaptive  to  an  unjust status quo,  so  can  norms  and meanings  be  a
predictable  outgrowth  of limited  autonomy  or heteronomy.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 962 1996

1996]

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

work as  an  airline pilot,  to hate cooking,  to dress in  a certain  way.224  We
have  seen  that  a  status  is  a  particular  kind  of role;  statuses  are  imposed
rather  than chosen.  Thus statuses are  an occasional  target of law.  In par-
ticular,  law might attempt to  overcome  a  collective  action problem  faced
by victims  of discrimination  in changing prevailing  norms, meanings, and
roles.

In American  law,  problems  of discrimination  typically raise  issues  of
caste.  We  might say that we  have a system with  caste-like  features when  a
highly visible  and  morally irrelevant  factor  is turned,  by social  and legal
practices,  into a systematic  source  of societal  disadvantage.2 25  An  impor-
tant and  disastrous  feature  of this  situation  is  the  signalling effect  of  the
characteristic  that is  shared  by lower  caste  members.  That characteristic
promotes  a  certain  social  role  for  caste  members,  since  it  is  associated
with  a range  of undesirable  or otherwise  stigmatizing traits.  Often  an  at-
tack  on  a  caste  system  amounts  to  an  attack  on  that  social  role  and  its
associated  social  norms-especially  as  a  result  of  behavioral  norms
shared,  or  thought  to be  shared,  by members  of the  lower  caste.2 26  For
lower caste members,  the problem  is that the shared characteristic  carries
with  it  a  meaning-stupidity,  passivity,  venality-that  cannot  be  con-
trolled by individual  agents.

Laws forbidding  discrimination might well  have,  as one  of their pur-
poses and effects,  a change  in  the signalling  effect of the relevant  charac-
teristic.  They  might  be  designed  to  encourage  people  to  be  self-con-
scious  about  registering  the  preexisting  signal.

Suppose,  for  example,  that it was  thought  important  to  alter  social
norms about gender  relations.  The social role  of "being a woman" is asso-
ciated with  a wide range  of social  norms and social meanings.  There  are
many  examples  from  the  present  and  recent  past.  Thus  it  may be  that
women  do the majority of domestic  labor.  In  these  circumstances,  a man
who  does  most  of  the  domestic  labor  might  seem  odd,  or  in  some way
woman-ish,  and  a woman who  asks for something like equality  in  domes-
tic labor might seem odd, selfish, or in some way man-ish. 227  Or a woman
in  her fifties  might be  seen  as fundamentally  different from a man  in his
fifties,  because  of social  norms  associated  with  gender.  Or  a  single wo-
man  might  be stigmatized,  or  inquired  about, in ways  fundamentally  dif-
ferent from what  happens to  a similarly  situated man.  Or a woman  who

224.  For what might be seen  as an argument  in  favor of changing the  social meaning

of biological  characteristics,  see Case,  supra  note  71,  at 9-36.

225.  See  Cass  R. Sunstein,  The Partial  Constitution  338-46  (1993);  Cass  R. Sunstein,

The Anticaste Principle,  92  Mich.  L. Rev.  2410,  2428-33  (1994).

226.  Note  in  this  regard  Richard  Wright's  suggestion  that unlike  most blacks  in  the
south,  he would  "act straight and human."  See Richard  Wright,  Black Boy:  A Record  of
Childhood  and Youth  162  (1937).  Wright  says that most blacks,  even  those who felt great
resentment,  pretended  to accept  their  inferior position.  See  id.  at 160-62.

227.  Cf. Zelizer, supra note 59,  at 36-70 (discussing "dole" and "allowance"  in context

of use of domestic  money  by women).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 963 1996

964

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

complains  about apparently  mild forms of sexual  harassment might seem
to  be  a  radical, "a troublemaker,  or  someone without  a  sense  of humor.
For lower  caste  members,  a  wide  range  of "choices"  might  emerge
from  the  underlying  social  norms.  These  choices  might  reflect  adapta-
tion by lower caste members to existing injustice;  they might be a product
of the  social  opprobrium  attached  to violation  of social  norms  by lower
caste  members.228  The  choices  might  even  be  called  "preferences";229
certainly desires  can be  affected.  But many women believe  on reflection
that  the  social  meaning  of being  a  woman  is  bad  for  them  and  that  it
should  be  changed.  These  women  face  a collective  action  problem  that
may  be  solved  best via law.23 0  In  any  case  a  caste  system  tends  to  deny
autonomy  to lower  caste members.  Thus we  have a particular  reason  for
legal intervention:  to overcome  the obstacles  to autonomy produced  by a
system  of caste,  obstacles  that  cannot  be  overcome  by individual  agents.
This  is simply  a stylized  discussion  of the  problems  faced  by people
who  live  within  a  caste  system,  and-who  might  seek  to  enlist the  law  to
make  things better.

E.  The Expressive Function of Law

Many  laws  have  an  expressive  function.  They  "make  a  statement"
about how much, and how, a good or bad should be valued.  They are  an
effort to constitute  and  to affect social meanings,  social norms, and social
roles.  Most  simply,  they  are  designed  to  change  existing  norms  and  to
influence  behavior in  that fashion.

Of course  human  goods  are valued  in  different ways;  people  have  a
wide variety of evaluative stances toward relationships  and goods. 2 3 1  Laws
with expressive  functions  are  often  designed  to promote  a certain  way of
valuing certain  goods.  Many such  laws are  intended  to  say  that specified
goods  should be  valued in a way that deters thinking of them  as mere objects for
use.  Laws  forbidding  the  purchase  and  sale  of  certain  goods  can  be  so
understood.  A  ban  on  the  sale  of  children  is  designed  (among  other
things)  to  say that  children  should  be  valued  in  a  way  that  forbids  the
acceptance  of cash  as  a  reason  for  taking  them  out of parental  care.  A
ban on vote-selling can  be viewed similarly.  We might understand  such a
law as an effort to make  a certain  statement about  the pricelessness-not

228.  See  Kuran, supra note 17, at 196-204 (discussing  preference adaptation  of lower

caste members  in India).

229.  See  Becker,  supra  note  31  (adopting  an  economic  approach 

to  family
relationships  and  choices);  cf.  Amartya  K  Sen,  Gender  and  Cooperative  Conflicts,  in
Persistent Inequalities  123,  126-28  (Irene  Tinker ed.,  1990)  (describing social  factors that
lead  women  to adapt to,  and accept,  injustice).

230.  See Kuran, supra note  17, at 134 ("Because society will generally ostracize anyone
who  abandons  the  caste  system,  the  potential  member  of an  anticaste  colony is likely  to
withhold his participation until it appears likely to succeed.  With  other potential  members
reasoning likewise,  the colony will  remain  unformed.").
231.  See Anderson,  supra note  23,  at  1-16.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 964 1996

1996]

SOCTAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

the  infinite  value-of the  right to  vote.  In  the  environmental  area,  de-
bates  over  market  valuation  are  partly  debates  over  this  question. 23 2
Some  people  think  that  market  valuation  should  be  viewed  with  suspi-
cion;  it  threatens  to  affect  social  norms  and social  meanings  in  undesir-
able  ways.

Laws  with  expressive  justifications  are  most  plausibly  defended  on
the ground  that  they  will  in  fact  affect  social  norms  and move  them  in
appropriate  directions. 23 3  But at this stage there  are empirical  questions:
Do laws  really affect social  norms and social  meanings?  Under what con-
ditions?  Much  work remains  to be  done  on  these  important  questions.

VII.  BLOCKED  GROUNDS

What  I  have  suggested  here should  unsettle  some  common  under-
standings  about  government  "paternalism"  and  "meddling."  If private
choices  are a function  of roles,  norms,  and meanings  over  which  private
people  have  no  sovereignty,  many  imaginable  initiatives  are  consistent
with  individual  autonomy,  rightly  conceived.  But  this  conclusion  ought
not  to  suggest  that  government  should  be  licensed  to  do  whatever  it
wishes.  There  should be firm limits on government's  efforts to engage  in
norm  management.

Of  course  government  action  should  often  be  rejected  on  simple
pragmatic  grounds-because,  for  example,  it  is  likely  to  be  futile  or
counterproductive. 23 4  The  "just say  no"  campaign  with  respect  to  drug
use  probably falls  in  this  category.  Perhaps  efforts  to  stigmatize  teenage
smoking will  backfire  and  make  smoking seem  bold or  glamorous.  Per-
haps  government  has  mistakenly  concluded  that there  is  a  collective  ac-
ton  problem  calling  for  governmental  response.  Perhaps  most  people
are  happy  that littering  is not stigmatized.

It  is  also  true  that  government  interference  with  norms,  roles,  or
meanings  might  compound  a collective  action  problem,  aid  well-organ-
ized private groups  promoting unjust goals,  or aggravate  a caste-like  situa-
tion.  Imagine  an  effort to promote the use of cigarettes,  alcohol,  or drugs,
or to  discourage the buckling  of seat  belts, or  to increase  the opprobrium
associated with  the role  of being a homosexual.  Nothing I have  said sug-

232.  See  Steven  Kelman,  What Price Incentives?  52-83  (1981).
283.  See  Zelizer, supra note 27,  at 16-17  (discussing  prohibitions  on  life  insurance).
In  making  these  claims,  I  do  not  endorse  the  use  of  law  to  "make  statements"
independently  of consequences.  Though  I cannot  defend  the point  here, official  use of
law  merely  to  "make  statements"  risks fanaticism  and pointlessness.  See  Sunstein,  supra
note  64.  Indeed,  emphasis  on  consequences-and  on  the  empirical  questions  raised by
arguments  over consequences-has  the salutary function  of reducing the volume and  the
heat raised  by policy disputes.  It does so by shifting debate from basic values  to issues that
are,  at least  in principle,  subject  to empirical  testing.  I  believe  that this  is an  important
social  function of approaches  to law  and policy that are based  on consequences;  it is also
part  of the  appeal  of utilitarianism.

234.  Cf. Raz,  supra note  22,  at 428-29  (discussing pragmatic objections  to  pursuit of

perfectionist  policies).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 965 1996

COLUMBIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

gests  that government  is  not properly criticized when  it engages  in  activi-
ties  of this  sort.  But any such  criticism  should  be  on  the  merits,  not on
the  ground  that  government  may  not interfere  with  private  preferences
or  choices.

There is a final  and especially  important point.  A liberal  society lim-
its  the  permissible  bases  for  governmental  action. 23 5  Ordinarily  people
describe  these  limits  as  "rights."  Rights  operate  as  constraints  on  norm
management  as on everything  else  that government does.  A full account
of these limits would be far too ambitious  for an  article of this sort; but a
few notes will  be  helpful.

Some government  action  designed to change  norms, meanings, and
roles  might be  based  on  religious  grounds;  these  should  be  banned  as
reasons for public action.  At least in the American  constitutional  system,
for example,  it is unacceptable  for government  to attempt to legislate on
the  ground  that  the  divinity  of Jesus  Christ  requires  a  certain  state  of
affairs.

It  would  be  equally  unacceptable  to  base  government  action  on
grounds  that  deny  the  basic  equality  of human  beings-as  in  efforts  to
encourage  norms  that treat  members  of racial  minorities  as second-class
citizens.  Many  efforts  to  change  norms  would  impair  autonomy  rather
than promote  it.  If government  attempted  to  promote  norms  ensuring
that women  occupy traditional  roles,  its  attempt would be  illegitimate-
not because  it  is  an  attempt  at norm  management,  but because  the  at-
tempted  management  invades  rights  of sex  equality.

In  any  case  some human  interests  are  properly denominated  rights,
and efforts  to  change  norms,  meanings,  and roles  should not be allowed
to invade  rights.23 6  Many imaginable efforts  ought to be rejected  because
of this  risk.  Consider, for  example,  a suggestion  that  the meaning  of re-
fusing  to  allow  government  officials  into  your  home  is  now  "personal
courage  and  independence"-accompanied  by  the  not  implausible
thought that things would be better  if the meaning were  "unpatriotic un-
willingness  to  cooperate with  the crime-fighting  effort,"  culminating in  a
proposal  that  all people  should  be  required to  open  their homes  to  the
government.  There  is  a  collective  action  problem  here.  But if it  is  be-
lieved that people  should  have  a right to keep government  officials from
their homes,  this  proposal  should be  rejected.

Political liberals  go  further and urge rejection  of any ground for  ac-
tion  that  is  based  on  a  "comprehensive  view."23 7  Of  course  there  are

235.  For discussion, see, e.g.,  Dworkin, supra note 11,  at 266-78;  Larmore, supra  note

207,  at 42-68;  Raz, supra  note  22,  at 400-29.

236.  I  do  not mean  to say anything  here about  the status  or basis  of rights.
237.  See  Larmore,  supra  note 207,  at  40-90  (arguing  that  liberal  government  must
remain  neutral  by not selecting  among  divergent  "conceptions  of the  good  life");  Rawls,
supra  note  190,  at  58-66,  133-72  (describing  political  principles  on  which  those  with
diverse  "comprehensive  views"  can  rely).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 966 1996

19961

SOCIAL  NORMS AND  SOCIAL  ROLES

many  complexities  in  this  claim.238  What is  important  for  present pur-
poses  is  that on  any sound view  of liberalism,  there  is  no  general basis,  in
principle, for objection to proposals  of the sort I have suggested.  Political
liberals  ought  to  acknowledge,  for  example,  that  social  roles  and social
meanings  may  undermine  the  equality  and  liberty  of  citizens  and  that
changes  require  collective  action.  The  constraints  imposed  by  political
liberalism  impose no  bans  on  those  changes.

CONCLUSION

Many claims  about the appropriate  limits of law are insufficiently  ap-
preciative  of  the  pervasive  effects  of social  norms,  social  meanings,  and
social  roles.  In  fact  these  effects  have yet  to  receive  much  attention.239
But-to say the least-the  impact of law on human  behavior is  an impor-
tant matter for lawmakers  to understand,  and that impact has  everything
to do with  social  norms.  An  understanding of norms will  therefore  help
illuminate effective  regulatory policy.  Many  of the most dramatic gains  in
health  and  safety  policy  are  a  product  of changes  in norms,  meanings,
and roles.  Many  of the  most severe  problems  in  current  societies  are  a
product of unfortunate  norms,  meanings,  and roles.

Norms relate  to some broader issues  as well.  Often  it is  said that the
common  law,  and  a  liberal  regime  dedicated  to  freedom,  take  "prefer-
ences" as  they are and do not seek to change  them.  But the term "prefer-
ences" is  highly ambiguous.  If the term  is  meant  to refer  to  "choices,"  it
should  be understood  that  choices  are  very much  a function  of context,
including governing norms, meanings,  and roles.  Certainly the particular
choices  made  by people  in  markets-in  their  capacity  as  consumers  or
laborers-do  not  suggest  global  or  acontextual  valuations  of  relevant
goods.  If the  term  "preferences"  is meant  to refer  not  to  choices  but to
the motivational  and mental states  behind choices,  it is important  to  rec-
ognize  that  those  mental  states  include  assessments  of social  norms,  the
expressive  meaning  of acts,  and  the  expectations  associated  with  a  daz-
zling  variety  of social  roles.  Norms  and  roles  affect  both  public  action
and  public  talk,  in  ways  that  can  much  disguise  how  people  think  pri-
vately.  This  point has  large  implications.  In  many settings,  it would  be
best  to  dispense  with  the  idea  of  "preferences,"  and  to  shift  instead  to
more  concrete  ideas,  including  intrinsic  value,  reputational  effects,  and
effects  on  self-conception.

238.  See Rawls,  supra  note  190,  at 183-72.
239.  The  principal  contributions  are  Dan M.  Kahan,  What Do Alternative  Sanctions
Mean?,  63  U.  Chi. L.  Rev.  (forthcoming  1996)  (discussing  how  norms  affect  the  public
assessment  of  criminal  punishment);  Lessig,  supra  note  24  (arguing  that  law  should
account for, and regulate, social meaning); and from a different direction, Ellickson, supra
note 51  (discussing norm of neighborliness  in land-use bargaining);  see also Kuran,  supra
note  17  (describing  role  of  "preference  falsification"  in  reflecting  and  shaping  social
norms).

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 967 1996

COLUMBIA LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  96:903

We  have  also  seen  that norms  can  be  far more  fragile  than  they  ap-
pear.  Hence  "norm  entrepreneurs"  can  help  solve  collective  action
problems,  and  hence  "norm  bandwagons"  and  cascades  are  common.
Sometimes law interacts  with  the efforts  of norm  entrepreneurs,  facilitat-
ing  or blunting  their  efforts,  and  sometimes  law ratifies  or accelerates-
or  halts-norm  bandwagons  and  cascades.

While  social  life would  be impossible without  norms, meanings,  and
roles,  individual  people  have  little  control  over these  things.  The  result
can be severe limits on human  well-being and  autonomy.  Certainly  there
is a problem with existing norms when  all or almost all people would  seek
a  change.  There  may  well  be  a  problem  when  reputational  incentives
lead  people  to  do what  they would  otherwise  refuse  to  do, at least if the
relevant norms deny people  the preconditions for autonomy or otherwise
undermine  well-being.  In  fact  lives  are  shortened  and  unjustified  in-
equalities  are  perpetuated  by the  existence  of many  current  norms.

People need collective  help if they want to change  norms, meanings,
or  roles.  Collective  help  may  be  futile  or  counterproductive;  it may  be
illegitimately  motivated.  But  these  matters  require  an  inquiry  into  the
particular  context.  The  issue  should  not be  foreclosed  by resort  to  con-
fusing claims  about the need  to  respect  private  choice.

HeinOnline  -- 96 Colum. L. Rev. 968 1996

