 Cass R. Sunstein* * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This is a written version of the Goase Lecture, delivered at the University of Chicago on November 28, 1995. I am grateful to Bruce Ackerman, Richard Craswell, Gertrud Fremling, Elizabeth Garrett, Daniel Kahan, William Landes, Larry Lessig, John Lott, Martha Nussbaum, Susan Moller Okin, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Joseph Raz, David Strauss, and Richard Thaler for valuable discussions and comments. I am also grateful to participants in very helpful workshops at the University of Chicago and at New York University. B. Willingness to Pay vs. Willingness to Accept: The Place A. Ultimatums and Fairness1 Economists have invented a game: the ultimatum game. The people who run the game give some money, on a provisional basis, to the first of two players. The first player is told to offer some part of the money to the second player. If the second player accepts that amount, he can keep what is offered, and the first player gets to keep the rest. But if the second player rejects the offer, neither player gets anything. Both players are informed that these are the rules. No bargaining is allowed. Using standard assumptions about rationality, self-interest, and choice, economists predict that the first-player should offer a penny and the second player should accept. B. Littering Why do people litter? Why don't they throw things out instead? Social psychologist Robert Cialdini tried to find out.3 He placed flyers under the windshield wipers of cars and waited to see what drivers would do with them. Cialdini made arrangements so that before reaching their cars, some people would see someone (a Cialdini associate) walk past them, pick up from the street a bag from a fast-food restaurant, and throw it in the trash can. Of the group who both saw the responsible behavior and noticed the flyers, almost none threw them on the street. In the control experiment, with no one showing responsible behavior, over 1/3 of the drivers threw the flyers on the street.4 C. Smoking, Rationality, and Race About 400,000 Americans die each year from smoking-related causes.5 Government has tried to reduce smoking through educational campaigns designed to inform people of the risks. Indeed the government has now initiated a large-scale program to reduce smoking, especially among teenagers. 6 Despite this fact, about one million Americans begin smoking each year, many of them teenagers, 7 and people worry that educational campaigns will succeed, if at all, only with well-educated people. 2. See Camerer & Thaler, supra note 1, at 210-11. In December 1995, the ultimatum game was played in a law school classroom (consisting of about 70 students) in an experiment run by Richard Thaler and me. The results-consistent with the usual oneswill be discussed in Christine M.Jolls & Richard H. Thaler, Behavioral Law and Economics (1996) (unpublished manuscript). 7. See Michelle Ingrassia & Karen Springen, Waiting to Exhale, Newsweek, May 1, D. Recycling in the Hamptons In East Hampton, New York-part of the famous and wealthy "Hamptons"-what used to be called the East Hampton Dump is now the East Hampton Recycling and Disposal Center. At the East Hampton Recycling and Disposal Center, there are separate bins for green glass, clear glass, newspapers, tin cans, paper other than newspaper, and more. Almost every day in August (the most popular period in the Hamptons), residents can be found patiently separating their garbage for placement in the relevant bins. Sometimes this takes a long time. The people at the Center tend to own expensive cars-Mercedes Benzes, BMWs-that are parked near the bins. As they separate their garbage, they look happy. of his behavior. 1. He buys smoke alarms and installs them in three rooms in his 2. He loves chocolate and ice cream, and eats a lot of both. He also eats a fair amount of frozen foods; he makes sure that they are "lean" whenever he has a choice. According to his doctor, he is slightly over his ideal weight. 5. He buckles his seat belt whenever he is in a car. His own car is a Volvo, and he bought it partly because it is said to be an especially safe car. Is Jones risk-averse or risk-inclined? What is Jones's dollar valuation of a human life, or of his own life? F. The Point of this Article My goal in this article is to challenge some widely held understandings of rationality, choice, and freedom, and to use that challenge to develop some conclusions about human behavior and the appropriate uses and domain of law. I particularly seek to understand and defend the place of law in "norm management." I urge that behavior is pervasively a function of norms; that norms account for many apparent oddities or anomalies' 0 in human behavior; that changes in norms might be the best way to improve social well-being; and that government deserves to have, and in any case inevitably does have, a large role in norm management. 1' As I will suggest, norm management is an important strategy for accomplishing the objectives of law, whatever those objectives may be. One of my goals is to show how this is SO. table:' Deaths from Preventable Risks in the United States Percent of Total Deaths (Range) Total Deaths/yr Tobacco Diet/activity Alcohol Microbial Toxic agents Firearms Sexual behavior Motor vehicles Illicit drugs Existing social norms encourage much risk-taking behavior; and almost all of these risks of death could be much reduced with different norms. Consider smoking, diet/activity, alcohol, firearms, sexual behavior, motor vehicles, and illicit drugs as causes of death. In all these cases, new norms could save lives.' 3 A regulatory policy that targets social norms may well be the cheapest and most effective strategy available to a government seeking to discourage risky behavior. It may complement or work more efficiently than existing regulatory approaches. But part of my motivation is theoretical. It involves a conceptual puzzle. In the last decade there has been an intense debate about whether and to what extent law should try to change people's "preferences.' u 6 But the term "preferences" is highly ambiguous, and it is not clear what 12. Adapted from McGinnis & Foege, supra note 5, at 2208. 13. See Marilyn Chase, Besides Saving Lives, Wearing Helmet When Cycling Is Cool, Wall St. J., Sept. 18, 1995, at B1 (noting dramatically shifting social norms with respect to bicycle helmets); see also Richard E. Nisbett & Dov Cohen, Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence in the South (1996) (discussing role of social norms in producing violence as a result ofjudgments about "honor"). use it as a placeholder for the reader's preferred account. the participants in this debate are actually disputing when they say that "preferences" should or should not be respected by law. I attempt to clarify possible meanings of the term. I also suggest that when the idea of a "preference" is unpacked, it becomes plain that the term is often too abstract and coarse-grained to be a reliable foundation for either normative or positive work. We will thus find reason to doubt the elaborate edifice of social science based on the notion of "preference." The ultimate task is to separate positive, descriptive, and normative inquiries more sharply and, in the process, to try to untangle different motivational states and their influences on choices. points: 1. Existing social conditions are often more fragile than might be supposed, because they depend on social norms to which-and this is the key point-people may not have much allegiance. What I will call norm entrepreneurs-people interested in changing social norms-can exploit this fact. If successful, they produce what I will call norm bandwagons and norm cascades.17 Norm bandwagons occur when small shifts lead to large ones, as people join the "bandwagon"; norm cascades occur when there are rapid shifts in norms. Successful law and policy try to take advantage of learning about norms and norm change. Libertarians, some economic analysts of law, and many liberals22 give inadequate attention to the pervasive functions of social norms, social meanings, and social roles. Often it is said that in a free society, governments should respect both choices and preferences. But the case for re 21. See infra Part Im. I think that Gary Becker moves in the direction of dispensing with the idea in Gary S. Becker, Accounting For Taste (forthcoming 1996), because he disaggregates I am not sure, however, that Becker would accept my characterization. One of my central points here is that individual agents have little control over social norms, social meanings, and social roles, even when they wish these to be very different from what they are. 25 This is not an argument against norms, meanings, and roles. Human beings can live, and human liberty can exist, only within a system of norms, meanings, and roles; but in any particular form, these things can impose severe restrictions on well-being and autonomy. 23. Illuminating discussions include Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics 1-90 (1993); Amartya Sen, Behavior and the Concept of Preference, in Choice, Welfare and Measurement 54 (1982); Jean Hampton, The Failure of Expected-Utility Theory as a Theory of Reason, 10 Econ. & Phil. 195 (1994); Amartya Sen, Internal [hereinafter Sen, Internal Consistency of Choice, 61 Econometrica 495 Consistency]. 24. For especially instructive discussion, see Lawrence Lessig, The Regulation of Social Meaning, 62 U. Chi. L. Rev. 943 (1995). Though I have referred to this paper at various points, my presentation here owes a general debt to Lessig's argument and in particular to his emphasis on the collective action problem presented by social meanings. See id. at 991-1016. 31. This is the idea behind much of Gary Becker's work. See, e.g., Gary S. Becker, A Treatise on the Family (enI. ed. 1991). For Becker's most recent statement-which is, I believe, in a somewhat different spirit-see Becker, supra note 21. In this section I discuss three ideas that will play an important part throughout this Article: social norms, social roles, and social meanings. Social norms are the most central of these, since they provide the foundation for both social roles and social meanings. I also connect these ideas to problems of collective action, movements for legal and social change, and some issues about the goals and functions of law. 1. In general. - The term "social norms" might be understood in many different ways.3 6 For present purposes the differences among the possible definitions are not very important, and we can rely on conventional understandings. If a definition is thought necessary, we might, very roughly, understand "norms" to be social attitudes of approval and disapproval, specifying what ought to be done and what ought not to be done. Some norms set good manners, for example, about how to hold one's fork; others reflect morally abhorrent views, as in the taboo on interracial relations; others reflect hard-won moral commitments, as in the norm against racial epithets. In fact there are social norms about nearly every aspect of human behavior. There are norms about littering, dating, smoking, singing, when to stand, when to sit, when to show anger, when, how, and with whom to express affection, when to talk, when to listen, when to discuss personal matters, when to use contractions, when (and with respect to what) to purchase insurance. 37. See Elster, The Cement of Society, supra note 26, at 132-33. 38. I do not offer an account here of the emergence of norms. For relevant discussion, see Elster, The Cement of Society, supra note 26; Allan Gibbard, Wise Choices, Apt Feelings: A Theory of Normative Judgment (1990); Cristina Bicchieri, Norms of Cooperation, 100 Ethics 838 (1990). Nor do I discuss the relationship between social norms and moral judgments about, for example, fairness. Social norms are sometimes supported by such judgments, but sometimes not. Social norms are sometimes a product of such judgments, but sometimes not. On the relation between behavior and judgments about fairness-more precisely, in my view, social norms rooted in judgments of fairnesssee Daniel Kahneman et al., Fairness and the Assumptions of Economics, in Richard H. Thaler, Quasi Rational Economics 220 (1991). Changes in social norms can influence choices if intrinsic value is held constant, by altering the effects of reputational incentives and consequences for self-conception. 43 If littering produces shame or disapproval, behavior will shift; if race discrimination produces reputational cost rather than benefit, fewer people will discriminate on the basis of race; if parenthood out of wedlock is stigmatized, there should be less parenthood out of wedlock.44 Indeed, obedience of law is built in large 42. Cf. Kuran, supra note 17, at 24-38, which has much influenced my presentation here. Kuran discusses reputational and intrinsic utility; he also refers to what he calls "expressive utility," by which he means the expressive value of the act. See id. at 30-35. Some people may, for example, want to deviate from existing norms because of the expressive value of deviation. But I think it is better to speak of effects on the agent's selfconception; this is a more general idea that includes, but is not limited to, what Kuran calls expressive value. in an Urban Community 112-37 (1990) (describing impact of social norms on patterns of childbirth and parenting). correlation between fear of peer disapproval and compliance). 50. Cf. Holmes, supra note 22 (arguing that constitutional constraints improve governance). There are many possible reasons for rejecting prevailing norms. Some people depart from the prevailing norm because of their reflective judgments. Such people think, on reflection, that the norm is too silly or too unworthy to affect behavior, or that relevant roles diminish autonomy or well-being. Marrying someone of a different race may reflect thisjudg 51. See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, The Emergence of Norms 18-133 (1977). For an important discussion of how norms produce social order, and solve collective action problems, in the absence of legal constraints, see Robert C. Ellickson, Order Without Law (1991). But norm changes need not produce Pareto improvements; there can be losers as well as winners even in the face of a solution to a collective action problem, as when, for example, some members of a small group reject a ban on littering. Moreover, there is a crucial question about which norms are taken as given, and which are put up for grabs, in the sort of analysis that celebrates certain norms as solving collective action problems. See infra Part VI.A. For an illuminating discussion of why norms might be inefficient, see Eric A. Posner, Law, Economics, and Inefficient Norms, 144 U. Pa. L. Rev. (forthcoming 1996). A growing literature discusses the place of norms in ordering behavior entirely outside of law. See, e.g., Lisa Bernstein, Opting Out of the Legal System: Extralegal Contractual Relations in the Diamond Industry, 21 J. Legal Stud. 115 (1992); Robert D. Cooter, Structural Adjudication and the New Law Merchant: A Model of Decentralized Law, 14 Int'l Rev. L. & Econ. 215 (1994). This literature raises interesting questions about the extralegal development of norms and the extent to which law should build on those norms. gender inequality in domestic labor). in the spirit of what I am suggesting here: [I]t's simply not true that cultural changes and legal bars, together, cannot work to reduce consumption .... If you make it clearly illegal, more inaccessible, you reduce the lure of advertising, and then you have an affirmative campaign, a positive campaign, so that you don't say, "Just Say No." You give young people information and you make it the smart, the cool, the hip thing to do to take care of yourself and keep yourself healthy and alive. 5. Norms and nonfungible cash. - Because of prevailing social norms within relevant communities, money itself is not fungible.5 9 The point deserves separate discussion, for it has particular importance for law and legal policy, and it has not received the attention it deserves. a variety of domestic "cash stashes"-"generally one in the billfold of each adult, children's allowances and piggy banks, a 'petty cash' fund in a teapot-equivalent, a dish of change for parking meters or laundry"-or "banked stashes of money," including Christmas club savings and accounts designated for spe unthought"). 59. See generally Viviana A. Zelizer, The Social Meaning of Money (1994) (proposing differentiated model of money that recognizes certain monies as nonfungible, nonportable, subjective, and heterogeneous). manuscript, on file with the Columbia Law Review). Social theorists have often feared that the use of money would "flatten" social life, by erasing qualitative distinctions among goods. Ironically, however, social life, pervaded as it is by social norms, has "unflattened" money by insisting on qualitative distinctions. 62 "There is no single, uniform, generalized money, but multiple monies: people earmark different currencies for many or perhaps all types of social interactions .... And people will in fact respond with anger, shock, or ridicule to the 'misuse' of monies for the wrong circumstances or social relations .... The existence of norms involvng money suggests that it may not be possible to infer global judgments from particular consumption choices that are dependent on context-specific norms. Of course a wide range of norms ban the use of dollars as a reason for action, and sometimes law fortifies such norms; consider prohibitions on prostitution, vote-trading, and surrogate parenthood. 64 Here, however, I am concerned with norms that "subsidize" or "tax" certain uses of money. The point is important because economists often claim that particular choices demonstrate or reveal general valuations. 65 But this may be a mistake, because particular choices are a function of social norms that may be limited to the particular context. In a different context, the governing norms may be quite different. Thus, for example, the refusal to insure certain goods may be a product of social norms that are limited to the particular context of insurance. If so, it may be wrong to draw from insurance choices general conclusions about (say) the appropriate domain of tort law.66 1. In general. - Many norms are intensely role-specific, and law is often self-consciously concerned with social roles. Because the subject of roles raises distinctive issues, I now discuss some of the relationships among roles, norms, and law. 67. Cf.John R. Searle, The Construction of Social Reality 127-47 (1995) (describing the "background" knowledge which is necessary to constitute a role as I understand it here). (discussing exclusionary reasons). Often law tries to redefine roles. In recent years, this has happened with respect to the roles of employee, husband, father, disabled person, and judge. Thus, for example, the law has said that husbands may not rape their wives; that absent fathers owe duties of support to their children; that disabled people have certain rights of access to the workplace. All of these measures can be seen as attempts to create new or better norms to define the relevant roles. 70. Cf. infra note 226. 71. See infra Part VI.D. An illuminating discussion in the context of gender is Mary Anne C. Case, Disaggregating Gender from Sex and Sexual Orientation: The Effeminate Man in The Law and FeministJurisprudence, 105 Yale LJ. 1 (1995). In addition, citizens do or say things just because of existing social norms, which impose sanctions on publicly expressed dissident behavior or judgments; in their private capacity, people may be freer to do or say as they (in a sense, and subject to the prevailing norms) wish. In all cases the difference is connected to the fact that a citizen is helping to make a judgment not simply for himself but for a collectivity. 7" In this sense there are important contextual differences between market behavior and voting behavior. The former does not affect the collectivity in the same way, and hence those concerned, for example, with protecting the environment may believe that their own behavior is largely irrelevant, whereas distinction between citizen and consumer). Ticket." Unfortunately, the poem is truly horrible: I am unjust, but I can strive for justice. My life's unkind, but I can vote for kindness. I, the unloving, say life should be lovely. I, that am blind, cry out against my blindness. no more than a single market decision. In fact many efforts to change law are at least partly an outgrowth of the difference between citizens and consumers.8 0 Consider laws outlawing sexual harassment, providing incentives to share domestic labor,8' or granting workers a right to unionize. It should be clear that in such cases, there is no simple relationship among choices, preferences, norms, and roles. There may be conflict or tension between two or more of these. Social norms help people assign "social meaning" to "human behavior. With this term I refer to the expressive dimension of conduct (not excluding speech) in the relevant community.8 2 Social meaning is a product of social norms.8 3 The expressive dimension of conduct is, very simply, the attitudes and commitments that the conduct signals. A complex body of First Amendment doctrine deals with the problem of "expressive conduct," that is, acts that carry an expressive purpose and effect, such as flag-burning and draft card-burning.84 But most conduct (including words) has an expressive function-not in the sense that the actor necessarily intends to communicate a message, but in the sense that people will take the conduct to be expressing certain attitudes and commitments.8 5 Advertisers are, of course, well aware of this point, and much advertising is an effort to affect the social meaning of a product or of a purchasing decision.86 Thus ad 78. The very idea that I treat the prevention of environmental damage just like buying a private good is itself quite absurd. The amount I am ready to pay for my toothpaste is typically not affected by the amount you pay for yours. But it would be amazing if the payment I am ready to make to save nature is totally independent of what others are ready to pay for it, since it is specifically a social concern. The 'lone ranger' model of environmental evaluation confounds the nature of the problem at hand. from citizen judgments). vertisements often focus not on the intrinsic value of the product, but instead on its reputational value and (equally important) its consequences for self-conception-making the purchaser seem smart, sophisticated, and in control of the situation. Political advertisements can have similar functions. They often attempt to alter the social meaning of a vote by making the opponent's supporters seem like whiners or dupes and voters for the advertised candidate seem decent and good. Language also has social meanings, extending far beyond the words themselves and reflected in the attitudes and commitments signalled by how people talk. Context determines those meanings. The words, 'You look great today," can have many different possible social meanings. Consider their use from a mother to a fifteen-year-old daughter, from a male employer to a female employee, from a doctor to a convalescent patient, from a homosexual male student to a male classmate. If you refer to women as "ladies," you are also making (whatever your intentions) a certain set of statements about yourself and about your views on gender issues. A description of certain Americans as "blacks" will have a different meaning in 1996 (after the rise of the term "African-American") from what it was in (say) 1976. are confused and need a superior mind, but instead feel superior in their capacity to hire a servant. What is the relationship among social norms, social roles, and social meanings? As I have said, social norms determine the social meaning of action. Social roles are similarly a product of social norms. But social norms can also be an artifact of social meaning. Suppose that the social meaning of condom use is a confession, an accusation, 94 or a statement, "I am not a spontaneous person." If so, there will be a social norm discouraging condom use.95 There are many public efforts to change this norm.9 6 Social norms can also be produced by social roles. A university teacher has a certain role, and the social norms governing acts by such a teacher-use of a first name, informal clothing, references to popular music-are an outgrowth of that role. Of course roles have no content apart from social norms. Suppose that the social meaning of a male teenager's refusal to fight when insulted is, "I am cowardly." The norm in favor of fighting, in such circumstances, is a product of the role. There is now a public effort to change this very norm.97 93. See Zelizer, supra note 27, at 41-89 (describing changing social meaning of life insurance). Life insurance companies engaged in self-conscious efforts at norm management, from the view that life should not be commodified or an object of gamble, to the view that good fathers and husbands, at least, protect their families in this fashion: "'The necessity that exists for every head of family to make proper provision for the sustenance of those dear to him after his death, is freely acknowledged and there is no contingency whereby a man can stand excused from making such a provision.'" Id. at 56 (quoting Manhattan Life Insurance Co., Life Insurance 19 (1852)). 97. Thus there is an effort to publicize a new symbol: a fist covered by a hand. The meaning of this symbol is: Though I am offended, I will not fight. The publicity campaign is designed to change the meaning of a refusal to fight back. I have noted that social norms can make people act and talk publicly in ways that are different from how they actually think, or from how they act and talk privately. It is time to explore this point. Political actors might be able to exploit private dissatisfaction with existing norms in order to bring about large-scale social change. In fact many political participants can be described as norm entrepreneurs; consider Martin Luther King, Jr., William Bennett, Louis Farrakhan, Catharine MacKinnon, Ronald Reagan, and Jerry Falwell. As we have seen, individuals who favor changes in norms face a free rider problem; norm entrepreneurs can alert people to the existence of a shared complaint and can suggest a collective solution. Thus political actors, whether public or private, can exploit widespread dissatisfaction with existing norms by (a) signalling their own commitment to change, (b) creating coalitions, (c) making defiance of the norms seem or be less costly, and (d) making compliance with new norms seem or be more beneficial. We might say that the intrinsic value of some option may be held constant, but the reputational and self-conception values may shift dramatically. Choices, meanings, roles, and norms are commonly based on beliefs about relevant facts. Someone may believe, for example, that cigarette smoking is not dangerous, and he may smoke partly for that reason. If he really believed that smoking was dangerous, perhaps he would not smoke.'0 5 Choices are pervasively a function of beliefs. The same is true for social norms. Consider the dramatic recent shifts in social norms governing smoking. Such norms have a great deal to do with prevailing beliefs about whether smoking causes harm to nonsmokers. When the belief shifts, the norm shifts as well.10 6 Norms about behavior are interpenetrated with beliefs about harm and risk. Thus many religiously-grounded norms about personal cleanliness and hygiene owe their origins to beliefs about what is healthy; but the norms often outstrip the beliefs and receive a kind of moral grounding that is not simply reducible to an instrumental judgment about likely risks. When someone violates a norm relating to hygiene, people's reaction is different-more stern and more deeply moralized-than it would be if the reaction were based solely on the incremental increase in risk. smoking). (exploring perceptions of and reactions to risk). If we attend to the functions of norms, meanings, and roles, how will we understand the relationship between choices and preferences? How will we understand the notion of "preference" itself? My proposition here is that attention to the functions of norms, meanings, and roles challenges our understanding of notions like "choice" and "preference" in much of modem social science. 107. See Helen E. Longino, Science as Social Knowledge: Values and Objectivity in The idea of a "preference" might be understood as simply a choice, as in the idea, influential within economics from the work of Paul Samuelson, of the "revealed preference."'' On this view, preferences are choices. This approach seems promising, because it makes it unnecessary to inquire into the mental states that accompany choices. Perhaps we can work from behavior alone, and make predictions on the basis of behavior alone. Perhaps behavior itself will show valuations that can be used not only for positive but also for normative purposes." 2 And there is no doubt that it is illuminating to catalogue choices. 110. The question is not adequately sorted out in the legal literature on both sides of current debates about government respecting "preferences." Thus-to take a not entirely random example-Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Interference With Private Preferences, 53 U. Chi. L Rev. 1129 (1986), takes the term "preferences" as if it is clear; the analysis is weakened by the failure to discuss the ambiguities in the term. In fact extremeness aversion is itself a contextual "taste," one that varies with both setting and governing norms. In a society or subculture in which extremeness is prized, there may be no such aversion (assuming the idea would be intelligible). All of us have seen subcultures in which extremeness is a virtue (and does not quite count as extremeness). In fact many people who are generally averse to extremeness are, in one setting or another, quite willing or even delighted to be extreme; a person who dresses in ordinary ways may be delighted to wear loud ties, or to make odd dessert choices. This is partly because the social meaning of extremeness in that context is different from what it usually is. It may, for example, signal boldness and confidence rather than self-destructiveness and peculiarity. 120. I do not suggest that that choice would be norm-free or that it should be taken as definitive of what preferences "really" are. Normative arguments on the basis of choices alone 12 will also run into serious trouble. After finding that a person or group makes certain choices, we may think we can infer what or how much that person or group values, and from this make policy recommendations about, for example, workplace safety or environmental protection. But this is hazardous. Choices are a function of norms, which may be limited to certain settings. Choices need not suggest acontextual valuation of social goods, and thus even if we want to respect people's valuations, we will have to look not at, but behind, choices. Let us turn, then, to another, more promising conception of a "preference." The term is often meant to refer not to choices themselves, but to something that lies behind, and accounts for, choices. Gary Becker's work is in this tradition.' 24 The idea has obvious advantages. It seeks to provide the motivational story behind choices, and if the motivational story is uncovered (and sufficiently simple), positive work should be possible. And if we can identify what lies behind choices, perhaps we can get a sense of people's own conception of what promotes their well-being. Knowledge of this conception is surely relevant for purposes of both ethics and politics.' 2 5 Hence an emphasis on social norms should not be seen as an attack on rational choice approaches to social and political problems. From the standpoint of an individual agent, norms provide a part of the background against which costs and benefits are assessed; more specifically, they help identify some of the costs and benefits of action. From the standpoint of the individual agent, this is hardly irrational, and it is hardly inconsistent with self-interest. (Whether certain norms are rational for society as a whole is a different question. Undoubtedly some of them are not.) The example is merely illustrative. The same questions might be asked about smoking, drug use, single parenthood, risky sexual activity, recycling, and much more. Collective efforts to discourage damaging or risky behavior, or to encourage norms that promote well-being or solve collective action problems, might well be consistent with people's underlying aspirations and judgments. From all this we might conclude that for many purposes, the whole idea of a "preference" is confused and misleading because it is ambiguous between choices and underlying psychological forces, and because the mental operations that produce choices are a function of a great many factors, prominently including social norms and social roles. For many purposes, it might well be best to dispense altogether with the idea of preference and to work instead with choices on the one hand and with complex and somewhat unruly mental states on the other-or to relate choices to more concrete sources of subjective value (intrinsic value, reputational effects, and effects on self-conception) or to a wide set of influences (norms, roles, price changes, increases in leisure time). I believe that this point gives us reason to doubt the elaborate edifice of social 131. See Gary S. Becker, Habits, Addictions, and Traditions, in The Essence of Becker, supra note 32, at 218, 232 (referring to metapreferences); cf. Harry G. Frankfurt, Freedom of the Will and the Concept of a Person, in The Importance of What We Care About 11, 11-25 (1988) (distinguishing between first order and second order desires). In this section I discuss in more detail how social norms, roles, and meanings affect choice. I also deal with the place of shame and pride in explaining certain anomalies in human behavior. In the process I offer some notations on how this point bears on law and legal policy, especially by showing how law can affect choice by affecting the sources of shame and pride and associated norms. What is the relationship between choices and social norms, between choices and social roles, and between choices and social meanings? 1. Choices and norms. - Choices are, of course, affected by social norms. As I have said, we can understand a norm-with respect to choices-as a subsidy or a tax. If you would otherwise like to dress colorfully, and if the relevant norm fortifies that choice, the norm is a subsidy; but norms governing dress can operate as a tax too, as they do in many professional (and nonprofessional) settings. 133. This is the approach defended by Gary Becker. See Becker, supra note 131. In Becker's view, preferences change, but metapreferences stay constant. There are many puzzles here. Metapreferences may change too. Someone may want to be the sort of person who has many friends and goes to many parties (whether or not one is that sort of person); but this metapreference may shift. Someone may want to be the sort of person who likes classical music (even if one prefers rock and roll); but this may shift. It may be possible to posit a human motivation of some sort-to have a good life, or to have a lot of money-and see how far we can get with the assumption. Perhaps some of the motivations that it is helpful to posit can be described as metapreferences. But certainly one's preferences about one's preferences shift over time, and it may even be possible to model those shifts. Note that metapreferences, like preferences, are a product of social norms. Becker has, however, recently recast his approach to place emphasis on "social capital" rather than metapreferences, and this recasting fits well with much of what I am suggesting here. See Becker, supra note 21. movement in that direction. 136. Consider, for example, contemporary China. Once we incorporate social norms into our account of choice, we can explain some anomalies in common theories of rationality. As the five tales at the beginning of the Article show,139 seemingly anomalous behavior can result from anticipated shame or pride. My goal here is to explain how social norms help account for anomalies in ways that bear on positive social science in general. Many such anomalies qualify as such at least partly because of social norms. In particular, behavior is a product of shame and pride, or anticipated shame and pride, and changes in behavior often reflect anticipations of shame and pride (as seen in all five tales in Part I). discussed above. This point has received considerable empirical confirmation, often in the context of environmental amenities. One study found that people would demand about five times as much to allow destruction of trees in a park as they would pay to prevent the destruction of those same trees.1 43 When hunters were questioned about the potential loss of their hunting licenses, they said that they would be willing to pay an average of $247 to prevent the loss-but would demand no less than $1044 to accept it. 4 4 In another study, participants required payments to accept degradation of visibility ranging from five to more than sixteen times higher than their valuations based on how much they were willing to pay to prevent the same degradation. 14 5 A related experiment tried to ascertain the "existence value" of a tree-like houseplant. The subjects were told that any trees not sold or kept would be killed at the end of the experiment. The mean willingness to pay (WTP) to avoid the "kill" option was $7.81. The mean willingness to accept (WTA) payment to allow a tree to be killed was $18.43.146 140. Including the Coase theorem. 141. See Richard H. Thaler, Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice, in Quasi Rational Economics, supra note 38, at 3, 7-10. A good overview is Elizabeth Hoffman & Matthew L. Spitzer, Willingness to Pay vs. Willingness to Accept: Legal and Economic Implications, 71 Wash. U. L.Q. 59 (1993). See also W.R. Dubourg et al., Imprecise Preferences and the WTP-WTA Disparity, 9J. Risk & Uncertainty 115, 116 (1994) (arguing that imprecision of people's preferences is a factor explaining WTP-WTA disparities). 146. See Rebecca R. Boyce et al., An Experimental Examination of Intrinsic Values as What explains this phenomenon? There are many possibilities, and none is likely to be exhaustive.1 49 My suggestion is that some of the difference between WTP and WTA has a great deal to do with social norms and social meanings. If someone says that she is willing to accept $X to allow the extinction of a species, the meaning of her action is altogether different from what it is if she says that she is willing to pay $X (and no more) to prevent the extinction. Under prevailing social norms, one ought not to accept even a great deal of money to allow destruction of an environmental amenity-partly because the good at issue is collectively owned, partly because its loss may be irreversible, and partly because it is not thought to be commensurable with its cash equivalent (in the sense that it is not valued in the same way or along a single metric). Some intriguing work suggests that the disparity between WTA and WTP is connected with the assignment of moral responsibility for the destruction of environmental assets, which are perceived as intrinsic goods. The WTA measure assigns responsibility to the individual. The WTP measure does so more ambiguously.' 5 2 These findings are consistent with the norm-based explanation I am offering here. People want to avoid or minimize the feeling that they have been morally culpable for producing the loss of an environmental amenity. 153 Feelings of moral culpability are tightly connected with prevailing social norms. The general point-that choices are a function of norms and the sentiments they produce-relates to the first, second, and fourth tales in Part I;154 we are now in a position to explain these apparent anomalies as well. When two people are to divide an amount given to them under the stated conditions, the offeror in the ultimatum game feels shame given prevailing norms' 5 5-that he is demonstrating that he is a greedy and even horrible person-if he offers a penny or a dollar from a sum of (say) $200. If a sum is given to two people under the conditions of the game, good people share; they do not try to keep almost all of the money for themselves. For his part, the offeree feels mistreated-treated in a contemptuous way-if a small or token amount is suggested.' 5 6 The social meaning of the statement, "How about five cents for you?" is contempt; the social meaning of responding, "Great!" is a willingness to be dishonored.' 152. This is an apparently pervasive social judgment about responsibility, but it must of course be defended; it is not self-evident. Consider the distinction between acts and omissions, of which this is an example; the line between the two has a great deal to do with ascriptions of moral responsibility. I am trying to describe the norm, not to defend it. Experimental work shows that people contribute to a shared good, and refuse to free ride, far more often than economists predict.' 5 9 It also shows that agents are willing to cooperate, and hence to solve collective action problems without coercion, if most people are seen as cooperators; in such circumstances the social meaning of noncooperation is greed or selfishness. When a number of people free ride, and are seen to free ride, cooperation breaks down; in such circumstances the social meaning of cooperation is a willingness to be a "dupe" or a "sucker." The desire to contribute to a collective good is palpably a function of social norms. If social norms do not lead most people to contribute, contributions decrease steadily and dramatically.16 0 The second tale' 6 1-involving littering and cooperation-should therefore be taken as a metaphor for many social outcomes. 158. See supra Part I.D. 159. See Charles A. Holt, Industrial Organization: A Survey of Laboratory Research, in The Handbook of Experimental Economics, supra note 1, at 349, 409-11; John 0. Ledyard, Public Goods: A Survey of Experimental Research, in The Handbook of Experimental Economics, supra note 1, at 111, 141-69;John M. Orbell et al., Explaining Discussion-Induced Cooperation, 54J. Personality & Soc. Psychol. 811, 811 (1988). Note also that cooperation increases when people can talk with one another; discussion significantly raises contribution rates, perhaps because it increases empathy and the shame associated with noncooperation. See id. at 811-12, 818. Of course discussion may increase cooperation because it can introduce more assurance of compliance; but the greater assurance itself comes from norms. These points suggest a more complex and adventurous one: For many purposes, it is not sensible to oppose "rationality" and social norms. Of course we could define "rationality" in many ways, and economists have offered restricted definitions that are useful for many purposes. 163 Such definitions, whether or not abstracted from norms, may be valuable for positive purposes. The test of a positive theory lies in its usefulness in making predictions. My central point here is that norms will create many of the costs and benefits that enter into an agent's decision. It follows that from the standpoint of the individual agent, rational decision is very much a function of social norms. Norms help show what it makes sense to do; norms even help identify costs and benefits as such. An implicit (but undefended and obscure) state of nature theory seems to lie at the heart of many distinctions between social norms and rationality, or between social norms and rational self-interest. That is, the distinction seems to make sense only on the basis of some supposition about what people would do in some natural state lacking social norms. But we are not likely to be able to make much progress in that way. As I have suggested, a positive theory of human rationality will likely do best if Sometimes it seems desirable for individuals or societies to change choices. Government might attempt to change, or help people to change, choices by changing social norms, social meanings, and social roles. In fact changes in norms may be the cheapest and most effective way to make things better, whatever are our criteria for assessing that matter. The relation between behavior and norms has yet to receive sustained attention; when we attend to that relation, we see that government has a policy instrument of great potential value. In this section I deal with some general points. I turn to more specific grounds, and more specific objections, in Parts VI and VII. Common objections to "paternalism" or "meddling" are not easy to sustain in such contexts. Recall that people usually do not choose norms, meanings, and roles; all of these are (within limits) imposed. As I have said, it would be ludicrous to deplore norms, meanings, and roles. They make life possible and they much facilitate social engagement. They provide the context within which free interaction is possible. Nonetheless, some of them operate as severe limits on autonomy or well-being, and certainly they should not be treated as fixed or given regardless of their content or consequences. Suppose that government wants to change norms, meanings, or roles. It has many different tools for doing so; some of these are mildly intrusive while others may foreclose choice. Government may restrict itself to education, understood as simple statements of fact designed to en 166. See Epstein, supra note 16, at 37-49; Richard A. Posner, Sex and Reason 2-4 (1992). I think that both Epstein and Posner give inadequate attention to the libertylimiting effects of norms, roles, and meanings. The classic source of the "harm to others" idea, Mill, offers subtle arguments on the point. See John S. Mill, The Subjection of Women (1869); John S. Mill, On Liberty (1859) (developing a complex discussion of pressures to conform). constant. See infra Part VIA2. Of course government may try to ensure accurate beliefs in order to persuade people to do something new or different. It may seek to increase or decrease shame; or it may not be thinking much about norms. But so long as government restricts itself to the provision of accurate information, there should be no objection to governmental efforts to correct false beliefs, even if the correction affects norms, meanings, and roles. In fact the change along this dimension may be the most important consequence of education, which may, for example, remove certain kinds of shame on the part of people who want to buckle their seat belts or abstain from premarital sex. 170. Beliefs, however, are not easily mutable because of cognitive dissonance. See George A. Akerlof & William T. Dickens, The Economic Consequences of Cognitive Dissonance, in George A. Akerlof, An Economic Theorist's Book of Tales 123 (1984); Aronson, supra note 95, at 171-239. smoking trends and public information). If government is interested in persuasion, it will understand that "reference states" matter a great deal, and it will use this understanding to lead people in the right direction. People are generally loss averse, in the sense that they are made more unhappy by a loss of a certain amount than they are made happy by an equivalent gain. 175 Hence reactions to information turn a good deal on how the information is framed. A claim that breast cancer examinations will increase the number of lives saved (over what it would otherwise be) is far less effective than a claim that the failure to examine one's breast will decrease the number of lives saved (over what it would otherwise be). 176 Similarly, energy conservation programs are far more effective if they point to the dollars lost through failure to conserve than if they point to the dollars saved through conservation. 177 The difference has a great deal to do with social norms and social meanings and in particular with shame. If government is interested in changing behavior, it will take advantage of the phenomenon of loss aversion. instead of changing to a preferred alternative); see also Dubourg et al., supra note 141, at 128 (discussing overwhelming importance of the "reference state" in determining reactions to changes in risks). Government also might use economic instruments to tax or subsidize choices. Of course education is assisted publicly, as are day care, museums, and public broadcasting (at least as of this writing). Alcoholic drinks, tobacco products, generation of waste, and some polluting activities are met with taxes (although some of these are subsidized too). We can understand some economic incentives as efforts in part to counteract social meanings, social norms, or social roles with financial benefits or penalties designed to produce a good "equilibrium." A social meaning that is perceived to be bad might be "matched" with a financial disincentive. Some such incentives may amount to efforts to change social norms or social meanings. If a good becomes more expensive, the social meaning of choosing it may change. Cigarette smoking, for example, may become less popular if most people cannot afford to smoke. Of course it is hard to predict the effects of changes in price on norms. 183. See id. at A19. It might be speculated that there has been a shift from cigarettes to some other harmful substance, such as illicit drugs. But it is notable that AfricanAmericans have lower lifetime rates of reported use of illicit drugs (especially cocaine) than whites. The 1990 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse finds that 40 to 50 percent fewer African-Americans than whites under age 35 report any lifetime use of cocaine. (About 20% more African-Americans than whites over age 35 report lifetime cocaine experience.) For use in the last year, African-Americans between 12 and 17 report the lowest rates of use of cocane-1.7% compared to 2.3% for whites. African-Americans in the 12 to 17 age group consistently posted lower prevalence rates than whites for lifetime, past year, and past month use. (Surveys in 1985, 1988 and 1990.) All of these data suggest that young African-Americans use illicit drugs at a lower rate than do young white people. These data do not address directly the substitution of cocaine for cigarettes. But it appears that while African-Americans between 12 and 17 use cocaine at lower rates than whites (according to 1985, 1988, and 1990 surveys), rates for both groups have decreased from 1985 to 1990. The white rate has decreased from 4.2% to 2.3% and the African-American rate has gone from 2.4% to 1.7%. Thus it seems that the public health success story regarding African-American teenagers and cigarette smoking also extends to cocaine use. And there may be another public health success story to be told with respect to cocaine use among white teenagers. All data is from Denise B. Kandel, The Social Demography of Drug Use, 69 Milbank Q. 365, 395-99 (1991). I am grateful to Tracy Meares for help on this point. Occupational Drinking Culture (forthcoming 1996). ward coercion. Thus government might prohibit the use of certain drugs; require everyone to recycle or buckle their seat belts; or make education mandatory for people under a certain age. A polity concerned to change norms could proceed through different levels and with different institutional arrangements. Should it encourage private behavior through creative public-private partnerships? Should it, for example, fund private groups that are engaged in discouraging teenage pregnancy, drug use, and promiscuity? There is also a question about whether national action or local action is better. Norm management could occur in towns; it could happen at the state level; it could be a self-conscious effort of the national government. My discussion will not by any means exhaust law's expressive uses,' 8 7 and I do not discuss any of these grounds in much detail. I offer instead a brief sketch of some possibilities. An account of legitimate grounds for changes in norms will overlap a great deal with-and may even be reducible to-an account of the legitimate bases for governmental action. My purpose here is hardly to offer such an account, but instead to see how some fairly standard ideas might be brought to bear on the particular subjects under discussion. In none of these cases do I urge that social norms should be free from scrutiny on the merits by individual citizens. Government ought not to inculcate norms that cannot be supported and evaluated publicly, and on the basis of reasons. Like rules, norms will typically have a degree of crudeness and rigidity, and it is entirely appropriate for citizens to conclude that there are contexts in which even good norms make no sense if they are mandated.' 8 8 Nor do I urge that the mere fact that behavior is a function of norms provides some warrant for governmental action. To defend governmental action, some claim has to be offered about how such action will make things better. A reference to norms helps undermine the view that government should restrict itself to the satisfaction of "preferences." We have seen that this term is highly ambiguous and that norms can often undermine human well-being. But to defend a change, the idea of wellbeing has to be specified, and it has to be shown that the change would improve matters under the relevant criteria. 186. For more discussion, see Sunstein, supra note 64. 187. In particular there is an intriguing set of laws designed to fortify norms regulating the use of money as a reason for action. See id. These are brief notations on some highly controversial subjects. Needless to say, I cannot attempt here to defend an account of the appropriate role of the state; my purpose is more modestly to connect the project of norm management with some familiar ideas about what the state legitimately does. Notably, there are cases in which it is unnecessary to choose among two or more of the general grounds for government action; people with varying theoretical commitments might believe that a particular action makes sense. Hence political participants might achieve 189. See infra Part VIA. 190. On this conception of autonomy, see Raz, supra note 22, at 400-29. This idea is very controversial as a foundational norm. See, e.g., John Rawls, Political Liberalism 134-35 (1994). But political liberals might well favor an effort to ensure against norms that prevent people from being or acquiring the capacities to be free and equal citizens. See id. at 174-76. 1. Standard accounts. Even more fundamentally, the words "rational" and "self-interest" obscure a great deal, since they take so much for granted. At first glance it appears that there is no sharp dichotomy between rationality and social norms or between self-interest and social norms; taking the words in their ordinary sense, what is rational and what is in an agent's self-interest are functions of social norms. 19 7 Return to our second story1 9 8 and suppose that there is a social norm that everyone should pick up litter. 19 9 If the norm is in place, people who act in their rational self-interest will not litter. In the second tale, were the non-litterers or members of the control group acting in their rational self-interest? What is rational, and what promotes self-interest, depends on many exogenous factors, including existing norms. 200 There is a further point,20 1 and it raises serious difficulties for the traditional account of the relationship between norms and collective ac Several answers might be offered. On the Coasian view, we might ask which norms can be changed most cheaply. Just as one person in a legal controversy might be the cheapest cost avoider, so one norm in a collective action problem might be the cheapest target of norm management. 205. Of course it may be possible to create property rights as a way of diminishing or eliminating the collective action problem. See Terry L. Anderson & Donald R. Leal, Free Market Environmentalism 3 (1991). mind. John Jones, the protagonist of the fifth tale,20 9 is in one way quite usual: There is an evident and pervasive difference between people's choices as consumers and their choices as citizens. This is because people are choosing quite different things.2 1 0 In their private capacity, people may watch silly situation comedies; but they may also support, as citizens, the use of government resources to assist public broadcasting. Some people seek stringent laws protecting the environment or endangered species even though they do not use the public parks or derive material benefits from protection of endangered species-and even though in their private behavior, they are unwilling to do much to protect environmental amenities. The mere existence of certain environmental goods seems to be highly valued by political participants, even if they are not willing to back up the valuation with dollars in private markets. Of course many people give to organizations that support environmental protection. But what people favor as political participants can be different from what they favor as consumers. It is in part for this reason that democratic outcomes are distinct from those that emerge from markets.2 1' In fact a good deal of empirical work shows that people's judgments about politics are not a product of their self-interest, narrowly under 207. See Churchland, supra note 128, at 272-78 (describing role of paradigm cases in mental functioning); Charles E. Larmore, Patterns of Moral Complexity 1-5 (1987) (discussing moral examples). Creativity in politics and law usually consists of assimilating new cases to the paradigm ones. See Sunstein, Legal Reasoning, supra note 191, at ch. 3. 208. Some cases can be imagined in which the response would be invasive of rights and therefore, by hypothesis, unacceptable. See infra Part VII. citizens may support laws for whose costs other people are responsible. The disjunction between political and consumption choices presents a puzzle. Would it make sense to say that consumer behavior is a better or more realistic reflection of "actual" preferences than is political behavior?2 18 In light of the fact that choices depend on context, and do not exist in the abstract, the very notion of a "better reflection" of "actual" preferences is a confusing one; there is no such thing as an "actual" (in the sense of unitary or acontextual) preference in these settings. The difference might be explained by the fact that political behavior reflects judgments made for a collectivity.2 14 For this reason it reflects a variety of social norms that are distinctive to the context of politics. Thus far I have tried to avoid the most controversial questions and to build from common understandings. Let us venture now into more complicated territory, connected with the ideas of well-being and autonomy. Outside of the domain of autonomy, we might think that there are obstacles to well-being in norms that encourage people to take high risks simply because the failure to do so signals-in light of those normscowardice or worse. Suppose that people engage in certain behavior not because of its intrinsic value but because of the reputational cost of failing to do so. We are dealing, then, with classes of cases in which the danger accompanying choice means that intrinsic utility is not high but risk-taking behavior persists because of social norms. Suppose too that people dislike the norms that generate that reputational cost, or that on reflection, people would dislike those norms. If so, norms that encourage people to carry guns, use dangerous drugs, drive well over the speed limit, engage in unsafe sex, and so forth may properly be an object of governmental attack, because of their potentially pernicious effects on people's lives. Information and persuasion are probably the best tools for government to use. But in some cases economic incentives or coercion may be justified. choice). Social norms, social meanings, and social roles bear very much on problems of discrimination. For someone who is African-American, female, or handicapped, existing meanings are possible obstacles to autonomy or well-being. The social meaning of being female, for example, may bear on a range of choices at home and in the workforce. So, too, for the social meaning of particular choices by women, which may diverge sharply from similar choices from men: not to have children, to 220. Of course some people may be able to defy existing norms against autonomy. 221. See Raz, supra note 22, at 407-08. 222. See id. at 408. 223. Cf. Elster, supra note 101, at 109-40 (describing adaptive preferences); Sen, Commodities and Capabilities, supra note 130, at 81-83 (in India, the "perception of relative needs of different members of the family may be closely related to social influences"). Just as preferences can be adaptive to an unjust status quo, so can norms and meanings be a predictable outgrowth of limited autonomy or heteronomy. 224. For what might be seen as an argument in favor of changing the social meaning of biological characteristics, see Case, supra note 71, at 9-36. of use of domestic money by women). Many laws have an expressive function. They "make a statement" about how much, and how, a good or bad should be valued. They are an effort to constitute and to affect social meanings, social norms, and social roles. Most simply, they are designed to change existing norms and to influence behavior in that fashion. caste members in India). to family relationships and choices); cf. Amartya K Sen, Gender and Cooperative Conflicts, in Persistent Inequalities 123, 126-28 (Irene Tinker ed., 1990) (describing social factors that lead women to adapt to, and accept, injustice). What I have suggested here should unsettle some common understandings about government "paternalism" and "meddling." If private choices are a function of roles, norms, and meanings over which private people have no sovereignty, many imaginable initiatives are consistent with individual autonomy, rightly conceived. But this conclusion ought not to suggest that government should be licensed to do whatever it wishes. There should be firm limits on government's efforts to engage in norm management. 232. See Steven Kelman, What Price Incentives? 52-83 (1981). 283. See Zelizer, supra note 27, at 16-17 (discussing prohibitions on life insurance). In making these claims, I do not endorse the use of law to "make statements" independently of consequences. Though I cannot defend the point here, official use of law merely to "make statements" risks fanaticism and pointlessness. See Sunstein, supra note 64. Indeed, emphasis on consequences-and on the empirical questions raised by arguments over consequences-has the salutary function of reducing the volume and the heat raised by policy disputes. It does so by shifting debate from basic values to issues that are, at least in principle, subject to empirical testing. I believe that this is an important social function of approaches to law and policy that are based on consequences; it is also part of the appeal of utilitarianism. perfectionist policies). Many claims about the appropriate limits of law are insufficiently appreciative of the pervasive effects of social norms, social meanings, and social roles. In fact these effects have yet to receive much attention.239 But-to say the least-the impact of law on human behavior is an important matter for lawmakers to understand, and that impact has everything to do with social norms. An understanding of norms will therefore help illuminate effective regulatory policy. Many of the most dramatic gains in health and safety policy are a product of changes in norms, meanings, and roles. Many of the most severe problems in current societies are a product of unfortunate norms, meanings, and roles.