Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles Part of the Law Commons
Cass R. Sunstein, "General Propositions and Concrete Cases (With Special Reference to Affirmative Action and Free Speech) Oliver Wendell Holmes Devise Lecture Symposium," 31 Wake Forest Law Review 369 (1996).
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.
Cass R. Sunstein*
On October 27, 1995, the Wake Forest University School of Law hosted the Oliver Wendell Holmes Devise Lecture Series. Professor Cass R. Sunstein, the Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence at the University of Chicago School of Law, delivered the following remarks as the lecture's keynote address. In addition, the lecture included four distinguished panelists who spoke in response to Professor Sunstein: A.E. Dick Howard, the White Burkett Miller Professor of Law and Public Affairs at the Virginia School of Law Professor Sheri Lynn Johnson from Cornell Law School and Professor Michael Kent Curtis and Professor Ronald F. Wright from the Wake Forest University School of Law. The remarks of these panelists are presented following the text of Professor Sunstein's speech.
INTRODUCTION In this lecture I discuss two phenomena of special importance for law. The first involves agreement on an abstraction, unaccompanied by agreement on what the abstraction specifically entails. The second involves agreement on a judgment in a concrete case, unaccompanied by agreement about what sorts of considerations ultimately account for the judgment. These agreements are incompletely theorized, though in differ-
* Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. This essay is the written version of the 1995 Oliver Wendell Holmes Lecture, delivered at Wake Forest University on October 27, 1995. For this lecture I have drawn on Cass R. Sunstein, (forthcoming Mar. 1996) Incompletely Theorized Agreements, 108 HARv. L. REv. 1733 (1995) Problems with Rules, 83 CAL. L. REv. 953 (1995).
ent ways. They are a clue to many features of a well-functioning legal culture, including the system of constitutionalism and the process of decision by reference to precedent. They also bear on democratic politics and practical reason in many arenas of social life. I connect these points with current debates over affirmative action and freedom of speech.
A. In General
Incompletely theorized agreements play a pervasive role in law and society. It is quite rare for a person or group completely to theorize any subject, that is, to accept both a general theory and a series of steps connecting that theory to concrete conclusions. Thus we often have, in law, an incompletely theorized agreement on a general proposition-incompletely theorized in the sense that people who accept the principle need not agree on what it entails in particular cases.
This is the sense emphasized by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes in his great aphorism, "General principles do not decide concrete cases." We accept the free speech principle, but disagree about pornography and commercial advertising. We know that murder is wrong, but disagree about whether abortion is wrong. We favor racial equality, but are divided on affirmative action. We believe in liberty, but disagree about increases in the minimum wage. Hence the pervasive legal and political phenomenon of an agreement on a general principle alongside disagreement about particular cases. The agreement is incompletely theorized in the sense that it is incompletely specified. Much of the key work must be done by others, often through casuistical judgments at the point of application.
Often constitution-making becomes possible through this form of incompletely theorized agreement. Many constitutions contain incompletely specified standards and avoid sharp-edged rules, at least when it comes to the description of basic rights. Consider the cases of Eastern Europe and South Africa, where constitutional provisions include many abstract provisions on whose concrete specification there has been sharp dispute. Abstract provisions protect "freedom of speech," "religious liberty," and "equality under the law," and citizens agree on those abstractions in the midst of sharp dispute about what these provisions really entail. Thus, in South Africa various parties have agreed on a statement of abstract principles that will receive greater specification in the future. The South African Constitution is an interim one setting the framework for a final document. And in South Africa, as elsewhere, the content of the free speech principle is unclear despite the existence of that principle so too with the range of policies that go under the rubric "affirmative action." The many abstractions found in Eastern European constitutions coexist with sharp disagreements on particular issues.
Incompletely specified agreements thus have important social uses. Many of their advantages are practical. They allow people to develop frameworks for decision and judgment despite large-scale disagreements. At the same time, they help produce a degree of a social solidarity and shared commitment. People who are able to agree on political abstractions-freedom of speech, equal protection of the laws, freedom from unreasonable searches and seizures-can also agree that they are embarking on shared projects. These forms of agreement can help constitute a democratic culture. It is for the same reason that they are so important to constitution-making.
Incompletely specified agreements also have the advantage of allowing people to show one another a high degree of mutual respect. By refusing to settle concrete cases that raise fundamental issues of conscience, they permit citizens to announce to one another that society shall not take sides on such issues until it is required to do so. Of course, there may be contexts in which more in the way of specification is a good idea. Sometimes it is important to move in the direction of rules. I am not denying this, nor am I urging that incomplete specification is always desirable. I am urging only that it has important social uses, especially at the initial stages of lawmaking.
Why General Propositions Do Not Decide Concrete Cases
I have referred to Holmes' suggestion that "General propositions do not decide concrete cases."' I believe that this is the greatest of Holmes' many great aphorisms. But like most aphorisms, it needs a good deal of unpacking. Much of law seems to consist of general propositions. How can law fail to decide concrete cases? What, most simply, does the statement mean?
I think that Holmes' central point is that general propositions are incompletely specified. It is for this reason that they do not resolve particular cases, which turn on the specification. The Equal Protection Clause is an obvious example. To know whether a law denies someone "the equal protection of the laws," a great deal of supplemental detail is necessary. The Equal Protection Clause does not say whether a law discriminating on the basis of disability is violative of the equality norm. It does not say whether sex discrimination is acceptable. It does not tell us whether affirmative action is or is not constitutionally permissible.
This point applies to many general propositions whose meaning depends on abstract terms conspicuously capable of many different meanings. In such cases, concrete cases depend on a substantive argument, not on a language lesson. Those who stress language tend to disguise the substantive argument and to conceal the substantive argument behind a (false) claim about the inevitability of a particular specification.
2. 1996).
3.
setting, the notions "low-level," "high," and "abstract" are best understood in comparative terms, like the terms "big," "old," and "unusual." The "clear and present danger" standard is a relative abstraction when compared with the claim that members of the Nazi Party may march in Skokie, Illinois.12 But the "clear and present danger" idea is relatively particular when compared with the claim that nations should adopt the constitutional abstraction "freedom of speech." The term "freedom of speech" is a relative abstraction when measured against the claim that campaign finance laws are acceptable, but the same term is less abstract than the grounds that justify free speech, as in, for example, the principle of personal autonomy.
What I am emphasizing here is that when people diverge on some (relatively) high-level proposition, they might be able to agree when they lower the level of abstraction. Incompletely theorized judgments on particular cases are the ordinary material of law. And in law, the point of agreement is often highly particularized-absolutely as well as relatively particularized-in the sense that it involves a specific outcome and a set of reasons that typically do not venture far from the case at hand. Highlevel theories are rarely reflected explicitly in law.
The point is especially important in the areas of equality and free speech. In such cases, the Court makes decisions, but they have been incompletely theorized in the sense that the majority does not make a final judgment about what underlies the equality or free speech principle. People can converge on the result-protecting true and nonmisleading commercial speech, offering something other than rational basis review for affirmative action-from many different foundations. Thus the Court's First Amendment jurisprudence reflects no choice among the deepest foundations of the free speech principle.
Perhaps the participants in law endorse no such theory, or perhaps they believe that they have none, or perhaps they cannot, on a multimember court, reach agreement on a theory. Perhaps they find theoretical disputes confusing or annoying. What is critical is that they agree on the best rule or on how a case must come out. Consider both rules and analogical thinking. Many rules-the speed limit law, the rule requiring people to compensate for intentional torts-can be accepted from diverse foundations. In fact, legal rules often are acceptable to people who diverge on the ultimate basis of law.
The same is true for analogies. People might think that A is like B, and covered by the same low-level principle, without agreeing on a deep theory to explain why the low-level principle is sound. They agree on the matter of similarity, without agreeing on a large-scale account of what makes the two things similar. In the law of discrimination, for example, many people think that sex discrimination is "like" race discrimination and should be treated similarly, even if they lack or cannot agree on a
13. Of course, concurring opinions are common, sometimes because an incompletely theorized agreement is possible on a result without being possible on a rationale, and sometimes because one judge wants to theorize an issue more (or less) deeply than do others. Sometimes the existence of a concurring opinion can compromise rule of law values by making it hard to form expectations sometimes concurring opinions raise issues of collegiality, since authors of majority opinions are not thrilled to find separate concurrences.
14. See (1993).
15. 410 U.S. 113 (1973).
16. This is the goal of the equal protection argument. See generally CASS R.
(1993).
way, and that is all I am suggesting here.
B. Multimember Institutions and Individual Judges Turn now to reasons that call for incompletely theorized agreements whether or not we are dealing with a multimember body. The first consideration here is that incompletely theorized agreements have the crucial function of reducing the political cost of enduring disagreements. If judges disavow large-scale theories, then losers in particular cases lose much less. They lose a decision, but not the world. They may win on another occasion. Their own theory has not been rejected or ruled inadmissible. When the authoritative rationale for the result is disconnected from abstract theories of the good or the right, the losers can submit to legal obligations, even if reluctantly, without being forced to renounce their largest ideals. I have said that some theories should be rejected or ruled inadmissible. But it is an advantage, from the standpoint of freedom and stability, for a legal system to be able to tell most losers-many of whom are operating from foundations that have something to offer, or that cannot be ruled out a priori-that their own deepest convictions may play a role elsewhere in the law.
The second point is that incompletely theorized agreements are valuable when we seek moral evolution over time. Consider the area of constitutional equality, where considerable change has occurred in the past and will inevitably occur in the future. A completely theorized judgment would be unable to accommodate changes in facts or values. If the legal culture really did attain a theoretical end-state, it would become too rigid and calcified we would know what we thought about everything. This would disserve posterity.
Incompletely theorized agreements are a key to debates over constitutional equality, with issues being raised about whether gender, sexual orientation, age, disability, and others are analogous to race such agreements have the important advantage of allowing a large degree of openness to new facts and perspectives. At one point, we might think that homosexual relations are akin to incest at another point, we might find the analogy bizarre. Of course, a completely theorized judgment would have many virtues if it is correct. But at any particular moment in time, this is an unlikely prospect for human beings, not excluding judges.
Consider too the fact that in the area of affirmative action, the Court's decisions have been highly case-specific, and that the Court has not offered a final resolution. Instead, it has largely "remanded" the issue to the public for a debate that is now underway. The fact that the Court has eschewed clear rules, and operated so casuistically, may appear to be lamentable, an offense to the rule of law. But it may well fit appropriately with the role of the Court, which decides cases and does not select broad theories of the right or the good. Moral evolution is far more likely to occur-and basic offense to others is less likely-when the Court acts in this fashion.
A particular concern here is the effect of changing understandings
equality and free speech, this is a characteristic feature of modern constitutional adjudication, where judges have tended to proceed casuistically, and avoided large-scale theories.
Legal argument is often weakened by the pretense that general propositions decide concrete cases. From the fact that the Constitution protects freedom of speech, it is often said that a particular conclusion follows with respect to (say) libel or commercial advertising. From the fact that the Constitution bars states from denying any person the equal protection of the laws, it is said that particular conclusions follow for affirmative action. These are species of bad formalism-a practice with continuing influence on the legal culture, and a practice against which Holmes frequently railed. The Supreme Court's performance in affirmative action cases has suffered by virtue of the Court's disregard of Holmes' suggestion, and this is a point that remains true whatever we think, in the end, of affirmative action. And the popular culture's treatment of free speech issues has suffered from a similar pathology, as people derive, from a general proposition, concrete results in hard cases.
I have sought to draw attention to two important legal phenomena-agreement on abstractions amidst uncertainty about particulars and agreements on particulars amidst uncertainty about abstractions. Constitutionalism-and modern lawmaking-are both made possible by the former phenomenon. Incompletely specified abstractions may well seem inconsistent with the rule of law, but they have important social uses. Moreover, agreements in particulars amidst uncertainty about abstractions are the hallmark of the common law, not excluding that form of common law that we know as constitutional doctrine. In fact, it would not be too much to say that incompletely theorized agreements on particulars are a defining characteristic of Anglo-American adjudication.
The pervasive place of these kinds of agreements casts doubt on the idea that full theorization is desirable for law, or even that full theorization is possible. I cannot adequately defend this proposition here. Instead, I end with a passage from a somewhat casual but in my view highly illuminating letter from Oliver Wendell Holmes, very much in the spirit of my remarks here, and pointing in the directions in which such a defense might go:
I read Aristotle's Ethics with some pleasure. The eternal, universal,
wise, good man. He is much in advance of ordinary Christian morality
with its slapdash universals (Never tell a lie. Sell all thou hast and give
to the poor[,] etc.). He has the ideals of altruism, and yet understands
that life is painting a picture not doing a sum, that specific cases can't
be decided by general rules, and that everything is a question of degree
