 Cass R. Sunsteint There are deep and fundamental and intuitively understood grounds for rejecting the view that confines itself merely to checking the parity of outcomes, the view that matches death for death, happiness for happiness, fulfillment for fulfillment, irrespective of how all this death, happiness and fulfillment comes about. The fiftieth anniversary of the Administrative Procedure Act2 arrives at a time when administrative institutions are receiving more serious public attention than in any period since the New Deal. The New Deal was committed to immensely strengthened national institutions and to large and largely independent bureaucratic entities? These commitments are now under severe strain. Much of this was signalled by the election of President Reagan in 1980 and, in particular, by his promulgation of a controversial executive order calling for attention to the costs and benefits of regulatory initiatives.4 In 1993, it was firmly established that a new direction had been set, when President Clinton issued a new executive order that substantially overlapped with President Reagan's.5 t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Richard Craswell, Frank Easterbrook, and Richard Posner for helpful comments; to Jonathan Wiener for helpful discussion; to participants in a work-in-progress lunch at the University of Chicago; and to Carl Nichols for research assistance. The University of Chicago Law Review Nor has the national legislature refused to reexamine the legacy of the New Deal. In 1994 and 1995, Congress devoted a good deal of attention to the costs and benefits of government regulation. Before long, it may enact a "supermandate" requiring cost-benefit balancing from all agencies.' In the near future, Congress may well enact legislation that is a mixture of a new Administrative Procedure Act and an Administrative Substance Act.7 Such legislation may ultimately be seen as part of a "constitutional moment" involving large-scale revision of fundamental national commitments.8 If such a revision does occur, it will be partly a product of an immense wealth of new learning about the nature and performance of the regulatory state. This learning has emphasized the need for better priority setting,9 for more flexible tools,'0 for balancing rather than absolutism," and for closer attention to the unanticipated adverse effects of regulation.' These points do not suggest that the regulatory state has failed. In many areas, things are much better because of regulatory initiatives." But with better strategies and tools, existing pathologies could be sharply reduced, thus saving many billions of dollars and many lives in the process. For example, a recent study suggests that better allocations of existing health expenditures could save an additional sixty thousand lives with no additional cost-and that with better allocations, we could prevent the same number of deaths we now prevent with $31 billion in annual savings.'4 During the twentieth-century explosion in regulatory activity-including the New Deal and the "rights revolution" of the 1960s and 1970s-there was no effort to create a general mechanism for monitoring regulatory performance. But with new empirical studies of the effects of regulation, it is now clear that the national government has failed adequately to perform the tasks assigned to it and that it has sometimes made things worse. Increasingly it is asked whether the costs of regulation justify the benefits. Hence assessment of regulatory performance has increasingly taken the form of the criterion of cost-benefit analysis, and hence the American administrative state is increasingly becoming a cost-benefit state. This is so despite the fact that there is much controversy about how to value and characterize both costs and benefits.' 5 My purpose in this Essay is to discuss a pervasive problem in risk regulation, one that helps account for regulatory failure, that is an intriguing part of cost-benefit assessment," and that is only now receiving public attention.'7 The problem occurs when the diminution of one health risk simultaneously increases another health risk. Thus, for example, fuel economy standards, designed to reduce environmental risks, may make automobiles less safe, and in that way increase risks to life and health." Regulations designed to control the spread of AIDS and hepatitis among health care providers may increase the costs of health care, and thus make health care less widely available, and thus cost lives. 9 If government bans the manufacture and use of asbestos, " Harvard Group on Risk Management Reform, Reform of Risk Regulation: Achieving More Protection at Less Cost 16 (Harvard 1995), citing Tammy 0. Tengs, Optimizing Societal Investments in Preventing Premature Death (1994) (doctoral dissertation, Harvard School of Public Health). offs (cited in note 13). I owe a general debt to Graham and Wiener throughout. The University of Chicago Law Review it may lead companies to use more dangerous substitutes.0 Regulation of nuclear power may make nuclear power safer; but by increasing the cost of nuclear power, such regulation will ensure reliance on other energy sources, such as coal-fired power plants, which carry risks of their own.2' When government requires reformulated gasoline as a substitute for ordinary gasoline, it may reduce carbon monoxide emissions but produce new pollution problems from hydrocarbons and smog.22 When government regulates air pollution, it may encourage industry to increase the volume of solid waste, and in that sense aggravate another environmental problem. A ban on carcinogens in food additives may lead consumers to use noncarcinogenic products that carry greater risks in terms of diseases other than cancer." The general problem is ubiquitous. It stems from the fact that government officials, like individual citizens and the public as a whole, suffer from both limited information and (even more importantly) selective attention.' A large current priority is to develop mechanisms that overcome the problems posed by the fact that people-both citizens and regulators-tend to focus on problems that are parts of complex wholes. Such a mechanism should take account of Sen's point in the epigraph to this Essay. Risks to life and health are qualitatively diverse, and because of their origins and nature, some risks warrant greater attention than others. I also deal with the respective roles of courts, Congress, and the President in managing health-health tradeoffs. I urge that often agencies ought to be taken to have legal authority to make such tradeoffs, and that they ought to exercise that authority much more than they now do. To this end I argue for an interpretive principle to the effect that agencies should be allowed to consider health-health tradeoffs in the absence of a clear congressional statement to the contrary. I also urge a modest but far from trivial judicial role in requiring agencies to consider aggregate rather than isolated risks. Thus I claim that agency decisions that increase aggregate risk levels should be found arbitrary or capricious under the Administrative Procedure Act.25 More generally, I urge that Congress should amend the Administrative Procedure Act ("APA") to require agencies to consider ancillary risks and to minimize net risks. I also argue that the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs ("OIRA") should see the reduction of overall risk as one of its principal missions. Much more than it now does, it should undertake a coordinating function so as to ensure that this mission is carried out. tion. They also have consequences for the pervasive issue of incommensurability in law. Discussions of the administrative state-and proposals for improving it-fall into two general categories. Most familiar is the traditional lawyers' approach, reflected in the Administrative Procedure Act and in much of conventional administrative law. Here we find a range of efforts to limit administrative discretion, mostly through procedural requirements and judicial review. On this view, the basic problem for the administrative state is the exercise of policy-making discretion by unelected bureaucrats; the basic solution is to reduce this discretionary authority." The second approach is concerned with improving regulatory performance by asking concrete questions about the effects of regulation.2 7 On this view, administrative discretion is a problem only to the extent that administrative discretion produces bad outcomes.2 8 And on this view, administrative law doctrines, and reform proposals for the administrative state, should be founded on a concrete understanding of what strategies will make regulation work better by, for example, saving or lengthening lives, reducing cost, increasing employment, and improving education. 26 This approach sees the fall of the nondelegation doctrine as the basic problem and attempts to provide surrogates for that doctrine. See, for example, David Schoenbrod, Power Without Responsibility: How Congress Abuses the People Through Delegation 155-91 (Yale 1994). being. For the future a critical question is the relationship between administrative law doctrines and those effects. If, for example, administrative discretion is in some domain likely to lead to better outcomes than legislative discretion-as is certainly imaginable in technically complex areas, especially those involving the choice of means for achieving given ends-then there ought to be at least a presumption in favor of administrative discretion. Traditional lawyers might be tempted to reject such discretion by reference to large-sounding abstractions involving, for example, legitimacy, Marbury v Madison,2 9 or checks and balances. But if an administrative law doctrine-involving, for example, judicial deference to administrative interpretations of law ---is likely to reduce overall costs and increase the rationality of regulatory law, there is a good argument for that doctrine. As the twenty-first century approaches, it is, in short, appropriate for administrative law to focus less on large-sounding abstractions, usually rooted in a controversial understanding of the Constitution, and more on questions that are at once more concrete, more empirical, more manageable, and more directed toward real-world consequences. And though I cannot support the point here, I believe that such a shift would point toward new ways of approaching a host of old questions.3' Let us turn, then, to the important and pervasive issue of health-health tradeoffs as a case in point, and see how administrative law might be revised to deal with that issue. To get a handle on the problem of health-health tradeoffs, we need to make some distinctions. Call the risks that government is trying to control the regulated risks. Call the risks that are increased by regulation the ancillary risks.3 2 Ancillary risks take many different forms, depending on their relationship to the regulated risk. We might say, for example, that the increase in acid deposition is not within the same do The University of Chicago Law Review main as the risks prevented by regulation of nuclear power plants. This is true in two different ways, legal and factual. First, and for many purposes most importantly, the law does not consider them in the same domain. The agency that regulates one of these risks, the Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA"), has no authority to regulate the other, which falls under the jurisdiction of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission ("NRC"). A pervasive problem in handling health-health tradeoffs stems from organization charts that allocate authority to diverse agencies, frequently in ways that make it difficult or impossible for agencies to coordinate their responses.3 3 Second, the risks of acid deposition (mostly from coal-fired power plants) have a different source from the risks created by nuclear power plants as a simple matter of fact. This point suggests that health-health tradeoffs will often require agencies to compile extensive information, possibly in a way that will dwarf existing capacities. Compare a situation in which the regulation of sulfur dioxide emissions increases carbon monoxide emissions. If this happens, we are dealing in any event with air pollution, indeed air pollution from largely the same technologies, and the EPA has the statutory authority to regulate both sources. See Part V for a discussion of suggested solutions. See generally March Sadowitz and John D. Graham, A Survey of Residual Cancer Health-Health Tradeoffs ical Protection, for example, recommends that environmental factors should not cause an incremental cancer risk, for those exposed over a lifetime, of more than about three in one thousand.35 But American agencies do not follow this recommendation. Indeed, their practices vary widely. The NRC sees one in one thousand as acceptable; the EPA's acceptable range varies from one in ten thousand to one in one million." The Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") has tried to use a standard of one in one million, but under the Delaney Clause,37 courts have required a standard of essentially zero.38 The Occupational Safety and Health Administration ("OSHA") has interpreted the "significant risk" requirement found in its governing statute to mean a risk of one in one thousand; labor groups have sought a change to one in one million.39 These varying standards make performing health-health tradeoffs a very complex matter. If one agency is using a standard of one in one thousand for risk A, and doing so lawfully, how should it deal with an increase in risk B, when that risk is regulated by a different agency operating lawfully under a different standard? Matters become even more complex when risks from cancer are being compared with other sorts of risk. regulatory ban may result in independent health risks coming from ancillary "replacement" risks. If we ban substance Aaron Wildavsky, Searching for Safety (Transaction 1988). A, the replacement substance B may also be dangerous. If a carcinogenic substance is regulated, perhaps people will use a product that is not carcinogenic but that causes serious risks of heart disease. -Regulated substances may create health benefits as well as health risks. By eliminating those health benefits, regulation may therefore create a net increase in health dangers. may create health risks, as I discuss below in Part II.B. When officials think about health-health tradeoffs, the distributional incidence of the ancillary risk may matter a great deal for policy purposes. Sometimes the ancillary risk falls on the same class of people as the regulated risk; sometimes the ancillary risk burdens an entirely different group. This suggests that risk redistribution, rather than risk reduction, is a possible goal and outcome of regulation. Interest groups may well try to exploit this possibility. Hence it should be expected that odd coalitions will develop to reduce risks of a certain kind when the result is to shift risks (and control costs) from some groups to others.' 42 A general description can be found in President Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore, Reinventing Drug & Medical Device Regulations (US GPO 1995). See also Miranda Perry, Health-Health Analysis and the FDA (unpublished manuscript on file with U Chi L Rev). Health-Health Tradeoffs Thus far we have been discussing cases in which the act of regulating one risk produces ancillary risks through a certain causal chain. There is a particularly controversial possibility here, one that has been receiving much recent attention. Regulations cost money-sometimes a great deal of money-and private expenditures on regulatory compliance may produce less employment and more poverty. People who are unemployed or poor tend to be in worse health and to live shorter lives." If wealthy people face diminished threats to life and health, and if poor people face greater threats, might not costly regulation increase risks simply by virtue of reducing wealth? There are several reasons why this might be so.' First, people with more wealth have more capacity to spend their income on health-enhancing goods and activities. There is strong evidence to this effect; for example, poor people have inferior housing and a lower rate of smoke detector installment, and this may well be connected with greater death rates from fire." Second, people who are poorer also suffer from various stresses that may have adverse health effects. Stress itself can contribute to morbidity and mortality; it can, for example, lead to an increase in heart disease. Finally, greater social wealth seems to be associated with more general social changes in the direction of greater safety, though the relevant mechanism is not well understood. The University of Chicago Law Review eral question is this: Would it be possible to make precise connections between governmentally required expenditures on risk reduction with shifts in unemployment and poverty? An incipient literature attempts to do precisely this. A 1990 study attempted to develop a model to quantify the view that "richer is safer."' According to Ralph Keeney, a single fatality might result from a compulsory expenditure of from $6.49 million to $7.25 million; with different assumptions about the distributional incidence of the costs, the estimate could range between $3 million and $12 million.49 In a concurring opinion in a 1991 case involving occupational safety and health regulation, Judge Williams invoked this evidence to suggest that OSHA's refusal to engage in cost-benefit analysis might not be beneficial for workers." Judge Williams reasoned in the following way. If a fatality results from an expenditure of $7.5 million, then some regulations might produce more fatalities than they prevent. Many regulations of course cost more than $7.5 million per life saved. In Judge Williams's view, an agency that fails to measure costs against benefits might be failing to measure mortality gains against losses. Comments Implicit income gains necessary to avert one death (millions) Joint Economic Committee (1984) Used income and mortality correlations from Kitagawa and Hauser (1960) data, and others Reflects income loss from recession of 19741975 Older workers aged 58-63; measured effects of wages and of value of one's home on mortality Controls for prior disability, and educational attainment Finds income effects at all income levels Controls for prior disability, educational attainment, and exposure to occupational hazards " The following table is borrowed from Randall Lutter and John F. Morrall, III, Health-Health Analysis: A New Way to Evaluate Health and Safety Regulation, 8 J Risk & Uncertainty 43, 49 table 1 (1994). National Institutes of Health (1992) 38 years of ageadjusted mortality and income data for the U.S. Estimate reflects effect of income changes on family mortality; study does not use multiple regression, does not control for prior health status or education Uses two measures of health endowments Uses four distinct controls for prior health conditions Distinguishes effects of permanent income from those of transitional income This point leads to a broader one with considerable implications for law. Even if agencies are sometimes prevented, by law, from measuring costs against benefits,5 3 perhaps they can compare health losses with health gains, and conclude that some regulations are not worthwhile because they cost lives in the aggregate. In fact it can be shown that some regulations fail health-health analysis whether or not they pass cost-benefit analysis. Thus we might be able to agree that such regulations are counterproduc See, for example, Tennessee Valley Authority v Hill, 437 US 153, 172-88 (1978) (holding that the Endangered Species Act prevented agencies from taking actions that would lead to the extinction of a species, whatever the cost); Lead Industries Association u EPA, 647 F2d 1130, 1148-51 (DC Cir 1980) (interpreting the national ambient air quality standards under the Clean Air Act, 42 USC § 7409 (1988), to prohibit consideration of economic or technological feasibility in setting air quality standards); American Textile Manufacturers Institute, Inc. v Donovan, 452 US 490, 509 (1981) (holding that cost-benefit balancing under the OSHA toxic substances regulations would be inconsistent with the statute, 29 USC § 655 (1988)). tive even if cost-benefit judgments seem too difficult or too contentious. Consider the following table: Budgeted regulations Agency Status Cost per life saved (millions of 1992 dollars) Regulations passing HHA vs. BCA tests 1. Steering column protection 2. Unvented space heaters 3. Cabin fire protection 4. Passive restraints/belts 5. Fuel system integrity 6. Trihalo-methanes 7. Underground construction 8. Alcohol & drug control 9. Servicing wheel rims 10. Seat cushion flammability 11. Floor emergency lighting 12. Crane suspended pers. platform 13. Child sleepwear flammability 15. Concrete & masonry construction 16. Hazard communication 18. Benzenelfugitive emissions Regulations failing BCA test 20. Radionuclides/ uranium mines Regulations failing HHA (and BCA) test Agency Status Cost per life saved (millions of 1992 dollars) 22. Ethylene oxide 23. Uranium mill taildinactive 24. Acrylonitrile 25. Uranium mill tailJactive 30. Arsenic/glass manufacturing 31. Benzene/storage 32. Radionuclides/DOE facilities 33. Radionuclides/elim. phos. 34. Acrylonitrile 35. Benzeneethylbenzenestyrene 36. Benzene/maleic anhydride 37. Formaldehyde The idea that "richer is safer" has started to affect public deliberations about risk. In a now celebrated letter written in 1992, James MacRae, the Acting Administrator of OIRA, wrote to the Department of Labor questioning a proposed regulation of air contaminants in the workplace.5 5 OSHA had estimated savings of between eight and thirteen lives per year, at an annual cost of $163 million. MacRae suggested that there was a significant gap in OSHA's analysis: If a statistical fatality is produced by an expenditure of $7.5 million, the regulation could actually cause ' See Keeney, 8 J Risk & Uncertainty at 96 (cited in note 48), discussing letter from James B. MacRae, Jr., Acting Administrator and Deputy Administrator, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, U.S. Office of Management and Budget, to U.S. Department of Labor (Mar 10, 1992). twenty-two additional deaths. MacRae asked OSHA to investigate the relation between health, wealth, and safety. OSHA responded that existing data to the effect that "richer is safer" seemed highly speculative, but it did call for more comments from the public."6 Eventually, a public outcry forced OIRA to retreat. Senator Glenn in particular complained of OIRA's "Alice-in-Wonderland type claim that health and safety regulations cause harm to workers" and objected that the "richer is safer" view "seems to stand logic on its head-to say that controlling a dangerous substance in the workplace makes an increased health hazard to the worker.""7 Despite the public outcry, further research on the issue suggests that lives can indeed be lost through required regulatory expenditures. At a minimum government ought to consider the problem seriously. We have now seen enough to know that an impressive body of work attempts to measure health gains from regulation against health risks from regulation. But why should we focus on this particular question? Would it not be better to attend to the overall gains from regulation and to the overall losses from reg ' Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Air Contaminants, 57 Fed Reg The University of Chicago Law Review ulation? Cost-benefit analysis is receiving considerable attention in both agencies 0 and Congress,6 and cost-benefit analysis, properly conceived, takes account of all of the health-related effects of regulation. Health-health assessments focus on a subset of effects, and refuse to translate those effects into dollars. Such assessments ignore all costs unrelated to mortality and morbidity. But what is special about health-health tradeoffs? Why should analysis focus on such tradeoffs rather than on all relevant effects? Part of the answer lies in existing public judgments, taken as simple brute facts. People seem to think that regulation is bad if it causes more deaths than it prevents; a demonstration that a particular regulation has this effect would count strongly against its adoption. But people do not always know how to compare health gains (fifteen lives gained, for example) with monetary losses (an expenditure of $15 million, for example). This uncertainty stems partly from the fact that lives and dollars are not easily made commensurable,6 2 and partly from the fact that the appropriate amount to spend on protection of a (statistical) life depends very much on context. see Hahn, Regulatory Reform (cited in note 11) (finding that about half of government regulations since 1990 would not pass a cost-benefit test). It would, however, be inadequate for present purposes to rely on existing public judgments, which may be irrational or confused. Perhaps public uncertainty about cost-benefit judgments depends on an obstinate and counterproductive unwillingness to acknowledge that even (risk to) life has its price and that risks are matters of degree rather than "dangerous or not."' But part of the answer can be found in information costs. The comparative defect of health-health assessment is also its virtue: it involves only a subset of the consequences of regulating. Fewer facts need to be compiled. The assessment may economize on the costs of inquiry into speculative issues about regulatory consequences. ' On people's reluctance to acknowledge this, see Donald A. Redelmeier, Paul Orzin, and Daniel Kaneman, Understanding Patients' Decisions: Cognitive and Emotional Perspectives, 270 JAMA 72, 72-73 (July 7, 1993). this kind undoubtedly underlies the interest in health-health analysis. A. First Approximation Let us try, in a simple, intuitive way, to identify the factors that should enter into deliberative judgments about health-health tradeoffs. Begin with a simple case in which the costs of information and inquiry are zero. If this is so, all agencies should investigate all risks potentially at stake. Agencies should always take account of ancillary risks and always try to limit overall or aggregate risks. See note 1 and accompanying text. Richard Zeckhauser and Donald Shepard, Where Now for Saving Lives?, 40 L & Health-Health Tradeoffs ysis: cost-benefit analysis may itself fail cost-benefit analysis-if the costs of undertaking cost-benefit analysis are high and the benefits lower.) When the costs of inquiry are not zero, the obligation to inquire into ancillary risks might be a function of several factors. First is the cost of delay, understood as the cost of not controlling the regulated risk until more information has been compiled. To assess this cost, it is necessary to explore the seriousness of the regulated risk and the length of time necessary to investigate the ancillary risk. Second is the cost of investigating the ancillary risk, where this cost is understood as a product of the cost of compiling and evaluating the relevant information. Third is the benefit of investigating the ancillary risk, with the benefit understood as the likelihood of uncovering information that might help to produce a different and better result. But even at an early stage, it is possible to know that some ancillary risks are likely to be high, while others are likely to be trivial or low. Moreover, some ancillary risks can be investigated at low cost, while others depend on scientific and predictive judgments that require enormous investments of time and resources. There is an analogy here to the question of whether and when agencies must explore alternatives under either the National Environmental Policy Act or the APA. Here courts have indicated that some, but not all, alternatives must be investigated, and the outcome turns on considerations like those I have been discussing."° Of course, an agency might be reluctant to inquire into 2d ed 1994) (detailing judicial responses to Vermont Yankee). ancillary risks on the theory that, if it does so, it will be unable to regulate the risk at issue within a reasonable period of time. It seems clear that the extent and nature of the regulated risk are crucial factors for those deciding whether to explore ancillary risks. Compare the question of how to handle ancillary risks created by the prohibited manufacture of asbestos. One ancillary risk arises because asbestos appears to be the safest and thus best product for use in brake linings. Whether this is true, and how serious the ancillary risk is, can be investigated at the present time. But other ancillary risks involve the eventual substitutes for asbestos in products for which no substitutes are now available. On the view of the EPA, the ban on asbestos will force technological innovation, producing new substances that do the work now done by asbestos." This may be a reasonable though speculative view. If so, the government has reason to regulate asbestos now and to wait before evaluating the risks posed by substitutes. How should we understand existing law in light of this first approximation? Congress has apparently forbidden health-health analysis in many settings by directing agencies to focus on cer 71 Compare this, however, with the EPA's position in Corrosion Proof Fittings v EPA, 947 F2d 1201, 1220 (5th Cir 1991) (proceeding with a ban on asbestos despite the possibility of ancillary risk from substitutes on the theory that new substitutes will develop because of the ban). See also note 73 and accompanying text. tain health problems to the exclusion of all others.74 Questions naturally arise about what understanding, if any, accounts for these prohibitions. Another explanation for why existing law makes relevant some risks but not others points to the important role of interest groups in the regulatory process.7 6 On this view, selective attention and disparities in regulatory strategies are attributable to the fact that well organized groups are able to obtain legislation in their interests and to fend off regulation that would be harmful to their interests. It should be unsurprising that the statute regulating agricultural practices allows for a form of open-ended balancing;" the agricultural groups are in a good position to fend off draconian legislation. Some environmental groups work very hard to obtain severe restrictions on carcinogenic substances. 78 In fact, interest groups might work together so as to redistribute risks, and the resulting coalitions might well ban agencies from engaging in health-health analysis for fear that the result will be decreased redistribution. If, for example, corn producers attempt to obtain an ethanol requirement for gasoline, they will not be disturbed to find that ethanol itself imposes environmental risks. Or if it happens that electric cars produce environmental hazards because of waste disposal problems, the redistribution of the risk may not be bothersome to those who favor electric cars on self-interested grounds. It would even be possible to imagine cases in which the redistributed risk was affirmatively sought, if, for example, those who face the new risk are competitors. Undoubtedly, an investigation of the political economy of risk regulation would reveal many diverse cases in which interest groups pursue their own interests rather than overall risk reduction. 79 Other explanations would point to myopia, selective attention, sensationalism, loss aversion, credit-claiming, and random agenda selection.0  Some statutes stem from sensationalistic events-the Love Canal scare is one example of this tendency-that encourage legislators to hold hearings, enact legislation, and claim credit for fixing problems that are either not very large " See the discussion of "omitted voices" in Graham and Wiener, Confronting Risk or that are just a part of a complex whole. Such statutes are likely to reflect myopia or selective attention.8' The result may well be a form of random agenda selection that bans healthhealth tradeoffs, that does not adequately reduce risks, or that even increases some risks. Moreover, people are pervasively averse to losses from the status quo-more so than they are favorably inclined to improvements from the status quo--and loss aversion may account for apparently irrational judgments about how to trade off health risks. These judgments might, however, result from something other than confusion. They might depend on judgments about sensible regulatory priorities and about qualitative differences among risks. I take up this point below. Our first approximation has suggested that all risks should be aligned along a single metric-expected annual deaths, aggregate mortality benefits-and hence measured against each other. Both expert and economic approaches attempt to do this, though in interestingly different ways. Experts tend to look at expected annual deaths and to assess risks accordingly.8 6 But ordinary people base their judgments on something quite different. They look, for example, at whether the risk is faced voluntarily or involuntarily; whether it is distributed equitably; whether it is faced by future generations; whether it is potentially catastrophic; whether it involves a type of death that is especially dreaded; and whether it is new and poorly understood. Consider the following summary: Table 3 Risk characteristic Aggravating factor Mitigating factor nature of risk dreaded acceptable permanence irreversible/uncontrollable reversible/controllable duration equity faced by future generations faced by those now living unfairly distributed fairly distributed source of risk man-made found in nature freedom voluntarily incurred forced exposure existing understanding known to science unknown relation to status quo new old If aggravating and mitigating factors are taken into account, it might well be the case that people would find, say, 300 cases of cancer less acceptable than 350 cases of heart disease, given certain assumptions about what causes each. In contingent valuation studies, people purport to be willing to pay far more to prevent cancer deaths (from $1.5 million to $9.5 million) than they would to prevent unforeseen instant deaths (from $1 million to $5 million).87 It is similarly possible that people might therefore accept a regulated risk involving 100 annual fatalities even if the ancillary risk involves 110 annual fatalities; perhaps the ancillary risk is less severe because it is voluntarily run, not especial ' See Paul Slovic, Baruch Fischhoff, and Sarah Lichtenstein, Characterizing Perceived Risk, in Robert W. Kates, Christoph Hohenemser, and Jeanne Y. Kasperson, eds, Perilous Progress: Managing the Hazards of Technology 91, 112 (Westview 1985); Richard H. Pildes and Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 U Chi L Rev 1, 3639, 55-58 (1995). ly dreaded, and well understood. The democratic decision to look at something other than quantity is easy to defend. It is filly rational. Table 4: Mortality Values by Cause of Death90 Category (per statistical life) Value Estimates in Million $ Low, Medium, High Category Medium Unforeseen instant death 1 Asthma/bronchitis Heart disease Emphysema Lung cancer 8 This proposition is defended in detail in Pildes and Sunstein, 62 U Chi L Rev at 55-95 (cited in note 86). Some complications are discussed in Cass R. Sunstein, Which Risks First?, 1997 U Chi Legal F (forthcoming 1997) (on file with U Chi L Rev) (exploring problems in ordinary valuations and arguing that voluntariness and control should not be taken as clear categories, but as pointing to low costs of risk avoidance). There are, however, enormous difficulties in the idea that officials can get, from private willingness to pay, an adequate sense of how to order the risks at stake in regulation. Healthhealth tradeoffs cannot easily be based on surrogates for market valuation. Actual choices are "noisy"; from a market decision-to take a job, to buy a Volvo, to get a smoke alarm-it is not easy to derive a consistent valuation of life. Such decisions are highly geared to the context in which they are made; it is not clear that one can infer from actual choices in one context people's valuations about other choices in different contexts. I now turn to existing law. If an agency takes account of ancillary risks, has it behaved unlawfully? If an agency refuses to consider such risks, should courts require it do so? " See Richard B. Stewart, Liability for Natural Resource Injury: Beyond Tort, in Richard L. Revesz and Richard B. Stewart, eds, Analyzing Superfund: Economics, Science, and Law 219, 236 (Resources for the Future 1995). A. Voluntary Agency Consideration of Ancillary Risks Suppose first that an agency actually considers health-health tradeoffs. Is it permitted to do so under existing law? Agencies have considerable flexibility here, since under current doctrine, agencies have discretion to interpret ambiguities in their governing statutes as they see fit.93 If the governing statute is ambiguous, agencies should be permitted to consider health-health tradeoffs. But sometimes agencies are given sufficiently broad authority, and they may, if they choose, consider ancillary risks. For example, the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act ("FIFRA") provides that agencies must ask whether pesticides produce "unreasonable adverse effects on the environment,"9 7 and this term requires the agency to take "into account the economic, social, and environmental costs and benefits of the use of any pesticide." 8 Thus FIFRA certainly authorizes the EPA to consider the possibility that a regulation will create aggregate harms. The Toxic Substances Control Act ("TSCA") reads in similar terms.99 The Clean Air Act allows the government to consider a broad range of good and bad environmental effects in requir to reasonable agency interpretations whenever statutory language is ambiguous). " On the other hand, it should be lawful to weigh health risks in the allocation of en ing technologies to reduce air and water pollution."°° Outside of the context of toxic substances, the Occupational Safety and Health Act defines occupational safety and health standards as those "reasonably necessary or appropriate" to the goal of ensuring "safe or healthful employment and places of employment."'0 ' OSHA may reasonably decide that a standard is not "reasonably necessary or appropriate" if the effect of the regulation is to lose aggregate lives. It is permitted to consider the effects of regulation in causing risks to life and health through poverty and unemployment. There is a pervasive choice, central to administrative law, between comprehensive rationality on the one hand and limited information on the other. If an agency tries to administer the statute so as to move in the direction of comprehensive rationality by ensuring that ancillary health risks are considered, it should be allowed to do so. Congress should not lightly or inadvertently be taken to have forbidden agencies from ensuring that requiring execution of a testator's will is interpreted not to require execution if it would benefit the testator's murderer); Church of the Holy Trinity v United States, 143 US 457 (statute clearly prohibiting the importation of any foreigners to perform "labor or service of any kind" is interpreted not to apply to religious organizations or services). regulations do not create net harm and that they create the greatest possible net benefit. The University of Chicago Law Review B. Refusal To Consider Ancillary Risks Now suppose that an agency refuses to consider, or to make decisive, the fact that its decision to reduce one risk increases another risk. Perhaps a new regulatory initiative from the NRC would increase the risks from coal-fired power plants. Is the NRC's refusal to consider such risks unlawful? The first question is whether the statute requires consideration of ancillary risks. The second question is whether, if the statute does not do so, the agency's decision is nonetheless arbitrary or capricious. literalism has led or is leading Congress to be more attentive to the problem of unintended bad consequences. vation alternatives). time. Its decision to this effect ought not to be found arbitrary or capricious unless it can be shown that the evidence is in fact solid and that the costs of incorporating it are reasonable. The relevant provision of the statute-the "reasonably necessary or appropriate" language-gives OSHA discretion to do with this evidence as it chooses. Under FIFRA, by contrast, an agency that fails to consider ancillary risks would probably be violating the statute, at least on a showing that the ancillary risks are real and the costs of investigation are not excessive. The result would be effectively the same harm that concerns petitioners and that the agency fails to negate or justify.""7 The court therefore remanded to the agency for a better explanation or a change in policy. The point I am making here might well be generalized. Agencies ought to be required to show that they are doing more Id at 1224. I do not mean to endorse the court's rejection of the EPA's effort at technology forcing. See note 71. good than harm.' This does not mean that courts should engage in independent review of agency judgments on this score. But it does mean that courts should take a "hard look" at agency decisions failing to undertake health-health comparisons.' A. Congress In its present form, Congress is ill equipped to consider the problem of health-health tradeoffs. Its committee structure ensures a high degree of fragmentation and does not allow for deliberation on such tradeoffs. On the contrary, that structure makes ancillary risks difficult to evaluate or, much worse, to see. Often ancillary risks are thought to be subject to the jurisdiction of another committee, which means, in practice, that coordination is extremely difficult. In these circumstances, I offer two simple suggestions for legislative reform. " See generally Edward W. Warren and Gary E. Marchant, "More Good Than Harm": A First Principle for Environmental Agencies and Reviewing Courts, 20 Ecol L Q 379 (1993). Procedure Act. Notably, recent initiatives designed to require cost-benefit balancing say almost nothing about this problem. The principal exception is a House bill introduced in 1995, which contains a subsection entitled "substitution risks." This subsection says that "[e]ach significant risk assessment or risk characterization document shall include a statement of any significant substitution risks to human health, where information on such risks has been provided to the agency." ' But this is a strikingly modest initiative. It does not require agencies to investigate ancillary risks on their own. Nor does it say that agencies may not proceed unless the regulation yields netbenefits. I suggest instead a new amendment to the Administrative Procedure Act: 'Agencies shall ensure, to the extent feasible, that regulations do not create countervailing risks that are greater than those of the regulated risk." A modest forerunner of this idea can be found in the "clean fuels" provision of the Clean Air Act, which says that the Administrator of the EPA may not prohibit the use of a fuel or fuel additive "unless he finds... that in his judgment such prohibition will not cause the use of any other fuel or fuel additive which will produce emissions which will endanger the public health or welfare to the same or greater degree than the use of the fuel or fuel additive proposed to be prohibited." This idea should be generalized. The words "to the extent feasible" are necessary because some investigations are too costly and speculative to be worthwhile. OIRA has been entrusted with the power to coordinate regulatory policy and to ensure reasonable priority setting.2 In the Clinton administration, OIRA appears to have become an advisory body, more limited in its power than it was in the Bush and Reagan administrations. In view of the absence of good priority setting, and the enormous room for saving costs and increasing regulatory benefits, this is highly unfortunate. OIRA should see, as one of its central assignments, the task of overcoming governmental tunnel vision, by ensuring that aggregate risks are reduced and that agency focus on particular risks does not mean that ancillary risks are ignored or increased. This is a more modest and particularized version of Justice Breyer's larger suggestion that OIRA should have a power to set priorities by diverting resources from smaller problems to larger ones.' It also fits with the emerging interest in "common sense government."' No body in government is now entrusted with the authority of ensuring that risk regulation is managed so as to ensure global rationality and coherence. OIRA is well situated to take on that role, at least by attending to the possibility that regulation of some risks may make risk levels higher on balance. 130 On the fiftieth anniversary of the Administrative Procedure Act, it would be far too simple to say that the administrative state has been a failure. In many ways, it has been a substantial success. Risks to safety and health are much lower than they have been in the past, partly because of regulatory safeguards.'3' But current programs are far more costly, and far less effective, than they should be. Reforms to the APA, as that Act was originally envisaged, would be much too modest to provide adequate correctives. Existing difficulties cannot be solved by weakening or intensifying standards of judicial review, or by increasing or decreasing the procedures that are required before agencies undertake regulatory action. 1995) (Third Report of the National Performance Review). The University of Chicago Law Review justify an Administrative Substance Act of the general sort that is receiving considerable current attention in Congress." 2 Among the principal side-effects, not well addressed in current proposals or existing law, is the increased risk sometimes produced by risk regulation. Selective attention of this kind is a natural outcome of the cognitive limitations of human beings; sometimes it is the product of self-conscious efforts by well organized private groups. In any case, selective attention can easily be exploited by such groups intent on redistributing resources in their favor. This is a significant problem, and through some simple steps, something can be done about it. Health-Health Tradeoffs sion, and susceptibility to both anecdotes and interest groups, that are exemplified by so much of modern risk regulation.