 The Right to Die Cass R. Sunstein' In a number of cases, people with terminal illnesses are seeking to end their lives with the aid of a physician.' Many such people suffer from hopeless conditions of increasing debilitation, sometimes accompanied by periods of excruciating pain. It was inevitable that circumstances of this kind would raise constitutional questions. Two recent cases have turned the "right to die"-or, more precisely, the right to physician-assisted suicide-into the next great arena for the struggle to define the scope of fundamental rights under the Due Process Clause. In Quill v. Vacco," the Court of Appeals for the due process claim but held, somewhat the Second Circuit rejected astonishingly, that New York had acted "irrationally" and hence in violation of the Equal Protection Clause because it prohibited physician-assisted suicide while simultaneously permitting patients to withdraw life-saving equipment. In Compassion in Dying v. Washington,3 the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held straightforwardly that a prohibition on the right to physicianassisted suicide violates the Due Process Clause. in t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Junsprudence. Uncrsity of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Richard Epstein. Jack Goldsmith. Daniel Kahan, Martha Nussbaum, Richard Posner, and David Strauss for helpful comments on a preious draft. This Essay is dedicated to the memory of my father. presented by a right to physician-assisted suicide are especially well-suited to a federal system, where appropriate experiments may be made, and where such experiments are likely to provide valuable information about underlying risks. It is particularly important that the issue of physician-assisted suicide is facing not neglect or indifference but intense discussion in many states.5 It is far too early for courts to preempt these processes of discussion, especially if we consider the fact that there is no systematic barrier to a fair hearing of any affected group. Despite appearances, the Court's current doctrines reflect this point. Thus a general theme of this Essay is that many cases involving "fundamental rights"-including the key privacy cases and the key equal protection cases-are best seen not as flat declarations that the state interest intrusion, but more narrowly as was inadequate democracy-forcing outcomes designed to overcome problems of discrimination and desuetude. to justify In short, the Court should say that even if it assumes that the right to physician-assisted suicide qualifies as "fundamental" under the Due Process Clause, a legal ban on physician-assisted suicide is constitutionally permissible in light of the state's legitimate and weighty interests in preventing abuse, protecting patient autonomy, and avoiding involuntary death. The Court should reach this conclusion partly because of appropriate judicial modesty in the face of difficult underlying questions of value and fact;6 it should emphasize these institutional concerns in explaining its conclusion. may cause serious social problems even if they are right. See infra text accompanying notes 129-33. By "recognizing rights," I mean invalidating legislation; as suggested below, I do think these cases are an appropriate setting for recognizing a presumptive right, in the sense that the state should be required to bring forward a strong justification for any intrusion. the right to physician-assisted suicide qualifies as "fundamental" under those cases. We might want to read current law to say that there is a presumptive right8 against government intrusion into a decision whether to terminate one's life under hopeless conditions or, alternatively and more broadly, a presumptive right against nontrivial government-imposed intrusions into the physical space of one's own body. In some cases, the right to physicianassisted suicide certainly meets the former standard, and while it does not quite meet the latter-it is a right "to" invasion, not a right "from" invasion-that right should probably be taken as close enough to the rights established by the existing case law to qualify as "fundamental" for constitutional purposes when the patient faces medically hopeless conditions. At the very least, it would be reasonable for the Court to make this assumption for purposes of decision. But-and this is the central point-the state has an array of strong justifications for intruding on that right. These justifications involve the risk of abuse by doctors and others and the danger that a right to physician-assisted suicide would, in practice, decrease rather than increase patient autonomy. sufficiently strong interest. The "right to die" might be asserted in a number of circumstances. 4 Of course, the term might refer to the interest in withdrawing life-sustaining equipment. The interest in doing so appears to have been recognized as having presumptive constitutional status in Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health,'5 in the sense that the state must come forward with a strong I1. See RICHARD A. POSNER, AGING AND OLD AGE 235-45 (1995) (arguing on behalf of right to physician-assisted suicide); see also Keown, supra note 6, at 263-66 (describing controversial safeguards in Netherlands). Keown identifies safeguards requiring that the request must come from the patient and be free and voluntary; the request must be well-considered, durable, and persistent; the patient must be intolerably suffering, with no hope of improvement; euthanasia must be the last resort, after other alternatives have failed; euthanasia must be performed by the physician; the physician must consult with another physician trained in the field; and the death record should not indicate death of "natural causes." These safeguards are controversial because it is not clear that they are respected in practice. See id.; see also HERBERT HENDIN, SEDUCED BY DEATH 47-95 (1997). of an autonomy right. The principle that a competent person has a constitutionally protected liberty interest in refusing unwanted medical treatment may be inferred from our prior decisions .... Although we think the logic of the cases ... would embrace such a liberty interest (in resisting the forced administration of life-sustaining medical treatment], the dramatic consequences involved in Right to Die justification for intruding on that interest. In any case, many states allow citizens to decline medical treatment.' 6 The distinction between the right to withdraw life-sustaining equipment and the right to physician-assisted suicide is problematic in many ways, 7 but here I am speaking of cases that involve more than the withdrawal of treatment. Consider the following possibilities, designed to give a sense of the range of factual contexts in which the right might be claimed. (1) A competent patient seeks death under conditions that are both medically hopeless, in the sense that the best medical judgment is that there is a fixed and relatively short time to live, and physically difficult and debilitating, in the sense that the patient will experience some intense pain. 8 (2) A competent patient seeks death under conditions that are medically hopeless, but do not involve much physical pain. (3) A competent patient with a disease that will produce a long period of deterioration and a long span of life-Alzheimer's disease is the most familiar example-seeks to terminate her life at some stage before the deterioration becomes serious. (4) A patient may be unconscious or otherwise incompetent and also in a medically hopeless state; his family or guardian seeks death, with or without evidence that this would be the patient's desire. These might be called cases of nonvoluntary euthanasia, as distinguished from voluntary and involuntary euthanasia. (5) A competent patient may be facing a severe medical problem. Though his condition is not utterly hopeless, he may seek death because he is generally depressed or no longer considers life worth living. (6) A patient may be facing a period of sustained medical difficulty without knowing whether or not some improvement is eventually possible. His condition is therefore considerably better than in (5), but he seeks death because he no longer considers life worth living. (7) Any of the above conditions might involve a person who seeks death, not with the assistance of a physician, but with the assistance of a friend or family member. (describing New York statutes allowing patients to decline treatment). example, Brock writes: There are not great numbers of patients undergoing severe suffenng that can only be relieved by directly killing them. Modem methods of pain management enable physicians and nurses to control the pain of virtually all such patients without the use of lethal poisons. though often at the cost of so sedating the patient that interaction and communication with others is limited or no longer possible. For present purposes, let us accept the following propositions. First, it can sometimes be hard to know, in the real world, whether a case qualifies as (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), or (6). The difficulty of making such distinctions bears on the desirability of a constitutional ruling: If apparent category (1) cases actually fall in category (6), perhaps a flat ban on physician-assisted suicide, accompanied by the good-faith exercise of prosecutorial discretion (protecting against arrests and indictments in the most excusable cases), makes a good deal of sense. Second, the state has a legitimate reason to make sure that any third party representation about the patient's wishes is actually reliable. When the patient has not consented, we have involuntary or nonvoluntary euthanasia, and it is safe to assume that the state has an especially strong interest in ensuring against involuntary or nonvoluntary deaths. 2' Third, and perhaps most importantly and more contentiously, let us assume that there is no constitutional barrier to laws forbidding ordinary suicide and ordinary assisted suicide, and hence that in categories (5) and (6) there is no constitutional problem.22 Let us accept this conclusion partly because of precedent23 and partly on the theory that the state has extremely strong 19. See, e.g., Seth F. Kreimer, Does Pro-Choice Mean Pro-Kevorkian? An Essay oil Roe, Casey, and the Right to Die, 44 AM. U. L. REv. 803, 824-25 (1995) (noting New York State Task Force on Life and the Law's opposition to physician-assisted suicide based in part on fact that majority of individuals who commit suicide suffer from depression and most doctors are not adequately trained to diagnose depression in complex cases such as terminal illness). fortifying laws both expressing and interests in encouraging a general commitment to the continuation of life and in protecting people from engaging in behavior that may be myopic or a product of short-term depression or distortions in judgment. Some of the strongest cases for public interference with private judgments involve myopia, cognitive error or motivational problems, or similar distortions. It is easy to imagine cases in which people facing severe temporary (or not so temporary) distress are inclined to seek a way out, and there is extremely good reason for social norms-and those social norms-discouraging such people from terminating their lives. Suicide may seem the only solution to the experience of intolerable suffering, perhaps occasioned by some disastrous or life-transforming event (death of a loved one, involuntary separation, divorce); but the suffering may be far more short-term and far more remediable than it seems.2'4 The norms directed against suicide and assisted suicide have a salutary function in encouraging people to deal with even the most severe problems in a more constructive fashion; part of the salutary function of the relevant norms and laws is to block serious thought of suicide in cases where it appears to be the only or the simplest solution. In fact, it is possible that in many cases those who are "assisting" suicide are actually urging or at least legitimating it.2 A decent society seeks to inculcate a strong norm in favor of preserving life even when things seem extremely bad. It does so especially in view of the fact that suicide seems remarkably contagious. Highly publicized suicides can create bandwagon or cascade effects.26 Of course we can also imagine cases in which a suicide may be warranted and in which assistance in suicide is morally acceptable and perhaps morally responsible, even in category (5). But in such cases, criminal prosecutions are quite unlikely, and even if there are such prosecutions, the relevant laws are generally acceptable on constitutional grounds, and is sufficient for my purposes here. I will deal, then, principally with cases falling in categories (1) and (2), for these are the most insistent ones for a constitutional "right to die." They also provide the factual settings behind both Quill and Compassion in Dying. These points suggest a possible problem with right-to-die litigation, one that points to the distorting lens of adjudication. The particular cases brought to a court's attention will certainly be the most compelling ones. They will involve competent patients facing horrible life prospects and perhaps intense pain. A focus on the particular cases will make the right seem particularly insistent, and this will be a fully reasonable reaction to those cases. But a their lives without reference to law). When he realized that my family was going to be away for a day, he wrote us a beautiful letter, went down to his basement, and shot himself with his 12 gauge shot gun. He was 84 .... My son-in-law then had the unfortunate and unpleasant task of cleaning my father's splattered brains off the basement walls. Under the Court's cases, the first question is whether the right to die, understood as a right to physician-assisted suicide in category (1) and (2) cases, qualifies as a "fundamental right" or "liberty interest, '"31 such that a state must show an especially strong reason for interfering with it. My ultimate suggestion is that the Court would do best to assume, without holding, that the relevant right so qualifies. Hence the discussion to follow is in a sense gratuitous; I will be arguing that the Court should put to one side the extraordinary complexities and proceed directly to the issue of justification. But the underlying issue is important, difficult, and of great intrinsic interest, and if the Court does answer the question, I suggest that it should conclude that the right to physician-assisted suicide is presumptively protected either (a) because there is a presumptive right to choose whether to live or die under medically hopeless conditions; or (b) because the cases establish a presumptive right to prevent physical invasions of one's own body, and the right to physician-assisted suicide is close enough to this established right to qualify as presumptively protected as well. 30. I will use the two terms interchangeably. There is. howsever. a technical difference If the Court finds a "fundamental fight," the state may intrude only on a showing that it has chosen the least restnctive means of promoting a compelling state interest. See. e.g.. Roe. 410 U.S. at 155 It is unclear whether the identification of a "liberty interest" has the same consequence, It is notable that in Cnrzon v- Director Missouri Department of Health, the Court spoke of a "liberty interest'" rather than a fundamental nght. see 497 U.S. 261, 278-79 (1990). though it is not clear that this was intended as a distinction 31. The plurality opinion in Michael H. v. Gerald D.. 491 U.S. 110 (1989). strongly supports this view: "We refer to the most specific level at which a relevant tradition protecting, or denying protection to, the asserted right can be identified." Id. at 127 n.6. Interestingly. the plurality found consistency with Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479 (1965), and Eisenstadt %- Baird. 405 U.S. 438 (1972). by saying that such cases did not acknowledge "a longstanding and still extant societal tradition withholding the very right pronounced to be the subject of [the] liberty interest." 491 U.S. at 127 Thus. in those cases, there was no tradition of state enforcement of laws withholding the liberty interest "continuing to the present day" Id. This idea bears on the notion of desuetude. See infra text accompanying notes 150-52. Use of Contraceptives Griswold v. Connecticut;" Access to Contraceptives Eisenstadt v. Baird34 Carey v. Population Servs. Int'13 Abortion Heterosexual Sodomy Prevention of Compulsory Skinner v. Oklahoma Sterilization Homosexual Sodomy Avoidance of Life-Saving Medical Treatment Avoidance of Administration Washington v. Harper4' Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Dep't of Health' of Antipsychotic Drugs Paternal Visits to Child Conceived Out of Wedlock Live with Family Members Moore v. City of East Cleveland 43 Live with Friends Marriage Loving v. Virginia;45 Zablocki v. Redhail' [Bowers v. Hardwick] Village of Belle Terre v. neither of these readings holds out much promise; both are far too crude. As we will see, the "no-more-except-for-tradition" reading does not fit the cases very well, and it also lacks much appeal in principle. On the other hand, the terms "personal" and "intimate" are far too broad; they create too many ambiguities and lead in too many unhelpful directions. This is not the occasion for a full discussion of these points-I cannot attempt to sort out the modem doctrine of substantive due process in this space4-but a few notations will be helpful. On occasion, influential Justices and the Court as a whole have said that fundamental rights under the Due Process Clause qualify as such largely because of their origins in Anglo-American traditions, understood at a level of considerable specificity. 9 Let us for the moment assume that this is the case. If the right to physician-assisted suicide must emerge from such traditions, the case is relatively simple: There is no such right. The right to physician-assisted suicide is not something that Anglo-American law traditionally protects.' Of course suicide and assisted suicide have been banned by tradition. 5' Perhaps we could say that Anglo-American practice with respect to suicide is complex, not simple, because enforcement has often been lacking and because physicianassisted suicide is a novel phenomenon; 2 perhaps we could say that tradition yields no clear judgment that suicide is to be banned in the distinctive circumstances that we are discussing. But even if this is true, and hence the tradition does not speak with clarity, it would be implausible to suggest that our tradition affirmatively supports a right to terminate one's life with the help of a doctor. From the standpoint of Anglo-American traditions, a ban on the use of contraceptives within marriage may well count as anomalous;"' so too 48. For relevant discussions, see LAURENCE H. TRIBE & MICHAEL C. DORF. O READING TlE CONsTrrLToN (1991), which challenges traditionalism in constitutional law; JIM Balkin. Tradition. Betrayal, and the Politics of Deconstruction. II CARDOZO L. REv. 1613 (1990). which argues that traditions are indeterminate; and Jed Rubenfeld. The Right of Privacy. 102 HARV. L REv. 737 (1989). which argues for broad privacy right not rooted in tradition. rarity of enforcement). the Court consider in the future notwithstanding and unclear historical rules on abortion). period). historical traditions relating to adulterous natural father rather than parenthood more generally). Right to Die that is an to assume, we will find large problems with using traditions, narrowly and specifically conceived, as the sole source of rights under the Due Process Clause. To be sure, such a use of tradition does help to discipline judicial traditions were discretion, and systematically reliable as sources of rights, and if judges thinking more independently about the appropriate content of rights were systematically unreliable, due process traditionalism might be justified on rule-utilitarian grounds. That is, due process traditionalism might be justified as a way of minimizing aggregate judicial errors65 even if it were quite imperfect as a source of rights. if But this is not a very plausible view, for there is no reason to think that traditions, understood at a level of great specificity, are systematically reliable or so close to systematically reliable as to exclude a somewhat more reflective and critical judicial role.66 Anglo-American traditions, so understood, include a great deal of good but also significant confusion and injustice (consider, for example, bans on racial intermarriage); it is appropriate for courts to engage in at least a degree of critical scrutiny of intrusions on liberty even if those intrusions do not offend tradition. Nor is there sufficient reason to think that judges will inevitably do very badly if they think critically about rights. Of course judges should be very cautious about rejecting judgments made by elected officials; of course judges should avoid hubris in examining the past. to think that judges should generally proceed Certainly incrementally and in good common law fashion from previous decisions. 67 It also makes sense to say that substantive due process should be used sparingly.68 Understandings of this kind provide important constraints on judicial power under the Due Process Clause. But at the very least it is right is, in to ask whether the interest said to qualify as a fundamental right principle, at all different from rights that have been sanctified by tradition. If, in principle, between a for example, there were no relevant difference, traditionally unrecognized right to physician-assisted suicide and (let us suppose) a traditionally recognized right to resist treatment, courts should not say that the latter is constitutionally protected and the former is not. it Fourteenth Amendment Incorporate the Bill of Rights?, 2 STAN. L. REv. 5. 9-15 (1949) historical development of limited Privileges and Immunities Clause). should be characterized at level of greatest specificity). relatively simple to identify traditions. 67. See generally David A. Strauss, Common Law Constitutional Interpretation. 63 U. CHI. L. REv. If tradition is not decisive, what is the source of fundamental rights for purposes of substantive due process? This is one of the largest unanswered questions in American jurisprudence, and it would be foolish to attempt a full answer here. But terms such as "intimate" and "personal" provide too little help. They tend to be conclusions masquerading as analytic devices. In any case, some of the cases deny protection to interests that seem highly intimate and highly personal; consider both Hardwick and Village of Belle Terre v. Boraas.69 Thus the Court's cases refuse to accept the view that intimate and personal decisions deserve constitutional protection as such. As we will see, the relevant cases seem to depend not simply on deciding that an interest has considerable importance, but also on at least implicit problems of procedural due process or equal protection, problems that suggest an underlying defect in democratic processes themselves. 7, It is extremely difficult to produce any verbal formula that is satisfactory, consistent with current law, and adequate to resolve the issue of physician-assisted suicide. For this reason, it would be best for the Court simply to assume that the right qualifies as fundamental and to proceed from there to the question of justification; 72 at least this course would make sense if the justification is sufficient, as I will argue. minimalism in midst of complex issues of fact and value). that this choice is as central to But if the Court wanted to be more ambitious, it might venture a tentative alternative. The Court might say very narrowly that Cruzan should be read to recognize a presumptive right to make a choice about whether to live or die when one is suffering from a medically hopeless condition. Such a individual selfright would recognize determination as any that one can imagine; and if conditions are medically hopeless, it is harder, at least, to say that a state prohibition helps counteract individual irrationality. The existence of such a right would be important not only for people who are now dying but also for people not facing such conditions, who would be able to rest secure that if their condition became unbearable, they would have power to end it." Thus the Court might put to one side the issues raised by "dignity" and "intimacy" and rely instead on selfdetermination as the source of constitutional doctrine; it might conclude that whatever may fall in that category, the right to die when one is facing a terminal illness certainly does so. Such a right would also recognize that it is hard, in principle, to distinguish between withdrawal of life-saving equipment and category (1) and (2) cases,74 if we put to one side the risks of abuse discussed below. Those risks go not to the question of whether there is a right in the first instance, but to the separate issue of whether government has an adequate justification for intruding on the right. Suppose that the Court sought to be more ambitious and to introduce somewhat more order to the cases. It could find a principle of some appeal, is a and considerable consistency with presumptive right against government authorization of nontrivial physical invasions into a person's body. A government authorization may be found when the law allows invasions by government officials or when law forbids people from fending off physical invasions by private persons. This basic idea-intended as a statement of a sufficient, if not necessary, condition for a fundamental interest-explains the notion that people have a presumptive right the cases, if it said that there to resist the involuntary administration of drugs.75 It accounts for the widespread intuition that there would be serious constitutional issues if the government undertook medical experiments on people against their will or required them to have operations for their own good. It helps account for Cruzan as well, though the Court did not announce a general right against physical invasions of a person's body. Less obviously, the standard helps explain both Roe v. Wade and the cases involving governmental efforts to prevent people from diminishing risks of pregnancy. In these cases, the government is preventing people from taking steps to prevent a physical invasion of their bodies via pregnancy. The key point, then, is that a pregnancy is a physical invasion, and if government wants it needs a special to prevent people from fending off that justification.76 A particular advantage of the standard is that it helps explain why the Court has struck down laws involving contraception and abortion without saying that there is a right to engage in sexual activity as such; the Court has been careful to say that the Constitution does not prohibit laws forbidding fornication and adultery,77 and it has restricted its holdings to state efforts to control fornication and adultery indirectly by creating a risk of pregnancy. The suggested standard thus distinguishes Hardwick, on the ground that there is no prohibition on the regulation of sexual conduct if pregnancy and childbirth are not at risk. In any event, the standard seems to provide a sufficient if not necessary condition for constitutional concern; there do not appear to be any cases that fail to find a constitutionally protected interest in cases in which the standard is met.78 Of course this standard does not answer all imaginable questions, and this fact argues against its judicial adoption in a case that does not require the Court to attempt to make sense of its privacy doctrine, which undoubtedly consists of a number of incompletely theorized judgments 79 not easily reconciled with one another. The notion of "physical invasion" is vague. We 75. Cf. Washington v. Harper, 494 U.S. 210, 219-27 (1990) (holding that Due Process Clause permits state to administer antipsychotic drugs to prisoner against his will despite significant liberty interest in avoiding such administration of drugs). to can start with core or defining cases in which government officials or private actors are authorized literally to invade bodily space-Cruzan and Washington v. Harper ° are examples-but hard questions can easily be imagined, in is a physical invasion.8' Some of the which it is unclear whether there modem due process cases finding fundamental rights do not meet the standard; the right to marry"2 and the right live with one's grandchild13 are examples. Moreover, I have not explained what is special about the physical invasion of one's own body. The best answer might begin with an understanding of the time-honored nature of that right in Anglo-American law; tradition affords a special place to the individual's right to prevent invasion of his body. The right to self-defense can itself be understood in these terms. Even if tradition is not decisive, for reasons suggested above, it plainly matters under existing law, and it tends to support the right described here. Tradition aside, protection of one's body against external intrusion provides the most primitive and basic sense of personal security and independence. In this way, the right to prevent physical invasions can be seen as the most central and defining case of a series of familiar rights, including the right to private property itself.84 Does this standard support the right to physician-assisted suicide? Understood minimally, the standard seems not to create any such right. In such cases, the state is attempting to prevent a physical invasion. It is not itself undertaking a physical invasion, or making it impossible for people to stop a physical invasion from other private parties. Instead, the government is attempting to forbid people from allowing their bodies to be physically invaded. Thus the suggested standard seems to create a right to withdraw lifesaving equipment without creating a right to physician-assisted suicide. But there are two problems with this conclusion. First, as discussed above, some cases find a fundamental right even without a bodily invasion. Second, the distinction between withdrawal of life-saving equipment and physician-assisted suicide raises some serious conceptual issues, involving perhaps intractable distinctions between actions and omissions. Does it make sense to say that people have a constitutional right to resist physical invasions without also saying that they have a constitutional right to bring about physical invasions? In other words, we might say that the former implies the latter, so that people have a presumptive right to decide whether or not their bodies will be property and self-ownership). From these points, several alternatives are available to the Court. First and simplest, the Court might say that it need not decide whether the right to physician-assisted suicide qualifies as fundamental for constitutional purposes and proceed from that point to assess the state's justifications. Second, the Court might hold that its decisions protect rights vindicated by tradition and at most involve a right to prevent physical invasions and do not extend to other kinds of decisional autonomy, even when the body is directly involved. But this approach has the disadvantage of failing to account for some key cases. It also fails to explain why so sharp a distinction should be drawn between removing life-sustaining equipment and administering a drug that hastens death. As we shall see, a distinction of this kind is reasonable if we focus on the potential for abuse; but at the level of presumptive rights, it is much harder to defend. In any case, it seems odd to say that this vexed and controversial distinction can support the momentous difference between rational basis review and something like the "compelling interest" standard. of autonomy as matter of policy). such an interest in terminating his life through "more active" means. ' On this view, the state must therefore meet a severe burden if it seeks to intrude on those judgments. Because of the difficulties associated with the various alternatives, it would probably be best for the Court to take the first route, to assume that the right to physician-assisted suicide qualifies as fundamental, and to proceed from there with the issue of justification. This is the course suggested by Cruzan.s7 Suppose that the right to physician-assisted suicide does or is assumed to qualify as a fundamental interest for constitutional purposes. From this point it should not be concluded, in mechanical fashion, that any state intrusion is unacceptable. The Court should say, as it did in Adarand Constructors, Inc. V. in fact."' 9 The Court Pena,8 that "strict scrutiny" need not be "'fatal is reasonable, should require a strong demonstration that the interference that it actually agrees with the enacting without having to be persuaded legislature. 9° Does the state have a sufficient reason to interfere with that interest? There are several possible grounds." I outline them here, not to endorse them, but to suggest what reasonable people might say on behalf of the ban on physician-assisted suicide. The broadest point is that autonomy, rightly conceived, does not entail respect for all "choices"; sometimes the right to choose can diminish autonomy by subjecting people to novel pressures and influences. People who are in intense pain or emotional distress, and who face a bleak future, may well be unlikely to think clearly. They may be deeply depressed or myopic; short-term distress may overwhelm their judgment. We could easily imagine that people who are or appear to be terminally ill might be facing the equivalent of duress. In these circumstances, a right to die might be denied as a way of protecting people against their own distorted judgment. As I have suggested, the ban on suicide itself is best justified in these terms. but noting that state may nonetheless have sufficient grounds to interfere with that interest) 88. 115 S. Ct. 2097 (1995). 89. Id. at 2117 (quoting Fullilove v. Klutzmck. 448 U.S. 448. 519 (1980) (Marshall. J . concurrng)) 90. I defend this standard below. See infra Section IV.A. 91. 1 am putting to one side the idea that the state has an interest in protecting life as such In man) forms, that view is rooted in considerations that are essentially religious in nature and therefore an illegitimate basis for upholding a law. In nonreligious forms, the idea is hard to understand independently of the considerations discussed in the text. B. Protecting the Patient Against External Pressure to intrude on A ban on physician-assisted suicide may seem the autonomy of the patient; this is in fact the strongest argument against the ban. Ironically, however, the ban may have the opposite effect. A vulnerable person with perhaps a short time to live might be subject to various psychological pressures from family, certainly if (as is likely) family members are feeling great distress and also if (as is possible) nontrivial sums of money are at stake. The closing stages of life can, in short, create conflicts of interest between a patient and the patient's family members.94 The patient may wish to live as Right to Die long as possible; family members may believe that this is a situation of great tragedy, difficulty, and expense, and that it will be much better when it is over. Here too a right to die may seem the simplest solution while more difficult approaches would be better for all concerned. Physician-assisted suicide may in practice increase the authority of physicians rather than the autonomy of patients. 96 Suppose that a patient is confronted with a list of options from a doctor, one of which includes physician-assisted suicide. In some such cases the patient--confused or not-might feel actual or implicit pressure to accept the option of death. This is not because this option is, all things considered, the patient's preferred one, but because the physician explicitly or implicitly favors it and because, under the circumstances, the physician has assumed the role of an authority figure. Once a right (consciously or unconsciously) favor death for any number of reasons, including financial pressures and the need to allocate scarce time to other, more promising cases. People who are poor, undereducated, or otherwise disadvantaged may be especially vulnerable to pressure. Here, too, we have a case in which a ban on physician-assisted suicide supports rather than undermines autonomy. It is relevant here that in the Netherlands, the only nation to legalize physicianassisted suicide, there are many allegations that patient consent is not always the precondition for medical decisions. 97 One observer claims, "Euthanasia, real-world physicians may is granted, do so, and in such cases the right might undermine their autonomy. It is unlikely. however. that a large percentage of abortions results from these pressures as a matter of fact. If the percentage were in fact large. the argument for the right to abort would be undermined. D. Nonvoluntary Euthanasia Many critics of the "right to die" believe that there is an easy slippage from voluntary to nonvoluntary euthanasia. Their argument has two forms. 99 Some people believe that the safeguards designed to ensure a trustworthy expression of the patient's will cannot be held in place-that in a number of cases, those safeguards will, as an empirical matter, prove inadequate, and the patient will be killed despite his wishes. Other people do not stress this empirical possibility but urge instead that if doctors are put in a position to honor the suicide requests of (autonomous) patients, the doctors will also inevitably be making some evaluation of whether those patients' lives will be worth living. Once doctors begin to make that evaluation, they will, in practice, be making judgments about the competence of patients and the value of their lives, and in some number of cases will ultimately terminate lives partly or mostly on the basis of their own judgments rather than those of their patients. °° The experience in the Netherlands is complex, but it is taken by reasonable people to signal a warning on this front.'0' A comprehensive survey suggested that of 130,000 people who died each year, 49,000 raised issues of whether to withdraw life-saving equipment or hasten death, and about 400 cases amounted to assisted suicide.1t 2 There were 9000 annual requests for euthanasia; of these, voluntary euthanasia-"any action that intentionally ends the life of someone else, on the request of that person"-was allowed in 2300 cases, or about one-quarter. In 8100 cases, doctors intended to hasten deaths via pain-killing drugs. 0 3 Some people believe that abuse has been extensive, in the form of deaths that did not receive adequate consent) °4 Thus, of the 8100 cases involving pain-killing drugs designed to hasten death, 5508 involved no explicit request on the patient's part.' One observer suggests that "the Dutch euthanasia experience lends weighty support to the slippery slope argument .... Within a decade, the so-called strict safeguards against the slide have proved signally ineffectual; non-voluntary euthanasia is 6 now widely practiced and increasingly condoned 0 Others disagree." 7 The existence of uncertainty on the question suggests that there is at least a significant possibility of abuse. in Some people undoubtedly support the prohibition on suicide and assisted suicide because of the expressive value of the prohibition.' That is, a ban on suicide may be supported as an intrinsic good insofar as it reflects social attitudes about the sanctity of life.' 9 Perhaps it is inadequate to defend a law intruding so deeply on patient autonomy on purely expressive grounds. But less controversially, it might be suggested that the ban has expressive value insofar as it has salutary effects on social norms-helping to create a culture in which life is seen with a degree of reverence, and in which the termination of life, by self or others, is taken to be a tragic event. This point has special importance insofar as a prohibition on suicide and assisted suicide, even in the most compelling cases, helps express and fortify norms in favor of dealing with difficult conditions in more constructive ways. A right to physicianassisted suicide might be taken to compromise the general social norm against suicide and assisted suicide, even if, as a technical matter, it applies only in a restricted and compelling context. We have seen that acts of suicide can be contagious."0 The state may want to disallow physician-assisted suicides for fear that a few highly publicized cases may spur a wide range of additional cases, with harmful effects on norms against suicide in general."' It is also possible that a right to physician-assisted suicide would have adverse effects on the norms and role of physicians. Physicians are now faced with an entrenched norm in favor of the preservation of life. A right to physician-assisted suicide might have harmful effects on that norm. It is possible, for example, that such a right would make doctors more willing to hasten death whether or not this is actually the patient's choice. Such a right light of the right We have now seen that the state can invoke some powerful justifications to oppose to physician-assisted suicide. these considerations, how might the Court resolve the question of whether there is a constitutionally guaranteed right to die? I believe that the Court should reject the constitutional challenge, partly for institutional reasons connected with the limited place of the Supreme Court in American government:" 2 When the issue is very close in light of the underlying issues of fact and value, and when there is no democratic defect in the underlying political process, the Court should not strike down reasonable legislative judgments. I consider substantive due process, equal protection, and (following the lead of Judge Guido Calabresi in Quill) the form of procedural due process involving the defect known as "desuetude." 1. Narrowly Vindicating the Right Like the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, the Supreme Court might say that there is a fundamental liberty interest in deciding whether to live or die and that the various state justifications are not sufficient to overcome that interest. It might support this view with the plausible suggestion that the various risks can be counteracted through less restrictive alternatives. A state concerned about those risks might take steps to make sure that the patient really wants to die by requiring a certain burden of proof, ensuring that the circumstances meet certain constraints, imposing procedural safeguards of various kinds, and using the criminal law against doctors who pressure patients and do not simply follow their wishes. This approach would be reminiscent of Roe in the sense that it would follow the familiar two-step process of finding a fundamental right and declaring that the state does not have a "compelling" interest that it is unable to support with less restrictive means. not overriding. Perhaps the basic risks could be adequately handled through procedural safeguards (as I believe is likely true as a matter of policy). Indeed, it is possible to think that such a route would be stronger than that in several of the privacy cases, including Roe itself. Here the individual interest may be at least as insistent and the countervailing interests might seem weaker insofar as the individual in question has extremely poor life prospects. There is no direct argument, as there is in the abortion context, about preventing harm to third parties. The Court has almost never said that a state can intrude on a right that qualifies as fundamental, and unlike the procedural rules upheld in Cruzan, the barrier to physician-assisted suicide is a total ban. equal democratic deliberation. concept of desuetude). (discussing role of Catholic Church in preventing statutory change). deliberative processes in circumstances in which reasonable people may differ. This is so especially insofar as the relevant judgments depend on factual issues not well-suited for judicial judgment. The Court might simply uphold the relevant laws. It might hold that there is no fundamental interest, for reasons discussed above. Far more promisingly, it might say that even if there is a fundamental interest, the state has sufficient reason to interfere with the choice. There is a great deal to be said on behalf of this conclusion. The distinction between withdrawing treatment and active euthanasia may not be supportable at the level of first principles; but it reflects widely held intuitions and, more fundamentally, the state's justifications for rejecting a right least in degree.12 3 Thus risks of abuse and misapplication are not so serious in the case of withdrawal of treatment, but that a state could reasonably decide that those risks are decisive against physician-assisted suicide. that say the Moreover, recognition of the importance of the state's countervailing interests would free up state legislatures to do as they wish with a problem that is very much on the public agenda. As we have seen, the state does have powerful interests with which to counterpose the claim from decisional autonomy. 24 Notably, those interests are more powerful than in any of the privacy cases vindicating state's the underlying justification-protection of fetal life-seemed (and seems) to many quite strong; but at least there is a serious question whether, on secular grounds, fetal life deserves the same respect and concern as human life post-viability. By contrast, the potential abuses introduced by any right to physician-assisted suicide have considerable weight whatever one's convictions about foundational issues. The Court is not in a good position to know whether the likely risks are serious and whether they can be reduced sufficiently through less restrictive means. For this reason, the question is admirably well-suited to a federal system that can conduct a range of experiments. right. It should be clear that the argument I am making depends on the controversial suggestion that when there is no palpable defect in the system of 123. See infra text accompanying notes 143-45. 124. A suggestion to this effect is made by a defender of the right to acti'c cuthanasia See BROCK. democratic deliberation,1 5 courts should respect very reasonable legislative judgments even if a "fundamental interest" is at stake. 26 This view depends on two assumptions. The first is that judicial judgments about how to balance the relevant interests, especially in light of factual and predictive uncertainties, are not always reliable. Judges are aware of this point and they devise doctrines accordingly. Of course, judges have certain advantages by virtue of their insulation and their ability, perhaps, to be especially careful with respect to underlying issues of both fact and political morality. But with respect to issues of both fact and value, judicial insulation can be a disadvantage too; it can make it harder for courts to obtain relevant information, and it can make it less legitimate for judges to choose what to do in the face of factual uncertainty. Judicial insulation suggests that courts should not be too sure that they are right, 127 in the sense that they should be reluctant to overturn a legislative judgment when the balance is quite close and when there is no problem in democratic deliberation.12 1 The second assumption is that even if judges are right, they should be aware that their (by hypothesis correct) moral judgments, once announced, may not receive immediate social vindication and may instead produce something very different from what they intended. 29 This is because judicial judgments may truncate ongoing processes of democratic deliberation, and by so doing, may prove futile or even counterproductive. In the context of abortion, this is a plausible view, for the nation may well have been moving reasonably amicably toward a solution not far from Roe and reflecting deliberative 125. I am referring here to the general view of constitutional interpretation set out in ELY, supra note 4; see also JORGEN HABERMAS, BETWEEN FACTS AND NORMS 266 (William Rehg trans., Polity Press 1996) (1992) (arguing against judicial paternalism); SUNSTEIN, supra note 29, at 123-61 (embracing same general view). On this view, a democratic problem exists if a right central to democracy is at issue (for example, the right to free political speech) or if a group is being fenced out of political processes through formal exclusions or, more controversially, prejudice or "animus." See Romer v. Evans, 116 S. Ct. 1620, 1627 (1996) (striking down state constitutional amendment partly because it reflects "animus"). in producing social reform and complex effects of Roe v. Wade). the right compromises in various states. 3' Currently, the same may well be true with respect to physician-assisted suicide (or, to take an issue that is in some ways these circumstances, a similar, constitutional ruling may embroil the Court in decades of political conflict. This consideration should not be decisive; if the argument for the constitutional right were compelling, as in for example Brown v. Board of Education,32 a majority or minority that rejects the right should not be allowed to exercise any kind of heckler's veto. In Brown, the existence of political inequality and that possible disagreement among apparently racial animus suggested reasonable people should not be decisive in court. But where there is no such inequality and the issue is otherwise very close, institutional considerations of this kind are relevant. 133 They suggest that if democratic processes are not malfunctioning, judges should be cautious about invoking their own moral judgments partly because of the risk of producing unfortunate and unintended consequences. 130. Cf id. at 182-84 (discussing growing popular support for repeal of abortion laws pnor to Roe). But see DAVID J. GARROW, LIBERTY AND SEXUALITY 616-17 (1994) (contending that states would not have moved in direction set by Roe). Whether or not Roe is a good example. the point certainly holds in general. 1. Rationality Review In Eisenstadt v. Baird,34 the Court struck down as irrational a law forbidding the distribution of contraceptives to unmarried people. The Court said that it was irrational to prohibit the distribution of contraceptives among unmarried people if such distribution was not prohibited to married people. 35 Many questions might be raised about the Court's reasoning; the state's decision was hardly irrational in the technical sense. But Eisenstadt can be understood as a rather cautious and modest ruling, one that vindicates a claim that the Court thought convincing without going so far as to announce a general "substantive due process" right to purchase contraceptives. approach has Equal Protection Clause because it was "not rationally related to any legitimate state interest."'37 On this view, there is no sufficiently good reason to allow people to terminate their lives in one way while banning them from doing so in another way. Under the decision of the court of appeals, New York might be able to ban both physician-assisted suicide and removal of life support systems (though the latter step would raise substantive due process questions under Cruzan), but it may not discriminate. The equal protection/rationality an advantage of comparative modesty; it also has a plausible antecedent in Eisenstadt. But the argument is nonetheless weak. Longstanding traditions, and many reasonable people, have distinguished between killing and letting die. 3 This distinction finds a particular instantiation in the idea that people should be allowed to remove life-saving equipment but not to kill themselves. Certainly the action/omission distinction raises many puzzles, and it is far from clear that the distinction makes ultimate sense in this context,139 but a holding that it is "irrational" runs afoul of both ordinary law and ordinary intuitions. If the distinction in this context is unconstitutional because it is irrational, it is in many other contexts as well. Consider, for example, unconstitutional law's distinction between killing and letting die,' ' law's criminal absence of liability for bad samaritans, 1 ' and indeed due process law's own distinction between government actions and omissions.'- 2 tort There is also theoretical support for the distinction. Here are some possible grounds. Without endorsing the distinction for all purposes, we can say that someone who jumps off a building expresses contempt for his own life, whereas someone who disconnects life-saving equipment, and allows nature to take its course, expresses no such contempt. The attitude expressed by what are conventionally labelled "acts" may well be different from the attitude expressed by what are conventionally labelled "omissions." Similarly, it might seem that a doctor who assists in suicide is different from a doctor who withdraws life-saving equipment, because of the different attitudes expressed by the two acts. In any case, the right to remove life support might to prevent the government from be rooted in a desire to allow people restraining and invading their bodies against their will. The right to physicianassisted suicide is at least plausibly different on this score. I do not mean to the general failure to assist people who will die without help. (holding that there is no affirmative right to action by state). less likely to reflect an This is not to deny that withdrawal of life support raises risks of abuse as well. We can certainly imagine instances in which very dependent patients feel pressured, by family or doctors, to misstate their true wishes in the face of exceptionally expensive medical treatments. But at least some safeguard against widespread abuse comes from the very possibility that the withdrawal would produce death; these are relatively rare cases, mostly involving terrible and terminal illnesses, and allowing the withdrawal of treatment does not risk the sheer number of conceivable instances in which a right to physicianassisted suicide would produce nonautonomous or involuntary deaths, or deaths that more nearly resemble ordinary suicide. The withdrawal of treatment produces death only if the patient suffers from a fatal illness, whereas the right to physician-assisted suicide may well, in either theory or practice, apply far more broadly even if we attempt to restrict its domain.'" It is for this reason that this distinction is fully plausible as a way of attempting to protect patient autonomy and to combat risks of abuse. 45 So long as rationality review is genuinely at work, the equal protection challenge is unconvincing. is that the distinction is sufficiently plausible for constitutional purposes; the policy issue is different. See supra text accompanying notes 11-13; see also Orentlicher, supra note 143, at 665-66 (arguing that permitting assisted suicide in "limited" cases will bring law closer to society's moral values). The equal protection argument might be rooted in the "fundamental rights" branch of equal protection doctrine. In a number of cases, the Court has said that it will look skeptically at classifications that involve fundamental rights. It might be concluded that there is a fundamental interest here and that any discrimination with respect to that interest must be given a compelling justification. The distinction between refusing treatment and physician-assisted suicide is rational, to be sure, but perhaps it does not have a compelling argument on its behalf. Thus understood, the case would be like Skinner v. Oklahoma ex rel. Williamson146 and Zablocki v. Redhail,"' involving sterilization and marriage, respectively, and using the fundamental rights branch of equal protection doctrine. support obligations). The Court might strike down such laws unless they are a product of recent legislative deliberation on the particular issues raised by physicianassisted suicide. This is the solution favored by Judge Calabresi in his intriguing if somewhat adventurous concurring opinion in Quill. 49 Judge Calabresi's solution identifies an important and salutary theme in constitutional law, one that raises complex issues and deserves considerable attention. A large advantage of Judge Calabresi's approach is institutional. It ensures that interferences with important forms of liberty will not be based on law that lacks current political support; in that way, the approach is democracysupporting. Moreover, it does not preempt but instead catalyzes democratic processes, and in that sense reflects the courts' appropriate caution in dealing with complex ethical and factual issues. The principal problem with Judge Calabresi's approach is that the case of physician-assisted suicide does not easily fit the case of desuetude, for the "right to die" has received ample recent consideration in most of the relevant states. I conclude that the idea of desuetude is extremely important and valuable, and deserves a more prominent and explicit place in constitutional law, but that it ought not to be used to call for new legislation in Washington or New York. The basic argument is simple. Suppose that the relevant laws-banning people from helping in the commission of suicide-were written long ago, and suppose too that they were not specifically addressed to the problem of physician-assisted suicide. Indeed, that problem is a recent one, made available by new technologies and practices. In light of the novelty of the relevant practice, and (let us assume) the lack of legislative attention to that practice, we could imagine a state court ruling that state law bans on assisting suicide do not even cover physician-assisted suicide, on the ground that criminal statutes should be construed narrowly and not applied to a case that is so far afield from the understandings of the enacting legislature.'50 If a state court concurring in the result). has not so held, a federal court, faced with a due process challenge, might say something like this: We do not hold that a state may never forbid physician-assisted suicide. But if a state is going to forbid a decision of this kind, it must demonstrate that it has focused with some particularity on the problem and concluded that its rationale is weighty enough to override the individual's decision. An old statute banning assistance in suicide, enacted long ago in a time of different values and facts, is not sufficient. 153. 116 S. Ct. 2264, 2277-79 (1996) (striking down law in part on ground that there %%a5 no actual purpose of promoting educational diversity and equal opporunity). see also Thompson % Oklahoma. 487 U.S. 815, 857-58 (1988) (O'Connor, J., concurring) (voting to stike dosn la%% imposing death penalty sith no minimum age provision on grounds that statute did not reflect actual and recent legislatie judgments in light of subsequent statute allowing minors to be dealt with as adults in sonic cases. Califano v Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199, 223 n.9 (1977) (Stevens. J.. concurrng) ("Perhaps an actual, considered legislatie choice would be sufficient to allow this statute to be upheld. but that is a question I %ould reserse until such a choice has been made."). a more specific that the In its intriguing decision in Hampton v. Mow Sun Wong,' the Court similarly held that if aliens are going to be deprived of all federal employment, it must be because of a judgment from Congress or the President, not the Civil Service Commission. The Court said that the Due Process Clause renders invalid a wholesale deprivation of employment unless a constitutionally specified official has decided that such a drastic step is desirable.' 59 The (holding NLRB without jurisdiction over teachers in church-operated schools under the National Labor Relations Act so as to avoid First Amendment difficulties); Kent v. Dulles, 357 U.S. 116, 129 (1958) (construing statute so as to avoid constitutional doubts). problem with the relevant regulation was that it faced a "legitimacy deficit" it had not been embraced by someone with adequate political because accountability."' ° All of these cases have close connections with the notion of desuetude. They suggest that a less intrusive alternative to a substantive due process holding is a conclusion that the state must show sufficient grounds, in actual democratic judgments, for an intrusion on certain interests and rights. As I have noted, an idea of this kind is not a version of substantive due process; it suggests instead that there is a procedural defect in the laws at hand. What would be wrong with an opinion of this sort? There is an obvious slippery slope problem. Many statutes now in operation were enacted long ago, when facts and values were different; are all such statutes unconstitutional? Surely they are not, and their longstanding character may well testify to their wisdom and good sense, not to their doubtful legitimacy. A constitutional doctrine would be absurd if it declared all old enactments void. The answer would have to be that the prohibition against desuetude applies not only when a law is very old, but also when (a) a liberty interest is at stake; (b) the rationale brought forward in the law's defense did not play any kind of role in the enacting legislature; (c) there is a demonstrated problem of sporadic and perhaps discriminatory enforcement; and (d) the relevant rationale, if supported by adequate facts and an actual legislative judgment, may well be sufficient to justify the intrusion on the liberty interest. An idea of this kind provides the strongest support for Griswold itself, and, as we have seen, it is far from entirely foreign to constitutional law. But this rationale could not be used if the statute forbidding physician-assisted suicide were the product of recent and sustained legislative deliberation. Here we find the simplest response to the argument from desuetude: These are not at all cases in which states have been inattentive to the underlying issues of fact and policy. On the contrary, the issue of physician-assisted suicide has received a great deal of attention. In the state of Washington, the relevant law was enacted in 1992.162 In New York, there has been no recent legislative enactment forbidding physician-assisted suicide, but the issue has been receiving intense consideration at the highest levels of state government. Thus a new enactment specified the conditions for withdrawal of life-saving equipment as recently as 1990,63 and in 1994, a highly visible Task Force issued a report recommending that things be left as they were.164 is not Judge Calabresi may be suggesting that intense consideration enough and that a state must not only consider a statute that raises problems of desuetude but also reenact it. t65 The apparent thought is that inertia may reflect something other than approval, and that in any case, an intense minority may be able to block consideration, in the sense of an actual vote, without being able to block enactment once a vote occurs. In some ways this is an attractive view; it suggests a possible distinction between New York and Washington. But if there is good evidence that a state government has actively and intensely considered an issue, as New York has, it seems strained to say that the Due Process Clause requires actual reenactment. The question is whether it would really make sense to invalidate the New York ban while upholding the ban in Washington, when the distinction seems relatively thin in light of the large volume of public attention given to the issue in both states. Nor is this a case like Griswold, in which a politically intense minority was able to block legislative change that was generally desired. 66 With respect to physician-assisted suicide, politically intense minorities are on all sides of the question, and no particular group faces or creates a systematic barrier to well-functioning democratic deliberation. to repeal statute is not necessarily sufficient to rebut challenge on grounds of desuetude). only because of political power of Catholic Church). process route; that we could imagine cases involving physician-assisted suicide that would provide a good arena for invoking that idea; but that the issue has been under intense discussion in many states and that Washington and New York have had intense recent deliberations. If the Court is to accept a version of Judge Calabresi's proposal-and I believe that it ultimately should-it should do so in a simpler and more compelling setting. At several points I have compared the right to physician-assisted suicide with the right to have an abortion, and it will now be useful to bring together some strands of the comparison, since Roe looms so clearly in the background of the discussion of a constitutional right to die. A central distinction is that Roe is best understood as largely a case about sex equality. It was not simply a due process case, as the Court has come to recognize; it depended centrally on the fact that restrictions on the right to abort are a form of discrimination against women and closely associated with traditional and no longer legitimate ideas about women's appropriate role. 167 The right to die does not have this equal protection element. 6 Along the dimension of justification, there is also a difference between Roe and the right to physician-assisted suicide. The principal justification in Roe rested on the perceived importance of protecting the fetus. It is possible to think that fetuses are not people and that a commitment to the overriding importance of their survival depends on sectarian claims. Without defending this controversial view, we can see that a claim of this general sort underlies Roe itself. By contrast, the state's justifications for interfering with the right largely to physician-assisted suicide are unquestionably empirical in nature. To the extent that the state is saying that it fears risks of abuse, it is able to offer a quasi-predictive defense of the sort that was unavailable in Roe. It also follows from what I have said thus far that the Court should be very cautious about duplicating the experience of Roe and that it is by no means clear that the broad holding of Roe was right at the time. At the very least, it is by no means clear that the Court was correct to have created so broad a right in its first confrontation with the abortion issue. The Court would have done much better to have proceeded narrowly and incrementally, and to 167. For a recent discussion, see United States v. Virginia. 116 S. Ct. 2264. 2274-76 (1996). in which the Court invalidated same-sex education at Virginia Military Institute. AVISHAI MARGALIT. TttE DECENTI is, in my view, a relevant discussion of the phenomenon of "humiliation- via state Soct ry (1996), channels. In this Essay I have made three claims. First, I have suggested that courts should be reluctant to invalidate legislation under the Due Process Clause in its "substantive" dimension when there is no defect in the system of democratic deliberation and when reasonable people might decide the underlying questions of value and fact either way. I have also suggested that this idea plays a large and underappreciated role in existing law. The key privacy cases, though decided as a matter of substantive due process, had important dimensions of desuetude and equal protection. The equal protection "fundamental rights" cases had large dimensions of democracy-reinforcement, involving as they did political rights or groups at particular risk in democratic processes. opinion would assume for purposes of argument that the right to physicianassisted suicide qualifies as a "fundamental right" while finding that the state has sufficient reason to override that right.