 Cass R. Sunsteint Begin with a platitude: When government attempts to regulate the market, many things may go wrong. In the familiar litany, regulation may be counterproductive, producing outcomes that defeat the aspirations of well-meaning reformers. Or, regulation may be futile, as the market adapts to the relevant initiatives. Or, regulation may produce unanticipated harmful consequences. All of these results may follow from the regulators' incomplete understanding of the system into which they are attempting to intervene. This is not an argument that government should never intervene in markets. But it is certainly a reason for caution, for attempting to acquire a good deal of information, and for proceeding in an experimental, nondogmatic way. t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. See Yosal Rogat, The Judge as Spectator, 31 U Chi L Rev 213 (1964). See Richard A. Epstein, Takings: Private Property and the Power of Eminent Domain (Harvard University Press, 1985). See also Bernard H. Siegan, Economic Liberties and the Constitution (University of Chicago Press, 1980). The problem is not limited to values. On the underlying facts, things are changing very rapidly, and courts know relatively little; but the facts are crucial to the analysis. The new communications technologies in general are a good example. If cable television flourishes, will ordinary broadcasters be at risk in a way that threatens free programming?" Courts are not likely to be in a good position to answer this question. This was the key problem in the Turner case,1 and while there is reason to think that interest-group pressures underlay the relevant statute, predictive issues are not, in general, well-suited to judicial resolution. In such circumstances the Court does best if it proceeds cautiously and with humility, allowing some room for political judgment and maneuvering in a setting that is in such flux. 2 In the area of cyberspace, there is a related but more general issue. I believe that the First Amendment is sometimes playing substantially the same role with respect to the communications market as did the Fourteenth Amendment with respect to the labor market in the period from 1905 through 1936.13 In that period, questions about minimum-wage and maximum-hour laws, or efforts to protect labor unions, were answered in significant part by asking: What does the Due Process Clause say on such questions? 4 In retrospect we can see that this was a bad way to proceed-that it would have been much better to dispense with lawyers and cases and to focus instead on underlying questions of fact and value, questions for which purely legal tools are inadequate. The problems of policy should be solved by people who understand problems of policy, not by lawyers skilled in reading Supreme Court opinions. A. Child Pornography, Obscenity, Parental Control Consider a few examples. With the touch of a button, it is now possible to reach millions of people, whether or not they want to be reached. Libelous statements, commercial messages, hate speech, child pornography, threats-the cost of sending all of these to millions is very low. This simple fact may make it necessary to rethink constitutional categories. There has been particular concern recently about the free availability of sexually explicit materials on the Internet, especially in the context of materials soliciting, involving, or available to children."5 Perhaps the government should be allowed to regulate not only child pornography, and not only obscenity, but a somewhat broader range of materials because of the distinctive interest in protecting children.16 At least the Court's obscenity doctrine bears uncertainly on this question, and mechanical use of that doctrine may produce error. It is important to get a sense of the nature of the underlying problem before reaching confident conclusions. 7 5 The increasing attention being given to pornography on the Internet is evidenced by the fact that from Spring 1991 to January 24, 1994, Lexis-Nexis listed only 69 articles on this subject, as contrasted with 3,451 articles on this subject entered from January 24, 1994 to January 24, 1996. Related issues are raised by the use of the Internet to circulate libelous, threatening, or sexually violent material about an identifiable person. It may well be that the easy transmission of such material to millions of people will justify deference to reasonable legislative judgments.18 Suppose that the government intends to assist parental control by allowing families to "block" certain material and to prevent it from entering the home. This idea would bear an obvious resemblance to the controversial "v-chip" proposal that was recently enacted by Congress. 9 Through this enactment, Congress is requiring new televisions to be equipped with technology enabling parents to block certain programming. The requirement may substantially affect programming because of anticipated parental blocking; but this by itself is not constitutionally decisive. The existence of such an effect resulting from anticipated viewer behavior is part of a well-functioning market. Proposals of this sort would facilitate parental control, but would not involve federal content regulation; they would not involve direct governmental control or censorship of the speech market."0 Because they are noncensorial and facilitative, courts should treat them more leniently. permission to exclude "indecent" programming), " But see United States v Baker, 890 F Supp 1375 (1995). In that case, the defendants sent sexually explicit e-mail to one another which contained the graphic description of the torture, rape, and murder of a classmate of one of the defendants. The government charged the defendants with transmitting threats to injure or kidnap another. The court dismissed the charges, finding that the descriptions contained in the e-mail were fiction and did not constitute a "true threat" under the statute. Let me turn now to a question that has received considerable public attention and that particularly shows the need for a degree of judicial caution in using the First Amendment: the question of violent speech on the Internet." Applying ordinary standards, constitutional lawyers may well believe that this is a simple issue, settled by Brandenburg v Ohio.2 But things are more complex. demn a statute which purports to punish mere advocacy and to forbid assembly with others merely to advocate the described type of action). are not very well known even though all the materials can be easily obtained by anyone (including minors)."29 After the Oklahoma bombing, an anonymous notice was posted to dozens of Usenet news groups listing all the materials in the Oklahoma City bomb, explaining why the bomb allegedly did not fully explode and exploring how to improve future bombs.30 Fifty hate groups are reported to be communicating on the Internet, sometimes about conspiracies and (by now this will for making bombs.3  On come as no surprise) formulas shortwave radio, people talk about bizarre United Nations plots and urge that "the American people ought to go there bodily, rip down the United Nations building and kick those bastards right off our soil.""2 In fact, last year Rush Limbaugh, who does not advocate violence, said to his audience, "The second violent American revolution is just about, I got my fingers about a fourth of an inch apart, is just about that far away. Because these people are sick and tired of a bunch of bureaucrats in Washington driving into town and telling them what they can and can't do. 33 In the wake of the Oklahoma City bombing, a national debate has erupted about speech over the Internet counseling violence or inciting hatred of public officials. 4 Of course it is unclear whether such speech has had a causal role in any act of bombing. But new technologies, and particularly the Internet, have put the problem of incitement into sharp relief. It is likely, perhaps inevitable, that hateful and violent messages carried over the airwaves and the Internet will someday be responsible 1. The clear and present danger doctrine and its evolution. It should go without saying that recent events should not be a pretext for allowing the government to control political dissent, including extremist speech and legitimate hyperbole (a large and important category). But the new and unanswered question has to do with the constitutionality of restrictions on speech that expressly advocates illegal, murderous violence in messages to mass audiences. For most of American history, the courts held that no one has a right to advocate violations of the law."5 They ruled that advocacy of crime is wholly outside of the First Amendment-akin to a criminal attempt and punishable as such. 6 Indeed, many of the judges .revered as the strongest champions of free speech believed that express advocacy of crime was punishable. Judge Learned Hand, in his great 1917 opinion in Masses Publishing Co. v Patten,37 established himself as a true hero of free speech when he said that even dangerous dissident speech was generally protected against government regulation. But Hand himself agreed that government could regulate any speaker who would "counsel or advise a man" to commit an unlawful act.3" In the same period the Supreme Court concluded that government could punish all speech, including advocacy of illegality, that had a "tendency" to produce illegality.3 9 Justices Holmes and Brandeis, the dissenters from this conclusion, took a different approach, saying that speech could be subjected to regulation only if it was likely to produce imminent harm;" thus they origi For many years thereafter, the Supreme Court tried to distinguish between speech that was meant as a contribution to democratic deliberation and speech that was designed to encourage illegality. 3 The former was protected; the latter was not. In 1951 the Court concluded in Dennis v United States" that a danger need not be so "clear and present" if the ultimate harm was very grave.45 The break in the doctrine did not come until the Court's 1969 decision in Brandenburg v Ohio." There the Court said the government could not take action against a member of the Ku Klux Klan, who said, among other things, "[W]e're not a revengent organization, but if our President, our Congress, our Supreme Court, continues to suppress the white, Caucasian race, it's possible that there might have to be some revengence taken."47 The speaker did not explicitly advocate illegal acts or illegal violence. But in its decision, the Court announced a broad principle, ruling that the right to free speech does "not permit a State to forbid or proscribe advocacy of the use of force or of law violation except where such advocacy is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and is likely to incite or produce such action."48 Offering extraordinarily broad protection to political dissent, the Court required the government to meet three different criteria to regulate speech.49 First, the speaker must promote not just any lawless action but "imminent" lawless action.5 ° Second, the imminent lawless action must be "likely" to occur.5 Third, the speaker must intend to produce imminent lawless action.52 concurring). lawless action"). is possible it ' The case might be different, however, if the counsel of violence is made part of an actual political argument. See Cohen v California, 403 US 15 (1971) (holding that a state could not, consistently with the First and Fourteenth Amendments, make wearing a jacket with the words "Fuck the Draft" a criminal offense). None of this suggests that the First Amendment has no role in cyberspace. I suggest that the Court should proceed confidently in three kinds of cases. The first involves those in which the government is discriminating on the basis of viewpoint. The prohibition on viewpoint discrimination is a natural inference from the First Amendment's ban on governmental favoritism. If the government regulates the Internet so as to preclude or prefer viewpoints of the government's liking, the First Amendment requires invalidation. Finally, courts should strike down palpably vague or overbroad statutes."1 Nonpolitical speech may certainly be regu show how easy it is to learn how to make a bomb. lated in a constitutionally unacceptable manner. Statutes that produce guessing games for regulated parties create an unacceptable risk. Congress should be expected to regulate with at least a reasonable degree of clarity.62 Thus lower courts were correct to invalidate a vague and broad statute banning "indecent" speech on the Internet. 3 When values and institutions are in flux, it is appropriate for the Court to proceed casuistically and to avoid broad rulings. The constitutional issues raised by cyberspace will turn on issues that cannot be fully resolved in 1995, 1996, or even 1999. In some ways, the First Amendment is, with respect to modern communications markets, playing the same pernicious role as did the Due Process Clause in the early part of the twentieth century with respect to labor markets. Hard issues of value and fact-issues of policy in which policy analysts should play a large role-are displaced by reference to constitutional categories, some of them quite arcane, and some of them likely to be ill-suited to a good understanding of the underlying phenomena. In a period of rapid change and technological uncertainty, in which those schooled in law are likely to be ignorant, there is much room for tentative, speech); Brockett v Spokane Arcades, Inc., 472 US 491 (1985) (deferring to Court of Appeal's conclusion that a Washington statute which included "lust" within its definition of "prurient" was unconstitutionally overbroad, but reversing the decision on the ground that the lower court should have partially invalidated the statute as to the portion including "lust" rather than entirely invalidating it). But see New York v Ferber, 458 US 747 (1982) (holding that a child pornography statute which prohibited "lewd exhibition of the genitals" was not overbroad).