 Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics The Cost-Benefit State Cass R. Sunstein Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "The Cost-Benefit State" (Coase-Sandor Institute for Law & Economics Working Paper No. 39, 1996). Cass R. Sunstein* Introduction Gradually and in fits and starts, the American regulatory state is becoming a cost-benefit state. By this I mean that government regulation is increasingly assessed by asking whether the benefits of regulation justify the costs of regulation. For many years, those attempting to assess the performance of the regulatory state have been interested in statistical measures. Gross Domestic Product helps capture economic performance; can something similar be used for regulatory initiatives? The use of cost-benefit analysis can be understood partly as an effort to overcome the interest-based and anecdote-driven nature of contemporary regulation in favor of an approach that examines, in a readily understandable way, the real-world consequences of regulatory initiatives. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Law, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics symbolic level, the movement in the direction of cost-benefit analysis was much accelerated in 1985 with the issuance of Executive Order 12498,2 requiring that cost-benefit analysis inform the annual regulatory plan to be issued by all executive agencies. These initiatives were quite controversial insofar as they threatened to delay regulatory requirements and perhaps to transfer authority from individual agencies to OMB. But Presidents Reagan and Bush, among many others, believed that they provided a crucial mechanism by which the White House might coordinate and centralize regulation, —and ensure against measures that would do more harm than good. agency action to ensure at least a rough kind of proportionality between costs and benefits. Sometimes courts have been quite aggressive in requiring proportionality as part of their function in reviewing agency action to test whether it is “arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion.”6 These developments have not meant that the regulatory state is now routinely subject to scrutiny for conformity with costbenefit criteria (a vague notion, as we shall see). In fact it is not. Presidents and courts of course have sharply limited authority; they must act consistently with federal statutes, which often forbid cost-benefit balancing. Consider, for example, the Clear Air Act, the Clean Water Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act, the Delaney Clause, and the Safe Water Drinking Act, many of whose provisions ban agencies from balancing costs against benefits. It is partly for this reason that the American regulatory state contains many regulations imposing costs not justified by benefits.7 From existing evidence8 it is possible, moreover, to conclude that in spite of the recent executive orders, efforts at cost-benefit balancing within the executive branch have been sporadic and episodic, and that the highly publicized executive orders have served a largely symbolic and aspirational function. Hence much of the contemporary interest in regulatory reform is directed toward Congress. Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics of the Federal mandate.”10 Under the second provision, all agencies must “identify and consider a reasonable number of regulatory alternatives and from those alternatives select the least costly, most cost-effective, or least burdensome alternative that achieves the objectives of the rule.”11 There is an exception if these steps are inconsistent with law or if the agency explains why it has not chosen that least burdensome alternative; but this provision could have significant consequences. Cost-benefit requirements are of course most easily justified on economic grounds, as a way of promoting economic efficiency and thus eliminating unnecessary and wasteful public and private expenditures. But cost-benefit requirements also have strong democratic justifications. Indeed, they can be understood as a way of diminishing interest-group pressures on regulation and also as a method for ensuring that the consequences of regulation are not shrouded in mystery but are instead made available for public inspection and review. Some of the strongest arguments for cost-benefit requirements are not so much economic as democratic in character. See Cass R. Sunstein, Congress, Constitutional Moments, and the problems to continue; and some forms of cost-benefit analysis actually fail cost-benefit analysis. They impose extensive informational demands on agencies. They create excessive delay. They obstruct desirable regulation. Thus efforts at regulatory reform should avoid the pervasive risk of excessive proceduralism. The second point stems from the fact that some of the most promising strategies for regulatory reform require a shift from command-and-control regulation to economic incentives. In these circumstances, cost-benefit analysis should not be taken as a modest, procedural step designed to engraft new informationgathering requirements on top of existing regulatory tools. On the contrary, it should be part and parcel of a more ambitious and thorough-going effort to move toward new and better tools, often replacing federal command and control with disclosure remedies and with economic incentives. The shift from command-andcontrol to more flexible methods of obtaining regulatory goals should, in short, be a central part of the cost-benefit state. Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics reformation of the original constitutional structure.13 The New Deal qualifies as a substantial reformation above all because it refashioned the three basic cornerstones of that structure: federalism; checks and balances; and individual rights. See B. Ackerman, We the People vol. 1 (1993) (discussing New Deal as creation of third American constitutional regime). I borrow in this and the following section from Sunstein, Congress, Constitutional Moments, and the Cost-Benefit State, supra note. statement. adjudication, execution, and legislation. Certainly they were not limited by requirements of cost-benefit analysis. the creation of It is notable that during both the New Deal and the rights revolution, no mechanism was created to evaluate regulatory performance. There was no system to assess whether agencies were making things better or worse. In the New Deal, any such system might have seemed peculiar in light of the widespread national enthusiasm for the President and for the possibilities of See Cass R. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution (1990). Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics benign administration. Of course cost-benefit thinking was quite foreign to political actors, and hence cost-benefit analysis—which in any case had not been “invented” in anything like its current form—played little or no role in the public debate. David Schoenbrod, Power Without Responsibility (1994). See Richard Epstein, Simple Rules for a Complex World (1995). Some of the criticisms of regulatory performance have been far more pragmatic in character, and it is here that cost-benefit balancing, accompanied by risk analysis, has played a special role. As I have noted, the New Deal period was accompanied by no mechanism for monitoring regulatory performance. But it is now suggested that national government has failed adequately to perform the tasks assigned to it and that it has often made things worse. In this view, there is no suggestion that markets are ideal; but often markets work better than the regulatory programs designed as solutions. In sum, the question is whether the benefits justify the costs. In the last decade, something very close to a consensus has emerged on some of the most important problems in existing government regulation. If government were to act on this consensus, it would introduce important changes. The consensus has the following features. See Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle (1992); Pildes & Effectiveness, Risk Analysis, forthcoming. Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics There are also serious and apparently unjustified asymmetries in life-saving expenditures. For transportation, there is a median per life year saved of $56,000; for occupational regulation, the number is $3 4 6 ,0 0 0 ; for environmental regulation, it is $4,207,000.22 There are enormous variations within each group as well. Annual lives saved are highly variable.2 3 Of course calculations of costs and benefits are somewhat speculative, and these numbers are of uncertain reliability. But with better allocations and more deliberative judgments, much could be done to make things better by providing more protection at identical cost. Id. W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs, supra, at 264. No more than that. To know whether there is cost-effectiveness, it is necessary to know more than cost per life saved. It is necessary to know as well (at a minimum) cost per unit of benefit; and benefits might include morbidity as well as mortality gains, improvements in recreation, mortality and morbidity gains for plants and animals, and improvements in aesthetics. The FDA has tried to use a standard of 1 in 1 million, but under the Delaney Clause, courts have required a standard of essentially 0.26 OSHA’s understanding of the “significant risk” requirement found in its governing statute means a risk of 1 in 1000; labor groups have sought an increase to 1 in 1 million. In the face of these variations, sensible priority-setting is unlikely. market-based incentives rather than rigid commands. Existing efforts at seeking better regulatory tools are hobbled by the statutory status quo, which sometimes forbids such tools, and which sometimes requires that they be engrafted on a bureaucratically complex system.28 Thus a 1989 study suggested that the EPA’s emissions trading program had saved between $ 525 million and $12 billion per year.2 9 Thus the Clinton Administration calculates that its market-oriented proposals for amending the Clean Water Act could save between $1 and $12 billion over alternative approaches. Thus studies show that Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics incentive-based mechanisms for controlling air pollution could have accomplished the same amount at one-quarter the cost.30 An especially valuable incentive-based approach consists of disclosure of information. Government might disclose risk-related information on its own, as it has in the case of cigarette smoking, or it might require companies to provide such information to workers and consumers. If, for example, companies offer information about risk, consumer and worker behavior will probably be affected. The national government has offered many initiatives in this direction. In particular, the Toxic Release Inventory of the Superfund Amendments appears to have been highly successful, spurring voluntary reductions at relatively low cost, and without requiring governmental mandates.31 A great deal of work remains to be done in conceiving and designing appropriate informational approaches to risk. harmful unintended consequences. See Tom Tietenburg, Emissions Trading (1985). See Robert Percival et al., Environmental Law and Policy (1992). See John Graham and Jonathan Wiener, Risk-Risk Tradeoffs (1995), for an excellent overview; see also Symposium, 8  Journal of Risk & Uncertainty 5 (1994); Aaron Wildavsky, Searching for Safety (1987). pervasively true that controls on one risk may increase another risk. Unfortunately, risk regulation is not designed with this problem in mind. There is also an incipient literature suggesting that regulatory expenditures can actually cost lives, since regulatory expenditures can produce greater unemployment and hence poverty, and since poor people do not live as long as people who are not poor. A 1990 study attempted to develop a model to quantify the common sense view that “richer is safer.”33 According to Keeney, a single fatality might result from an expenditure of from $3 million to $7.5 million. In a concurring opinion in a 1991 case involving occupational safety and health regulation, Judge Williams invoked this evidence to suggest that OSHA’s refusal to engage in cost-benefit analysis might not be beneficial for workers.34 Judge Williams reasoned that if a fatality results from an expenditure of $7.5 million, some regulations might produce more fatalities than they prevent. Many regulations of course cost more than $7.5 million per life saved (see Table 1). In Judge Williams’ view, an agency that fails to measure costs against benefits might be failing to measure mortality gains against losses. International Union v. OSHA< 938 F.2d 1310, 1326-27 (DC Cir. 1991) (Williams, J., concurring).See also Building & Constr. Trades Dept. v. Brock, 838 F.2d 1258 (DC Cir 1988), suggesting that “leaning toward safety may sometimes have the perverse effect of increasing rather than decreasing risk.” Id. at 1267. See also New York State v. Brown, 854 F.2d 1379, 1395 n. 1 (D. C. Cir., 1988 (Williams, J., concurring):  “extravagant expenditures on health may in some instances affect health adversely, by foreclosing expenditures on items—higher quality food, shelter, recreation, etc.—that would have contributed more to the individual’s health than the direct expenditures thereon.” See Portney and Stavins, Regulatory Review of Environmental Policy, See Lutter and Morrall, Health-Health Analysis, 8  J Risk & Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics These findings should be taken with many grains of salt; existing evidence is in its infancy. In particular, there is reason to believe that expenditures that reduce the income of poor people have far more serious mortality effects than expenditures that reduce the income of rich people.37 In any case it would certainly be good for government to know about unintended adverse consequences and to try to counteract them to the extent feasible. There is now no systematic mechanism by which government regulators can be made attentive to harmful unintended consequences. incentives to better information. See Chapman & Hariharan, Do Poor People Have a Stronger Relationship between Income and Mortality Than the Rich?, 12 J Risk & Uncertainty 51 (1996). Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics any exercise of quantification can be illusory, or at least give the impression of far more knowledge than people actually have. See, e.g., Cotton Dust: An OSHA Success Story?, in W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (discussing the extreme overstatement of compliance costs by industry). 5. Technocratic, economic, and democratic judgments all have their appropriate place. 1. Hazardous waste sites 2. Exposure to worksite chemicals 3. Industrial pollution of waterways 4. Nuclear accident radiation 5. Radioactive waste Public Medium-toHigh Low Not ranked Not ranked See Pildes & Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 U Chi L See Colim Camerer, Individual Decision Making, in The Handbook Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics 6. Chemical leaks from underground storage tanks Medium-to 7. Pesticides 8. Pollution from industrial accidents 9. Water pollution from farm runoff 10. Tap water contamination 11. Industrial air pollution 12. Ozone layer destruction 13. Coastal water contamination 14. Sewage-plant water pollution 15. Vehicle exhaust 16. Oil spills 17. Acid rain 18. Water pollution from urban runoff 19. Damaged wetlands 20. Genetic alteration 21. Non-hazardous waste sites 22. Greenhouse effect 23. Indoor air pollution 24. X-ray radiation 25. Indoor radon 26. Microwave oven radiation low low low low low High Medium-toMedium High High High Low Medium-toHigh Medium-toHigh Medium Low Low Medium-toLow High Not ranked High Not ranked When citizens misperceive the facts, government should not respond to them. Citizen judgments that are based on mistaken beliefs should be corrected through education. And when they are mistaken, government should try to act on the basis of reality rather than fiction. For public judgments to govern, it is important to ensure that they are undergirded by sound science, as opposed to sensationalistic anecdotes or scare tactics. There is nothing undemocratic about a governmental refusal to respond to a demand for regulation that is based on factual ignorance. On the contrary, a system of representative democracy has as one of its central justifications the “filtering” of ignorant judgments. The Cost-Benefit State especially dreaded, well-understood, and voluntarily incurred.42 The psychological research can be summarized in the following way: table 3 Risk Characteristic Nature of risk Permanence Duration Equity Source of risk Freedom Existing understanding Reflection to status quo Aggravating Factor Mitigating Factor Dreaded Irreversible/uncontrollabl e Faced by future generations Unfairly distributed Man-made Voluntarily incurred Known to science New Acceptable Reversible/controllabl e Faced by those now living Fairly distributed Found in nature Forced exposure Unknown Old Qualitative distinctions of this kind do not play a role in expert assessments. But citizen judgments on these points are entirely reasonable. They deserve respect, at least in a democracy. It is therefore important to ensure that any regulatory reform takes account of public judgments about which risks are most severe—so long as those judgments are both reflective and informed. on means. Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics parochial omnipresent issue in federal regulation. is an It is possible to limit interest-group power—and at the same time to reduce cost—through legislative attention to ends rather than to means of achieving those ends. When Congress focuses on ends, it makes it less likely that interest-group struggle over means will convert regulation into a struggle among groups with high stakes in particular means. And when Congress focuses on ends, it makes it more likely that the democratic process will be attending to the important questions. Thus “performance standards” are generally better than “design standards.” What matters is whether the level of emissions is low or high, not whether the relevant company has installed scrubbers. In general, Congress should let administrators decide on the appropriate means for reaching legislatively-decreed ends, and administrators should, to the extent feasible, be permitted to rely on market forces to choose those means. If an industry can comply with a sulfur dioxide emission standard with clean coal, or with energy conservation methods, government should be entirely satisfied. A. Problems and Solutions light of these considerations, a new and general requirement of (some form of) cost-benefit balancing seems a natural corrective. Indeed, such a requirement might well incorporate an understanding of many of the lessons learned in the last decades about problems in the regulatory state. Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics administrative state is far from a democratic utopia. Existing regulatory outcomes do not reflect the deliberative judgments of the polity. On the contrary, many current outcomes are a product of a odd combination of factors: interest-group power, selective attention, “legislation by anecdote,” media sensationalism, entrepreneurial legislators, and sheer lack of information. Relevant discussion can be found in Bruce Ackerman and William Hassler, Clean Coal/Dirty Air (1981); Aaron Wildavsky, But Is It True? (1995); Cass R. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution ch. 3 (1990). analysis might be favored on the ground that as compared to the status quo, it is likely to reduce interest group power over the administrative state and at the same time to bring relevant issues into the open. I have said that the executive branch has been the most important institution in developing cost-benefit analysis, and a few historical notes will help put current developments in perspective. It is especially important to see the limited role of courts in the reviewing process as it has been designed by many presidents. It is also important to understand the extent to which cost-benefit balancing has been an innovation from the executive branch, embracing many diverse administrations. Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics The most direct precursor to the current structure of executive oversight of regulation via cost-benefit analysis was the system of “Quality of Life” reviews initiated in the Nixon administration.49 Nixon’s response to the expanding administrative bureaucracy was to create a “counter-bureaucracy” in the White House. He doubled the executive office staff, created the modern OMB, and established the Domestic Council (chaired by a top aide, John Ehrlichman). The Council met with representatives of different departments having jurisdiction over a problem and tried to develop coordinated policy positions for presidential approval.50 In the “Quality of Life” review process, agencies were required to submit significant rules to OMB in advance of publication in the Federal Register. OMB’s principal duty was to circulate the agency draft to other agencies for review and comment. Although the process was intended to apply to all agencies, only EPA and OSHA were actually subject to the reviewing process. OMB’s function was rarely substantive; it served instead a coordinating function.51 President Ford continued the interagency review process and added to it a process designed to control the effects of regulation on inflation. Most important, the Council on Wage and Price Stability (CWPS) reviewed regulations for their effects on inflation. In addition, OMB promulgated a circular to agencies arguing that the inflationary impact of a proposed rule could best be assessed through a quantitative cost-benefit comparison. The Council’s role was principally technical, consultative, and advisory. It was understood that the relevant agency might well persist in the face of CWPS disagreement. Congress ultimately enacted a statute allowing CWPS to participate in rulemaking and to explore adverse effects on inflation. The purpose of this fifteen-agency group was to conduct interagency review of cost-effectiveness analyses, which were required of “significant” rules from relevant agencies. Notably, the executive order establishing the RARG review process did not require cost-benefit analysis. In fact RARG reviewed relatively few rules, though the President did resolve a few highly controversial issues. Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics OMB reviewing process created more rational regulation, though OMB did try to control the most extreme regulations. Even with these executive orders, the problems traced in Part I—poor priority-setting, ineffective tools, and so forth—have persisted, and hence the movement for regulatory reform has not lost momentum. Thus the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act makes some modest steps in the direction of statutory cost-benefit requirements for all regulations. Thus Congress is now considering more aggressive “supermandates” cutting across all existing legislation. A general requirement of cost-benefit balancing from the national legislature has much to commend it. But there are three important issues that any such requirement must address: excessive proceduralism; appropriate regulatory tools; and the matter of valuation. During recent efforts at regulatory reform, including those within the executive branch, it is possible to detect two competing strands. The technocratic and highly professionalized: an effort to improve regulatory performance by first strand is See Pildes and Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 U Chi L See Albert Gore, Common Sense Government (1996). ensuring close attention to real-world consequences as these can be understood through the most sophisticated regulatory tools. For committed technocrats, the idea is to discipline the administrative state by assessing actual effects. Where the costs of regulation are low and the benefits high, nothing is wrong with regulation.54 The second strand is reactionary: an effort to eliminate regulation whether or not it can be justified. Here costbenefit requirements are combined with detailed procedural and information-gathering burdens, and also (ironically) with limits on appropriations—limits that will make it harder for agencies to comply with their new duties. Here the goal is not to improve but to obstruct regulation. Thus recent reform proposals have included blanket moratoriums on new regulations (a truly crude and lazy strategy for “reform”) and costly “look back” provisions requiring agencies to do extended analyses of old regulations and to defend those analyses in court. See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1993), and consider the Reagan Administration’s decision to eliminate lead from gasoline, a decision founded on cost-benefit balancing. Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics agencies, and sometimes it is not clear that those duties produce benefits that justify the costs. Cost-benefit analysis will, in some forms, fail cost-benefit analysis. The Cost-Benefit State and benefits of, say, ten alternatives to the proposal under discussion, on the theory that the costs of the exploration would not justify the benefits. From this point we can conclude that any legislative requirement of cost-benefit balancing should give agencies some room to allocate resources as they wish—including the investigatory resources that are involved in cost-benefit analysis itself. See Eisner and Kaleta, Federal Agency Review of Existing Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics agencies alone (except to the extent that governing statutes mandate cost-benefit balancing). For the future it probably makes sense to allow court review to ensure that agency judgments about costs and benefits are not arbitrary. It also seems reasonable for presidents to impose on agencies a duty to ensure against obsolete regulations. But it probably does not make sense to surround the process with “look back” requirements designed to enable courts to require agencies to do cost-benefit analyses of past rules. Of course this is an issue that cannot be settled through first principles; it has large empirical dimensions. A degree of experimentation would be desirable before Congress attempts a statutory solution. Congress is now considering proposals to amend many existing statutes to call for cost-benefit analysis. As we have seen, some such shift is quite promising. A number of statutes forbid balancing and call for absolutism,59 and such approaches are not easy to justify. Moreover, it is important to offer some criteria by which to monitor regulatory performance, and cost-benefit analysis is probably the best available technique for embarking on a form of “national performance review” in the regulatory context. Standing by itself, however, a shift in the direction of costbenefit analysis would be only a modest improvement over the status quo. Unless it is understood in a particular way—as a part of and a stimulus to a far larger change in direction—a decision to engraft a cost-benefit requirement onto current law would represent an insufficiently fundamental departure from the system of command and control regulation. In fact a skeptic might say that by itself, a requirement of cost-benefit analysis allows legislators to take credit for “getting the regulators under control” without forcing them to make hard choices, which would remain left to agencies and the President. This credit-claiming device can hardly substitute for fundamental reform. Imagine—to take a rough analogy—if the Soviet Union had decided (in, say, 1986) to replace an “absolutist” five-year plan for producing wheat with another five-year plan, one that better recognized the need for balancing competing variables. This step might well have been an improvement; but a five-year plan based on governmental balancing is no less a five-year plan than one based on governmental absolutism. Governmental dictation of outcomes rooted is better than governmental dictation based on absolutism, but neither is ideal. In fact it would be easy to imagine a generation of dreary cycles with respect to regulatory reform. In those cycles, conservatives might require more balancing, more procedures, and fewer deadlines for administrators; liberals then argue against cost-benefit analysis and for solely health-based or solely technology-based standards, fewer procedures, citizen suits for regulatory beneficiaries, and stricter deadlines; conservatives, a few years later, seek greater procedural requirements and more attention to costs; liberals respond with the familiar litany; and so on until, say, 2 0 5 0 . Something of this kind is not a bad description of regulatory debates since 1980. But its continuation would represent an enormous failure of imagination and creativity. It would fix American policy in outmoded debates of the early 1970s, before the outpouring of learning that makes the “more” or “less” debate seem to unhelpful. instead It ought judgments. Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics As I have suggested, cost-benefit analysis, properly understood, should help spur use of better regulatory tools. It should be understood as part of a general movement away from command-and-control regulation. I will return to this point below. The Cost-Benefit State or that it is founded on an indefensible theory of value. Another specified—that its sort of criticism is that it is incompletely meaning depends on further subsidiary judgments that have yet to be offered. Cost-benefit analysis is properly subject to the first kind of criticism to the extent that it purports to align all social values along the single metric of aggregated private willingness to pay, and to evaluate all social and economic regulation by reference to that criterion. Inventive economists have devised many intriguing methods for discerning the “shadow prices” of goods not normally traded on markets; such methods have their uses, but their value and limitation result from their foundations in the idea of private willingness to pay. Regulation may be rooted in redistributive rather than allocative goals, and for fully legitimate reasons; consider the anti-discrimination laws as examples. To the extent that cost-benefit analysis is rooted in the technical economists’ understanding, it has a great deal to offer, but it cannot capture all of the appropriate goals of regulation.60 As a political creed—as it operates within Congress and the executive branch—the principal problem with cost-benefit analysis is that it is incompletely specified. Its meaning depends on how costs and benefits are characterized and on how issues of valuation are resolved. Are equitable concerns a part of costbenefit analysis? Suppose, for example, that a certain environmental risk is concentrated among African-Americans. Can a good cost-benefit analysis take this into account? (We should hope so, whatever private willingness to pay may suggest.) Or suppose that some of the benefits of regulation are aesthetic. How will these benefits be valued? Of course there is an extensive literature on valuation of human life and environmental goods.61 By itself cost-benefit analysis does not take a stand on the associated controversies; but regulators must take some such stand. My suggestion here is that it is always appropriate to identify costs and benefits so as to inform analysis, and even to require that benefits justify costs, but that regulators should not See the parallel points in L. Lave, Benefit-Cost Analysis: Do the Benefits Exceed the Costs?, in Risks, Costs, and Lives Saved (Robert Hahn ed. 1996). 61 Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics claim that benefits and costs must be grounded in traditional economic criteria involving private willingness to pay. Many important regulatory statutes are of course plausibly understood in terms of economic efficiency; they can be seen as efforts to counteract market failures. The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act and the Toxic Substances Control Act are examples. Such statutes may be designed to overcome an absence of sufficient information; harms to third parties; or collective action problems of various sorts. Lundberg and Starz, Private Discrimination and Social Intervention in r e s p o n d . 6 4 Regulation involving smoking, recycling, educational programming, and sexual harassment can be understood in these terms. See Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles, 96 Colum L Rev Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics statutes that were originally designed to promote economic efficiency. Under this approach, a cost-benefit supermandate would not alter the basic understandings that underlie existing statutes. It would instead have a more modest but nonetheless important goal: imposing a particular understanding of rationality on statutes formerly understood and implemented in a less precise, more ad hoc, and more intuitive way. The Cost-Benefit State that, by general understandings, seem out of line with existing practice or too absolutist.65 Certainly there is a difference between agency behavior under balancing statutes and agency behavior under statutes that forbid balancing.66 But those concerned about administrative discretion would urge some greater guidance from the national legislature. I offer two suggestions here. Any required cost-benefit analysis for diverse regulatory agencies should reflect these points. Any cost-benefit analysis should, moreover, be accompanied by a more disaggregated and more qualitative description of the consequences of government action, so that Congress and the public can obtain a fuller picture than the crude and misleadingly precise “bottom line” of the costbenefit analysis. This is not at all to deny that it is important to be precise and quantitative when agencies can be precise and quantitative. It is only to say that any “bottom line” about how to characterize and assess costs and benefits will involve judgments about values, not about science, and Congress and the public should see what those judgments are. and Rodenticide Act with Clean Air Act and Delaney Clause and EDA. See George Tolley et al., Valuing Health for Policy (1994). Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics 5. Floors and ceilings. It is of course troublesome to assign dollar values for life, partly for the reasons I have sketched; but since tradeoffs of multiple kinds are inevitable, it may be best for Congress to set out some guidelines, floors, and ceilings governing expenditures, without pretending to say how much a life is “really worth.” In light of the diversity of regulated risks, no single number would make sense for valuing life. It may well make sense to set benchmark standards of, say, $10 million per life saved as the maximum amount and $3 million as the minimum. These benchmarks might be accompanied by explicit permission for agencies to select a lower or higher number if the agency can explain that special circumstances call for that higher number. On this view, the data emerging from studies of revealed preferences would be used not because it reflects “actual” or acontextual valuations, but because for pragmatic purposes, it provides a good place to start, one that is better supported and more usable than any available alternative. See Zackhauser and Shepard, Where Now For Saving Lives?, 40 Law problem occurs when the diminution of one risk simultaneously increases another risk. It would be good for Congress to consider a new provision to this effect: “(1) Agencies shall ensure, to the extent feasible, that regulations do not create countervailing risks that are greater than those of regulated risks. A cost-benefit supermandate, properly interpreted, may well incorporate an understanding of this sort. But it would be best to make such a requirement explicit. Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics 2. Encourage and allow plans from private sector that show greater (but cheaper) reductions. In the United States, the EPA has taken modest steps in the same direction. Thus the EPA has moved toward more cooperative solutions that use social pressures and moral suasion to encourage the use of innovative, low-cost pollution reduction techniques. The Green Lights Program, informing business about energy-efficient light fixtures, is an example, as is a recent program designed to encourage voluntary reductions in seventeen highly toxic chemical emissions.71 Consider also OSHA’s Star program, allowing companies with a demonstrably good safety record to rely on self-policing rather than government oversight. EPA is attempting to develop an Environmental Leadership program to parallel the Star program. The Cost-Benefit State if they achieve a 90% reduction in toxic pollutants before EPA promulgates relevant regulations.72 Under most federal statutes, however, EPA cannot approve private plans as substitutes for public mandates, even if the plans promise better results for less money. Congress should move in the direction of allowing private substitutes, so long as government monitoring is maintained. Of course it remains important to know whether the benefits from the private alternative are higher than the costs; perhaps the private alternative is cheaper but still not worthwhile on balance. What I am suggesting is that more creative, cooperative, and flexible programs, enlisting the informational advantages of the private sector, could be a large improvement over the status quo. The United States is embarking increasingly on the project of assessing government regulation by asking whether the benefits justify the costs. The regulatory state is slowly becoming I borrow here from Statement of Jonathan Wiener, Before the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, March 8, 1995. Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics something like a cost-benefit state; this is an unmistakable feature of public life in many institutions of American government. Thus in the last decade and more, the executive branch has attempted to embrace a form of cost-benefit analysis for specific purposes— to promote better priority-setting, to move toward market-oriented tools, to exempt de minimis risks, to attend to informed public judgments, to foster voluntary and least-cost compliance, and to focus on ultimate results rather than methods and processes. Similar steps can be found in Congress and the federal courts; but they remain tentative and incipient. The Cost-Benefit State make large improvements by offering initiatives that make sense under any reasonable theory of value. Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor The Law School The University of Chicago 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, Illinois 60637 Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics (Second Series) 1. William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 4. Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Con 6. Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal (January 1993). J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). Chicago Working Paper in Law & Economics 14. Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental of Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 21. Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle 22. Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). American Business Enterprise (April 1995). Software and Biotechnology (November 1995). 1996). J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996).