 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, © 1997 Kluwer Academic Publishers of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Abstract is presented to show that people are willing to pay a premium to avoid "bad deaths" - deaths that are Evidence of this distributed. especially dreaded, uncontrollable, incurred, kind help explain the demand for regulation. But some of these judgments do not justify current policies, and confusion. Few causes of death are entirely uncontrollable because they stem from selective attention faced wholly involuntarily; "bad deaths" deserve special attention: suffering, or they can be controlled but at what cost. But three kinds of those preceded by unusual pain and and those producing distributional those imposing high externalities, the issue is not whether Public judgments and inequitably involuntarily inequity. cost-benefit analysis Many people think that it is best to die quickly, quietly, and in one's sleep at night. People often say they have a special fear of certain deaths, including those from cancer and AIDS. All deaths are bad. But some deaths seem worse than others. My purpose in this essay is to investigate the place of bad deaths in the valuation of life.1 Much psychological work emphasizes apparent public concern with "qualitative" factors aggravating certain deaths. I show how this concern helps explain some conspicuous anomalies in current government regulation. Despite its explanatory power, I conclude that the psychological evidence does not justify those anomalies, because the public concern probably depends on selective attention, mistakes, and confusions. On the other hand, I argue that four sources of public concern should play a role in regulatory policy: these involve deaths accompanied by unusual pain and suffering, deaths concentrated among socially disadvantaged groups, deaths involving especially high costs of risk avoid ance, and deaths that produce unusually high externalities. Further research is necessary to identify the actual sources of public judgments and to see if those judgments can survive critical scrutiny. When government is trying to maximize the value of life, what, exactly, should it be maximizing? Any answer should meet two constraints. First, it should be acceptable from the theoretical point of view. Second, it should be administrable, that is, it should be something that real-world officials can actually use. The two constraints are mutually checking. A practically useful answer might be indefensible from the standpoint of theory. A theoretically appealing answer might be rejected because it is too complex or unwieldy, because it imposes unrealistic informational demands on government, or because it is an struggle. Any judgment about what government should maxiinvitation to interest-group mize might also attempt to be minimally contentious, that is, it might attempt to put to one side the largest theoretical disputes and to attract support from widely divergent startingpoints. A degree of philosophical parsimony, achieved through bracketing large-scale controversies, would be promising if it is possible (see Sunstein, 1996). It may, for example, be better to extend a life from five to twenty-five a notion of "decently livable life years," which is designed to bypass some of the more controversial questions and to set a floor of basic functional capacity, above which each life-year saved should count for no less and no more than one (Sunstein, 1997). There is considerable evidence that when voting, responding to questions, or engaging in market behavior, people evaluate different deaths differently. On this there seems to be general agreement. I summarize some of the relevant evidence here. 1. Government performance. A recent study of different life-saving interventions on the part of government shows dramatic disparities in expenditures per life-year saved (Tengs et al., 1996). Thus the median intervention sector costs $56,000/life year, whereas the median in the occupational sector is $350,000/life year. If the occupational interventions are divided into those that prevent fatal injuries and those that involve control of toxic substances, the medians are even more strikingly different: $68,000/life year versus $l,400,000/life year. Agency performance reflects the dramatically different degrees of attention given to different deaths. For the Federal Aviation Administration, the median cost is $23,000/life year; for the Consumer Product Safety Commission, $68,000/ life year; for the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, $78,000/life year; for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, $88,000/life year; and for the Environmental Protection Agency, no less than $7,600,000/life year. 2. Survey data . There is substantial evidence that people perceive certain hazards as worse than others. Several studies indicate, even if they do not prove, that people are especially averse to some deaths. A recent study (Savage, 1993) concludes that people are willing to pay significantly more to contribute to lower the risks of cancer than they are willing to contribute to lower the risks posed by automobile accidents, home fires, and aviation. In terms of willingness to pay, cancer ranks first, followed in order by automobile accidents, home fires, and aviation. (As noted above, government expenditures per life year saved correlate with these findings.) A national survey in England offers evidence on how people compare deaths from cancer, heart disease, and motor vehicle accidents (Jones-Lee, Hammerton, and Philips, 1985). Respondents were asked whether they would prefer to save 100 lives from one or another of these three causes. Nearly three-quarters of people ranked a cancer death as worse than a death from heart disease or motor vehicle accidents. The authors conclude that people "would be willing to pay very substantial sums to avoid the protracted period of physical and psychological pain prior to cancer death" (id., p. 68). These findings have been taken to show that people are willing to pay nearly twice as much to reduce heart disease deaths as motor vehicle deaths, and that they are willing to pay nearly three times as much to prevent a death from cancer as a death from motor vehicle accidents (Tolley, Kenkel, and Fabian, 1994 at 339). Consider Table 1: Table 1. Ratings of serious conditions by cause of death Cause of death Motor accidents Heart disease Cancer Mean willing to pay for reduction Using similar data, private willingness to pay to avert cancer deaths (from S 1.5 million to $9.5 million) has been found to be systematically higher than private willingness to pay to avert unforeseen instant deaths (from $1 million to $5 million). More specifically (Tolley, Kenkel, and Fabian, 1994, at 342) Table 2: Table 2. Mortality values by cause of death (per statistical life) Category Unforeseen instant death asthma/bronchitis heart disease emphysema lung cancer Value estimates, and high These findings strongly suggest that people view some deaths as worse than others, but for purposes of both positive and normative work, they should be taken with many grains of salt. It is not clear that people in good health have adequate information from which to assess deaths from diverse causes. The notion of a "cancer death" may produce irrational and ill-considered fear, perhaps because people call to mind especially stressful periods of pain and suffering that are not representative, or because those incidents may assume undue salience (dwarfing the very fact of death itself) when the relevant question is asked. I return to these points below. & Subramanian, 1995). The study revealed significant differences among programs that would save exactly the same number of lives at exactly the same cost. Thus 55% of respondents chose a program controlling industrial air pollution over one involving smoking education; 54% chose a program reducing water pollution over one involving colon cancer screening; 54% chose one controlling auto emissions over one involving colon cancer screening; 63% chose one involving industrial air pollution over one involving pneumonia vaccination; 65% chose a smoking ban in the workplace over controls on radon in homes; and 72% chosen a program banning pesticides in fruit over one regulating radon in homes. A pattern emerges from these choices. Important variables in the disparity were the ease with which the risk can be avoided and the extent to which beneficiaries of the program were to blame for their deaths. designed to obtain further information on "risk-risk tradeoffs."2 Students were asked how many heart attack deaths would equal 100 deaths saved from cancer. Sixty-three students answered 100; seven answered less than 100; forty-eight, or 40.2%, answered more than 100. Students were also asked how many deaths from airplane crashes would equal 100 or 44.4%, answered 100. Thirty-two, or 27.4%, deaths saved from cancer. Fifty-students, answered less than 100. Thirty-four, or 27.2%, answered more than 100. Respondents were asked, finally, about whether to chlorinate drinking water. They were told that chlorination can cause a small cancer risk, but that it also can prevent acute illness, which can also be fatal. They were asked whether to chlorinate the gastrointestinal water if the lifetime fatality risks were the same. Thirty-nine percent said yes, 29.7% said lives saved/cost first choice weighted second ranking of choice options last choice AIDS, smoking, AIDS, $25 port security, nuclear power million on smokplant inspections ing, $20 million on airport security, $10 million on plant inspection lead ingestion/smoking million on each lead ingestion/AIDS 1 10/$50 million on each It is also interesting to find a general conclusion that addressing two problems by half is better than curing only one problem in full - accompanied by a judgment that addressing too many problems at small fractions each (spreading too thin) is worse still. AIDS policies were perceived as important, but less important than smoking, and apparently are most attractive only in conjunction with some other problem. The most popular option combining saving children in the inner city and would-be smokers - may have been well-regarded because it involved a large number of life-years and also reflected distributional considerations. AIDS-related policies were in one sense a distinctly unpopular option, as can be seen from the fact that only one respondent favored an AIDS-only choice (though this choice was pretty good in terms of aggregate lives saved and also life-years saved) and the fact that the inner city children plus AIDS policies option did much worse, as first choice, that the inner city children plus smoking policies option. On the other hand, the "lowest lives" option was also the most frequently cited last choice, and option five received significant support as a second choice. There is a great deal of "noise" in the study, however, and because many variables change across the comparisons, it would be hazardous to say what factors actually accounted for choice. Here much room remains for further work. In identifying what makes certain deaths seem especially bad, a natural place to look is in the psychological literature showing variations between lay and expert judgments of risk. Some of these variations stem from heuristic devices that make ordinary people peculiarly prone to factual error. But some of these variations (it is widely said) come from the wide range of variables that ordinary people think relevant in assessing risks to life and health (see, e.g., Slovic, 1991). Experts tend to focus on aggregate lives or life-years at stake. Ordinary people - on the now-conventional account - look at a range of more qualitative variables. They care not simply about number of lives at risk but also about whether the risk is equitably distributed, potentially catastrophic, controllable, voluntarily incurred, and so forth. Here is a representative compilation (developed from the summary in Margolis, 1996): At this stage it is not clear whether and to what extent these factors actually account for judgment and choice; the psychological work should be seen as suggestive hypotheses rather than as demonstrations. Moreover, it is readily apparent that some of these factors aggravating new uncontrollable involuntary focussed on by media unfairly distributed children at special risk at risk irreversible especially dreaded victims known benefits clear human origin institutions lack of trust familiarity personal control voluntariness media attention equity children future generations reversibility dreadedness of victims identifiability benefits accompanying human or natural origin trust in applicable timing of effects understanding delayed mechanisms understood or process not past history major or minor accidents mitigating old controllable voluntary ignored by media fairly distributed children not at risk not at risk reversible not especially dreaded victims not identifiable benefits not visible created by nature good deal of trust immediate mechanism or process understood no past accidents are not helpful in suggesting which deaths should be treated as especially bad. On the contrary, many of them are easily accounted for under the "decently livable life years saved" criterion. Media attention, for example, is closely connected with the well-known availability heuristic, and the fact that the media are focussed on a certain risk does not suggest that government should give that risk special attention too. Past history should be similarly understood; it is a rough proxy for future probability, not a reliable guide to the future. So too with trust. If people do not trust an institution's assurances, they are thinking that the risk is more serious than they are being told. And if children and future generations are at risk, more life years are at stake. issue. But it is also possible that an apparently "rich" conclusion that a certain risk is severe, or not severe, depends not on well-considered judgments of value, but instead on an absence of ordinary contextual cues, on a failure to see that tradeoffs are inevitably being made, on heuristic devices that are not well-adapted to the particular context, or instead on a range of confusing or confused ideas that people cannot fully articulate. When people say, for example, that the risk of nuclear power is very serious, they may be responding to their intense visceral concern, possibly based on (uninformed) statistical judgments about likely lives at risk and on their failure to see (as they do in other contexts) that that risk is accompanied by a range of social benefits. The fact that nuclear power, and application of pesticides, produce benefits as well as risks may not "register" on the lay viewscreen, and this may help produce a "high risk" judgment (see Alhakami and Slovic, 1994). do not explain the actual basis of their judgments. This possibility remains to be investigated and tested. For the moment let us put this issue to one side and assume that the psychological evidence does suggest that certain risks are perceived as bad very much for the more qualitative reasons that are typically invoked. The important question is which of them justifies a qualification of the basic criterion of decently livable life-years. By itself the fact that people perceive certain risks and deaths as especially bad should not be decisive for purposes of policy. Suppose, for example, that ordinary judgments stem from heuristic devices that produce predictable factual mistakes, so that both private behavior and the demand for regulatory protection are affected. Certainly government should not incorporate judgments based on mistakes - a point that raises doubts about some uses of willingness to pay as a basis for regulatory policy. To the extent that WTP is a function of factual errors, government should not rely on it. The appropriate remedy is inform people of relevant facts. This general point suggests that it is important to examine not simply what deaths people especially abhor, but also why those deaths are abhorrent, and whether the underlying reasons can survive scrutiny. The American political system aspires to be a deliberative democracy, in which citizen preferences are supposed to be subject to a process of reflection. They are not to be automatically translated into law (Sunstein, 1993; Bessette, 1996). It is often said, on the basis of evidence like that outlined above, that especially dreaded deaths deserve special attention. Deaths from cancer and AIDS fall in this category. There is nothing at all mysterious to this idea. The underlying point is that the relevant deaths are especially grueling and hence there is a kind of "pain and suffering premium" - not merely a life lost, but an antecedent period of intense emotional and physical difficulty as well. This period of intense difficulty might impose costs on those with the illness and on friends and family members as well. Sudden, unanticipated deaths can be dreaded too consider the extremely unpleasant idea of dying in an airplane crash. But the dread here stems from some factor (perhaps terror) different from and much shorter than the extended period of suffering that precedes some deaths. Thus it might be concluded that dreaded deaths deserve special attention in accordance with the degree of suffering that precedes them. these ideas seem sound. But some qualifications is necessary. First, some recent work in psychology has shown that people often fear certain risks ex ante, but when those risks come to fruition, they are able to adapt much better than they believed possible, and the utility loss is less severe than they anticipated (Loewenstein and Schkade, forthcoming; Kahneman, 1996; see also Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarim, forthcoming). Notably, people think that they will respond much more negatively to a positive result for HIV than they do in fact (see Sieff, Dawes, and Loewenstein, forthcoming). Thus people may dread certain diseases more than they "should" in the sense that the lived experience of the disease is less horrible than was thought before the fact. If true, this point makes it necessary at least to question whether ex ante fear justifies the degree of attention that uninformed people seek from government, if ex post adaptation is possible. Some risks might be, or be thought to be, inequitably distributed, above all because the victims are disproportionately members of socially disadvantaged groups. Certain deaths might, for example, be concentrated among poor people, African-Americans, or homosexuals. Consider the risk of lead paint poisoning suffered by inner city children, or the risk of AIDS, faced disproportionately by African-Americans as well as homosexuals. Citizens or elected representatives may think that inequitably distributed risks of death deserve special attention from government. Here the relevant deaths are bad not because each one is especially bad to experience, but because there is social concern about the fact on members of certain social groups. that a certain cause of death falls disproportionately When such social concern exists, and when it is not objectionable on constitutional or other grounds, it is entirely legitimate for officials to respond. Thus regulators should be incidence is espepermitted to give distributional weights to risks whose distributional cially troublesome. The point supports special efforts to control AIDS; environmental risks like asthma, which are concentrated among inner city children; and perhaps the spread of diseases whose incidence is concentrated among women. Of course this idea raises familiar issues about appropriate redistributive policies. A scheme, likely more risk policy with distributional weights is an in-kind redistributive effective than strategies of redistribution than redistribution via cash. It is also possible that any distributional weighting will subject the political market to pressures from well-organized groups, which will predictably offer equitable arguments for their preferred outcome, perhaps at the expense of the weakest and least organized members of socieyy. Finally, it is hardly clear that in-kind benefits should generally be distributed in a way that benefits the less well-off. It does not seem to make sense to say that homosexuals and women, for example, should receive better transportation, better dental care, more food stamps, and better housing than heterosexuals and men. In these circumstances, public judgments about the need for distributional weights in risk regulation may neglect the possibility and even the fact that redistributive efforts are being made through other routes. My minimal claim is that if there is a public judgment in favor of according a distributional weight to a certain or otherwise illegitideath-reduction policy, and if that judgment is not unconstitutional mate, policy makers should not be barred from respecting that judgment. People seem to perceive voluntarily incurred risks as less troublesome than involuntarily incurred risks. Consider diverse public reactions to airplane crashes and automobile crashes. Or consider the fact that tobacco is by far the largest source of preventable deaths in the United States. Why do we not devote much more of our regulatory effort to reducing smoking? The reason seems to lie in a judgment that smoking is a voluntary activity and hence the resulting deaths are less troublesome than other sorts of deaths. Here people have voluntarily assumed the relevant risks (there is of course a detailed literature on this general topic; see, e.g., Viscusi, 1992). if taken to suggest something special about "lay rationality," risk is voluntarily incurred. "Voluntariness" may be entirely absent in the case of an unforeseeable collision with an asteroid; but voluntariness is not, in the cases under consideration, an all-or-nothing matter. Instead it is a matter of degree. Return to the conventional thought that airplane crashes are "involuntary" and automobile crashes more "voluntary." Certainly it would be possible to see the risks from air travel as voluntarily run; people have a choice about whether to fly, and when they do fly, they pay a certain amount for a certain package, including risks of various sorts. The same is true of automobile safety - and it is not in any way less true, however disparate the two kinds of risks may "seem." Perhaps people are responding to the perceived fact that they have no control over the pilot's behavior, whereas they have considerable control over automobile safety since they are themselves drivers. But airlines respond to market forces, including the market for safety, and many people injured in automobile accidents are not at fault, and thus along the dimension of voluntariness this is hardly a crisp distinction. The difference between the two risks is hardly so categorical as to justify an assessment divide. Indeed, it is not clear that they fall on poles of some voluntariness-involuntariness even what is meant by the suggestion that one is voluntary and the other is not. Something else appears to underlie that suggestion. But turn now to a third class of cases, involving a wage package or contract that does include compensation for the relevant risks. Assuming that point, we might want to distinguish between two different possibilities. In a case of a high-level scientist, knowledgeable about relevant risks and involved in work that he finds rewarding, people may well conclude that we have an instance of voluntariness. (In the same category can be found the case of an astronaut.) But people might not say the same about a low-level worker who does not like his work at all (cf. Anderson, 1993). What distinguishes the two cases? If knowledge is present, or if the compensation package includes payment for the relevant risk, it is not clear how the two differ. The underlying judgment must be that the compensation is inadequate, perhaps because background inequality has produced a wage package that seems unfair even if voluntarily chosen by the parties. run "involuntarily" accurately, high costs of obtaining information about the risk, 2) a belief that information to one side, it would be very costly for people to avoid the risk, or 3) a belief that the risk a belief that the contract is is unaccompanied by compensating benefits, notwithstanding in some sense worth signing. It may seem hard to make sense of 3); what might be at work is a judgment that background inequalities are producing the relevant bargain (not by itself a good reason to disrupt the deal), or perhaps a belief that workers are competing to their collective detriment, and an agreement not to compete would be in their best interests (Frank, 1983). On this view, the question whether a risk is run voluntarily or not is often not a categorical one but instead a matter of degree, associated with information cost, risk-reduction cost, and the existence or not of accompanying benefits. Of course there are interesting background questions about why and when a risk "codes" as voluntary or involuntary; undoubtedly the answer depends a great deal on heuristic devices and selective attention. It might seem that this consideration - the purpose for which the risk is incurred overlaps with or is even identical to the question whether there are high costs of riskavoidance. When the costs are low, as in sky-diving, the purpose might seem inadequate. But on reflection the two ideas are hardly the same. It may well be that failing to sky-dive, technology, imposes high costs on sky-divers. or sky-diving with some safety-increasing There seems to be an objective judgment, not necessarily connected with subjective costs, in the claim that some risks are voluntary, or deserve less attention, because they are run for inadequate purposes. ante compensation for the relevant risk. There is a general point here. Sometimes observers confuse two quite different questions: (1) Should people be banned from running a certain risk, when they have run that risk voluntarily? (2) Should government attempt to reduce a certain risk, when people have run that risk voluntarily? A negative answer to question (1) does not answer question (2). People find risks less acceptable if those risks do not seem to be within their control. Automobile accidents may seem less troublesome than airline disasters partly for this reason. and "controllable" deaths may stem from a desire to reduce the fear of dying. People who feel in control also feel less afraid. This feeling may be irrational, but it is not necessarily irrational to try to minimize an irrational feeling. Or the perceived difference may involve a distinctive utility loss at time of death. Perhaps a death from an airplane crash is especially horrifying because of one's feelings at the time the crash is happening. Undoubtedly some of the horror at airplane crashes has to do with empathetic identification with people in that position. Thus it would be reasonable to put a special premium on some deaths if informed people believe that the risk-reduction reduces social fear in a reasonable way, or that the terror and panic in the period preceding death deserves special attention. Empirical work would be necessary to show whether these are in fact widely held judgments. 3.5. High externalities, catastrophes meaning The psychological evidence suggests, thought it does not squarely identify, an important in the sense that they and relevant fact: Some deaths produce unusually high externalities, generate widespread losses, including those stemming from empathy and fear, in a way that leads to predictable pecuniary and nonpecuniary costs (see Zeckhauser, 1996, for an illuminating discussion of catastrophes). Consider, for example, the death of the President of the United States, a death that imposes a wide range of costs and that taxpayers invest significant resources to prevent. A parallel can be found in the relatively large level of resources devoted to prevent the assassination of many important public officials. But the point is hardly limited to the highest public officials. An airplane hijacking or crash, partly because it is likely to be well-publicized, may produce large externalities in the form of empathy and fear. It may even deter air travel by making people unusually frightened of air travel, simply because of heuristic devices (availability) and other predictable factors that make people's probability assessments go awry. This fear may be damaging because it is itself a utility loss and because it may lead people to use less safe methods of transportation, because the sudden loss of dozens or hundreds of people seems so unusually and senselessly tragic, in a way that produces large empathetic reactions, or because it signals the further possibility of random, apparently inexplicable events in which large numbers of people die. Some catastrophes are especially disturbing because they appear to produce pointless and especially unnatural deaths. A recent airplane crash in Israel, killing over seventy soldiers, is an example, producing an extended period of national mourning - stemming from the youth of those who were killed, the fact that they were serving their country, and the highly unusual character of the accident, apparently stemming from preventable human error. These considerations suggest that special attention might justifiably be devoted to air safety in the time following a crash even if the relevant precautions do not cause a significant drop in deaths. The same idea may justify special safeguards of nuclear reactors. Even a minor and harmless accident may produce a kind of day-to-day fearfulness that properly places a role in an official calculus, at least if educative efforts cannot work against public fears to the extent that they are irrational or based on error-producing heuristic. expert assessments rest on genuine value differences (four times as many deaths may be much more than four times as bad) rather than on factual errors in cognitive processes of ordinary people. Conclusion People do not consider all death-related events to be the same. Some deaths seem especially bad. It follows that valuation of life should not be based on a uniform number per life or life year saved, but should instead incorporate different social judgments about different kinds of death, to the extent that these judgments can survive critical scutiny. Some such judgments do not really treat some deaths as worse, in themselves, than other deaths. They are based on {he fact that deaths of some kinds occur very early, and thus a large number of life-years are lost. This point can easily be incorporated by reference to the criterion of life-years rather than lives saved. Moreover, judgments based on pre-death pain and suffering do not treat death-events as themselves deserving different levels of attention. But when a death is preceded by a period of pain and suffering, it is appropriate to make special efforts to guard against it. Much further work remains to determine the appropriate "bad death premium" to be placed on such deaths; a special problem stems from the fact that public judgments or private willingness to pay may be it may well be ill-informed. When people believe that deaths are inequitably distributed, sensible to make particular efforts to prevent them, at least if the judgments about what is it is appropriate to devote inequitable are legitimate. Finally, and perhaps most important, unusually high levels of resources to preventing deaths accompanied by high externalities, at least if those externalities cannot be reduced through education and information. Far harder puzzles are posed by the familiar idea that some deaths are especially bad If the point is that there is a because they involve a lack of control and involuntariness. - perhaps special hedonic loss at the point of death - a special feeling of powerlessness that loss deserves consideration in resource allocation. Or it may be that some risks are accompanied by especially low or especially high costs, informational and otherwise, of mortality avoidance. In such cases those especially low or high costs might qualify the starting point defined in terms of decently livable life years saved. Sources of Deaths Table A. Leading Causes of Death: 1993 Cause of Death All ages Leading causes of death: Number of Deaths Total Male Female Total Male Female Heart disease Malignant neoplasms disease Cerebrovascular pulmonary diseases and allied conditions and nephrosis Table B. Age-adjusted Cause of death All causes Major cardiovascular Malignancies Accidents and adverse effects diseases Motor vehicle All other and parasitic diseases syndrome, and influenza liver disease and cirrhosis Chronic obstructive Pneumonia Diabetes melitus Suicide Chronic Nephritis, nephrotic Homicide and legal intervention Septicemia Other infectious Benign neoplasms Ulcer of stomach and duodenum Hernia of abdominal Anemias Cholelithiasis Nutritional Infections Tuberculosis Meningitis Viral hepatitis Acute bronchitis Hyperplasia Symptoms, All other causes of prostate signs, and ill-defined deficiencies of kidney and bronchiolitis conditions cavity and intestinal obstruction and other disorders of gallbladder Table C. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) deaths, by selected characteristics: Number Percent Distribution Questionnaire on kinds of death 1. Assume that you are entrusted with the task of allocating S 100 million among a number of possible regulatory activities. The possibilities include: 1. Spend all S 100 million on AIDS education, prevention, and treatment. Estimated lead ingestion by children in the inner city. Estimated total estimated annual savings of 160 lives. 6. Spend $50 million on option 6 and $50 million on AIDS-related policies, for estimated annual savings of 150 lives. 2. a. How many lives would you need to save from Heart Disease so that you would find it equally important to save those lives and to save 100 lives from Cancer? Lives saved from Heart Disease (Note: If you find it equally important to save lives from Cancer and lives from Heart Disease, the number you report should be 100. If you would prefer to save lives from Cancer rather than from Heart Disease, the number you report should be greater than 100. If you would prefer to save lives from Heart Disease rather than from Cancer, the number you report should be smaller than 100.) b. How many lives would you need to save from airline crashes so that you would find it equally important to save those lives and to save 1 00 lives from cancer? Lives saved from airline crashes 3. Many communities treat their drinking water with chlorine to reduce microbial con tamination. Microbial contamination tinal illness, which in some cases is fatal. But by-products of the chlorination process (such as trihalomethanes like chloroform) may create a cancer risk to those drinking the water. Assume that chlorination completely prevents microbial contamination, and that the lifetime fatal-cancer risk from chlorination is equal to the lifetime fatality risk from microbial contamination without chlorination. Would you prefer that your town's drinking water be chlorinated or not? Chlorinated - Unchlorinated - No preference For every 100 deaths due to cancer from chlorination, what is the number of deaths from microbial illness such that you would find the risks equally serious? (Note: If you find the risk of chlorination more serious, your number will be greater than 100; if you find the risk of not chlorinating more serious, your number will be less than 100.) Number of microbial illness deaths Acknowledgment I am grateful to Richard Craswell, Gertrude Fremling, John Lott, Martha Nussbaum, Richard Posner, Mark Ramsayer, David Strauss, W. Kip Viscusi, and Richard Zeckhauser for very helpful comments. I am also grateful to Jonathan Weiner for helpful discussion and to Christopher Houston for excellent research assistance. 1 . I do not deal here with the distinctive problem of deaths produced by intentional well be appropriate distinctive to devote special attention questions raised by deaths in the course of war. 2. These students may not be representative, to be sure. Information is lacking about the students' personal - about whether, for example, a significant percentage were smokers. As a kind of control, characteristics part of the survey asked students a standard question involving fairness, used in psychological for $10; after a storm, it raises the price to $15. Respondents were asked to describe store sells snowshovels this outcome as completely unfair, acceptable, unfair, or extremely unfair. In some studies 80% of respondents consider this outcome unfair or extremely unfair. Among Chicago law students only 18.2% considered to the this outcome unfair or extremely unfair. This result certainly shows a degree of distinctiveness sample. It connects with work suggesting to cooperate question whether the effect observed effect, or an effect related to some training about whether that economics majors have different in prisoners' dilemma situations. See Frank, Gilovich, and Regan, 1993). It raises the further in my study is a law school effect, a University of Chicago law school in economics. studies: A 3. I am grateful to Jonathan Weiner for his conference, fall of 1996, dealing with comparative drew for the "cancer deaths" and "chlorination" in a paper by James Hammitt. reported risk analysis, and circulating in the "Risk in the Republic," held at Duke University risk survey on which I a comparative questions. The results of the survey held there will be References Alhakami, Ali Siddiq and Paul Slovic. (1994). "A Psychological (1993). Value in Ethics and Economics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Inhibit Cooperation?" J. of Economic Perspectives of Economic Behaviour. Loewenstein, George, and Nachum Sicherman. In Daniel Kahon neman, Edward Diener, and N. Schwarz (eds) Understanding Quality of Life : Scientific Perspectives Enjoyment and Suffering. New York: Russell Sage Foundation Press. Robinson, J., M. Higgins, and P. Bolyard. (1983). "Assessing Environmental It Be Nice? Predicting Future Feelings." Impacts on Health: A Role for Behavioral Science," Environmental Investigation into the Effect of Psychological Perceptions on the Willingness 6:75-90. to Pay to Reduce Risk." J. of Risk and Uncertainty Sieff, E.M., Robin M. Dawes and George Loewenstein. Results." Forthcoming American Journal of Psychology. Slovic, Paul. (1991). "Beyond Numbers: A Broader Perspective Life-Saving on Risk Perception (eds.). Acceptable Evidence. New York: Oxford University and Political Conflict. New York: Oxford University Press. Press. Press. "Anticipated versus Actual Reaction to HIV Test of Viscusi, W. Kip (1992). Smoking. New York: Oxford University Zeckhauser, Richard and Shepard. Zeckhauser, Richard. Press.