University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1997 

Introduction 
Introduction 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Introduction - The Legitimacy of Constitutional Courts: Notes on 
Introduction - The Legitimacy of Constitutional Courts: Notes on 

Theory and Practice Feature: Questioning Constitutional Justice: 
Theory and Practice Feature: Questioning Constitutional Justice: 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Introduction - The Legitimacy of Constitutional Courts: Notes on Theory and Practice 
Feature: Questioning Constitutional Justice: Introduction," 6 East European Constitutional Review 61 
(1997). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

WINTER  1997

Feature:
Questioning Constitutional Justice

Introduction
The Legitimacy  of Constitutional Courts: Notes  on Theory and Practice
Cass R.  Sunstein

Everyone  agrees that the job a constitutional  court is
to interpret the constitution. But the fact  that consti-
tutional  courts are entrusted with this job can create
two kinds  of problems for politicians  and, above all,
for leaders  of the executive  and  legislative  branches
of  government.  The  first  kind  of  problem  arises
when a constitutional  court invokes  the unambiguous
language  of the  constitution  to invalidate  a political
act. The  second kind  of problem  arises  when a con-
stitutional  court  invokes  the ambiguous  language  of
the constitution to invalidate a political act.

These problems are quite different, and their dif-
ferences  bear  very  much  on  the  issues  discussed  in
this  symposium.  When  a  court invokes  unambigu-
ous  constitutional  language  to  prevent  politicians
from  doing  what  they want, politicians  may  suffer
intense frustration. And if the court has the strength
to  resist  politicians, constitutional  amendment  may
be  the  only course.  But  from  the  standpoint  of the
rule  of law,  and  constitutionalism  itself, the  politi-
cians' frustration is no cause for alarm. It is part of the
point.  If  a  constitutional  amendment  is  necessary,
and  the  constitutional  court  invokes  unambiguous
language to say so, constitutional democracy is work-
ing very well. Frustrated politicians  who attempt to
"tame" the court, by  bending  it to  their  wishes,  are
making  a  travesty  of the  rule of law and the  whole
project  of constitutional  democracy. They may also

be  harming their  long-term  interests.  Politicians  can
benefit from  an independent  court; such a court  can
enable politicians  to  insulate  themselves  from  pres-
sures that they would like to avoid, and  such a court
can allow politicians the potential advantage of point-
ing  to  constitutional  constraints,  enforced  by  the
court, as a limitation on their power of action.

Things are different when the governing consti-
tutional  provision  is ambiguous-when  reasonable
people can interpret that provision in diverse ways.
If  a  court  invokes  ambiguous  language  to  strike
down  a political  act, politicians  may claim  that the
court's interpretation  is erroneous,  that the court is
following  not  law  but  personal  predilection,  and
hence  that  the  politicians, rather  than  the judges,
are the constitution's true loyalists. Of course many
constitutional  provisions  are  ambiguous.  How  do
social  and  economic  guarantees  bear  on  political
effort to change  the  fabric  of socialist  law?  Does a
constitutional  ban on  inequality, or a  requirement
of  equal  treatment,  forbid  discrimination  on  the
basis  of sex? In education? In the military?  Does an
equality  provision  forbid  discrimination  on  the
basis of homosexuality, or disability? Does a right to
free  speech  protect the right  to urge  crime, revolu-
tion, or hatred of ethnic and religious groups? Does
it  include  the right to  engage  in  unrestricted  com-
mercial  advertising  or  to  spread  pornography?

HeinOnline  -- 6 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 61 1997

These-are questions  on which constitutional  provi-
sions  are  frequently  ambiguous,  and  when  politi-
cians disagree  with the Court, they may well claim
to do so in the constitution's  name. Their objection
is to the court, not to the constitution.

These  observations  show  the  complexity  of
the  notions  of  "judicial activism"  or  "an  activist
court." A court that invokes the unambiguous  lan-
guage  of  the  constitution  may  be  described  as
"activist" if and in  the sense that it invalidates  acts
of public officials.  But  this form  of activism  is far
from troubling.  On  the contrary, it is a tribute  to
the  rule  of law.  Hence  a  court  that  ignores  the
unambiguous language of the constitution in order
to permit public officials  to do as they choose might
also be described  as "activist," though  in a very dif-
ferent  sense.  Such  a  court  is capitulating  to  the
political  winds;  it  is allowing  the  constitution  to
dissipate  under  pressure.  We  can  conclude  that
when  a  constitution  is clear,  it  should  be  obeyed;
that the minimal role of a  constitutional court lies
here; and that the proper question to ask of such a
court  in  such  a  case  is whether  it has  or has  not
capitulated  to politics.

A  court that deals  with ambiguous provisions
is much  harder  to  evaluate.  Some  people  think
that courts  should consider themselves  the special
guardians  of their constitutions, so thatjudicial use
of ambiguous  provisions,  to invalidate public acts,
is  entirely  acceptable.  (In  the  United  States,  this
position  is  sometimes  associated  with  Ronald
Dworkin;  it  is  also  one  view  of the  situation  in
Hungary.)  But some  people  think  that the  court
should  uphold  public  acts  if the constitution  con-
tains  any  uncertainty.  (In  the  United  States,  this
position  is  sometimes  associated  with  James
Bradley Thayer;  it is one  view  of the situation  in
Russia.) (Table 1)

TABLE  I

FAST  EUROPEAN  CONSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW

Cells  (1) and  (2)  are  simple;  the  most  serious
question  is  whether  the  court  will  capitulate,  and
the  answer  is  that  it  should  not  if constitutional
democracy  is  to prevail.  The  hardest puzzles  arise
for  constitutional  courts  when  those  courts  are
asked to invoke the ambiguous language of the con-
stitution to invalidate acts of public officials. Why-
politicians  might  and  will  predictably  ask-should
courts be  allowed to  interpret ambiguous  language
as  they wish, especially  in light of the fact that the
interpretation  of  such  language  will  inevitably
-involve not merely  "law"  but also  the judges'  own
judgments  of policy or principle?  Interpretation  of
ambiguous  language  cannot avoid some  such judg-
ments. The vice of "formalism" can be found when-
ever  judges  claim,  falsely,  that  they  are  simply
speaking  for  "the law,"  and  deny  the role  of their
own values  in interpretation. Formalism  is a perva-
sive risk for cells  (2) and (3).

But  there  are  some  answers  to  the  politician's
question  about why courts  should feel free to  inter-
pret ambiguous  language  to invalidate acts of other
public officials. In  ordinary  life, we frequently con-
front ambiguous  language, and we know that some
interpretations  are  better  than  others.  So,  too,
ambiguous  constitutional language can be interpret-
ed well or poorly; much depends on the context and
the purposes of the relevant language. And perhaps
judges are in an especially good position to interpret
ambiguous  provisions,  precisely  because  they  are
insulated  from  political  forces.  In  other  words,
judges' comparative  independence  may be a virtue,
not a vice, even or perhaps especially if the interpre-
tation  calls for a judgment of principle. If the ques-
tion is the scope of religious liberty, it is possible that
courts  are  in  a  particularly  good  position  to  make
reasonable  judgments,  and  hence  that  while
respectful  of the decisions  of public officials, courts
charged  with constitutional
interpretation  should feel to
reject those decisions  if they
seem  inconsistent  with  the
best  understanding  of  the
constitutional  guarantee.

There  is a more  fun-
damental  point. We should

Constitution unambiguous 
against act in question

Constitution  ambiguous

Invalidate act 

Validate  act 

(1) Rule  of Law 
(2)  Cowardice;  capitulation 
to politics 

I 

(3)Judidal overreaching  (?)
(4) Excessive judicial
caution  (?)

HeinOnline  -- 6 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 62 1997

WINTER  1997

not be too quick to identify the outcomes of any par-
ticular  political  process  with  democracy.  Perhaps
the  best  course  isfor a constitutional court  to  interpret
ambiguous provisions  by  reference  to  democratic ideals
themselves-by, for  example, assuming  an  especially
large  role  when  rights  central  to  democratic  gov-
ernment  are  at  stake,  or  when  groups  not  able  to
protect  themselves  through  ordinary politics  are at
risk. This view, associated  with both John  Hart Ely
(in  the  United  States)  and  Jurgen  Habermas  (in
Germany), lays great stress on what might be called
the internal  morality  of democracy. Thus  it might
be  said  that courts  should  aggressively  review  any
effort to stifle political dissent (by, for example, lim-
iting  criticism  of public  officials,  or  reducing  the
areas  where dissenters  can  make their view heard),
and also take strong steps to ensure full political par-
ticipation  and  to counteract  discrimination  against
groups  at  systematic  risk  in  the  political  process,
such as religious and ethnic  minorities.

We  might  therefore  conclude,  at  least  provi-
sionally, that a constitutional  court acts legitimately
when  it invokes  unambiguous  constitutional  pro-
visions  and  when  it  interprets  ambiguous  provi-
sions  by  reference  to  democratic  ideals.  When
people  question  constitutional justice,  these  ideas
provide  a  good place  to start. But  they raise ques-
tions  of  their  own.  Democratic  ideals  can  them-
selves be ambiguous:  What do  such ideals  require
in the context of (say) libel law and equality on the
basis of sex? In any case  a constitutional  court will
inevitably be dependent on a constellation  of polit-
ical  forces  that  will  constrain  it  in  one  way  or
another. That latter lesson-involving  the complex
relations  between  theories  of legitimacy  and prac-
tical  constraints  on legitimacy-may  be the princi-
pal  one  emerging  from  this  symposium.  Thus  a
full understanding  of constitutional justice  would
have  to consider  not  only  accounts  of democracy
and  (closely  related)  accounts  of legal  interpreta-
tion; it would also  have  to connect  those  accounts
to  an  understanding  of real-world  limitations  on
what  constitutional  courts,  consisting  of  human
beings whose reputations, employment, and some-
times  even  lives  may  be  on  the line,  are  actually
permitted to do.

Belarus
Interview with Former Constitutional Court
Justice Mikhail Chudakou
Alexander Lukashuk

Mikhail Chudakou was born in 1949. In 1972, he grad-
uated from Belarusian State University (BSU), worked in
the attorney general's office as assistant counsel in civil mat-
ters from  1972-1976, and completed his doctorate, 'The
Legal  Problems  of Individual Participation in  Direct
Democracy in the USSR," in 1982. From 1977 to the pre-
sen4 he has taught at BSU. From 1990 to 1994 he was a
member of the  Constitutional Commission ang  in June
1996, he became a member of the Constitutional Court. In
protest against the president's December 1996 referendum,
Justice Chudakov resignedfrom the Court on January 23,
1997 Before the referendum the Court had 11  members.
Following the referendum seven members resigned or were
fired. On January 4,  the president reappointed the four
remaining justices to  the Court and appointed two  others.
On January 24, the  Council of the Republic (the  upper
house of the National Assembly) appointed five  more jus-
tices. The post-referendum Court has 12 seats, although to
date only  11  seats have been fied

Alexander  Lukashuk: The  first  Constitutional
Court of Belarus existed  for  two and  a  half years.
What  favored  and  what  hampered  the  work  of
the Court?
Mikhail  Chudakou: First, the  executive  branch's
antagonism  toward thejudiciary  made it impossible
to work  in a  normal  way. Our invalidation  of presi-
dential  decrees was invariably perceived by the exec-
utive  as  intentionally  hostile.  The  executive  viewed
the Court as a functionary of the opposition. Another
factor was that, in the majority of cases, one ofthejus-
tices always would deliver a "special opinion." Today,
the author of these "special opinions" is the new chair-
man of the Court, Ryhor Vasilevich. The purpose of
these  "special opinions"  was  to argue  in legal  terms
why the president  was always right. They had a par-
ticularly detrimental  effect on the Court.
AL:  Were  these  "special opinions" political  rather
than legal arguments?
MC:  Yes.  The  public  perception  was  that  while
one  group  of justices  supported  one  approach,

HeinOnline  -- 6 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 63 1997

