 I provide these remarks in the context of two personal observations. As you may know, at the University of Chicago, the economists and the lawyers interact frequently. I have noted that these highly intelligent economists contribute, much in their field, but when they talk about law it is apparent that something has gone wrong. They do not clearly understand the legal field, and there is even a question of what it is about the field that they do not understand. claim to autonomy. Chicago Law School. incompletely The second claim theorized focuses on arguments. Law often tries to get agreement on particulars from people who disagree about abstractions. The autonomy of lav often lies in incompletely theorized agreements on particular points amidst diversity of opinion on abstract concepts. In a family, a workplace, a court, or a nation, people often disagree on first principles, whether they are utilitarians or Kantians or democrats. Though they may disagree very sharply, they might still be able to agree that a speed limit law makes perfect sense, or that the basic rules of negligence are quite plausible. Take another example. There is a law school in the United States that was doing quite well in hiring new faculty. By and large, it handled each particular case well. But then there came a decision in which issues of diversity had to be brought out for theoretical agreement. At that point, the law school stopped working well. People who had agreed on particulars could not agree on the abstractions underlying those particulars. My in submission simultaneous agreement on particulars amidst disagreement about abstractions. that lies is to truncate My third claim is that sometimes cost-benefit analysis itself may fail cost-benefit analysis because it does not minimize the sum of decision costs and error costs. Often law makes a kind of the sorts of second order, or meta-decision, considerations to which participants in law may look. The autonomy of law is best understood as reflecting the secondthat particular people occupying certain order decision institutional roles should look at some select considerations and not at others. For example, judges, in deciding what the Occupational Safety and Health Act means, are not to make a decision about what the Occupational Safety and Health Act ought to mean.' Often in ordinary life and in law there is a second-order decision to say-that certain considerations are blocked-they are just not admissible on the agenda. You might think, for example, that you are not allowed to gossip about some secret that a close friend told you just because it would be fun-the second-order consideration blocks that means of having fun. Law works similarly. The second-order decision itself has to be justified, but it results in a degree of legal autonomy. In the first instance, this is a question of congressional instructions. Note, interestingly, that the proposition itself is incompletely theorized. That is, people who agree that the question of whether agencies deserve deference in their interpretations of law is a question for Congress to answer hold that opinion for diverse reasons. Some would offer economic justifications pointing to Marbury v. Madison. Others would offer non-economic justifications also pointing to Marbuiy v. Madison. The proposition is, itself, incompletely theorized. 9. SeeAntonin ScaliaJudicialDeference tofAdministrative Interpretations ofLaw, 1989 DUKE L.J. 511, 517 (noting that administrative errors in statutory interpretation can be more readily remedied thanjudicial errors). The Autonomy of Law in Law and Economics diversity of arguments for and against Chevron, they are debates on the grounds not far from those identified by Justice Scaliawhat rule will most reduce the costs of decision and the costs of error? Current debates on the scope of Chevron focus on very similar issues. These are debates that have a degree of technicality, but they raise large questions about the nature of separation of powers and constitutional government. There are debates about the role of legislative history and of statutory text in statutory interpretation. Suppose an agency wants to go against the legislative history or wants to buck the statutory text. Debates in such a case are about the degree of decisional simplicity that can be produced by one rule or another and the best way to reduce error. Federalist Society Symposium on Law and Public Policy (1997). action that would be admissible in other circumstances.' These various practices produce a degree of autonomy for law. They need a second order or metajustification which may be either in economic or non-economic terms. It makes legal judgment independent of moral or political or economic judgment for moral, political, or economic reasons. reason to regulate speech.