 Recommended Citation Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Note on Voluntary Versus Involuntary Risks, A Second Annual Cummings Colloquium on Environmental Law: Risk in the Republic: Comparative Risk Analysis and Public Policy: Making Risk Policy in the Face of Expert/Public Conflicts," 8 Duke This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. Ordinary people seem to perceive voluntarily incurred risks as less troublesome than involuntarily incurred risks. Consider the diverse public reactions to airplane crashes and automobile crashes. Or consider the fact that tobacco is by far the largest source of preventable deaths in the United States. Why do we not devote much more of our regulatory effort to reducing smoking? The reason seems to lie in a judgment that smoking is a voluntary activity, and hence, the resulting deaths are less troublesome than are other sorts of deaths. People have voluntarily assumed the relevant risks. This idea helps account for the fact that the government devotes relatively little in the way of resources to control not only smoking, but also to combat the habits of poor diet and insufficient exercise, which produce at least 300,000 premature deaths every year. risks "voluntary" from governmental to exempt undoubtedly a response to the public demand for regulation-results in hundreds of thousands of unnecessary and preventable deaths each year. If the government focused its attention on more of the supposedly "voluntary" causes of death-consider smoking, poor diet and exercise, and automobile accidents-it could save an enormous nunber of lives, and it could do so at a relatively low cost. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. This essay draws on Cass R. Sunstein, Bad Deaths, 14 J. OF RISK AND UNCERTAINTY 259 (1997); Cass R. Sunstein, Selective Fatalism, 26 J. LEGAL STUD. (forthcoming 1997). cases of this kind, we are thus dealing-with high costs of risk avoidance, in the distinctive form of high (sometimes prohibitively high) costs of acquiring relevant information. On this view, the question whether a risk is run voluntarily or not is often not a' categorical one but instead a question of degree, associated with information costs, risk-reduction costs, and the existence or not of accompanying benefits. Of course there are interesting background questions about why and when a risk "codes" as voluntary or involuntary; undoubtedly the answer depends a great deal on heuristic devices used by ordinary people, and also on selective attention, as people focus on a single aspect of a complex transaction or set of events. Risks may seem "voluntarily" run when people do not approve of the purpose for which people run the relevant risks, and involuntarily run when people think that the purpose for which the risk is run is laudable. It is predictable that people will not want to pour enormous taxpayer resources into lowering the risks associated with skydiving, even if the dollars/life-years saved ratio is quite good. By contrast, it is doubtful that people think that it is wrong to spend enormous resources on the prevention of death from childbirth or from being a police officer, even though the decision to have a child is (with appropriate qualifications) voluntary, as is the decision to become a police officer. The general point is that observers frequently confuse two quite different questions: (1) should people be banned from running a certain risk when they have run that risk voluntarily? and (2) should the government attempt to reduce a certain risk when people have run that risk voluntarily? A negative answer to the first question does not answer the second question. People may run a risk voluntarily, but also be better off when that risk is reduced. They are hardly hypocritical or confused when they seek the government to help in risk reduction. They may well say that they acted voluntarily, but that they did not voluntarily run the risk, at least in the sense that they. wished it to be lower than it was, and wish it to be lower than it now is. From these points, it should be concluded that a lay judgment that a risk is "voluntary" should not be decisive for purposes of policy. Many risks that people consider "voluntary" should be the subject of greater governmental concern, not least because hundreds of thousands of lives might thereby be saved. The lay focus on "involuntary" risks sometimes points to reasonable judgments, but it is at most a start. The danger of using it as the basis for policy is that it is, literally, dangerous, in the sense that it ensures that the government will do far less than it could to reduce the number of premature deaths. ily, people's concern, with voluntariness should not allow dramatic departures from this basic goal, which specifies what the government is generally trying to increase. The most that can be said is that when reasonable judgments underlie a judgment that people have been voluntarily or involuntarily exposed to a risk, the extent of the government's focus might be adjusted. In other words, the government might devote more resources to a problem when those at risk lack relevant information or when the costs of risk-avoidance are especially high, and it might devote fewer resources to a problem when those at risk have the information and when the costs of riskavoidance are low.