University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1997 

Behavioral Analysis of Law 
Behavioral Analysis of Law 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Behavioral Analysis of Law," 64 University of Chicago Law Review 1175 (1997). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Behavioral Analysis  of Law
Cass R. Sunsteint

The  future  of economic analysis  of law lies in new and better

understandings  of decision  and choice.'

In  the last two  decades,  social  scientists  have learned  a great
deal  about  how  people  actually  make  decisions.'  Much  of  this
work  calls  for  qualifications  of  rational  choice  models.3  Those
models  are  often  wrong in  the  simple  sense  that they yield  inac-
curate  predictions.  Cognitive  errors  and  motivational  distortions
may press behavior  far from  the anticipated directions;  normative
accounts  of rational  choice  should  not  be  confused  with  descrip-
tive  accounts.4  But it  does not follow  that people's behavior  is un-
predictable,  systematically  irrational,  random,  rule-free,  or  elu-
sive to  social scientists.  On the contrary, the  qualifications  can  be
described,  used,  and  sometimes  even  modeled.  Those  qualifica-
tions,  and  the  resulting  understandings  of  decision  and  choice,5

t  Karl N.  Llewellyn Distinguished  Service  Professor, The University  of  Chicago, Law
School  and  Department  of Political  Science.  I  am grateful  to  J.B.  Heaton,  Judith  Avra-
hami, Dan  Kahan, Martha Nussbaum,  Richard Pildes,  Richard Posner, Eldar  Shafir,  and
Richard Thaler  for valuable  comments,  and especially to Thaler and Daniel Kahneman  for
helpful  discussions  of many relevant  topics;  none  of the aforementioned  people is respon-
sible for mistakes  and misconceptions.  Some  of the  ideas  developed  here  are  discussed in
more  detail  in  Cass R. Sunstein,  Daniel  Kahneman,  and  David Schkade, Assessing Puni-
tive  Damages  (forthcoming  Yale  L  J);  Christine  Jolls,  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  and  Richard
Thaler, Behavioral Law and Economics  (forthcoming).

'  These  understandings  sometimes  go  under the  name  of behavioral  research  or be-

havioral  decision  theory.

2  I  draw  here  on  Richard  H.  Thaler,  Quasi Rational Economics  (Sage  1991);  John

Conlisk,  Why Bounded Rationality?, 34 J  Econ Lit 669 (1996).

There  is  of course  much  controversy  in  specifying  what  rational  choice  models  re-
quire. Some  of the evidence  I  discuss shows  how  people  react  to the  presence  of decision
costs,  and it  is far  from irrational  to take those  costs  into account.  It  may also  be fully ra-
tional to  consider the  effects  of social norms  on choice,  since norm violations  can  count as
costs. It  is far less important to struggle over whether the evidence shows  violations of"ra-
tionality"  than  to be  as  clear  as  possible  on how  human  beings  actually  behave;  it  is the
latter issue that I  am concerned with here.

'  This  is  a  prominent  theme  in  the  work  of Amos  Tversky,  taking  "normative  ac-
counts" to refer to  expected utility theory; Tversky's  emphasis  here is on cognitive  errors.
See,  for example,  Amos Tversky,  Rational Theory and Constructive Choice, in  Kenneth J.
Arrow,  et al, eds, The Rational Foundations ofEconomic Behavior 185 (St. Martin's 1996).
See, for example, Daniel Kahneman  and Amos Tversky, Prospect Theory: An Analy-
sis of Decision Under Risk, 47  Econometrica 263  (1979);  Graham  Loomes and Robert Sug-
den, Regret Theory: An Alternative Theory of Rational Choice Under Certainty, 92  Econ J
805  (1982).

1175

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1175 1997

1176

The University of Chicago Law Review

[64:1175

are  playing a large  and  mounting role  in  many fields  within  eco-
nomics  and other social  sciences.

Oddly,  the  relevant  research  has  yet  to  find  a  significant
place  in the economic  analysis  of law.6  An  enormous  gap  remains
to be filled. This gap  is especially  important for economic  analysis
of law, which  is  concerned  in  significant  part with nonmarket be-
havior.  It  is  here  that  deviations  from  the  conventional  model
are-it is generally  conceded-most  likely to occur.'

Much  behavioral  work  suggests  that  preferences  and values
are  sometimes  constructed  rather  than  elicited  by  social  situa-
tions.8  "[O]bserved  preferences  are  not simply read off some  mas-
ter list;  they are actually  constructed in the elicitation  process....
Different  elicitation  procedures  highlight  different  aspects  of  op-
tions  and  suggest  alternative  heuristics,  which  may  give  rise  to
inconsistent  responses."'  People  do  not  generally  consult  a  free-
standing  "preference  menu"  from  which  selections  are  made  at
the  moment  of choice;  preferences  can  be  products  of procedure,
description,  and  context  at  the  time  of  choice.  "Alternative  de-
scriptions  of the  same  choice  problems  lead to  systematically  dif-
ferent  preferences;  strategically  equivalent  elicitation  procedures
give rise  to  different choices;  and the preference  between x and y
often  depends  on  the  choice  set  in which  they  are  embedded.""
What has been  learned  about  human  behavior  and choice  should
be linked,  at the theoretical  and empirical  levels, with  analysis  of
the legal system.

6  Much  of the relevant research involves experiments  and survey data, and hence it  is

possible to question  whether the findings  are reliable  in  the real world. There  is  of course
a  possibility  that experiments,  particularly in  the  form  of answers to  questionnaires,  are
imperfect  predictors  of actual behavior.  By this  stage, however,  there is  adequate  basis to
conclude that the findings  I  describe  are replicated in the real world;  in  fact many  of them
are  based on  real  world evidence.  See,  for example,  Daniel Kahneman,  Jack  L. Knetsch,
and Richard  H. Thaler, Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect and the Coase Theo-
rem, 98  J  Pol Econ  1325  (1990)  (cataloguing  evidence  from  experimental  and  real  world
settings).  On the  general  topic,  see  Colin  Camerer, Individual Decision Making, in  John
H.  Kagel and Alvin E. Roth,  eds, The Handbook of Experimental Economics 587  (Princeton
1995);  Richard H. Thaler, The Psychology and Economics Conference Handbook, in  Thaler,
Quasi Rational Economics 189 (cited in  note 2).

'  See  the  revealing remarks  to this effect  in Jason F.  Shogren  and Dermot J.  Hayes,
Resolving Differences in  Willingness to Pay and Willingness to Accept: Reply, 87  Am Econ
Rev  241,  243  (1997)  (criticizing general  claims  about endowment  effects  but acknowledg-
ing their importance in  nonmarket settings).

'  See  Paul Slovic,  The  Construction of Preference, 50  Am Psych  364,  364-65  (1995);

Tversky, Rational Theory, in Arrow, et al, Economic Behavior (cited in note 4).

'  Amos Tversky,  Shmuel Sattath, and Paul Slovic, Contingent Weighting in  Judgment

and Choice, 95 Psych Rev 371,  371 (1988).

z' Tversky, Rational Theory, in  Arrow, et  al, Economic Behavior at  186  (cited in  note

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1176 1997

1997] 

Behavioral Analysis 

1177

This  is  so  especially  because  the  legal  system  is  pervasively
in the  business  of constructing procedures,  descriptions,  and con-
texts  for  choice.  Of course  the  legal  system  creates  procedures,
descriptions,  and contexts  in  the  course  of litigated  cases.  For  ex-
ample,  the alternatives  (selected  to be)  placed  before  the jury  or
judge  may  matter  a  great  deal;  liability  or  conviction  on  some
count A may very much depend  on the  nature  of counts  B,  C,  and
D.n  In  this  respect  the  preferences  and values  of judges  and ju-
ries  may  well  be  constructed,  not  elicited,  by  the  legal  system.
This  is certainly  true for the  awarding  of damages,  where  special
problems  may  arise. But similar points  hold outside  of the court-
room.  The  allocation  of  legal  entitlements,  and  the  structures
created  for  exchange  (or  nonexchange)  by  law,  may  well  affect
both preferences'  and values. Thus law can construct  rather than
elicit  preferences  both  internally,  by  affecting  what  goes  on  in
court,  and  externally,  by  affecting  what  happens  in  ordinary
transactions-market  and nonmarket.

For  purposes  of analysis,  we  might  distinguish  among  three
different  tasks:  positive,  prescriptive,  and  normative.  Positive
work  is  of course  concerned  with predictions.  If,  contrary  to  con-
ventional  assumptions,  people  dislike  losses  far more  than  they
like  equivalent  gains,  predictions  will  go  wrong  insofar  as  they
rest  on  these  conventional  assumptions.  As  we  will  shortly  see,
this  point has important implications  for positive  analysis of law,
prominently  including the  Coase Theorem.

Prescriptive  work  is  concerned  with  showing  how  society
might  actually  reach  shared  goals;  this  is  a  central  purpose  of
economic  analysis  of  law.  Consider  the  following  information
campaigns,  which  conventional  analysis  deems  equivalent:  (a) if
you  use energy  conservation  methods,  you will  save  $X per  year;
(b) if  you  do  not use  energy  conservation  methods,  you  will  lose
$X  per  year.  It  turns  out  that  information  campaign  (b)  is  far
more  effective  than information  campaign  (a).3  Some  features  of
human  judgment,  properly  understood,  undermine  conventional
economic  prescriptions  about  what  will  work  best;  they  help  ex-
plain,  to  take just  one  example,  precisely  why  the  public  service
advertising  slogan  "drive  defensively;  watch  out  for  the  other
guy" is particularly ingenious.

"See  text accompanying  notes 29-31.

It  may  well  be  desirable  to  disaggregate  this  vexing  idea  into  various  component

parts;  in  fact this  is one  of the themes of this  essay,  which  I  leave  mostly  implicit.  See
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Rules, 96 Colum  L Rev 903,  931-39 (1996).

"See  Elliot Aronson, The Social Animal 124-26 (Freeman  6th ed  1996).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1177 1997

1178

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[64:1175

Normative  work is  of course  concerned  with what  the  legal
system  should  do.  Recent  revisions  in  understanding  human  be-
havior greatly unsettle  certain arguments  against paternalism in
law.  They  certainly  do  not  make  an  affirmative  case  for  pater-
nalism;  but  they  support  a  form  of  anti-antipaternalism.  If, for
example,  people  use heuristic  devices  that lead to  systematic  er-
rors, their judgments  about how  to  deal with  risks may be  badly
misconceived.' 4  If people  are  unrealistically  optimistic,  they  may
run  risks because  of a factually false  belief in their  own  relative
immunity from  harm,  even if they are fully aware  of the statisti-
cal  facts.  And  if  people's  choices  are  based  on  incorrect  judg-
ments,  at the  time  of choice,  about what their  experience  will  be
after the choice, there  is  reason  to  question  whether  respect  for
choices  rooted  in these incorrect judgments  is  a good way to  pro-
mote utility or welfare. None  of these points makes a firm case for
legal  paternalism,  particularly  since  bureaucrats  may be  subject
to  the  same  cognitive  and  motivational  distortions  as  everyone
else. 5  But they  do  suggest  that objections  to  paternalism  should
be  empirical  and  pragmatic,  having  to  do with  the  possibility  of
education  and likely failures  of government response, rather than
a priori in nature.

Now let me  offer  a few  details, tracing  some  of the principal
findings 6  that  emerge  from  behavioral  research,  and  showing

" Thus  the literature  on heuristics  and biases  helps  support  the  analysis  in  Stephen

Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle: Toward Effective Risk Regulation (Harvard 1993)  (fa-
voring technocratic assessments  of risk).

"  See  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Fatal Tradeoffs: Public and Private Responsibilities for Risk

(Oxford  1992).

1  The  discussion is  illustrative,  not exhaustive.  Other  examples  are  plentiful.  For ex-
ample,  people  appear  not to ignore  sunk costs.  See  Thaler,  Quasi Rational Economics at
11-13,  148-49 (cited  in note  2).  This point  bears  on predictions  about the behavior  of con-
tracting  parties.  Nor  do  I  provide  an exhaustive  discussion  of framing  effects.  For exam-
ple,  if  told that of 400  people  who  undergo  a certain  operation,  350  are  alive  after  five
years, many more  people will undergo  the operation  than if  they are told that of 400  peo-
ple who  undergo  an  operation,  50  are dead  after five years. See  Donald A.  Redelmeier,  et
al, Understanding Patients'Decisions, 270 JAMA 72,  73 (1993).  This effect may reflect not
confusion  about  expected  value, but instead the  social  meaning of the  statement;  when  a
person  says that a certain  number will die,  he  may be  signaling  something about  the  na-
ture  of the option,  and  the signal  may be  different from  the  (mathematically  equivalent)
statement  that  a  certain  number  will  live.  For  a  contrasting  view,  see  Willem  A.
Wagenaar,  Gideon  Keren,  and  Sarah Lichtenstein,  Islanders and hostages: Deep and sur-
face structures of decision problems, in  William  M.  Goldstein and Robin  M.  Hogarth,  eds,
Research on judgment and decision making: Currents, connections, and controversies 552,
552-64  (Cambridge  1997)  (discussing differences  among  mathematically  equivalent  situa-
tions).

People  also make  different judgments  of probability  after different  descriptions  of the
same  problem,  partly  because  a  description  that  stresses  the  components  of  a  category
(how likely is  it  that X will  die from  cancer,  heart  disease,  or other natural  causes?)  pro-
duces  higher  numbers than  one  that refers  to  the  category  itself (how likely  is  it  that X

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1178 1997

1997]

Behavioral Analysis

1179

how  they  bear  on  positive,  prescriptive,  and  normative  work  in
law.

17

I.  Loss AVERSION

People  are  especially  averse  to  losses. 8  They  are  more  dis-

pleased with losses  than they are pleased with equivalent  gains-
roughly  speaking,  twice  as  displeased. 9  Contrary  to  economic
theory,  people  do  not  treat  out-of-pocket  costs  and  opportunity
costs  as if they were equivalent.

Loss  aversion  has  important  implications  for positive  analy-
sis  of law.  It  means,  for  example,  that  the  Coase  Theorem  is  in
one  respect quite wrong."  The theorem  is wrong because  the  allo-
cation  of the legal entitlement may well  matter, in  the sense that
those  who  are  initially  allocated  an  entitlement  are  likely  to
value  it  more  than  those  without  the  legal  entitlement.  Thus
workers  allocated  a  (waivable)  right  to  be  discharged  only  for
cause  may well  value  that right  far more  than they would  if  em-
ployers  were allocated  a (tradable) right to discharge  at will;  thus
breathers  of air  may well  value  their  (tradable) right to  be  free

will  die from natural causes?). See  Amos Tversky and Derek J. Koehler, Support Theory:A
Nonextensional Representation of Subjective Probability, 101  Psych  Rev  547,  550  (1994).
There  is also  a recent finding of a "focusing illusion,"  by which people,  focusing on  a com-
ponent of well-being,  think that it is far more important to well-being than it is in fact. See
David A.  Schkade  and Daniel Kahneman,  Would You  Be Happy If  You Lived  in Califor-
nia? A  Focusing Illusion in Judgments of Well-Being  17  (unpublished manuscript).  See
also  Richard  H. Thaler,  The Winner's Curse: Paradoxes and Anomolies  of Economic Life
(Sage 1994),  for an instructive  collection.

" An interesting  question  is  whether  these  various  effects  vary  across  cultures  and
(relatedly) whether they might be  changed through  education.  There  is evidence  that the
results of the ultimatum  game  are not culturally variant,  see Colin  Camerer  and Richard
H. Thaler, Anomalies: Ultimatums, Dictators and Manners, 9  J  Econ  Persp  209,  211-19
(Spring 1995);  Alvin  E. Roth, Bargaining Experiments, in Kagel  and Roth,  eds, Handbook
of Experimental Economics at 282-88 (cited in note 6). But this is at most  a start.

Of special  interest  is the  fact  that pigeons  and rats appear  to  behave  in  accordance
with prospect theory  rather than expected  utility theory! See  John H. Kagel, Raymond C.
Battalio,  and  Leonard  Green, Economic Choice Theory: An Experimental Analysis of Ani-
mal Behavior 162-67 (Cambridge  1995).

18 Kalmeman,  Knetsch,  and Thaler,  98  J  Pol  Econ  at  1328  (cited  in  note  6);  Thaler,
Quasi Rational Economics at 143 (cited in note 2);  Camerer, Individual Decision Making,
in Kagel  and Roth,  eds, Handbook of Experimental Economics at 665-70  (cited  in note 6).
Loss  aversion  is  an  aspect  of  prospect  theory.  See  Kahneman  and  Tversky,  47
Econometrica at 274-89  (cited in note 5).  On policy implications,  see Jack L. Knetsch, Ref-
erence States, Fairness, and Choice of Measure to Value Environmental Changes, in  Max
H. Bazerman  et al, eds, Environment, Ethics, and Behavior 13 (New Lexington  1997).

' 

ahneman, Knetsch,  and Thaler, 98  J  Pol Econ  at 1339  (cited in note  6) (reporting
data showing that the median value of an object was twice as  much  for a person  acting as
a seller than a person acting as a buyer).

'  Id at 1344-45.  The theorem remains current  insofar as it  suggests that the legal en-

titlement will not, under the stated conditions, affect efficiency.

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1179 1997

1180

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[64:1175

from  air pollution  far more than they would if  polluters had been
given  a (tradable) right to  emit  polluting  substances into  the  air.
The  legal  entitlement  creates  an  endowment  effect,  that  is,  a
greater  valuation  stemming  from  the  mere  fact  of endowment.
This effect has been  observed in  many contexts. 1

There  is  a  further  point.  People  are  averse  to  losses,  but
whether  an event  "codes"  as  a loss  or a gain depends  not on sim-
ple  facts  but  on  a range  of contextual  factors,  including how  the
event  is framed.  The  status  quo  is usually  the reference  point,  so
that losses  are understood  as  such by reference  to  existing distri-
butions  and practices;'  but it  is possible to manipulate  the frame
so as to  make a change  "code"  as a loss  rather than  a  gain,  or vice
versa. Consider  a company  that says  "cash  discount" rather than
"credit card  surcharge";  or a parent  who  says that  for behavior X
(rather than behavior  Y)  a  child  will  be  rewarded,  as  opposed  to
saying that for behavior Y (rather than behavior X) a child will be
punished;"3  or  familiar  advertisements  to  the  effect  that  "you
cannot  afford  not  to"  use  a  certain  product.  In  environmental
regulation,  it  is  possible to  manipulate  the  reference  point by  in-
sisting  that  policymakers  are  trying  to  "restore"  water  or  air
quality to its state at date X;  a proposal  to "improve" air or  water
quality from  date Y may  "code"  quite  differently.  The restoration
time matters  a great  deal to people's judgment.'M

For present purposes,  the most important source  of reference
points  is  the  law:  Where  has  the  legal  system  placed  the  initial
entitlement?  Much  research  remains  to be  done  on  the  effects  of
this  initial  allocation.  The  point  bears,  for  example,  on  the  dis-
tinction  between  "subsidies"  and  "penalties" that  has  proved  so

"  See  id  at  1325-29;  Cass R.  Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law,

in  Cass R.  Sunstein, Free Markets and Social Justice 245  (Oxford 1997).

'  See  William  Samuelson and  Richard Zeckhauser, Status Quo Bias in Decision Mak-
ing, 1  J  Risk  & Uncertainty  7,  9  (1988).  Status quo  bias  is related to the  phenomenon  of
"commission bias":  people  would much  prefer  to make  an  error  of  omission  than  one  of
commission,  even  in  the context  of vaccinating their children,  where  commission  bias can
greatly increase risks to children. See Ilana Ritov  and Jonathan Baron, Reluctance to Vac-
cinate: Omission Bias and Ambiguity,  3  J  Behav Decision Making  263,  263  (1990).  Com-
pare the finding that the status quo  becomes  more attractive  when there are two alterna-
tives  rather  than one.  Thus  doctors,  policymakers,  and ordinary  people,  in  situations  of
choice, may be ambivalent  between a  status quo option  (stay home  and study tonight,  pre-
scribe  the  ordinary  course  of treatment,  do  not depart  from  existing  policy) and  a  single
option;  the introduction  of a  new  alternative  makes  the status  quo  more  appealing.  See
Amos Tversky  and  Eldar Shafir,  Choice Under Conflict: The  Dynamics of Defined Deci-
sions, 3 Psychol Sci 358 (1992).

'  Personal experience  suggests  that this works!
"See  Robin  Gregory,  Sarah  Lichtenstein,  and  Donald  MacGregor,  The Role  of Past
Status in  Determining Reference Points for Policy Decisions, 55  Organizational  Behavior
and Human Decisions Processes  195 (1993).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1180 1997

19971

Behavioral Analysis

1181

crucial  to  the  law  governing  unconstitutional  conditions."  This
distinction  can be understood  as responsive to the phenomenon  of
loss aversion,  and framing effects very much influence judgments
about whether  a measure  constitutes  a subsidy or a penalty."

Loss  aversion  also  raises  serious  questions  about  the goal  of
the tort system. Should  damages measure  the amount that would
restore  an injured  party to the status  quo  ante, or should they re-
flect the  amount  that  an injured  party would  demand  to  be  sub-
ject to  the injury  before  the  fact?  Juries  seem to  believe  that the
amount  that  would  be  demanded  pre-injury  is  far  greater  than
the  amount  that would  restore  the  status  quo  ante.  The  legal
system  appears  generally  to  see  compensation  as  a  mechanism
for  restoring  the  status  quo  ante,  although  it  does  not  seem  to
have  made  this  choice  in  any  self-conscious  or  systematic  way.
Loss  aversion  also  has  large  implications  for the  choice  between
liability  rules  and  property  rules.  Property  rules  allow  a  taking
based  on the entitlement holder's  "willingness to  accept";  liability
rules  frame  the  question  in  terms  of  "willingness  to  pay."  The
economic  literature on  the choice  between  the two  generally does
not  recognize  that the  resulting  valuations  may be  dramatically
different.8

Consider  too the  fact  that  people  may well  choose  A  over  B
when  asked  the  question  "which  of  two  options  do  you  accept,"
but  B  over  A  when  asked  the  question,  "which  of these  two  op-
tions  do you reject," at least if  A has  both more positive and more
negative  features  than B.  In  the  "accept" frame,  the  positive  fea-
tures  stand  out;  in  the "reject" frame, the negative  features  stand
out.29  This  point  bears  on  legal  strategy  before  both  juries  and
judges.

II.  EXTREMENESS  AVERSION

People are  averse  to  extremes. Whether  an option is  extreme
depends  on  the  stated  alternatives.  Extremeness  aversion  gives
rise to compromise effects.  As between  given  alternatives,  people
seek  a  compromise.  In  this,  as  in  other  respects,  the  framing  of

See Geoffirey R. Stone, et al, Constitutional Law  319-23  (Little, Brown 3d ed 1994).
See, for example, Harris v McRae, 448 US 297, 315-18 (1980).
See  Edward  J.  McCaffrey,  Daniel J.  Kahneman,  and Matthew  L.  Spitzer, Framing
the Jury: Cognitive Perspectives on Pain and SufferingAwards, 81 Va L Rev 1341,  1372-73
(1995).

See, for example,  Louis Kaplow and  Steven  Shavell, Property Rules  versus Liability

Rules: An Economic Analysis, 109 Harv L Rev  713,  730-32 (1996).

See  Eldar  Shafir,  Itamar  Sinonson,  and Amos  Tversky,  Reason-based choice,  in

Goldstein and Hogarth, eds, Judgment 69,  73-76 (cited in note 16).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1181 1997

1182

The University of Chicago Law Review

[64:1175

choice  matters;  the  introduction  of  unchosen,  apparently  irrele-
vant alternatives  into  the frame  can  alter the  outcome.  When, for
example,  people  are  choosing between  some  small radio  A  and  a
mid-size  radio B,  most may well  choose  A;  but the  introduction of
a third, large radio  C is likely to lead many people to  choose B in-
stead. °  Thus,  the  introduction  of a  third, unchosen  (and in  that
sense  irrelevant)  option  may  produce  a  switch  in  choice  as  be-
tween  the two  original  options.  Almost  everyone  has  had the  ex-
perience  of switching to  (say) the  second-most  expensive  item on
some menu  of options,  and of choosing that item partly because  of
the presence  of the most expensive item.31

Extremeness  aversion  suggests  that a  simple  axiom  of con-
ventional  economic  theory-involving  the  irrelevance  of  added,
unchosen  alternatives-is  wrong.2  It  also  has  large consequences
for  legal  advocacy  and judgment,  as well  as  for predictions  about
the  effects  of law.  How  can  a preferred  option  best be framed  as
the  "compromise"  choice?  When  should  a lawyer  argue  in  the  al-
ternative,  and  what kinds  of alternative  arguments  are  most ef-
fective?  This  should  be  a  central  question  for  advocates  to  an-
swer. Juries  and judges may try to choose  a  compromise  solution,
and what "codes" as  the compromise  solution  depends on what al-
ternatives  are  made  available.  In  elections,  medical  interven-
tions,  and  policymaking,  compromise  effects  may  matter  a  great
deal.

III.  SELF-SERVING  BIAS,  UNREALIsTIC  OPTIMISM,  AND
OVERCONFIDENCE

People's  judgments  about  fairness  are  self-serving;  people
also  tend to  be  both unrealistically  optimistic  and  overconfident
about  their judgments.3  In  any random  couple,  it  is highly likely
that addition  of answers to  the  question,  "what percentage  of the
domestic  work  do  you  do?"  will  produce  a  number  greater  than
100  percent. The point bears on the otherwise  largely inexplicable
phenomenon  of bargaining  impasses.  Why  don't  more  cases  set-
tle?  Why  does the legal  system  spend so  much on  dispute  settle-

See Mark  Kelman, Yuval Rottenstreich,  and Amos Tversky,  Context-Dependence in

Legal Decision Making, 25 J  Legal Stud 287, 288  (1996).

"  Compare the phenomenon  of"tradeoff contrast": the introduction  of a  third alterna-

tive may  make  some  characteristic  of the  choice  especially  salient  and thus  affect judg-
ment. See id.

See Amartya Sen, Internal Consistency of Choice, 61 Econometrica  495  (1993).
See Daniel  Kahneman  and Amos  Tversky, Conflict Resolution: A  Cognitive Perspec-
tive,  in  Kenneth  J.  Arrow,  et  al,  eds,  Barriers to  Conflict Resolution 44,  46-50  (Norton
1995).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1182 1997

1997]

Behavioral Analysis

1183

ment?  Part of the answer  lies in the fact that self-serving bias-a
belief that one  deserves more than other people tend to think-af-
fects  both  parties  to  a  negotiation,  and  this  makes  agreement
very difficult.3 4

Unrealistic optimism  and self-serving  bias bear on individual
risk-bearing,  and hence  on  the role  of the  regulatory  state,  espe-
cially in the  area of dangers  to life and  health. Even  factually in-
formed people  tend to think that risks  are less  likely to material-
ize for themselves  than for  others. Thus  there  is systematic  over-
confidence  in  risk judgments,  as  the  vast  majority  of people  be-
lieve that they  are less likely than others  to be subject to automo-
bile  accidents,  infection  from  AIDS,  heart  attacks,  asthma,  and
many  other health  risks.35  In  one  survey, for  example,  90  percent
of automobile  drivers  considered  themselves  to  be  above-average
drivers.3 6  In another  survey,  students  asked to  envision their  fu-
ture said that they were far less likely than their classmates to be
fired  from  a job,  to  have  a  heart  attack  or  get  cancer,  to  be  di-
vorced  after  a  few years  of marriage,  or to  have  a drinking prob-
lem."

Unrealistic  optimism  appears  to  characterize  people  in  most
social  categories."  People  systematically  underestimate  the  ex-
tent to  which  they  are  at  risk, and  perceptions  of relative  invul-
nerability  affect  preventive  health  practices.  A random  commu-
nity-wide  survey  of attitudes  toward  health  risks  found  system-
atic  belief  of  above-average  immunity  from  risk.4 °  Older  people
underestimate  the likelihood that they will be in  a car accident  or
contract  major  diseases.4'  Gay men  appear  systematically  to  un-
derestimate the chance  that they will get AIDS,  even though they
do  not lack  information  about  AIDS  risks  in  general.4 2  Consider
as  well  recent  empirical  evidence  that workers  have  little under-

'  See  id;  Linda  Babcock  and  George  Loewenstein,  Explaining Bargaining Impasse:

The Role of Self-Serving Biases, 11 J  Econ  Persp 109,  119-21  (1997).

See  Neil  D.  Weinstein,  Optimistic Biases About  Personal Risks, 246  Science  1232

Shelley E.  Taylor, Positive Illusions: Creative Self-Deception and the Healthy Mind

(1989).

10-11  (Basic 1990).
Id at 33.

'  Laurie  J.  Bauman  and Karolynn Siegel, Misperception Among  Gay Men  of the Risk
for AIDS  Associated  with  Their Sexual  Behavior,  17  J  Applied  Soc  Psych  329,  330-31
(1987).

'  Neil D.  Weinstein,  Unrealistic Optimism About  Susceptibility to  Health Problems:
Conclusions from  a  Community-Wide  Sample,  10  J  Behavioral  Medicine  481,  497-98
(1987).

'1  Taylor, Positive Illusions at 33 (cited in note 36).

Bauman and Siegel,  17 J Applied Soc Psych at 331 (cited in note 39).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1183 1997

1184 

The University of Chicago Law Review 

[64:1175

standing  of the  existence  of an  "at-will" rule  for  employment,  be-
lieving instead that workers  have strong legal protections  against
arbitrary firings.4 3  This evidence  is  consistent with the hypothesis
that people  are  systematically  optimistic;  it  may  suggest a perva-
sive  phenomenon  with respect  to  popular  understandings  of the
law.

Unrealistic  optimism and self-serving bias are relevant to the
positive  and  prescriptive  tasks  of  law. Efforts  to  educate  people
about risk may run afoul  of unrealistic optimism; hence  mere sta-
tistical  knowledge  may  fail  to  produce  adequate  information.
Moreover,  efforts  to  increase  consensual  solutions  must take  ac-
count  of self-serving  bias;  problems  with negotiated  rulemaking,
one  of the most popular new  developments  in  administrative  law,
may have  self-serving  bias  at their roots. Evidence  of self-serving
bias also complicates  the widespread view that people often  over-
state  low-probability  events.  While  people  may  sometimes  think
that low-probability  events  have  higher  probability  than  they  in
fact  do,"  many  individual  agents  think  that they  personally  are
peculiarly  less  susceptible  to  such  events,  which  may  lead  them
to  underestimate  rather  than  overestimate  probabilities.  Note
also the  possibility  of debiasing  strategies;  it  appears  possible  to
reduce  self-serving  bias  by  requiring  people  to  list  the  weak-
nesses in their own view or case.'

IV. DECISION UTILITY VS.  EXPERIENCE  UTILITY

In  economics,  it  is  often  assumed  that the  utility  of experi-
ence is best measured  by the anticipated utility shown by people's
decisions.  But  a  good  deal  of recent  research"  shows  that  there
may well  be  systematic differences between  the  utility expected at
the time of decision and the utility actually experienced as a result
of decision. People's judgments  about their experience  at the time
of decision  can be mistaken;  they may have a  hard time assessing
what the experience  will actually be like.

There  are  many  examples  of this  divergence  between  deci-
sion  utility  and  experience  utility.  We  can  infer  from  the  phe-

"See  Pauline Kim, Bargaining With Imperfect Information: A  Study of Worker Percep-

tion of Legal Protection in  an At-Will World, 83  Cornell L Rev (forthcoming  1997).

This effect may come from the  availability heuristic. See notes  61 and 62.
See  Linda Babcock,  George  Loewenstein,  and Samuel Issacharoff, Debiasing Litiga-

tion Impasse (forthcoming J  L & Social Inquiry).

"See  Daniel Kahneman, New  Challenges to the Rationality Assumption, in  Arrow,  et
al,  eds,  Economic  Behavior at  203  (cited  in  note  4);  George  Loewenstein  and  David
Schkade,  Wouldn't It  Be  Nice? Predicting Future Feelings, to  appear  in  E.  Diener,  N.
Schwartz,  and  D.  Kahneman,  eds,  Hedonic Psychology: Scientific Approaches to  Enjoy-
ment, Suffering, and Well-being (forthcoming  Sage).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1184 1997

1997]

Behavioral Analysis

1185

nomenon of loss aversion  that people  value goods  more when  they
own  them than  when they  do  not. 7  This  "endowment  effect"  has
been observed  in  many settings.4 8  But in  recent experiments,  peo-
ple  have  been  unable  to  predict  the  endowment  effect,  and thus
unable  to  predict  their  own tastes.4 9  This  finding  is paralleled  by
many  studies  showing  that  people  do  not  accurately  predict  the
consequences  of certain major  events,  such as  winning the lottery
or  becoming  paraplegic.  (Winning  the  lottery  produces  much
lower hedonic gains than expected,  and people  adjust to becoming
paraplegic much  more easily than expected.) 0

An  especially  important  example  of  inaccurate  anticipated
utility  comes  from  a  study  dealing  with HIV  testing. People  are
quite  terrified  of their  reaction  if  they  find  that  they  are  HIV-
positive;  they predict  a  high degree  of panic  and  depression.  But
evidence  suggests  that people  are  able  to  adapt  fairly  well  to the
bad news, and their panic and  depression  are far less  severe than
they  feared. 1  Pessimistic  expectations  about  how  they would  re-
act to a positive result might therefore  lead people to "undertest";
people  are likely to  be especially  averse to undergoing  a process of
which  they  are  very  fearful.  It  might  follow  that  regulatory  ap-
proaches-education,  persuasion,  financial  incentives,  conceiva-
bly coercion-would  make a good  deal of sense.

Some  economists  have  urged  that  people  have  adequate  in-
formation  about the  risks  of smoking  and  that additional  regula-
tion  is  therefore  inappropriate.5 2  Perhaps  most  people  do  know
many  of the  basic  "facts."  But  a  study  of high  school  students
suggests  a  problem.  About  one-third  of  adolescent  smokers  be-
lieved  that  there  was  no  risk  from  smoking  a  pack  of  cigarettes
daily for the first few years  after  starting to  smoke.  Young people
who  smoked believed  that they were  personally less  at risk  from
smoking. And 85  percent  of high school teenagers  who smoked  oc-
casionally believed  that they  would not  be  smoking in five  years,
whereas  only 58 percent had actually quit  after five  years, and 37
percent  had  increased  their  consumption.  About  32  percent  of

,  See  Part L

See  Thaler, Quasi Rational Economics at 167-86 (cited in note 2).
See  George  Loewenstein  and Daniel  Adler, A Bias in the Prediction of Tastes,  105
Econ  J  929, 935-36  (1995);  Loewenstein  and  Schkade,  Wouldn't it be  nice? (cited  in  note
46).

See Loewenstein and Schkade, Wouldn't it be nice? (cited in note 46).

SI  See Elaine  M. Sieff, Robyn  M. Dawes,  and  George  Loewenstein, Anticipated Versus

Actual Reaction to HIV Test Results (forthcoming Am  J Psych).

See W. Kip Viscusi, Smoking: Making the Risky Decision (Oxford 1993).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1185 1997

1186

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[64:1175

those who smoked one pack daily believed that they would quit in
five years, but only  13 percent  did in  fact.53

When  people's  decisions  mispredict  their  experience,  a  com-
mon  argument  against  paternalism-to  the  effect  that  ordinary
people  choose  what will promote  their welfare-is  no longer  plau-
sible.  Perhaps  it  will  ultimately  be  possible  to  be  systematic
about  issues  of this  kind-to  know,  with  some  precision,  when
people's  decisions will produce  bad experiences.

V.  COOPERATION,  FAIRNESS,  AND  THE APPEARANCE  OF FAIRNESS

Economists 

sometimes  assume 

that  people  are  self-
interested. This  may well be  true, and  often  it  is  a  useful  simpli-
fying  assumption.  But  people  also  may  want  to  act  fairly  and,
perhaps  more  importantly,  they want to  be  seen to  act  fairly, es-
pecially among nonstrangers.  For purposes  of understanding law,
what  is  especially  important  is  that  people  may  sacrifice  their
economic  self-interest in order to be, or to  appear, fair.

Consider,  for  example,  the  ultimatum  game.'M  The  people
who run the game give  some  money, on a provisional  basis, to  the
first  of two  players.  The  first  player  is  instructed  to  offer  some
part  of the money  to  the  second  player.  If  the  second  player  ac-
cepts  that  amount,  he  can  keep  what  is  offered,  and  the  first
player  gets  to  keep  the rest.  But if  the  second  player rejects  the
offer,  neither  player  gets  anything.  Both  players  are  informed
that these  are  the  rules.  No  bargaining  is  allowed.  Using  stan-
dard  assumptions  about  rationality,  self-interest,  and  choice,
economists  predict that the  first player should  offer  a penny  and
the  second  player  should  accept.  But this  is  not  what  happens.
Offers  usually average  between  30 percent  and 40 percent  of the
total. Offers  of less than 20 percent  are  often rejected. Often there
is a 50-50 division. These results cut across the level of the  stakes
and also across  diverse cultures.5

The  results  of  the  ultimatum  game  are  highly  suggestive.
Perhaps  people  will  not violate  norms  of fairness,  even  when do-
ing  so  is  in  their  economic  self-interest,  at  least  if  the  norm-
violations  would  be  public.  Do  companies  always  raise  prices
when  circumstances  create  short-term scarcity?  For example,  are
there social  constraints  on price  increases for  snow shovels  after a

See  Paul Slovic,  What does it mean to know  a cumulative risk? (forthcoming J  Be-

havioral Decision Making).

"  See Roth, Bargaining Experiments, in Kagel  and Roth,  eds, Handbook of Experimen-
tal Economics at 282-88  (cited in note  6),  and Camerer and Thaler,  9 J  Econ Persp  at 209-
18  (cited in note 17),  for a general  discussion.

'  Camerer and Thaler, 9 J  Econ Persp at 210-11  (cited in note  17).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1186 1997

1997] 

Behavioral Analysis 

1187

snowstorm,  or  for  umbrellas  during  a rainstorm?  It  may well  be
that  contracting  parties  are  reluctant  to  take  advantage  of  one
another's misfortunes,  partly because  of social constraints  on  self-
interested behavior. Here there is much room  for future  work.

Experimental work  similarly shows  a high degree  of coopera-
tion in prisoners'  dilemma  situations,  especially  when people  are
speaking with one  another.56  There  is now  a good  deal  of evidence
about  the  mechanisms  by which  cooperation  is  produced  or  sus-
tained.5 7  Group  identity  appears  to  be  important,  as  does  the
in  the  private  sphere.5 8  These
practice  of  norm-enforcement 
points  are  especially  important  to  law  and,  in  particular,  to  the
relationship  between  law  and  "norm  cascades,"  producing  large-
scale behavioral  shifts. In some  contexts, the  mere  announcement
of a legal  requirement  can  yield  such  shifts,  especially  when  one
person's violation  can be observed  by others,  and thus  private en-
forcement  becomes  possible  through  the  imposition  of  reputa-
tional sanctions.5 9

VI.  HEURIsTIcs  AND  BIASES

People  make  judgments  about  probability  on  the  basis  of
heuristic devices,  responsive  perhaps  to high costs  of inquiry  and
decision,  that  work  in  many  cases  but  that  tend  also  to  lead  to
systematic  errors. 0  This  work  bears  on  the  demand  for  (and
hence  also  the supply  of)  government  services,  including  regula-
tion. It  also has implications  for the jury system-suggesting  that
juries  are  likely  to  make  many  mistakes  in  terms  of probability
assessments  and that correction  of those  mistakes  is  a large task
of  the  legal  system.  Here  is  a  very  brief  description  of  several
heuristics  of particular relevance  to  law, and of some  possible  re-
sponses.

For an overview, see John  0. Ledyard, Public Goods: A Survey of Experimental Re-
search, in Kagel and Roth,  eds, Handbook of Experimental Economics 111,  111-73 (cited in
note 6).

See  Robyn  M.  Dawes,  Alphons  J.C. van  de Kragt,  and John M.  Orbell,  Not  me  or
thee but  we:  The  importance of group identity in eliciting cooperation in dilemma situa-
tions: Experimental manipulations, in  Goldstein  and Hogarth,  eds, Judgment 379,  389-91
(cited in note 16).

"See  Robert A.  Kagan  and Jerome H. Skolnick,  Banning Smoking: Compliance With-
out Enforcement, in Robert L. Rabin  and Stephen D. Sugarman,  eds, Smoking Policy: Law,
Politics, and Culture 69,  76-85 (Oxford  1993).

See id; Sunstein, 96 Colum  L Rev at 945-46 (cited in note 12).
See  Camerer, Individual Decision Making, in Kagel  and Roth,  eds, Handbook of Ex-

perimental Economics at 590-616 (cited in note 6).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1187 1997

1188

The University of Chicago Law Review

[64:1175

A.  Availability

People  tend to think  that risks  are  more serious  when  an in-
cident  is  readily  called  to  mind  or  "available.""' If  pervasive,  the
availability heuristic will  produce  systematic errors. Assessments
of  risk  will  be  pervasively  biased,  in  the  sense  that  people  will
think  that  some  risks  (of a  nuclear  accident,  for  example)  are
high, whereas  others  (of a  stroke,  for example)  are relatively low.
"Availability cascades"  can  produce  a large  demand for  law, as in
the familiar "pollutant of the month"  syndrome in  environmental
law. We  lack  a  firm  understanding  of how  availability  cascades
occur  and  of how  institutions  might  be  designed  to  produce  ap-
propriate responses.'

B.  Anchoring

Often  people  make  probability judgments  on  the basis  of  an
initial value,  or "anchor,"  from  which  they  make  insufficient  ad-
justments.6 3  The  initial value may  have  an arbitrary  or irrational
source.  When this is so,  the  probability  assessment may  go  badly
wrong,  as  will  all  future  assessments  based  on  the  original  an-
chor.  This  point  bears  on jury  deliberations  reconstructing  the
facts;  an original "anchor," based on certain evidence  at trial, may
be  hard  to  dislodge.  The  point  also  suggests  pervasive  problems
with damage  determinations,  where  arbitrary  anchors  may loom
large. For  example,  in  the  case  of punitive  damages  or  damages
for pain and suffering,  libel,  or intentional  infliction  of emotional
distress,  an  enormous  amount is  likely  to turn  on  the  plaintiff's
original demand.

C.  Representativeness

Judgments  about  probability  are  in  large  part  judgments
about whether  some process  A will bring  about some event  B. For
example,  under what  circumstances  will  driving produce  signifi-
cant increases  in  air pollution  or fatal  accidents?  When will  air-
bags  produce risks to  children?  Do disposable  diapers cause pollu-
tion problems?  In  answering  such questions, people ask about the
extent to  which  A  is  representative  of B  in  the  sense  that it  re-
sembles B.  This  point  suggests  that  people  will  be  insensitive  to

"  See Kahneman  and Tversky,  Conflict Resolution, in  Arrow,  et  al,  eds, Barriers to

Conflict Resolution at 47-48 (cited in  note 33);  Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (cited in  note 15).

'  Timur  Kuran  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Availability  Cascades and Risk  Regulation

(work in  progress), is an effort to  deal  with these issues.

'  See  Kahneman  and Tversky,  Conflict Resolution, in  Arrow,  et  al,  eds, Barriers to

Conflict Resolution at 54-55  (cited in  note 33).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1188 1997

19971 

Behavioral Analysis 

1189

the sample  size, misunderstand  the phenomenon  of regression  to
the mean, have excessive  confidence  in  their own judgments,  and
misconstrue  the effect  on probability  of base-rate  frequency.'  As
a  result,  people  may  systematically  misunderstand  risk  levels.
Consider,  as  an  example,  the question whether  exposure  to pesti-
cides  is likely to  cause  cancer.  If "pesticides"  are taken to  be rep-
resentative  of cancer,  people  will judge  the  probability  of  causa-
tion to be quite high. But this judgment may well  be mistaken.

D.  Case-Based  Decision Theory

Heuristic  devices  are  often  used  when  the  costs  of delibera-
tion  are  high;  in  such  cases,  second-order  decisions,  operating  as
default  rules,  can  make  particularized  assessments  less  neces-
sary. An important  way  of reducing  decision  costs  is  to  make  as-
sessments on the basis of previous  cases rather than through par-
ticularized  assessments  of relevant  costs  and benefits.6 5  People  of-
ten  reason  in  this way,  calling  to  mind particular  cases  and  see-
ing how  the problem  at hand  compares  with those  cases;  this can
be an important method  of reducing  decision  costs.

A view  of case-based  decisions  as  a  way  of minimizing  deci-
sion  costs-while  producing  acceptably  low  error  costs-has  sig-
nificant  consequences  for  the  understanding  of  law.  Of  course,
adjudication  is  a  form  of case-based  reasoning.  And  we  may  be
able  better  to  understand  its nature,  and thus  its  vices  and  vir-
tues, if we  see  it  as  an alternative  to  both expected  utility theory
and  rule-bound  decisions.  This  alternative  responds  to  the  dis-
tinctive characteristics  of judicial institutions.6 6

Of  related  interest  are  findings  about  the  consequences  of
basing  choice  and  decision  on  reasons."  An  important  result  is
that many  decisions  (and, in  particular, nonintuitive  violations  of
value-maximization)  are  better understood  if  one  envisions  deci-
sion makers  as resorting to and  relying  on compelling  reasons  for

Id at 46.
Itzhak  Gilboa  and  David  Schmeidler,  Case-Based Decision Theory,  110  Q  J  Econ

605,  608-10 (1995).

Identification  of the settings in which  case-based decisions  make sense is a complex
matter.  Case-based  decisions  are  better  than  decisions  based  on  expected  utility theory
when  the  latter  imposes  excessive  cognitive  demands.  Case-based  decisions  are  better
than  rule-bound  decisions  when  particularistic  judgments  involve  fewer  errors  without
imposing high  decision  costs.  It is possible  that for the legal system,  case-based  decisions
are  often best, because judges can reduce their  cognitive  burdens in  this way without pro-
ducing the errors  of (crude)  rules.  Of course rules  are often  best. For discussion,  see  Cass
R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict 161-64 (Oxford 1996).

See Shafir, Simonson,  and Tversky, Reason-based choice, in  Goldstein and Hogarth,

eds, Judgment at 89-92 (cited in note  29).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1189 1997

1190

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[64:1175

their  decisions,  rather  than  focusing  on  the  options'  value.  This
perspective  is highly relevant to the law, and to the "constructive"
approach  to decision  making emphasized  here.

E.  Statistics, Not Intuitions

Despite  the  possible  advantages,  in  some  settings,  of  case-
based decision  theory, an understanding  of heuristic  devices  sug-
gests that single-shot, intuitionistic judgments  are frequently less
accurate  than judgments  based  on  statistical  regularities."  This
is  particularly  true  of  probabilistic  judgments,  for  which  people
tend  to  have  great  confidence  in  their  particular  assessments.
'People  are  overconfident  in  evaluating  the  accuracy  of their  be-
liefs one  at a time."9  The  point is important to  law, since partici-
pants  in  law  often  rely  on  projections  of probability  based  on  a
highly particularistic  understanding  of a fact pattern. How  likely
is  it,  for  example,  that  a  certain  course  of  action  would  cause
harm? And  how likely is it  that a particularistic judgment, from  a
court, will perform better than a rule?

Recent  research  suggests  that  in  matters  relevant  to  law,
statistical judgments  should receive  greater  attention.  Experts in
medical  care,  for  example,  responded  to  questionnaires  with  op-
timistic  and  inaccurate  judgments  about  the  median  time  be-
tween  triage  in  an  emergency  department  and  administration  of
antibiotics  in  children with meningitis.0  It  is interesting but per-
haps  not surprising  to  find that an  expert witness  in  a malprac-
tice  case  much understated  the  median  time;  but it  is  more  sur-
prising that the  spectrum  of opinions  among  doctors  as  a whole
differs  significantly  from the  statistical  reality. The  phenomenon
appears  to  be  attributable  to  certain  biases  affecting  anecdotal
recall-bias  toward the perceived  outcome  and hindsight  bias, by
which  people  believe  that  an  outcome  that  occurred  was  highly
likely to do  so."  In medical malpractice  cases,  and perhaps  a wide
range  of other cases  involving  questions  of negligence  founded on
judgments  of ordinary practice,  the legal  system would  do  well  to
move from  anecdotes  and  experts to  statistical  data. "Medical  ex-
pert testimony that  differs  significantly  from these  values  has no
basis in reality  and ought not to be credited."72

See Daniel  Kahneman  and Dan  Lovallo,  Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A  Cog-

nitive Perspective on Risk Taking, 39 Management  Science 17,  19-20  (1993).

Id at 26.
See William  L.  Meadow,  et al,  Ought "Standard Care" Be  the  "Standard of Care?,

147 Am J  Diseases of Children 40 (1993).

"  Id at 43.
7  Id at 44.

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1190 1997

1997]

Behavioral Analysis

1191

VII.  PROBABILITY  RELATED "TASTES"

Here we are  dealing not with factual  errors, but with "tastes"
or  preferences  that  lead  people  to  favor  certain  approaches  to
risk.  Probability  related  tastes  present  hard  questions  for  the
policy  analyst. These  tastes matter  to law insofar  as they bear on
the  demand  for  legal  regulation  and  insofar  as  they  are  highly
likely to  affect judgments  of both juries and judges.

A. 

"All or Nothing"

People  do  not  weight  probabilities  in  a  linear  fashion.  Most
importantly, they greatly prefer the  elimination of a risk over the
diminution  of  a  risk.  Thus,  it  appears  that  people  would  much
rather  see  a risk  of .001  reduced  to  zero  than  a  risk  of  .002  re-
duced  to  .001."  It is  not  clear  whether  this  preference  should  be
characterized  as irrational. Perhaps  people receive  a great deal  of
peace  of mind  from  an  eliminated  risk,  and  a  risk  of  reduced
probability  still creates  residual  fear. The point  appears  to be re-
flected in  law. For example,  the Clean Air Act speaks  in terms  of
ensuring safe levels of air quality,  admittedly a highly misleading
way to set up the problem. 4

B.  Ambiguity Aversion

A  closely  related  "taste" is  the  avoidance  of  ambiguity. 5  At
least when they lack relevant knowledge,  and know that they  do,
people  prefer  situations  of risk  (in which probabilities  can be  as-
signed to  outcomes)  over situations  of uncertainty  (in which  prob-
abilities  cannot be assigned).  Thus people  are  averse to situations
of uncertain  probability  and try to  avoid  choices  that place  them
in such situations. Risk regulation  is,  of course,  often undertaken
when  probabilities  cannot  be  assigned.  If people  are  averse  to
ambiguities,  they  may  produce  an  incoherent  pattern  of regula-
tion,  perhaps  based  on  an  illusory  perception,  related  to  all-or-
nothing  judgments,  that  some  things  are  "safe"  and  others  are
"dangerous."

C.  Status Quo Bias

As  noted,  people  evaluate  situations  largely  in  accordance
with  their relation  to  a  certain  reference  point;  gains  and  losses

See Redelmeier,  et al, 270 JAMA at 73 (cited in note 16).

"See  42 USC  § 7409(b)(1)  (1994).

See  Craig  R. Fox  and  Amos  Tversky,  Ambiguity Aversion  and Comparative Igno-

rance, 110  Q J  Econ  585 (1995).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1191 1997

1192

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[64:1175

from the  reference  point are  crucial.  An ordinary  reference  is  the
status  quo,  which  produces  status  quo bias.76  The legal  system  is
certainly responsive to this kind of bias.77

VIII.  MENTAL AcCOUNTING

A simple  and apparently  uncontroversial  assumption  of most
economists  is  that  money  is  fungible.  But  the  assumption  is
false.7"  Money  comes  in  compartments.  People  create  "frames"
that result  in  mental  accounts  through  which  losses  and  gains,
including  losses  and  gains  in  simple  monetary  terms,  are  not
fungible  with  each  other.  A  glance  at  ordinary  practice  shows
that people  often  organize  decisions  in  terms  of separate  budgets
and  accounts.  Thus some  money is for retirement;  some  is for  va-
cation;  some  is for  college  tuition;  some  is for mortgage  or rental
payments.  Mental  accounting  is  an important  aspect  of financial
self-control.

The practice  of mental accounting has  a range  of implications
for law and policy. It  suggests,  for example,  that government  may
be  able  to  create  certain  mental  accounts  by creative  policymak-
ing. And it  suggests  that there may be  a demand  for publicly  cre-
ated  mental  accounts,  perhaps  as  a  self-control  strategy,  as  for
example  with  Social  Security  and other  programs  with  an  appar-
ent  paternalistic  dimension.  Some  statutes  that  appear  to  pre-
vent people  from making choices  as they wish may be best under-
stood  as  responsive  to  the  widespread  desire  to  have  separate
mental  accounts.  Of course,  there  are  private mechanisms  for  ac-
complishing  this  goal;  but  lawyers  will  not  understand  these
mechanisms  well  unless  they  see  that money  itself is  not  fungi-
ble.

IX.  THE DIFFIcuLTY,  OUTSIDE OF MARKETS,  OF MAPPING
NORMATiVE  JUDGMENTS  ONTO DOLLARS

Often  the  legal  system  requires  judges  or  juries  to  make
judgments  of some  kind  and  then  to  translate  those  judgments
into  dollar  amounts. How  does this translation take  place?  Can it
be  done  well?  Research  suggests  that  in  many  contexts,  norma-
tive  judgments  are  both  predictable  and  nonarbitrary.79  When

76 See note 22 and accompanying text.

.See Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, in Sunstein, Free Markets at 252-53 (cited in

note  21).

"  See Thaler, Quasi Rational Economics at 26,  92 (cited in note  2);  see also Viviana A.

Zelizer, The Social Meaning of Money  (Basic 1994).

'  See  Daniel Kahneman  and  flana Ritov, Determinants of Stated Willingness to Pay

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1192 1997

1997]

Behavioral Analysis

1L193

asked  to  assess  bad  behavior  that might  produce  punitive  dam-
ages  on  a  bounded  numerical  scale,  people  come  up  with  rela-
tively  uniform judgments.  Similar  uniformity  has  been  found  in
contingent  valuations  of environmental  amenities.8 o But the  act of
mapping  those  normative  judgments  onto  an  unbounded  dollar
scale  produces  considerable  unpredictability  and  arbitrariness.
When  people  are  asked  how much  they  are willing  to pay  to  pro-
tect  two  thousand  birds,  or  how  much  a  defendant  should  be
punished  for  reckless  conduct  leading  to  personal  injury,  the
numbers  they  generate  seem  to  be  stabs  in  the  dark. The  legal
system,  however,  frequently  relies  on just  such  stabs.  Thus,  the
award  of damages  for  libel, sexual harassment,  and pain and suf-
fering are  infected  by severe  difficulties,  as  is the  award  of puni-
tive  damages  in  general.  An  understanding  of these  difficulties
may  well  lead  to  concrete  reform  proposals.  Perhaps  the  "map-
ping" can occur by a legislative or regulatory  body that decides,  in
advance,  on  how  a  normative  judgment  made  on  a bounded  nu-
merical  scale  or  by  comparison  to  preselected  scenarios  can  be
translated into dollars.

X. 

INTERTEMPORAL  CHOICE AND  DIscouNT RATES

A  conventional  assumption  of economics  is  that  people  will
discount  both  costs  and  benefits  to  present  value."  A  thousand
dollars  today is worth  more  than  a thousand  dollars  a  year  from
now,  because  the future  amount cannot  be  invested  or used.  But
to  what  extent  do  people  behave  in  accordance  with  this  under-
standing?  Sometimes  people  appear  to  have  negative  discount
rates.82  Thus,  teachers  often  choose  to be  paid  in  twelve  monthly
installments  (September-August)  rather  than  nine  (September-
June);  and people  often receive  tax refunds  from  the  government
in lieu  of adjusting the  withholding rate, thus  providing interest-

For Public Goods: A  Study  in the  Headline Method,  9  J  Risk  & Uncertainty  5,  28-30
(1994);  Sunstein,  Kahneman,  and  Schkade,  Assessing Punitive Damages (with notes  on
cognition  and valuation  in law) (cited  in note t). The latter paper, based  on 900  subjects,
discusses computer construction  of 120 million juries, including  (for example) all white ju-
ries,  all male juries, all poor juries, all female juries,  all Hispanic juries, well  educated ju-
ries,  poorly educated  juries. It  finds that  these disparate juries  evaluate  outrageousness
and  appropriate  punishment  in similar  ways  when using a bounded  numerical  scale of 1
to 6.  The story is much more complex for an unbounded  dollar scale.

o See  Kahneman and Ritov, 9  J  Risk & Uncertainty at 28-30 (cited in note  79).
8' See  Daniel A.  Farber  and  Paul A.  Hemnersbaugh,  The  Shadow of the  Future, 46
Vand  L  Rev  267  (1993);  George  Tolley,  et  al,  Valuing Health for Policy  130-33,  310-12
(Chicago  1994).

See  George Loewenstein  and Richard  H. Thaler, Intertemporal Choice, in  Goldstein

and Hogarth, eds, Judgment 365  (cited in note  16), on which  I draw for this section.

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1193 1997

1194

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[64:1175

free  loans  to the  government.8 3  There  is  also  evidence  that work-
ers  prefer  to have  increasing wage  rates,  in which weekly  wages
increase  each year, even  though  (in  the aggregate  equivalent) de-
creasing  wage  rates  would  provide  more  money  quickly.M  Loss
aversion  may help  explain  this  phenomenon;  a  decreasing  wage
reflects constant losses from the reference  point.

But sometimes  people  are  myopic, in  the  sense that their be-
havior reveals  extremely  high positive  discount  rates.  Studies  of
teenagers  and purchasers  of energy inefficient  appliances  suggest
a  large  and  puzzling  willingness  to  disregard  future  costs  and
benefits.8 5  The  line  between  absence  of information  and  myopia
may be thin in practice,  but it  appears  that well-informed  people
sometimes treat the future as if it  barely mattered.

These  findings  have  many  implications  for  law  and  policy.
Environmental  protection,  for  example,  requires  development  of
an appropriate  discount rate for both  costs  and benefits.8 6  It  is not
clear  that regulators  should base  their  decisions  on  people's  in-
tertemporal  tastes;"  but  if  they  do,  the  conventional  economic
understanding,  embodied  in  current  policy,  may  be  wrong.  Cal-
culation  of  damages  in  cases  of future  losses  may  well  require  a
discount  rate; here  people's  tastes  probably  matter  a  great  deal,
and use of a conventional  discount rate may produce  errors. Myo-
pia  bears  above  all  on  the  prescriptive  and  normative  tasks  of
law. Where  people  are myopic,  information may not be  enough to
produce  optimal  behavior.  And  on the  normative  side,  the  exis-
tence  of  myopia  may  support  paternalism,  or  at  least  anti-
antipaternalism.

Economic  analysis  of law has  proceeded  on the basis  of inac-
curate understandings  of decision and choice.  For the last genera-
tion  those  understandings  have  proved  fruitful  in  spite  of their
flaws.  Before  economics  became  part  of the  study  of law, people
analyzed  law  without  having  much,  if  any,  sense  of how  to  ex-
plore its  effects  on behavior.  Better  understandings  were  not  yet
available,  and simplicity has  its virtues. But it  is past time  to  see
what  can  be  learned-whether  positive,  prescriptive,  or  norma-
tive-from  bringing to  bear more  accurate  understandings  about
human behavior.

Id  at 366.
See id at 373.
Id  at 366.
See Peter S.  Mennell  and Richard  B.  Stewart,  Environmental Law and Policy 109-

11, 114  (Little, Brown  2d ed  1994).

See Tolley, et al, Valuing Health at  130-33,  310-12  (cited in note 81).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1194 1997

1997]

Behavioral Analysis

1195

In this  essay I have  at most sketched  those  understandings.
A large  question  involves  the  extent  to which  education  and  "de-
biasing" can counteract cognitive  and motivational  distortions,  so
as to eliminate  some of the effects  described  above. 8  Despite large
recent  advances,  behavioral  research  remains  in  an  early  stage.
An  understanding  of its  implications  for  law  and policy  will take
a long time. Let's go to work.

'  Some of these effects,  such as a taste for fairness,  should not be characterized  as dis-
tortions; on the contrary, such tastes  may help prevent unfortunate outcomes  in prisoners'
dilemma  situations.  See Robert  H. Frank,  Thomas  Gilovich,  and Dennis  T. Regan,  Does
Studying Economics Inhibit Cooperation?, 7 J Econ Persp  159,  163-67  (Spring 1993).

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1195 1997

6

HeinOnline  -- 64 U. Chi. L. Rev.  1196 1997

