Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

1997

Assessing Punitive Damages...
Cass R. Sunstein

Daniel Kahneman

David Schkade

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman & David Schkade, "Assessing Punitive Damages..." (Coase-Sandor Institute for Law & Economics
Working Paper No. 50, 1997).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES
(WITH NOTES ON COGNITION AND VALUATION IN LAW)

Cass R. Sunstein,1 Daniel Kahneman,2 and David Schkade3

I. INTRODUCTION

A. Two Goals

This  Article  has  two  goals.  The  first  is  to  investigate  the
sources  of  arbitrariness  in  punitive  damage  awards.4  This
investigation, which we believe to be the first of its kind, helps
to  answer  an  important  question:  What  are  the  sources  of
unpredictability in punitive damage awards?5 On the basis of
                                                                                                   
1  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor,  Law  School  and

Department of Political Science, University of Chicago.

2  Eugene  Higgins  Professor  of  Psychology  and  Professor  of  Public

Affairs, Princeton University.

3 Professor of Management and William W. Spriegel Fellow, Graduate
School of Business, University of Texas, Austin. The authors are grateful
to Exxon Corporation for financial support of the empirical study contained
in this Article; Exxon Corporation bears no responsibility for our analysis or
our  conclusions.  We  are  grateful  to  Richard  Craswell,  Richard  Epstein,
Dan  Kahan,  William  Landes,  Tracey  Meares,  Martha  Nussbaum,  Eric
Posner, and Richard Posner for valuable comments. We are also grateful
to  participants  in  the  rationality  workshop  at  the  University  of  California,
Berkeley  and  the  law  and  economics  and  legal  theory  workshops  at  the
University  of  Chicago.  J.B.  Heaton  provided  research  assistance  and
excellent comments.

4 A technical version of the survey and study, accompanied with more
detailed  statistical  analysis,  is  reported  in  Daniel  Kahneman,  David
Schkade, and Cass R. Sunstein, Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards: The
Psychology of Punitive Damages, J. of Risk and Uncertainty (forthcoming
1998).  This  paper  provides  a  nontechnical  summary  of  our  findings  and
develops, as that paper does not, its implications for law and legal reform.
5 We do not contend that we have identified the only source. See TAN
infra. There are also questions about the difference between experimental
and real-world conditions. See TAN infra.

2

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

responses  from  899  jury-eligible  citizens,  we  estimate  the
results  of  deliberations  consisting  of  all-white  juries,  all-
African-American  juries,  all-female  juries,  all-male  juries,  all-
wealthy  juries,  all-poor  juries,  and  juries  of  widely  diverse
degrees of age and education.

Our principal conclusions, stated briefly, are that  people’s
moral  judgments  are  remarkably  widely  shared,  but  that
people  have  a  great  deal  of  difficulty  in  mapping  their  moral
judgments  onto  an  unbounded  scale  of  dollars.  Erratic,
unpredictable,  and  arbitrary  awards,  possibly  even
meaningless awards, are a potential product of this difficulty.
Since  participants  in  law  are  frequently  asked  to  map  their
judgments  onto  an  unbounded  dollar  scale,  this  answer
relates  not  only  to  punitive  damage  reform  but  also  to  a
number  of  other  positive  and  normative  questions  now  faced
by the legal system, including the law governing libel, awards
for  pain  and  suffering,  sexual  harassment  and  other  civil
rights  violations,  intentional  infliction  of  emotional  distress,
administrative penalties, and contingent valuation. In addition
to identifying serious problems in current practices, our study
points  in  the  direction  of  a  large  and  potentially  fruitful
research agenda.

Our  second  goal  involves  what  might  be  called  the
behavioral analysis of law. In the last three decades, a great
deal  of  progress  has  come  from  the  application,  to  legal
problems,  of  a  certain  understanding  of  economics.6  Within
economics  and  psychology,  but  outside 
that
understanding  has  been  under  sustained  attack.7  Within
social science generally, the attack has produced insights that
supplement,  and  sometimes  undermine,  those  versions  of
economics  that  have  undergirded  economic  analysis  of  law.8
                                                                                                   
6 See Richard Posner, Economic Analysis of Law (5th ed. 1997) for a

law, 

wide range of relevant discussions.

7  A  good  recent  collection  is  William  Goldstein  and  Robin  Hogarth,

Research on Judgment and Decisionmaking (1997).

8 There are some important exceptions. See, e.g., Edward McCaffery,
Matthew Spitzer, and Daniel Kahneman, Framing the Jury, 81 Va. L Rev

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

3

These  insights very much bear on law. Our study helps show
what  might  be  missing,  impractical,  or  wrong  in  standard
economic  approaches  to  punitive  damage  awards,  and  in  a
way that bears on a range of additional issues as well.9

B. Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards

The  award  of  punitive  damages  has  become  one  of  the
most  controversial  and  important  uses  of  the  tort  law,
extending  well  beyond  the  common  law  to  such  statutory
areas  as  environmental  protection  and  employment
discrimination.10 Punitive damages are allowed in forty-seven
of the fifty states,11 and over sixty federal statutes now permit
the  award  of  punitive  damages,  making  judicial  review  of
punitive awards a significant part of federal law.12

The purposes of such awards are not obscure. Sometimes
compensatory  awards  provide 
insufficient  deterrence  of
                                                                                                   
1341  (1995);  Mark  Kelman,  Yuval  Rottenstreich,  and  Amos  Tversky,
Context-Dependence  in  Legal  Decisionmaking,  25  J.  Legal  Stud.  287
(1996);  George  Loewenstein  and  Linda  Babcock,  Explaining  Bargaining
Impasse, 11 J. Econ. Persp. 109 (1997).

9 See A. Michell Polinsky and Steven Shavell, Punitive Damages: An
Economic  Analysis,  Harv  L  Rev  (1997)  (forthcoming).  In  brief,  the
difficulty  with  the  Polinsky/Shavell  suggestion—that  juries  should  decide
punitive  damage  problems  by  reference  to  the  likelihood  that  the
defendant’s  acts  will  go  undetected—is  that  it  does  not  deal  with
psychological  and  institutional  problems  that  sharply  limit  jurors’  capacity
and  willingness  to  analyze  the  punitive  damage  problem  in  the  way  they
suggest. Thus a reader might conclude from the Polinsky/Shavell analysis
that punitive damages should be assessed by an administrative agency, or
some other expert body, and not by juries or even judges. See TAN infra.

10 See the Civil Rights Act of 1991, 42 U.S.C. 1977A.
11 See Richard Blatt et al., Punitive Damages: A State by State Guide

to Law and Practice (1991).

12  See,  e.g.,  7  U.S.C.  (a)(11)(3);  7  U.S.C.  18(a)B);  7  U.S.C.  21  (b)
(10); 7 U.S.C. 25(a)(3)(B); 10 USC 2207 (a)(2); 10 USC 2409(c)(C)(2); 15
USC  1681n(2);  15  USC  1681u(i)  15  USC  2622((b)(2)(B);  18  USC
248(cc)(1)(B)); 18 USC 25209(b)(2); 18 USC 2724 (b)(2); 42 USC 300j-9;
42  USC  300a-23;  42  USC  1981a;  42  USC  3613;  42  USC  7622;  42  USC
9607; 42 USC 13981.

4

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

private behavior, simply because injured parties do not detect
and seek compensation for all injuries. Punitive damages can,
in  theory,  take  account  of  the  infrequency  of  private  suits  by
penalizing  the  defendant  to  the  point  where  it  will  undertake
optimal precautions.13 Moreover, punitive damages may have
a  retributive  or  expressive  function,  designed  to  embody
social  outrage  at  the  actions  of  serious  wrongdoers.14  They
may reflect the “sense of the community”  about the egregious
character of the defendant’s action.

law—with 

the  elaborate  network  of 

Understood in these terms, however, punitive awards raise
several  puzzles.  Such  awards  interact  in  complex  ways  with
public 
regulatory
requirements  and  criminal  prohibitions  that  overlap  with  the
tort  law.  These  requirements  and  prohibitions  also  have
deterrent, retributive, and expressive functions. It is not clear
how  they  can  best  be  brought  together  with  tort  law  to
produce a coherent whole.

In  recent  years,  the  most  important  concern  is  that
whatever their purposes, punitive damages are unpredictable,
even  “out  of  control.”15  One  study  of  47  counties  in  eleven
states  over  a  several-year  period  showed  a  high  degree  of
variability:16 Punitive damages were awarded in about 25% of
the  successful  verdict  cases  in  some  counties  and  not
awarded  at  all  in  others.17  Median  verdicts  ranged  from  less
than  $10,000  in  some  areas  to  as  much  as  $204,000  in  San
                                                                                                   
13 See William Landes & Richard Posner, The Economic Structure of

Tort Law 160-65, 184-85, 223-24 (1993); Polinsky & Shavell, supra note.

14 See David Owen, The Moral Foundations of Punitive Damages, 40
Ala L Rev 705 (1989); Marc Galanter and David Luban, Poetic Justice, 42
Am. U. L. Rev. 1393 (1993); Jean Hampton, The Retributive Idea, in Jean
Hampton and Jeffrie Murphy, Forgiveness and Mercy 111 (1988).

15  John  Jeffries,  A  Comment  on  the  Constitutionality  of  Punitive

Damages, 72 Va L Rev 139, 139 (1986).

16  Stephen  Daniels  and  Joane  Martin,  Myth  and  Reality  in  Punitive

Damages, 75 Minn L Rev 1 (1990).

17 Id. at 32.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

5

Diego.18  Another  study  showed  increasingly  large  awards
against  businesses,  from  a  total  of  $1.1  million  in  five  large
states from 1968 to 1971 to  $343 million from  1988 to 1991,
an  89-fold  increase.19  A  recent  study  finds  that  in  San
Francisco,  California  and  Cook  County,  Illinois,  punitive
damage awards increased from about $1 million during 1960-
64, to $147 million during 1985-1989, and $215 million during
1990-94.20

On  the  basis  of  evidence  of  this  kind,  many  people  have
that  punitive  awards  have  a  “lottery-like”
complained 
character21 and require legislative or judicial remedy.22 Thus it
is  said,  in  well-publicized  documents,  that  the  arbitrary
character of punitive damage awards is “news to no one,”  that
they  produce  an  affront  to  the  rule  of  law  by  “distributing
awards  in  a  random  and  capricious  manner,”23  and  that  they
should  be  subject  to  a  cap  of  three  times  the  actual  harm.24
                                                                                                   

18 Id. at 42.
19 See Turner et al., Punitive Damages Explosion, Washington Legal

Foundation, Working Paper Series No. 50 (Nov. 1992).

20  Deborah  Hensler  and  Erik  Moller,  Trends  in  Punitive  Damages:
Preliminary Data from Cook County, Illinois and San Francisco, California
(RAND  Institute  for  Civil  Justice  unrestricted  draft  series,  March  1995).
See  also  Rand  Institute  for  Civil  Justice,  Punitive  Damages  in  Financial
Injury  Verdicts  (1997)  (showing  substantial  variability  and  growth  in
punitive awards).

21  Peter  Huber,  No-Fault  Punishment,  40  Ala  L  Rev  1037,  1037

(1989).

22  See  Paul  Rubin,  John  Calfee,  and  Mark  Grady,  BMW  v.  Gore:
Mitigating  the  Punitive  Economics  of  Punitive  Damages,  1997  Supreme
Court  Economic  Review  179,  184;  E.  Donald  Elliott,  Why  Punitive
Damages  Don’t  Deter  Corporate  Misconduct  Effectively,  40  Ala.  L.  Rev.
1053,  1057  (1989).  See  the  attempted  response  in  the  Product  Liability
Reform  Act  of  1997,  S.  5,  105th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.  (1997)  (proposing  to
require a clear and convincing evidence standard and also to cap punitive
damage awards).

23 Contract with America: The Bold Plan by Rep. Newt Gingrich, Rep.
Dick  Armey,  and  The  House  Republicans  to  Change  the  Nation  154  (Ed
Gillespie and Bob Schellhas eds., 1994).

24 Id. at 147.

6

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

Congress  continues  to  debate  bills  that  would  limit  the
availability and amount of punitive damages.25

It is not difficult to understand the widespread concern with
erratic punitive damage awards. If similarly situated people—
plaintiffs  and  defendants  alike—are  not  treated  similarly,
erratic  awards  are  unfair.  As  a  matter  of  fairness,  the
evidence suggests that some awards are too low, while others
are  too  high.  From  the  standpoint  of  economic  efficiency,
unpredictable  awards  need  not  be  troublesome;  perhaps
individual  awards  cannot  be  calculated  in  advance,  but  if
people can calculate the expected value of the relevant risks,
there  should  be  no  efficiency 
If  awards  are
unpredictable, however, resources are likely to be wasted on
that calculation, and as a practical matter a risk of extremely
high  awards  is  likely  to  produce  excessive  caution  in  risk-
averse  managers  and  companies.26  Hence  unpredictable
reasonable
awards  create  both  unfairness  and 
assumptions)  inefficiency,  27  in  a  way  that  may  create
overdeterrence of desirable activity.28
                                                                                                   
25  See,  e.g.,  H.R.  956,  104th  Cong,  section  2(a)  (1995);  H.R.  955,

loss. 

(on 

104th Cong, section 8(a), (C) (1995).

26  See  Kenneth  MacCrimmon  and  Donald  Wehrung,  Taking  Risks:

The Management of Uncertaity (1986).

27 These concerns about punitive damage awards have not produced
a  consensus  that  punitive  damages  are  unpredictable.  Some  empirical
work suggests that the aggregate data show a reasonably orderly pattern,
though  the  relevant  data  can  be  interpreted  in  different  ways.  See
Theodore Eisenberg et al., The Predictability of Punitive Damages, 26 J.
Legal  Stud.  623  (1997).  A  response,  coming  to  a  different  conclusion  on
the basis of the same data, is A. Mitchell Polinsky, Are Punitive Damages
Really  Insignificant,  Predictable,  and  Rational?,  26  J.  Legal  Stud.  663
(1997).

In  their  careful  analysis,  Eisenberg  et  al.  show  that  the  logarithmic
transformation yields a distribution that is almost normal. They also show
that  the  log  of  awards  is  predicted  rather  well  from  a  set  of  objective
characteristics of cases in which such awards were made. Eisenberg et al.
conclude that the unpredictability of punitive awards has been overstated.
We  find  no  inconsistency  between  their  analyses  of  real  jury  awards  and
our  experimental  data.  Indeed,  we  agree  with  their  conclusion  that  log

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

7

Our  principal  interest  here  is  in  identifying  some  of  the
sources of unpredictability in jury judgments. On the basis of a
study of 899 jury-eligible citizens, we offer the following major
findings.

1.  People  have  a  remarkably  high  degree  of  moral
consensus on the degree of outrage and punishment that are
appropriate  for  punitive  damage  cases.29  At  least  in  the
products  liability  cases  we  offer,  this  moral  consensus,  on
what might be called  outrage and punitive intent, cuts across
differences in gender, race, income, age, and education. For
example,  our  study  shows  that  all-white,  all-female,  all-
Hispanic, all-male, all-poor, all-wealthy, all-black juries, all-old
juries,  and  all-young  juries  are  likely  to  come  to  similar
conclusions about how to rank a range of cases.

2.  This  consensus  fractures  when  the  legal  system  uses
dollars  as  the  vehicle  to  measure  moral  outrage.  Even  when
there is a consensus on punitive intent, there is no consensus
about how much in the way of dollars is necessary to produce
appropriate  suffering  in  a  defendant.  Under  existing  law,
widely  shared  and  reasonably  predictable  judgments  about
                                                                                                   
awards are fairly predictable. But defendants and plaintiffs live in a world
of  dollars,  not  of  log  dollars.  In  terms  of  dollars  the  judgments  of  our
respondents  and  of  the  juries  examined  by  Eisenberg  et  al.  are  correctly
described  as  erratic  and  unpredictable,  because  the  severe  skewness
creates  the  possibility  of  either  modest  or  disastrous  losses  in  identical
cases. This produces unfairness, because the similarly situated are treated
differently, and also might induce risk aversion even in very large firms.

28  For  relevant  evidence  see  Paul  H.  Rubin  et  al.,  BMW  v.  Gore:
Mitigating the Punitive Economics of Punitive Damages, 5 Supreme Court
Economic  Review  179,  192-96  (1997);  Richard  L.  Manning,  Products
Liability and Prescription Drug Prices in Canada and the United States, 40
J. L. & Economics 203, 210-34 (1997).

29 Two qualifications are necessary. First, this conclusion is restricted
to  the  area  we  investigate,  involving  products  liability  suits.  It  is  an  open
question  whether  the  moral  consensus  would  operate  in  areas  involving,
for  example,  sexual  harassment  and  discrimination  on  the  basis  of  race.
Second, there is a greater consensus on how to rank the scenarios than on
the “absolute”  numbers for outrage and punishment. See below.

8

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

punitive  intent  are  turned  into  highly  erratic  judgments  about
appropriate dollar punishment. A basic source of arbitrariness
with the existing system of punitive damages (and a problem
not  limited  to  the  area  of  punitive  damages)  is  the  use  of  an
unbounded dollar scale.

3.  A  modest  degree  of  additional  arbitrariness  is  created
by  the  fact  that  juries  have  a  hard  time  making  appropriate
distinctions  among  cases  in  what  we  call  “a  no-comparison
condition.”  When  one  case  is  seen  apart  from  other  cases,
people  show  a  general  tendency  to  place  it  toward  the
midpoint of any bounded scale. It is therefore less likely that
sensible  discriminations  will  be  made  among  diverse  cases.
This  effect  is,  however,  far  less  important  than  the  effect
identified in (2) in producing arbitrary awards.

The  principal  purpose  of  this  Article  is  to  set  out  and  to
elaborate  these  findings  and  to  use  them  to  develop  some
policy  reforms  in  the  area  of  punitive  damages.  Our  basic
suggestion  is  that  the  legal  system  should  enable  juries  to
engage  in  tasks  that  they  are  capable  of  performing,  and
should  not  require  juries  to  carry  out  tasks  that  they  cannot
perform  well.  Juries  are  likely  to  produce  erratic  judgments
about  dollar  amounts;  their  judgments  are  likely  to  be  much
less  erratic  when  they  are  asked  to  rank  cases  or  to  assess
the  degree  to  which  a  defendant  should  be  punished  on  a
bounded rating scale.30  Thus  there  is  reason  to  ask  whether
the civil justice system ought not to be brought more closely in
line  with  the  criminal  justice  system,  where  juries  of  course
decide  questions  of  liability,  and  judges  decide  questions
                                                                                                   
30  Of  course  there  is  a  large  question  about  the  importance  of
predictability  in  an  assessment  of  punitive  damage  awards.  Such  awards
may  be  predictable  but  nonetheless  problematic,  because  (for  example)
they are too high or too low to produce optimal deterrence, or they do not
reflect the right theory of retribution. Our focus here is on the problem of
unpredictability,  which  is  an  affront  to  the  rule  of  law  and  a  particular
problem under the due process clause and associated principles. See TAN
infra.  But  we  discuss  below  the  relationship  between  unpredictability  and
other possible problems with damage awards.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

9

about  punishment,  subject  to  guidelines  and  constraints.  If
juries  cannot  consistently  or  sensibly  “map”  their  judgments
onto  an  unbounded  dollar  scale,  might  it  follow  that  judges,
rather than juries, should be making decisions about punitive
awards?  Should  the  legal  system  shift  to  a  system  of  civil
sentencing?  Might  the  same  conclusion  make  sense  for
compensatory  awards  in  cases  in  which  dollar  awards  are
also  likely  to  be  arbitrary?  Might  the  current  system  of  civil
liability,  both  punitive  and  compensatory,  sometimes  be
displaced by an administrative process, one that can aspire to
more in the way of coherence and rationality?

The choice of reform of course depends on an assessment
of precisely what defects ought to be corrected, and thus on a
set  of  normative  judgments  about  the  problems  with  punitive
awards  in  their  current  form.  We  attempt  to  disaggregate
three possible judgments here, partly as thought experiments,
and  partly  to  raise  some  questions  about  the  appropriate
domain of populist elements in the legal system.

If  the  basic  problem  is  simple  unpredictability,  the  legal
system  might  reduce  that  problem  by  asking  juries  not  to
come  up  with  dollar  amounts,  but  to  rank  the  case  at  hand
among  a  preselected  set  of  exemplar  cases,  or  by  using  a
bounded scale of numbers rather than an unbounded scale of
dollars.  A  conversion  formula,  based  on  previously  compiled
population-wide  data,  might  be  used  to  generate  population-
wide  judgments  about  dollar  amounts.  Through  this  route,  it
would be possible to reduce variability and to ensure that jury
judgments about appropriate dollar punishments do not reflect
the likely unrepresentative views of twelve randomly selected
people,  but  those  of  the  population  as  a  whole.  The  result
would be a form of predictable populism.

If  the  basic  problem  is  that  people  cannot  sensibly  map
their  moral  judgments  onto  dollar  awards,  the  legal  system
should  provide  a  mechanism  by  which 
judges  or
administrators,  rather  than  jurors,  can  translate  the  relevant
moral  judgments  into  dollar  amounts.  It  is  reasonable  to
question  whether  ordinary  people  can  know  what  a  given

10

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

dollar  amount  would  mean  for,  or  do  to,  the  defendant  or
those  in  the  position  of  the  defendant.  On  this  view,  the  jury
should  also  rank  the  case  at  hand  in  comparison  to
preselected  cases  or  come  up  with  a  number  on  a  bounded
scale.  A  conversion  formula,  based  not  on  population-wide
data  but  on  expert  judgments  about  what  various  awards
would actually mean or do, would be used to produce rational
judgments  about  dollar  amounts.  The  result  would  be  a  form
of technocratic populism—populist in the sense that normative
judgments  of  the  jury  would  be  the  foundation  of  decision,
technocratic  in  the  sense  that  experts  would  translate  those
judgments into legal awards.

If the basic problem is that people’s  moral  judgments  are
not  the  proper  basis  for  punitive  awards,  judges  might,  in
some or all contexts, use those moral judgments as one factor
to  be  considered  among  others,  or  the  legal  system  might
dispense with jury judgments entirely in some or all contexts.
If, for example, it is believed that existing social norms are not
the  appropriate  basis  for  punishment,  or  if  deterrence  rather
than  retribution  is  the  appropriate  goal  of  punitive  damages,
an  expert  body  might  decide  on  appropriate  awards,  or  it
could  offer  general  guidance  to  trial  court  judges.  The  result
would be a form of bureaucratic rationality.

We discuss these points in some detail. We also compare
these  reform  proposals  with  other  alternatives,  including
punitive  damage  “caps,”  simple  multipliers,  greater  judicial
control  of  awards,  and  monetary  schedules  building  on  the
workers’  compensation  model.  We  suggest  that  caps  and
multipliers  have  serious  problems,  but  that  firmer  judicial
control  would  likely  be  a  desirable  and  easily  administrable
step,  at  least  if  judges  can  produce  or  work  from  monetary
schedules  or  otherwise  attempt  to  work  from  comparison
cases.  A  more  radical  reform,  with  much  promise  but  also
some risk, would involve a shift from juries to administrators,
operating  from  a  set  of  guidelines  produced  by  specialists  in
the  areas  at  hand,  subject  of  course 
to  democratic
safeguards.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

11

the 

the 

and 

Both 

findings 

empirical 

policy
recommendations have implications well beyond the problem
of punitive damages. The problem of “mapping”  onto a dollar
scale  arises  not  only  in  the  setting  of  punitive  damages,  but
also in damages for “pain and suffering,”  libel actions, sexual
harassment cases, intentional infliction of emotional distress,
administrative penalties, and judgments about the appropriate
focus  of  the  regulatory  state.  About  one-half  of  tort  law
involves  monetary  awards  for  injuries  that  are  hard  to
monetize.31 From our findings, it is reasonable to infer that the
phenomenon  of  shared  judgments  and  erratic  or  arbitrary32
dollar amounts create a serious and unaddressed problem in
many  areas.    Very  typically,  juries  and  judge  are  mapping
judgments onto an unbounded dollar scale; the phenomenon
of  widespread  and  predictable  judgments,  combined  with  the
demonstrable  cognitive  difficulty  of  translating  preferences
and values into dollar amounts, has wide-ranging implications
for the operation of both private and public law.

Most generally, our findings raise a simple question: How
can the normative goals of the legal system be made to mesh
with  what  is,  or  might  be,  known  about  human  psychology?
This is a large and unanswered question. We attempt to make
some progress on it here.

III  outlines  our  study  and 

This  Article  comes  in  six  parts.  Part  II  outlines  existing
understandings  about  punitive  damages,  showing  how  the
sources  of  variable  judgments  are  relevant  to  constitutional
issues  and  also  to  existing  theories  of  deterrence  and
the  basic
retribution.  Part 
conclusions.  Part 
recommendations
IV  presents  policy 
designed  to  provide  a  role  for  community  judgments  without
the  “noise”  and  arbitrariness  that  accompany  the  current
system.  What  is  important  is  not  the  details  of  the  proposals
                                                                                                   
31 See W. Kip Viscusi, Reforming Products Liability 102-104 (1993).
32 They may be arbitrary either in the sense of erratic or in the sense
of a product of a normatively questionable “anchor”  on which the jury has
seized. See TAN infra.

12

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

but  their  basic  goal  and  direction:  to  provide  juries  with  an
opportunity  to  do  what  they  are  capable  of  doing  relatively
well, without requiring juries to do what they are bound to do
badly.

in  contexts 

the  general  problem  of 

Part V briefly discusses some analogies and implications,
jury
dealing  above  all  with 
determination  of  dollar  amounts 
in  which
monetization  is  unfamiliar  and  difficult.  We  show  how  an
evaluation  of  appropriate 
to
compensatory  awards  call  for  an  ambitious  decision  about
role 
of
“compensation”  judgments—or,  in  other  words,  a  decision
about what the vexing idea of “compensation”  should be taken
to mean. We also outline a possible research agenda to see
how  actual  or  potential  descriptive  findings  in  psychology
might bear on the normative goals of the legal system. Part VI
is a conclusion.

reforms  with 

technocratic 

ingredients 

populist 

respect 

and 

of 

II. DETERRENCE, RETRIBUTION, AND THE CONSTITUTION

A. Policy Notes

It is not our purpose to resolve the debate about whether
and  why  a  court  should  award  punitive  damages.33  Our
modest  goal  is  to  outline  some  of  the  relevant  arguments  by
way of introduction. It is important to provide those arguments
here,  since  they  provide  the  foundation  for  the  constitutional
law  governing  punitive  damage  awards,  and  because  the
arguments play a large role in our empirical study.
                                                                                                   
33  Relevant  discussions  include  Polinsky  and  Shavell,  supra  note;
Dorsey Ellis, Fairness and Efficiency in the Law of Punitive Damages, 56
Southern  Cal.  L.  Rev.  1  (1982);  Robert  Cooter,  Economic  Analysis  of
Punitive Damages, 56 S. Cal. L. Rev. 79 (1982); Robert Cooter, Punitive
Damages for Deterrence, 40 Alabama L. Rev. 1143 (1989); David Owen,
The Moral Foundations of Punitive Damages, 40 Ala. L. Rev. 705 (1989);
Marc  Galanter  and  David  Luban,  Poetic  Justice,  42  Am.  L.  Rev.  1393
(1993).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

13

The traditional view is that punitive awards serve deterrent
and  retributive  goals.  Thus  a  standard  jury  instruction  says,
“In  determining  whether  or  not  you  should  award  punitive
damages,  you  should  bear  in  mind  that  the  purpose  of  such
an  award  is  to  punish  the  wrongdoer  and  to  deter  that
wrongdoer  from  repeating  such  wrongful  acts.  In  addition,
such  damages  are  also  designed  to  serve  as  a  warning  to
others,  and  to  prevent  others  from  committing  such  wrongful
acts.”34

there 

1. Deterrence
(a)  Conventional  arguments.  With  respect  to  the  goal  of
deterrence, 
is  a  simple  and  standard  economic
argument for punitive damages: Compensatory damages work
well  for  deterrence  if  and  only  if  it  is  easy  to  identify  and  to
bring  suit  against  the  injurer,  and  to  collect  full  damages.
Under  these  conditions,  the  wrongdoer  faces  liability  for  the
full  social  costs  of  the  wrong.  Thus  there  is  no  need  for
additional  damages 
the  probability  of  detection  and
successful suit for compensation is 100%. But sometimes it is
difficult  to  identify  the  injurer,  perhaps  because  the  tort  has
occurred  surreptitiously.  In  such  cases,  adequate  deterrence
will not be provided, since wrongdoers will be able to continue
to  engage  in  conduct  whose  social  costs  exceed  social
benefits. Punitive damages are necessary to pick up the slack
for undetected wrongdoers.35

if 

that 

the  award  of  compensatory  damages 

Under  this  view,  the  goal  of  punitive  damages  is  to
is
ensure 
supplemented  by  an  amount  reflecting  the  fact  that  the
probability  of  that  award  is  less  than  100%.  The  simplest
conclusion  is  that  total  damages  should  be  the  harm
multiplied  by  the  reciprocal  of  the  probability  than  the
                                                                                                   
34 Ronald Eades, Jury Instructions of Damages in Tort Actions 98 (3d

ed. 1995).

35  See  William  Landes  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Economic
Structure  of  Tort  Law  160-65  (1987);  Polinsky  &  Shavell,  Punitive
Damages: An Economic Analysis, Harv L. Rev, forthcoming.

14

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

defendant  will  be  found  liable  when  he  should  be  found
liable; punitive damages would then consist of the excess of
total  damages  over  compensatory  damages.36  We  will
suggest  some  institutional  and  psychological  reasons  to
doubt that jurors can or will make judgments of this kind; let
us continue the simple account for now.

With  some  torts—medical  malpractice  is  an  obvious
example—it  is  very  plausibly  the  case  that  many  defendants
will  be  able  to  avoid  compensatory  damages.  When  the
defendant has been able to conceal his identity, or otherwise
to  escape  being  sued,  there  is  therefore  good  reason  to
award punitive damages. Interestingly, this analysis supports
a  relatively  high  punitive  damages  award  in  the  BMW  case
(discussed below), because it is not easy to detect fraudulent
repaintings  of  cars.  But  in  cases  in  which  the  probability  of
detection  and  suit  is  extremely  high,  punitive  damages  make
far  less  sense.  This  may  be  true,  for  example,  of  certain
homicides and assaults.

From  the  standpoint  of  optimal  deterrence,  there  is  a
second  possible  reason  to  award  punitive  damages.  There
may  be  cases  in  which  a  social  judgment  has  been,  and
should be, made that certain subjective gains ought not to be
allowed  to  count  at  all.37  If  someone  has  gained  utility  from
murder,  rape,  assault,  or  sexual  harassment,  it  might  be
thought—reasonably  enough—that  that  gain  should  not  be
permitted  to  count.  Of  course  the  argument  that  such  gains
should  not  count  is  not  itself  an  economic  judgment,  but  it  is
not  hard  to  imagine  defenses  of  that  argument.38  Punitive
damages are necessary to offset the utility gain that is judged
illicit. Compensatory damages are inadequate, in such cases,
                                                                                                   
36 See Polinsky & Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic Analysis,

Harv. L. Rev., forthcoming.

37 Some utilitarians make just this argument. See the discussion of the
exclusion  of  sadistic  or  malicious  preferences  in  John  Harsanyi,  Morality
and  the  Theory  of  Rational  Behavior,  in  Utilitarianism  and  Beyond  39
(Amartya Sen and Bernard Williams eds. 1982)

38 See id.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

15

because  they  do  not  have  this  effect;  they  require  the
defendant  to  internalize  the  victim’s  costs  without  also
eliminating the hedonic effects of the defendant’s benefits.

A  third  possible  reason  for  punitive  damages  stems  from
the fact that sometimes compensatory damages may be lower
than they should be, and sometimes it is especially costly for
courts  to  calculate  compensatory  damages.  If  compensatory
awards  are  systematically  low,  and  if  calculation  costs  are
high,  the  amount  awarded  for  punitive  damages  may  move
the legal system closer to optimal deterrence.39 Of course this
argument  has  a  degree  of  speculativeness  and  also
crudeness,  because  it  is  unlikely  that  punitive  damages  can
be  calibrated  with  sufficient  precision  to  make  up  for  the
shortfall 
is
reasonable to think that punitive damages bring the incentives
of wrongdoers closer to where they should be.

in  compensatory  damages.  But  perhaps 

it 

On this view, intentional torts, involving deliberate infliction
of  an  injury,  may  well  provide  good  cases  for  punitive
damages.  Of  course  it  is  in  such  cases  that  socially  illicit
gains  are  most  likely  to  be  involved.  In  such  cases,  the
probability of obtaining damages from the injurer may well be
less  than  100%;  intentional  torts  frequently  (though  not
always)  involve  a  form  of  concealment.  But  an  important
implication  is  that  punitive  damages  generally  do  not  make
sense for highly visible torts where the probability of detection
and  compensation  is  extremely  high;  there,  compensatory
damages are all that is required.40

(b)  Puzzles  and  problems.  Even  from  the  economic  point
of  view,  these  arguments  for  punitive  damages  raise  some
serious  puzzles.  An  important  question,  not  yet  taken  up  in
the economic literature, is the relation between  this rationale
for  punitive  damages  and  the  existence  of  other  regulatory
controls,  for  example  those  created  by  administrative  and
criminal  law.  Both  administrative  and  criminal  law  are  often
                                                                                                   

39 See Landes and Posner, supra note, at 160.
40 See id.; Polinsky and Shavell, supra note.

16

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

to  compensate 

defended  as  an  effort 
for  private
underenforcement of law;41 if the tort system also attempts to
pick  up  the  slack  via  punitive  damages,  overdeterrence  may
well  result.  A  system  containing  compensatory  and  punitive
damages  may  be  both  necessary  and  sufficient  taken  by
itself, but if it is complemented by administrative and criminal
law, it is likely to become incoherent.

There  is  an  independent  point,  closely  related  to  our
findings  here.  Even  without  administrative  and  criminal  law,
efforts to impose punitive damages may well misfire because
of the inevitable confusion or cognitive and motivational errors
of  jurors  and  judges.  There  is  thus  a  question  whether  real-
world  institutions  should  or  can  reliably  engage  in  the
enterprise of seeking to obtain optimal deterrence even if they
seek to do so. That enterprise is very costly, and the costs of
decision  may  argue  in  favor  of  some  other  system  for
juries  will  not
calculating  punitive  damages.  Perhaps 
understand the inquiry into optimal deterrence; perhaps it will
be  too  costly  to  give  them  the  relevant  understanding;
perhaps they will refuse to undertake that inquiry even if they
are asked to do so. We return to these issues below.

A  general  problem  is  that  if  juries  are  not  thinking  in
economic terms, they may award large punitive damages in a
way  that  deters  desirable  activity  (or  award  small  punitive
damages in a way that produces insufficient deterrence). With
large awards, activity that produces benefits as well as costs
may  be  stopped  or  significantly  reduced,  with  possible
adverse  effects  on  safety  and  health  itself.42  It  is  for  this
                                                                                                   
41  See,  e.g.,  Richard  A.  Posner,  Economic  Analysis  of  Law  220  (4th
ed.  1994).  A  general  discussion  is  Edward  Rubin,  Punitive  Damages:
Reconceptualizing  the  Runcible  Remedies  of  Common  Law,  Wisconsin
Law Review (forthcoming 1997).

42  Thus  there  is  a  possibility  here  of  health-health  tradeoffs,  which
occur  when  a  strategy  designed  to  reduce  health  risks  actually  increases
health  risks.  Some  punitive  damage  awards  may  actually  have  adverse
health  effects,  if  they  serve  to  increase  prices.  For  a  recent  discussion,
see Richard L. Manning, Products Liability and Prescription Drug Prices in

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

17

reason  that  the  strongest  cases  involve  intentional  torts,  and
the  weakest  case  involves  negligence.  In  cases  involving
negligence,  punitive  damages  would  be  likely  to  reduce
desirable  activity.  This  is  much  less  likely  for  intentional
wrongdoing,  where  desirable  activity  by  hypothesis  is  not  at
issue. Reckless behavior is of course an intermediate case.

For  those  interested  in  optimal  deterrence,  a  particularly
important  dispute  is  whether,  on  economic  grounds,  the
wealth or income of the defendant should matter.43 As we will
explain,  our  findings  suggest  that  the  defendant’s  wealth  is
likely  to  be  an  important  variable  in  actual  damage  awards,
though  it  plays  little  or  no  role  in  people’s  judgments  about
outrageousness  or  appropriate  punishment  on  a  bounded
numerical  scale.44  The  Supreme  Court  has  said  that  wealth
and  income  can  be  taken  into  account.45  On  a  conventional
view about optimal deterrence, however, wealth and income is
irrelevant.  Properly  calculated  by  reference  to  the  probability
of  punishment  and  the  need  to  counteract  illicit  gains,  a
punitive  damages  award  should  encourage  a  defendant  to
                                                                                                   
Canada and the United States, 40 J. L. & Economics 203, 210-34 (1997).
For general discussion, see John Graham and Jonathan Weiner, Risk vs.
Risk  (1996);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Health-Health  Tradeoffs,  63  U.  Chi.  L.
Rev.  1533  (1996).  Evidence  of  such  effects,  in  the  particular  context  of
punitive  damages,  can  be  found  in  Paul  Rubin,  John  Calfee,  and  Mark
Grady,  BMW  v.  Gore:  Mitigating  the  Punitive  Economics  of  Punitive
Damages, 1997 Supreme Court Review 179, 192-96.

43  For  the  view  that  wealth  should  be  irrelevant,  see  Kemezy  v.
Peters,  79  F.3d  22  (7th  Cir.  1996);  Kenneth  Abraham  and  John  Jeffries,
Punitive  Damages  and  the  Rule  of  Law,  18  J.  Legal  Stud.  415  (1989);
Ellis,  supra  note,  at  61-63;  Polinsky  and  Shavell,  supra  note.  For  an
argment  the  other  way,  see  Jennifer  Arlen,  Should  Defendants’  Wealth
Matter?, 21 J. Legal Stud. 413, 414 (1992) (discussing deterrence of risk-
averse people).

44 See TAN supra. Compare  Robert MacCoun, infra note 45.
45 See infra. Cf. Robert MacCoun, Differential Treatment of Corporate
Defendants  by  Juries,  30  Law  &  Society  Review  121,  133-39  (1996)
(finding  effects  from  corporate  identity  and  commercial  activity,  but  not
from wealth per se).

18

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

engage  in  optimal  behavior,  whatever  its  wealth  (assuming
risk  neutrality).46  But  there  is  a  question  whether  this  is
realistic; we take up this issue below.

2. Retribution
Thus far we have spoken in terms of deterrence; but under
conventional  noneconomic  analysis,  punitive  damages  also
have an expressive or retributive purpose. They are designed
to punish as well as to deter. Juries believe that such awards
express the community’s outrage at certain forms of behavior,
and judges’  instructions encourage juries to think in precisely
these 
that
provided  here,47  suggests  that  juries  are  not  attempting  to
promote optimal deterrence but instead to punish wrongdoing
with,  at  most,  a  signal  designed  to  ensure  that  certain
misconduct “will not happen again.”

fact  empirical  evidence, 

including 

terms. 

In 

Regrettably,  the  legal  culture  lacks  a  careful  normative
account  of  the  relationship  between  retributive  goals  and
punitive  damages.  Those  who  emphasize  retribution  are
seeking to ensure that the community’s outrage about certain
acts  is  reflected  in  punishment.  Probably  the  retributive  idea
would focus on two principal factors: the defendant’s state  of
mind  and  the  degree  of  harm  actually  caused  or  likely  to  be
caused  by  defendant’s  behavior.  The  first  point  is  especially
important.  Retributists  who  are  moral  egalitarians48  attempt,
through  civil  or  criminal  punishment,  to  capture  the  intuition
that certain intentional states are especially bad because they
reflect  abhorrent  and  false  views  about  the  moral  worth  of
persons.49  In  cases  where  one  person  murders  another,  or
                                                                                                   
46  See  Landes  and  Posner,  supra  note,  at  163-64;  Polinsky  and

Shavell, supra note.

47 See TAN infra.
48 Of course retributivists need not be egalitarians; we could imagine
retributists  who  thought  that  harms  against  some  persons  deserve  less
punishment than harms against other persons.

49  See  Jean  Hampton,  The  Retributive  Idea,  in  Jean  Hampton  and

Jeffrie Murphy, Forgiveness and Mercy 111 (1988).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

19

acts with gross negligence that produces another’s death, the
wrongdoer  reveals  a  belief  that  some  people  do  not  matter
very much.50 Public outrage is the appropriate response.

In this sense retribution, properly understood, embodies a
principle  of  moral  equality.  The  award  of  punitive  damages
can also be taken to have an expressive function; it expresses
the community’s outrage at certain kinds of conduct, in a way
that  is  intended  both  to  reflect  and  to  entrench  the  relevant
social  norms.  This  idea  connects  the  award  of  punitive
damages with their historical origins in affronts to the honor of
the victims.51  With  this  understanding  it  is  not  surprising  that
punitive  damages  have  come  to  be  awarded  for  sexual
harassment  and  for  other  violations  of  civil  rights  statutes;52
the  relevant  community  now  believes  that  these  kinds  of
illegality  reflect  an  especially  bad  state  of  mind,  and  hence
that  punitive  damages  are  a  necessary  supplement  to  other
sanctions.  The  defendant  must  be  punished  accordingly.  In
any event the retributive idea suggests that the most serious
cases for punitive damage awards thus involve harms that are
both  grave  in  degree  and  affirmatively  desired  by  the
defendant,  as,  for  example,  in  examples  of  homicide  or
assault.

We  connect  these  factors  to  the  psychology  of  punitive
damage awards in the discussion below. The central point is
that  if  retribution  is  the  goal  of  punitive  damage  awards,  it  is
important to ensure that juries are asked questions that allow
them  to  express,  in  a  rational  and  coherent  manner,  their
                                                                                                   
50 See id.; Jean Hampton, Correcting Harms Versus Righting Wrongs:
The Goal of Retribution, 39 UCLA L Rev 1659 (1992). Hampton discusses
punitive  damage  awards  in  particular  in  id.  at  1687-89;  see  also  the
illuminating discussion in Marc Galanter and David Luban, Poetic Justice:
Punitive  Damages  and  Legal  Pluralism,  42  Am  Univ  L  Rev  1393  (1993)
(connecting  punitive  awards  with  retributive  goals  and  community
outrage).

51  See  Dorsey  Ellis,  Fairness  and  Efficiency  in  the  Law  of  Punitive

Damages, 56 S Cal L Rev 2, 14-15 (1982).

52 See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. 1977A.

20

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

sense  of  outrage  and  their  judgments  about  appropriate
punishment.  The  question  then  becomes  whether  dollar
amounts  are  a  sensible  register  of  that  sense  and  those
judgments.

B. The Constitution and Punitive Damages

1. Options
What  is  the  relationship  between  the  award  of  punitive
damages  and  the  Constitution?  Because  punitive  damage
awards  have  been  so  controversial,  and  because 
the
Supreme  Court  has  been  effectively  forced  to  evaluate  a
range  of  punitive  damage  judgments,  this  question  has
become  one  of  the  more  complex  and  pressing  in  modern
constitutional  law.  There  are  three  possible  answers:  (a)
Punitive damages awards are always constitutional. (b) Such
awards are unconstitutional, as violations of the due process
clause  in  its  substantive  dimension,  when  they  are  “grossly
excessive.” 
(c)  Such  awards  are  unconstitutional,  as
violations  of  the  due  process  clause  in  its  procedural
dimension, when they are too likely to be arbitrary, because,
for  example,  they  are  unaccompanied  by  procedures  that
sufficiently confine the discretion of the jury. Our findings here
are  directed  principally  toward  proposition  (c)  and  to  the
general  question  whether,  why,  and  in  what  sense  punitive
damage  awards  are  likely  to  be  unpredictable  and  arbitrary.
The constitutional judgment overlaps with the more mundane
work  of  district  judges  and  appellate  courts,  which  set  aside
many punitive awards (as high as 20%) as arbitrary because
out  of  step  with  the  facts  of  the  case  or  with  comparison
cases.53

A  majority  of  the  Supreme  Court  has  recently  converged
on proposition (b), though  propositions (a) and (c) have also
received significant support, and though (c) is highly likely to
be a prime area for future contestation.54 In fact the majority’s
                                                                                                   

53 See cases cited in notes infra.
54 BMW of North America v. Gore, 116 S. Ct. 1589 (1996).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

21

recent 

endorsement  of  a  version  of  (b)  is  accompanied  by  an
understanding that a major problem with excessive awards is
that  they  fail  to  provide  sufficient  predictability.55  Hence  a
majority  of 
justices—most  prominently  Justices
O’Connor and Breyer, but at different times also Chief Justice
Rehnquist  and  Justices  Souter,  White,  Brennan,  Marshall,
Stevens, Kennedy, and Blackmun—have argued that the due
process clause requires constraints on jury discretion that will
provide  fair  notice  and  limit  the  role  of  arbitrary  or  irrelevant
factors.  The  Court  has  not  given  much  of  an  account  of  how
juries  might  be  led  in  the  direction  of  arbitrariness  or
unpredictability;  our  findings  offer  the  elements  of  such  an
account, one that attempts to specify and model some of the
concerns voiced by Justices O’Connor and Breyer.

In  a  series  of  early  cases  the  Court  refused  to  set  aside
punitive  damage  awards  as  inconsistent  with  the  excessive
fines and due process clauses.56 But it left open the possibility
that  in  an  extreme  case,  an  award  would  be  constitutionally
unacceptable  under  the  due  process  clause.  Thus  the
punitive damages decisions have refused to endorse the rule,
proposed  most  insistently  by  Justice  Scalia,57  that  the
Constitution imposes no constraints on what juries may do in
this  context.  Instead  the  Court  left  open  the  possibility  of  a
substantive due process limitation on excessive awards. The
Court  stressed  the  possibility  of  a  successful  claims  on  the
basis  of  substantive  rather  than  procedural  due  process
insofar as the Court emphasized that the problem would arise
if  the  relevant  award  was  unjustifiably  large  or  “excessive”—
rather than if the procedure that produced those awards was
unreliable.  There 
to  capital
punishment,  where  there  is  a  similar  judgment  to  be  made
                                                                                                   

is  a  clear  parallel  here 

55 Id. at 1604; id at 1605-07 (Breyer, J., concurring).
56  TXO  Producton  v.  Alliance,  509  US  443  (1993);  Pacific  Mutual  v.

Haslip, 499 US 1 (1991).

dissenting).

57  See  BMW  of  North  America  v.  Gore,  116  S.  Ct.  1589  (Scalia,  J.,

22

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

insufficiently 

about whether the problem with the death penalty is that it is
sometimes or always excessive or instead that it is produced
by 
reliable  procedures.  After  seriously
considering  both  routes,  the  Court  eventually  converged  on
the procedural option, and it is possible that this will happen
with punitive damage awards as well. And as we will see, the
choice of substantive rather than procedural due process is of
great 
importance;  empirical  evidence  suggests  some
advantages to the procedural route.

2. Repainted cars
For constitutional purposes, the key case is BMW of North
America  v.  Gore.58  In  that  case,  Dr.  Gore  sought  punitive
damages because his new BMW had actually been repainted,
and  he  was  not  informed  of  this  fact.  The  jury  granted  an
award of punitive damages of four million dollars, an amount
that  seemed  well  out  of  line  with  the  $4000  compensatory
damages  award.  Presented  by  this  disparity,  the  Court  ruled
for  the  first  time  that  an  award  of  punitive  damages  violates
the  due  process  clause.  But  there  was  an  internal  division.
The  opinion  for  the  five-member  majority  spoke  in  terms  of
excessiveness  and  hence  substantive  due  process,59  though
with subthemes of federalism and fair notice. Justice Breyer’s
concurring  opinion  was  procedurally  oriented.60  The  four
dissenting  justices  seemed  to  say  that  no  punitive  damage
award could ever violate the due process clause;61 part of the
impetus  for  their  opinion  was  to  impose  good  incentives  on
democratic  branches  to  take  care  of  the  problem.62  It  is
worthwhile  to  spend  some  time  with  the  opinions,  to  show
                                                                                                   

58 116 S. Ct. 1589 (1996).
59 Id. at 1598-1604.
60 Id. at 1605-09.
61 Id. at 1610-1614 (Scalia, J., joined by Thomas, J., dissenting); id. at

1614-1618 (Ginsburg, J., joined by the Chief Justice, dissenting).

62  Compare  the  idea  of  a  penalty  default  in  the  law  of  contracts  and
statutory  construction.  See  note  supra;  see  also  Ian  Ayres  and  Robert
Gertner, Filling Gaps in Incomplete Contracts, 99 Yale LJ 87 (1989).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

23

where our findings about jury judgments connect with existing
law.

In  finding  the  award  grossly  excessive,  the  Court  began
with the suggestion that a state may not impose sanctions on
law-violators  with  the  goal  of  changing  the  violators’ 
lawful
conduct  in  other  states.  The  Court  made  clear  that  a  state
may  not  attempt  to  change  a  company’s  policies  in  other
states if those policies are not unlawful in those other states;
and  though  it  left  some  ambiguity  on  this  point,  it  suggested
that  a  state  may  impose  punitive  damages  only  in  order  to
protect its own consumers and its own economy. In a crucial
passage,  the  Court  also  said  that  the  due  process  clause
requires not merely fair notice of what is criminal but also fair
notice  “of  the  severity  of  the  penalty  that  a  State  may
impose.”63  In  finding  that  BMW  did  not  receive  adequate
notice  of  the  magnitude  of  the  sanction  that  Alabama  might
impose, the Court referred to three “guideposts”:64 the degree
of  reprehensibility  of  the  nondisclosure;  the  relation  between
harm  and  potential  harm  on  the  one  hand  and  the  punitive
damages award on the other; and the difference between the
punitive  award  and  available  penalties 
for  comparable
misconduct.  Taking  these  guideposts  together,  the  Court
found 
the  award  unconstitutional  because  “grossly
excessive.”

The first factor, in the  Court’s  view,  is  an  effort  to  ensure
some  proportionality,  in  which  damages  reflect  the  extent  of
the  offense.65  Here  retributive  goals  appear  central.  In  the
Court’s view, this was a serious problem with the jury’s award,
because  no  special  aggravating  considerations  were  present
in Gore’s case. The injury was purely economic. There was no
effect  on  performance  or  safety  of  the  car,  or  even  its
appearance for a significant period. There was no indifference
to  or  reckless  disregard  for  health  and  safety.  The  failure  to
                                                                                                   

63 116 S. Ct. at 1598.
64 Id.
65 Id. at 1599.

24

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

disclose  the  relevant  material  was  very  plausibly  a  wrong,
especially insofar as it formed part of a national pattern, but it
was  not  a  matter  of  outrageous  behavior,  deliberate  false
statements,  concealment  of  evidence  of  improper  motive,  or
affirmative misconduct.66

to  actual 

In  discussing  the  second  factor,  the  Court  said  that  the
ratio  of  punitive  damages 
(or  potential)
compensatory  damages  was  especially  bad:  over  500  to  1.
This was worse than that in previous cases.67 Importantly, the
Court  did  not  say  that  the  ratio  would  be  decisive.  If  an
especially  egregious  act  produced  a  small  amount  of
economic  damage,  high  punitive  damages  would  be
legitimate;  so  too  where  “the  injury  is  hard  to  detect  or  the
monetary  value  of  noneconomic  harm  might  have  been
difficult to determine.”68 But 500 to 1 is “breathtaking.”69

Third,  the  civil  and  criminal  penalties  that  could  be
imposed  for  comparable  misconduct  were  far  more  limited,
involving, for example, a maximum civil penalty for deceptive
trade  practices  of  $2000.70  Thus  the  punitive  damage  award
was  quite  inconsistent  with  legislative  judgments  about  the
relevant conduct as seen in other areas of the law. The point
matters  as  a  means  of  checking  jury  determinations  against
the assessments of democratically elected legislatures.

In  a  concurring  opinion  joined  by  Justices  O’Connor  and
Souter, Justice Breyer pressed some different points, drawing
on the basic principle of fair notice.71 For Justice Breyer, the
most  serious  problem 
the  case  was  not  sheer
excessiveness  but  the  absence  of  legal  standards  that  could
                                                                                                   

in 

66 Id. at 1601.
67 Id. at 1601. Compare the Haslip case, involving a ratio of over 4 to
1, Pacific Mutual Insurance Co. v. Haslip, 499 US 1 (1991), and also that
in TXO Production Corp. v. Alliance Resources Corp., 509 US 443 (1993),
involving a ratio of 10 to 1.

68 Id. at 1602.
69 Id. at 1603.
70 Id.
71 Id. at 1605.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

25

reduce  decisionmaker  discretion  and  hence  caprice.  The
central  problem,  for  Justice  Breyer,  was  unlimited  jury
discretion. Here the relevant standards “are vague and open-
ended to the point where they risk arbitrary results.”72 The jury
operated  under  no  statute  with  standards  distinguishing
among permissible punitive damage awards. In the  Green Oil
case,73 decided in 1989, Alabama set out seven factors to be
used  by  appellate  courts  to  constrain  punitive  damages
awards.  These  included:  a  reasonable  relation  to  actual  and
likely  harm;  degree  of  reprehensibility;  removal  of  profit;  the
financial position of the defendant; costs of litigation and need
to create incentives for private litigants; the imposition, or not,
of  criminal  sanctions  on  the  defendant;  and  the  existence  of
mitigation  from  other  civil  penalties.74  In  this  case,  however,
the  seven  factors  were  not  applied  in  a  way  that  made  for
actual constraint. Nor have the state courts made any effort to
discipline those factors in such a way as to generate a legally
constraining standard. In so saying, Justice Breyer referred to
the  economic  test  referred  to  above,  in  particular  to  the
possibility  of  permitting  “juries  to  calculate  punitive  damages
by  making  a  rough  estimate  of  global  harm,  dividing  that
estimate  by  a  similarly  rough  estimate  of  the  number  of
lawsuits  that  would  likely  be  brought,  and  adding  generous
attorneys  frees  and  other  costs.”75  Here  there  was  no
evidence  that  the  Alabama  Supreme  Court  applied  “any
economic theory”  to explain the $2 million recovery.76 Nor was
there  a  community  understanding  or  historic  practice  that
would  provide  background  standards  exemplified  in  that
recovery. The general problem lay in the violation of the Rule
                                                                                                   

72 Id. at 1608.
73 Green Oil Co. v. Hornsby, 539 So.2d 218 (Ala. 1989).
74 Id. at 223.
75 116 S. Ct. at 1607.
76 Id.

26

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

of  Law.  “The  upshot  is  that  the  rules  that  purport  to  channel
discretion in this kind of case, here did not do so in fact.”77

Thus  Justice  Breyer’s  opinion  can  be  understood  as
connecting  the  outcome  in  BMW  with  void  for  vagueness
cases78  and  the  constitutional  attack  on  the  death  penalty  in
in
Furman  v.  Georgia.79  The  central  problem 
unconstrained  discretion.  For  Justice  Breyer,  the  outcome  in
the BMW case is not best understood simply by reference to
excessiveness. We will refer to Justice Breyer’s approach in a
number  of  places  below.  The  problems  identified  here
connect  directly  with  his  procedural  concerns;  but  they  also
suggest  a  distinctive  source  of  discretion,  one  very  different
from that emphasized in his opinion. 80
                                                                                                   

lies 

77 Id. at 1609.
78 See, e.g., Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville, 405 US 156 (1972).
79 408 US 238 (1972).
80 Two other cases should be briefly discussed. In Pacific Mutual Life
Insurance  Co.  v.  Haslip,  499  US  1  (1991),  Haslip  complained  of  the
lapsing  of  his  health  insurance  policy  as  a  result  of  misconduct  by  one
Ruffin,  an  agent  for  Pacific  Mutual  and  also  for  another,  unaffiliated
company.  Ruffin  had  misappropriated  premiums  issued  by  Haslip’s
employer  for  payment  to  the  other  insurer.  The  trial  court  instructed  the
jury that it could award punitive damages against Pacific Mutual if it found
liability for fraud. The jury awarded a general verdict of $1,040,000, with a
likely  division  of  $200,000  for  compensatory  damages  and  $840,000  for
punitive  damages.  The  Court  held  that  the  award  was  acceptable:  the
instructions  referred  to  deterrent  and  redistributive  goals,  pointed  to  the
character  and  degree  of  the  wrong,  and  excluded  evidence  of  Pacific
Mutual’s wealth; the Supreme Court of Alabama had established post-trial
procedures  for  scrutinizing  punitive  damage  awards;  and  that  Supreme
Court  provided  an  additional  check  by  examining  whether  there  is  a
reasonable  relation  between  the  award  the  actual  and  likely  harm,  the
degree  and  duration  of  the  defendant’s  conduct,  the  defendant’s  state  of
mind,  any  concealment  by  the  defendant,  and  the  frequency  of  past
similar conduct; the profitability to the defendant; and other factors. Id. at
17-20.

The  Court  was  badly  divided  over  the  damage  award  in  TXO
Production Corp. v. Alliance Resources Corp., 509 U.S. 443 (1993). TXO
had been held liable for $19,000 in actual damages as a result of having
slandered  Alliance’s  title;  the  jury  also  awarded  $10  million  in  punitive

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

27

C. Valuation, Variability, and Constraints

the 

After  BMW,  and  the  unruly  precedents  on  which  it  is
based, 
law  governing  constitutional  constraints  on
punitive  damage  awards  is  in  a  state  of  considerable
uncertainty  and  flux.81  It  is  clear  that  due  process  questions
are  raised  by  any  awards  that  are  unaccompanied  by
limitations  on  jury  discretion  and  that  exhibit  striking  ratios
between  punitive  damages  and  compensatory  damages  (of,
say, 10 to 1 or more). It is equally clear that striking ratios are
not  (and  should  not  be)  decisive,  that  a  jury  is  entitled  to
consider the wealth of the defendant, and that a plaintiff might
be  able  to  eliminate  constitutional  doubts  by  showing,  for
example, that the likely harm was higher than the actual harm,
that the defendant engaged in a long course of misconduct, or
that the defendant’s state of mind was especially bad. And in
Honda  Motor  Co.  v.  Oberg,82  the  Court  held,  in  a  way  that
bears a good deal on our study, that the due process clause
requires judicial review of the size of punitive damage awards,
to  ensure  that  they  are  not  arbitrary  or  excessive.  The  Court
said that a state that failed to provide judicial review violated
                                                                                                   
damages. The Court upheld the award. Justice Stevens, writing as well for
Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justice Blackmun, wrote the plurality opinion,
holding  that  the  TXO  award  was  not  excessive  merely  because  the
potential  harm  was  much  higher  than  the  actual  harm.  Id.  at  459-62.  If
TXO had succeeded, it could have produced a multimillion dollar reduction
in its own royalty obligations to Alliance, and Alliance could have suffered
a multimillion dollar loss. Id. at 462. In any case TXO’s pattern of behavior
threatened  millions  of  dollars  in  losses  to  others.  Id.  Thus  there  was  no
grotesque disparity between punitive damages and threatened harm. In a
lengthy  dissenting  opinion,  Justice  O’Connor,  mostly  joined  by  Justices
White  and  Souter,  complained  about  the  procedures  underlying  the  $10
million award, which, in her view, raised a serious risk of arbitrariness. Id.
at 474.

81  See,  e.g.,  Kim  v.  Nash  Finch  Co.,  1997  US  App  LEXIS  22511

(1997); Mathie v. Fries, 1997 US App LEXIS 19874 (2d Cir. 1997).

82 512 U.S. 415 ((1994).

28

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

procedural due process, because it risked a “lawless, biased,
or arbitrary”  result.83

But all this leaves many open questions. It is hardly certain
that the Court will embark on the project of creating a detailed
form  of  constitutional  “common  law” 
to  control  punitive
damages. But the BMW case practically forces lower courts to
begin to do exactly that, and this is what is now emerging.84

What  the  Court  lacks,  and  what  bears  on  constitutional
controls, is an understanding of the source of jury variability.
Where jurors’  judgments range over a wide range, what is the
reason?  Are  jurors  reacting  to  fine-grained  judgments  about
particular  cases?  What  is  the  source  of  unpredictable  or
erratic judgments? What strategies might work, or fail to work,
in  counteracting  the  problem?  These  are  the  questions  on
which we will try to make some progress here.

The answers do not bear only on constitutional law. As a
practical matter, nonconstitutional law is far more important as
a means of controlling punitive damage awards. What are the
standards  for  judicial  review  of  punitive  awards?  Appellate
the
courts,  admittedly  with  constitutional  pressure 
background, are often in the business of deciding whether to
reduce punitive damage awards as unreasonable.85  In  fact  a
significant  percentage  of  punitive  awards  do  not  survive
appellate  review.86  To  decide  when  to  reduce  awards,
                                                                                                   

in 

83 Id. at 433.
84 Id.
85 Klein v. Grynberg, 44 F. 3d 1497 (10th Cir. 1995); Stafford v. Puro,
63  F.3d  1436  (7th  Cir.  1995):  Allahar  v.  Zahora,  59  F.3d  693  (7th  Cir.
1995):  Ross  v.  Black  and  Decker,  Inc.,  977  F.2d  1178  (7th  Cir.  1992):
Vasbinder  v.  Scott,  976  F.2d  118  (2nd  Cir.  1992);  Kimzey  v.  Wal-Mart
Stores, Inc., 107 F.3d 568 (8th Cir. 1997): Lee v. Edwards, 101 F.3d 805
(2nd Cir. 1996): King v. Macri, 993 F.2d 294 (2nd Cir. 1993): Michelson v.
Hamada, 36 Cal.Rptr.2d 343 (Cal. Ct. App. 1994): Wollersheim v. Church
of  Scientology,  6  Cal.Rptr.2d  532  (Cal.  Ct.  App.  1992):  Baume  v.  212  E.
10  N.Y.  Bar  Ltd.,  634  N.Y.S.  2d  478  (N.Y.  App.  Div.  1995);  Parkin  v.
Cornell University Inc., 581 N.Y.S.2d 914 (N.Y. App. Div. 1992):

86  See  David  Baldus  et  al.,  Improving  Judicial  Oversight  of  Jury
Damages Assessments: A Proposal for the Comparative Additur/Remittur

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

29

appellate  judges  need  some  understanding  of  what  makes
awards  unreasonable,  and  hence  an  understanding  of  the
sources  of  variability.  Trial  courts  are  in  a  similar  position,
both in offering instructions and in reducing awards after they
have  been  made.  It  is  predictable  that  even  when  the  due
process clause is not at issue, both trial courts and appellate
courts will struggle with questions very much like those raised
in  BMW  as  they  continue  to  devise  principles  by  which  to
constrain  awards.  The  governing  principles  have  yet  to  be
well-settled and clear standards have yet to emerge. Indeed,
it is not at all clear why the legal system should not generally
contain  a  mechanism  for  increasing  punitive  damage  awards
when a particular jury has imposed an unduly low award87—a
question  to  which  we  will  return.  If  variable  and  erratic
judgments  are  the  problem,  the  legal  system  should  correct
awards  that  are  both  unreasonably  low  and  unreasonably
high, for both of these are likely to occur.88

Of course the whole question of punitive damages is under
active consideration in many states as well as at the national
level.89 States are considering caps in the form of ratios or flat
                                                                                                   
Review  of  Awards  For  Nonpecuniary  Harms  and  Punitive  Damages,  80
Iowa L. Rev. 1109, 1120 n. 20 (1995).

87 There is in some states a procedure for “additur,”  see David Baldus
et  al.,  Improving  Judicial  Oversight  of  Jury  Damages  Assessments:  A
Proposal  for  the  Comparative  Additur/Remittur  Review  of  Awards  For
Nonpecuniary Harms and Punitive Damages, 80 Iowa L. Rev. 1109, 1119-
1120  (1995),  but  this  procedure  is  used  infrequently  in  punitive  damages
cases,  see  id.,  and  not  at  all  in  the  federal  courts,  where  the  seventh
amendment  right  to  a  jury  trial  bans  the  use  of  additur,  see  Dimick  v.
Schiedt, 293 U.S. 474 (1934).

88 The best defense of the current system—allowing judges to reduce
or  overturn  awards  that  are  too  high,  but  not  to  increase  awards  that  are
too  low—is  that  populist  enthusiasms  might  make  juries  too  generous  to
plaintiffs and too punitive to defendants; there is no fear, apparently, that
pro-defendant  sentiments  will  lead  in  the  opposite  direction.  Our  study  at
least  suggests  the  possibility  of  problems  in  both  directions,  though  it
provides  particular  evidence  of  “skewing”  in  the  form  of  high  rather  than
low awards.

89  Three  states  do  not  allow  punitive  damages:  Nebraska,  New

30

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

dollar  limitations;  many  states  are  attempting  to  require
bifurcated  trials  in  which  judges  rather  than  juries  determine
the  level  of  punitive  damages.90  These  are  somewhat  crude
and  categorical  efforts  to  respond  to  the  general  fear  that
punitive  damages  are  “out  of  control.”91  An  understanding  of
the  source  of  variability  would  lead  in  the  direction  of  more
finely tuned remedies, or at least toward a fuller sense of why
the  crude  alternatives  would  be  acceptable.  It  is  this  fuller
sense that our study is designed to provide.

III. WHY PUNITIVE DAMAGE AWARDS ARE ERRATIC

We designed a study to examine hypotheses about three
topics:  (i)  the  psychology  of  the  sequence  of  judgments  and
                                                                                                   
Hampshire, and Washington. A number of states have special restrictions.
See  Robert  G.  Schloerb  et  al.,  Punitive  Damages:  A  Guide  to  the
Insurability  of  Punitive  Damages  in  the  United  States  18-26  (1988).
Federal proposals include a cap on punitive damages in some civil suits,
see S. 5, 105th Cong, 1st Sess. (1997). H.R. 56, 104th Cong section 201
(1995).

90  State  law  reforms  fall  in  several  categories.  See  generally
Developments  in  the  Law—The  Civil  Jury,  110  Harv  L  Rev  1408,  1527-
1536  (1997),  for  an  overview.  (1)  Some  states  have  enacted  caps;  other
states  are  considering  that  same  approach.  Some  caps  limit  the  entire
dollar  amount;  others  limit  punitive  damage  awards  to  a  multiple  of
compensatory  damages;  others  relate  possible  punitive  amounts  to  the
income  of  the  defendant.  (2)  Some  states  requires  part  or  all  of  the
punitive award to go to state agencies or the state treasury. See, e.g., Fla.
Stat.  ch.  768.73/(2)  (1995);  Kan.  Civ.  Proc.  Code  Ann.  60-3402(e).  (3)
Connecticut,  Kansas,  and  Ohio  have  required  the  judge,  not  the  jury,  to
determine  punitive  damage  awards.  See  Conn  Gen  State  52-240b;  Kan
Civ Proc Code 60-3701(a); Ohio Rev Code Ann 2315.21. (4) Some states
have  required  a  bifurcated  trial,  in  a  way  that  is  designed  to  reduce
confusion  and  to  make  clear  which  factors  are  relevant  to  which
proceeding.  (5)  Over  half  the  states  have  increased  the  standards  of
proof,  from  preponderance  of  the  evidence  to  clear  and  convincing
evidence or more.

91 They are crude because no one believes that a simple ratio or flat
cap makes much sense except as an easily administrable effort to ensure
against the most outrageous awards. See below for more discussion.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

31

attitudes  that  produce  individual  judgments  about  punitive
awards  in  particular  cases;  (ii)  the  sources  of  variability  in
these judgments; (iii) the implications of these findings for the
unpredictability of jury awards, and for possible reforms in the
tasks assigned to juries.

A  total  of  899  respondents  were  recruited  from  the  voter
registration  rolls  of  Travis  County,  Texas,  and  paid  $35  to
participate  in  the  study.  A  set  of  10  vignettes  of  personal
injury  cases  were  created  in  which  a  plaintiff  (always  an
individual  customer)  sued  a  firm  for  compensatory  and
punitive  damages.  All  vignettes  had  versions  that  differed  in
the  size  of  the  defendant  firm  (medium  or  large).  For  four  of
the  vignettes,  there  were  also  versions  that  differed  in  the
harm that the plaintiff was said to have suffered, but not in the
description of the defendant’s actions. In total, there were 28
different  variations  of  the  10  vignettes.  Each  respondent
evaluated 10 cases, composed of one variation of each of the
10  basic  vignettes.  The  respondents  were  told  to  assume  in
all  cases  that  compensatory  damages  had  been  awarded  in
the  amount  of  $200,000,  and  that  punitive  damages  were  to
be  considered.  Three  sub-samples  were  asked  to  answer
different questions about each scenario: how outrageous was
the  defendant’s  behavior  (on  a  scale  of  0  to  6);  how  much
should the defendant be punished (on a scale of 0 to 6); how
much  should  the  defendant  be  required  to  pay  in  punitive
damages.  Each  respondent  first  dealt  with  one  case  without
seeing  the  others  (the  “no  comparison”  condition),  then
received a booklet with nine new cases.

A. The Outrage Model

We  propose  a  descriptive  theory  of  the  psychology  of
punitive  awards,  called  the  outrage  model.92  The  essential
claim  is  that  the  moral  transgressions  of  others  evoke  an
attitude  of  outrage,  which  combines  an  emotional  evaluation
                                                                                                   
92  For  further  discussion  see  Kahneman,  Schkade,  and  Sunstein,

supra note.

32

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

and  a  response  tendency.  The  rules  that  govern  outrage
present  an  important  problem  that  we  do  not  address  in  this
paper.  We assume that outrage is largely governed by social
norms.  Judged  by  reference  to  these  norms,  a  particular
person's  expressions  of  indignation  may  be  deemed  too
intense for its cause, or not intense enough.  Social as well as
legal norms also regulate the mapping from transgressions to
punishment.

An  attitude 

is  not  directly
is  a  mental  state,  and 
observable. The various aspects of an attitude can, however,
be  “mapped”  onto  diverse  responses,  which  might  include
facial  expressions,  verbal  statements  of  opinion,  gestures—
even  physical  assault.    Response  “modes”  might  include  a
judgment  about  the  degree  outrageousness  on  a  numerical
scale.  Under  the  outrage  model,  punitive  damages  are
considered  an  expression  of  an  angry  or  indignant  attitude
toward a transgressor. The evaluative aspect of the attitude is
labeled  outrage;  the  response  tendency  is  labeled  punitive
intent.  Outrage  is  basic,  and  punitive  intent  is  measured  by
outrage and additional factors, such as harm. As we will see,
the  verbal  indication  of  the  desired  severity  of  punishment
(punitive intent) is affected both by the outrage that an action
evokes and by the severity of its consequences (“harm”). This
retributive  aspect  of  punishment  is  incorporated  in  many
aspects  of  the  law,  such  as  the  large  discrepancy  between
sentences  for  murder  and  sentences  for  attempted  murder.
The relationship between victim and juror was manipulated in
an  experiment  by  Hastie,  Schkade,  and  Payne.93    Under
experimental  conditions,  larger  awards  were  made  when  the
plaintiff  was  located  in  the  jurors'  community  than  when  the
plaintiff  was  from  a  remote  location.    We  speculate  that  this
factor  affects  punitive  intent:  the  retributive  urge  is  stronger
                                                                                                   
93 See Reid Haste, David Schkade, and John Payne (forthcoming).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

33

when the victim belongs to one's group than when the victim
is a stranger.94

In  some  situations  the  expression  of  an  attitude  is
restricted  to  a  particular  scale  of  responses.  For  example,  in
the  situation  with  which  we  are  concerned  here, 
the
responses of juries are restricted to a scale of dollars. Dollar
amounts  of  punitive  awards  (like  the  length  of  prison
sentences  in  criminal  cases)  are  just  one  of  a  number  of
possible  scales  on  which  outrage  might  be  expressed.  A
bounded  numerical  scale  would  be  another  obvious
possibility. We propose that some factors  affect the mapping
of  punitive  intent  onto  the  dollar  scale,  but  do  not  affect
punitive  intent  on  a  bounded  numerical  scale.  For  example,
the  size  of  the  defendant  firm  is  an  important  factor  in
translating  punitive  intent  into  dollars;  a  judgment  that
appears  severe  when  the  defendant  is  a  small  firm  may
appear  grossly  inadequate  when  the  defendant  is  a  giant.
Thus  firm  size  will  affect  dollar  awards  even  if  it  does  not
affect  punitive  intent  as  measured  on  a  bounded  numerical
scale.

In summary, the outrage model assumes an internal state
of  outrage,  which  can  be  mapped  onto  different  response
scales.    These  scales  vary  not  only  in  their  complexity  but
also  in  the  precision  and  reliability  of  the  measurement  that
they support: some scales are 'noisier' than others. As we will
shortly see, the dollar scale is an extremely noisy expression
of punitive intent.

Our two central hypotheses were simple:

                                                                                                   
94 The size of the awards was also affected by the amount demanded
by  plaintiff.    This  observation  is  most  likely  to  be  an  anchoring  effect,
which influences the dollar award directly, independently of punitive intent.
The anchoring effect may be quite important in light of the unfamiliarity of
the  dollar  scale  as  a  scale  of  punishment,  a  point  that  we  will  discuss  in
some detail.

34

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

1. Shared outrage
The  outrage  evoked  by  different  scenarios  of  tortious
behavior  is  governed  by  a  bedrock  of  broadly  shared  social
norms.

With respect to outrage and  punitive intent, are  randomly
selected  juries  likely  to  be  similar  to  one  other?  And  are
rankings  of  different  scenarios  generally  similar  for  different
demographic  groups?  We  hypothesized  affirmative  answers
to  both  questions,  at  least  in  the  context  of  the  products
liability cases given here.

2. Erratic dollar amounts
In  contrast  to  outrage  and  punitive  intent,  which  are
measured  on  bounded  scales,  punitive  awards  denominated
in dollars are susceptible to large individual differences, which
could  be  a  significant  cause  of  the  unpredictability  of  jury
determinations.

This  prediction  was  tested  by  comparing  the  extent  of
variations 
judgments  about  outrageousness  and
appropriate  punishment  with  the  extent  of  variations  in
judgments about appropriate dollar awards.

in 

We also examined three other hypotheses:

3. The harm effect
Punitive  intent—as  measured  on  a  bounded  numerical
the

the  outrageousness  of 

scale—is  determined  by 
defendant’s  behavior  and  by  other 
including the harm suffered by the defendant.

factors,  prominently

The  prediction  that  harm  affects  punitive  intent  but  not
outrage was tested by presenting alternative versions of some
scenarios,  in  which  the  severity  of  the  harm  suffered  by  the
plaintiff was varied.

4. Firm size effect
Damage awards are determined by punitive intent and by
other  ascertainable  factors,  prominently  including  the  size  of
the defendant firm.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

35

This prediction was tested by presenting each scenario in

two versions, in which the size of the defendant was varied.

5. Less discrimination without comparison
In  a  “no-comparison”  condition,  there  is  a  cautious
tendency  to  place  cases  toward  the  middle  of  a  bounded
numerical scale, and hence people will not make appropriate
distinctions among cases.

This hypothesis was tested by giving respondents cases in

isolation and in the context of other cases.

B. Shared Outrage

Our  first  question  was  whether  the  degree  of  outrage  is
consistent  across  individuals  and  across  possible  juries.  A
simple  way  to  answer  this  question  is  to  examine  whether
rankings  of  different  scenarios  are  generally  similar  for
different  demographic  groups.  We  therefore  computed  the
means  of  the  three  responses  (outrage,  punitive  intent  and
dollar  awards),  separately  for  groups  of  respondents  defined
by  demographic  variables  (men,  women,  white,  Hispanics,
African-Americans, different levels of income and education).
To measure the level of agreement across disjoint categories
(e.g., men and women) we computed the correlation between
their average responses,95 over the set of 28 cases.

The correlations were remarkably high for judgments both
of  outrage  and  of  punitive  intent.  In  particular,  there  was
essentially perfect agreement among groups in the ranking of
cases by punitive intent: the median correlation was .99. Men
and  women,  Hispanics,  African-Americans,  and  whites,  and
respondents at very different levels of income  and education
produced almost identical orderings of the 28 scenarios used
in  the  study.96  Judgments  of  intent  to  punish  in  these
                                                                                                   
95 We used means for outrage and punishment and medians for dollar

awards.

96  Of  course,  considerable  variability  between  individuals  remains
within  a  given  demographic  category,  even  though  the  aggregate
responses  are  very  similar  to  the  aggregate  responses  of  another

36

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

scenarios of product liability cases evidently rest on a bedrock
of moral intuitions that are broadly shared in society. We also
looked  for  differences  among  groups  in  the  average  severity
of  their  judgments  (i.e.,  the  level  of  the  average  rating),  and
here  too  found  no  significant  differences  (with  the  one
exception of gender, to be taken up below).
This striking finding may not generalize to all domains of the
law.97  We  might  expect  to  find  larger  differences  between
communities  and  social  categories  in  other  domains  of  the
law,  perhaps  including  attitudes  toward  civil  rights  violations
and  environmental  harms;  at  least  it  is  possible  that,  for
example, African-Americans would rate civil rights cases more
severely than whites do. We expect, however, that within the
same  category  of  cases,  rankings  may  remain  the  same
across different groups, so that different demographic groups
would  agree  on  which  defendants  have  behaved  least  and
most  egregiously.  Here  there  is  a  great  deal  of  room  for
further empirical work.

Table 1. Correlation Between Demographic Groups
on Intended Severity of Punishment*

Gender

Women

Men
.974

Ethnicity

Black White
.975
                                                                                                   
category.  Our  analysis  simply  shows  that  identifiable  groups  have  similar
distributions, not that all individuals are alike.

White

97  There  is  also  a  question  whether  the  competing  narratives  of  the
real  world  of  juries  might  create  more  heterogeneity  than  is  revealed  by
the  responses  to  our  fairly  stark  case  descriptions.  In  some  cases,  it  it
imaginable  that  members  of  different  groups  would  be  especially  alert  to
some facet of the narrative of one or another side. Experiments involving
mock juries might be designed to test for this possibility.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

37

Hispanic

.963

.988

Household 30-50K
> 50K
Income

< 30K
.991
.986

30-50K

.986

Age

30-39
40-49
> 50

< 30
.994
.992
.991

30-39

40-49

.994
.993

.987

*  Entries  are  correlations  between  mean  responses  to
scenarios  by  respondents  in  the  indicated  demographic
categories.

38

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

C. The Exception of Gender Ratings

As  noted,  the  only  statistically  significant  difference  in
average ratings was between women and men. While women
and men ranked the scenarios identically (as indicated by the
extremely  high  correlations),  men  were  somewhat  more
lenient  and  women  were  somewhat  more  severe:  women
rated  the  plaintiff’s  behavior  as  more  outrageous  (a  mean
difference  of  .52  scale  units,  p  <  .001),  expressed  more
punitive intent (a mean difference of .37 scale units, p < .001),
and set higher log dollar awards (p < .01). There was also an
interaction  between  scenarios  and  gender,  in  which  women
assigned even higher ratings of outrage and punishment (but
not higher awards) to cases in which the plaintiff was female
(p < .05).
This 

the
differences  in  ratings  were  relatively  small.  But  it  bears  on
legal  and  social  disputes  about  jury  composition,  providing
some  empirical  evidence  that  women  do  reach  different
conclusions from those reached by men and in particular that
they  seek  more  severe  punishment  of  civil  defendants.  The
fact  that  women  tend  to  favor  stiffer  punishments—and  that
men tend to favor more lenient punishments—is in one sense
counter  to  folk  wisdom,  which  sees  women  as  particularly
lenient. But our finding is in line, broadly speaking, with other
research  suggesting  that  women  and  men  view  social  risks
differently  and,  in  particular,  that  women  tend  to  view  such
risks as more serious than men do.98

finding  should  not  be  overemphasized; 

D. Unpredictable Dollar Awards

Our  central  hypothesis  was  that  dollar  awards  are  erratic
because  of  individual  differences  in  the  mapping  of  punitive
intent  onto  the  dollar  scale.  To  test  this  hypothesis  we
produced  simulated 
juries  by  randomly  sampling,  with
                                                                                                   
98  See  Paul  Slovic,  University  of  Chicago  Legal  Forum  (forthcoming

1997).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

39

replacement,  groups  of  12  responses  to  each  case  for  each
response  scale.  In  this  manner  we  constructed  a  large
number  of  three  types  of  simulated  juries:  “outrage  juries,”
“punishment  juries,”  and  “dollar  juries.”  Of  course  there  is  a
large  question  about  how  a  set  of  individual  judgments  will
produce  a  jury  verdict.  No  doubt  group  dynamics  can  push
deliberations in unexpected directions, sometimes toward the
most  extreme  member  of  the  group.  As  a  statistical  matter,
however,  the  experimental  literature  on  the  relationship
between  prior  individual  judgments  and  the  outcomes  of
group  deliberation  suggests  that  the  median  judgment  is  a
good  predictor,99  and  indeed  may  even  understate  our
ultimate conclusion.100

We therefore used the median judgment of each simulated
jury  as  an  estimate  of  what  the  judgment  of  that  jury  would
have  been.  Without  losing  sight  of  the  limitations  of  our
                                                                                                   
99  See  James  Davis,  Group  Decision  Making  and  Quantitative
Judgments, in Understanding Group Behavior (E. Witte and James Davis
eds. 1996); Shari Diamond and Jonathan Casper, Blindfolding the Jury to
Verdict  Consequences,  26  Law  and  Society  Review  513  (1992).  Clearly,
the appropriateness of this measure may depend on the task structure of
the  group  (e.g.,  whether  or  not  a  unanimous  decision  is  required).
However,  in  our  study,  replacing  the  median  of  juror’s  individual
judgments  as  the  group  decision  with  the  mean,  has  little  effect  on  the
results  for  outrage  and  punishment,  but  makes  dollar  awards  even  less
predictable.

100 See Diamond and Casper, supra note; Davis, experiment 1, supra
note;  Martin  Kaplan  and  Charles  Miller,  Group  Decision  Making  and
Normative  Versus  Informational  Influence,  53  J.  Personality  and  Social
Psychology 306 (1987). Note, however, the existence of an “amplification
of bias,”  by which a group process, involving a set of individuals biased on
one  direction  or  another,  may  push  awards  in  extreme  directions,  in  fact
more  extreme  than  that  of  any  individual  before  deliberation  begins.  We
are  indebted  to  Robert  MacCoun  for  suggesting  this  possibility.  Cf.  N.
Kerr,  Robert  MacCoun,  and  G.  Kramer,  Bias  in  Judgment:  Comparing
Individuals  and  Groups,  103  Psych.  Review  687  (1996)  (finding  an
amplification  of  bias,  but  not 
the  setting  of  punitive  damage
in 
from  group
determinations).  The  possibility  of  extremes  resulting 
deliberation  would  fortify  our  conclusion,  by  showing  even  greater
variance.

40

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

estimation  procedure,  we  apply  the  label  “jury  judgment”  to
for  simplicity  of  exposition.  Table  2
these  estimates 
summarizes the simulated jury judgments for punishment and
dollar awards.

the  predictability  of 

Jury  judgments  can  be  considered  shared  and  therefore
predictable, in our use of that term, if there is high agreement
between  juries  randomly  selected  from  the  population.  In
order  to  find  a  source  of  erratic  judgments,  we  attempted  to
compare 
judgments  made  by
simulated dollar juries, outrage juries, and punishment juries.
First, we imagined that all of our case scenarios were tried on
the  same  day  by  independent  juries,  analogous  to  how  jury
judgments  for  different  cases  are  produced  in  practice.  We
then  asked  the  question,  “If  these  same  cases  were  tried
again  independently,  how  likely  are  we  to  get  the  same
ratings and rankings as in this first set of trials?”

the 

To  answer  this  question  we  conducted  an  analysis
requiring 4 steps. (1) We created a randomly selected jury for
each of the 28 cases, and computed the median judgment for
each. (2) We then imagined that a time machine allowed us to
replay  each  case  again  independently  of  the  first  trial,
including  the  random  selection  of  a  new  jury.  We  therefore
created  a  second  set  of  28  randomly  selected  juries  and
corresponding  median  judgments.  The  correlation  between
these and the first set of jury judgments is a measure of how
erratic  or  consistent  juries  are.  (3)  To  get  a  more  reliable
indication  of  the  typical  correlation  between  juries,  we
performed  Step  1  60  times  for  each  of  the  three  response
modes.  This  produced  180  columns  of  data,  each  of  which
contained  one  set  of  28  jury  judgments.  (4)  We  then
computed  the  correlations  between  every  pair  of  sets  of
simulated  jury  judgments  (i.e.,  correlations  between  the
columns).  This  computation  was  performed  both  within
response (e.g., the correlation between two sets of 28 outrage
ratings) and across responses (e.g., the correlation between a
set of 28 outrage ratings and a set of 28 punishment ratings).
The  data  shown  in  Table  3  are  medians  of  the  correlations

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

41

obtained 
combination.

for  each  response  mode  or  response  mode

As  we  had  hypothesized,  the  individual  differences  in
dollar  awards  produce  severe  unpredictability,  and  highly
erratic  outcomes,  even  in  the  medians  of  12  judgments  (the
results  would  be  even  more  extreme  with  smaller  samples
such  as  6-person  juries).  While  there  is  strong  agreement
between independent sets of outrage or punishment juries (r =
.87  and  .89),  agreement  between  independent  sets  of  dollar
juries is quite weak (r = .42). The variability of individual dollar
judgments is so large that even the medians of 12 judgments
are quite unstable. The problem could be reduced, of course,
by  taking  larger  samples.  For  example,  we  found  that  the
median  correlation  between  sets  of  dollar  juries  rises  to  .80
when  the  size  of  the  juries  is  increased  to  30  (median
correlations for 30-person outrage and punishment juries rise
to .95 and .97).

Table 2.  Synthetic Jury Response Distributions by Scenario

Lower 95%
Confidence
Bound

Median

Upper 95%
Confidence
Bound

$500,000

$2,000,000

$15,000,000

Mean Jury
Punishment

Prediction Error
Ratio ($/Punish)

Martin

Medium

High

350,000

1,000,000

4,000,000

13.57

Scenario

Joan

Joan

Firm
Size

Large

Medium

Harm
Level

High

High

Thomas

Medium

200,000

200,000

200,000

175,000

350,000

230,000

225,000

290,000

250,000

350,000

200,000

100,000

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

Low

High

Low

Low

Low

150,000

Thomas

Joan

Martin

Frank

Frank

Mary

Joan

Mary

Martin

Martin

Susan

Large

Large

Large

Medium

Large

Large

Medium

Medium

Large

Medium

Large

5.14

5.03

5.02

4.98

4.95

4.93

4.92

4.86

4.82

4.79

4.71

4.70

4.47

4.16

3.27

900,000

500,000

3,000,000

1,575,000

560,000

2,750,000

1,000,000

12,500,000

1,900,000

10,000,000

760,000

2,100,000

1,000,000

4,000,000

1,000,000

4,000,000

750,000

710,000

5,500,000

2,100,000

1,000,000

5,000,000

675,000

300,000

2,250,000

1,000,000

42

Scenario
Susan

Janet

Carl

Carl

Janet

Janet

Janet

Jack

Jack

Jack

Jack

Sarah

Sarah

Firm
Size
Medium

Medium

Medium

Large

Medium

Large

Large

Large

Medium

Medium

Large

Large

Medium

Harm
Level
—

High

—

—

Low

High

Low

High

High

Low

Low

—

—

Lower 95%
Confidence
Bound
50,000

100,000

15,000

50,000

12,500

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Mean Jury
Punishment
3.03

Prediction Error
Ratio ($/Punish)

Upper 95%
Confidence
Bound
800,000

690,000

375,000

750,000

650,000

1,500,000

1,000,000

350,000

225,000

112,500

500,000

1,000

13,000

2.79

2.78

2.64

2.49

2.39

2.38

1.24

1.07

1.03

0.95

0.51

0.46

Median
225,000

200,000

155,000

200,000

150,000

287,500

200,000

45,000

2,550

0

0

0

0

43

infinity

Median

44

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

Table 3. Median Correlations Between Sets of Simulated
Juries

Outrage

Punishment

$ Awards

Outrage
Punishment
$ Awards

.87
.86
.47

Overall Median Award.71

.89
.51

.77

.42

.69

How  do  these  findings  bear  on  the  appropriate  role  of
juries in setting punitive damage awards? As we have seen, a
conventional understanding of such awards sees the jury as a
sample  from  the  community  whose  function  is  to  provide  an
estimate of community sentiment. If jury judgments are erratic,
this  function  is  badly  compromised,  for  any  particular  jury’s
judgment  may  not  reflect  community  sentiment  at  all.  The
bottom  row  of  Table  3  presents  the  median  correlations
between sets of simulated jury judgments for the 28 scenarios
and the corresponding estimates of community sentiment, for
which  we  used  the  overall  median  of  dollar  awards  for  each
scenario.  It  is  obvious  that  the  judgments  of  dollar  juries
provide  a  poor  estimate  of  overall  community  sentiment.
Indeed,  the  unreliability  of  dollar  juries  is  so  pronounced  that
the  dollar  awards  that  would  be  set  by  the  larger  community
are predicted more accurately by punishment juries. This is a
counterintuitive 
to  a  possible
recommendation, which we explore below: juries instructed to
state their punitive intent could be used, in conjunction with a
preset  conversion  function,  to  generate  punitive  awards  that
would  accurately 
thus
reducing much of the unpredictability of awards.

represent  community  sentiment, 

leads  directly 

finding. 

It 

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

45

E. The Underlying Problem: “Scaling without a Modulus”

A  key  to  our  analysis  is  a  distinction  that  psychologists
draw  between  two  types  of  scales.  (i)  Category  scales  are
bounded  and  anchored  in  verbal  descriptions  at  both  ends;
scales  of  this  type  are  often  used  in  public  opinion  surveys,
and  were  used  here  to  measure  outrage  and  punitive  intent.
(ii)  Magnitude  scales  are  unbounded  and  are  defined  by  a
meaningful  zero  point.  These  scales  are  often  used  in  the
psychological laboratory, for example to scale the brightness
of  lights  or  the  loudness  of  sounds.  Magnitude  scales  have
occasionally been used to measure the intensity of response
to socially relevant stimuli, such as the severity of crimes and
the  severity  of  punishments.101  The  dollar  scale  of  punitive
awards  is  obviously  not  a  category  scale;  it  satisfies  the
defining  characteristics  of  a  magnitude  scale,  for  the  zero
point is meaningful and the scale is unbounded.

the 

Although  the  relations  between  the  two  types  of  scales
have  been 
topic  of  much  controversy,102  some
characteristic differences between them are well established.
(i)  The  distributions  of  judgments  on  magnitude  scales  are
generally  positively  skewed,  with  a  long  right  tail  (this  is  a
consequence of the fact that the scale is bounded by zero at
the  low  end);  (ii)  judgments  on  magnitude  scales  are  often
erratic,  in  the  sense  of  highly  variable;  (iii)  the  standard
deviations  of  individual  judgments  of  different  objects  (a
measure  of  variability)  is  often  roughly  proportional  to  the
mean judgments of these objects.

 The  common  practice  in  laboratory  uses  of  magnitude
scaling is to define a  modulus: respondents are instructed to
                                                                                                   
101 Stanley S. Stevens, Psychophysics (1975); see also note infra.
102  See,  e.g.,  R.  Duncan  Luce  and  Carol  Krumhansl,  Measurement,
Scaling,  and  Psychophysics,  in  Stevens’  Handbook  of  Experimental
Psychology,  Vol  1:  Perception  and  Motivation  3-74  (Richard  Atkinson,
Richard Herrnstein, Gardner Lindzey, and R Duncan Luce eds. 1988); L.E.
Marks,  Magnitude  Estimation  and  Sensory  Matching,  43  Perception  and
Psychophysics 511 (1988); Stanley S. Stevens, Psychophysics (1975).

46

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

assign a particular rating to a “standard”  stimulus, defined as
the modulus, and to assign ratings to other stimuli in relation
to that modulus. Thus, for example, a modulus of “5”  might be
assigned  to  a  noise  of  a  certain  volume,  and  other  noises
might  be  assessed  in  volume  by  comparison  with  the
modulus. An experiment can, however, be conducted without
specifying  a  modulus.  In  this  situation  of  magnitude  scaling
without a modulus, different respondents spontaneously adopt
different  moduli,  but  their  responses  generally  preserve  the
same  ratios  even  when  the  moduli  differ.  For  example,  one
observer  may  assign  a  judgment  of  200  to  a  stimulus  that
another observer rates as 10. If the first observer now assigns
a rating of 500 to a new stimulus, we may expect the second
to assign to that stimulus a value of 25.

Here  is  the  central  point:  Magnitude  scaling  without  a
modulus  produces  extremely  large  variability  in  judgments  of
individual
any  particular  stimulus,  because  of  arbitrary 
differences  in  moduli.  The  assignment  of  punitive  damages
satisfies  the  technical  definition  of  magnitude  scaling  without
a  modulus.103  This  reasoning  is  what  led  to  the  central
hypothesis  of  the  present  study,  a  hypothesis  that  we
described and established above.104
                                                                                                   
103  In  the  legal  context,  some  moduli  might  even  be  insufficiently
informative  even 
for  example,  $0  means  entirely
acceptable,  and  $200  means  objectionable  (as  in  for  example  a  reckless
act  causing  minimal  harm),  the  jury  would  probably  continue  to  be  at  a
loss for most punitive damage cases. A modulus would have to provide a
standard  around  which  judgments  could  be  managably  organized  in  the
likely comparison set.

if  provided. 

If, 

104  Similar  evidence  emerges  from  Michael  Saks  et  al.,  Reducing
Variability in Civil Jury Awards, 21 Law and Human Behavior 243 (1997).
Saks  et  al.  show  that  under  experimental  conditions,  variability  can  be
reduced  in  the  context  of  pain  and  suffering  awards  by  telling  people
average dollar awards for the type of injury at issue, intervals (where 80%
of  awards  for  similar  injuries  fell),  average--plus-intervals,  and  examples
(awards  for  four  similar  cases).  Id.  at  249.  Without  using  the  concepts,
Saks et al. in effect supply a modulus in each of these conditions, and the
result  is  dramatically  to  decrease  variability  Id.  at  250-51.  See  also  the

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

47

F. A simple way to improve predictability
Is it possible to improve the predictability of dollar awards?
How might this be done? We performed a statistical analysis
designed to answer these questions.

A  conventional  view  about  the  role  of  juries  in  setting
punitive  awards  is  that  the  jury  is  a  sample  from  the
community,  whose  function  it  is  to  provide  an  estimate  of
community  sentiment.  In  the  context  of  our  experiment,
community  sentiment  about  the  punitive  damages  for  a
scenario was defined as the median of the damages set by all
the  respondents  who  judged  it.  This  sentiment  represents
population-wide  judgments  about  appropriate  dollar  awards.
The findings summarized in Table 3 suggest a straightforward
procedure 
this
community sentiment can be estimated from the judgments of
a sample of 12 citizens: use judgments of punitive intent and
a conversion function based on the results of a large sample,
one that can be taken to reflect a population-wide judgment.

the  accuracy  with  which 

improving 

for 

To  test  the  effect  of  this  procedure  in  our  data,  we  first
estimate  the  conversion  function  separately  for  medium  and
for large firms, since there was a significant effect of firm size
on dollar awards. Following Stevens,105 power functions were
estimated, which related the mean punishment jury response
for  each  case  to  the  corresponding  overall  median  of
individual  dollar  awards,  our  measure  of  community
sentiment.  We  then  generated  two  sets  of  simulated  jury
judgments for each case. The first set consisted of the median
judgments of 100 randomly sampled dollar juries. The second
set  was  obtained  by  taking  the  median  judgments  of  100
randomly  selected  punishment  juries,  and  transforming  this
value  to  dollars,  separately  for  each  jury,  by  the  appropriate
                                                                                                   
proposal  for  a  form  of  scaling,  through  baseline  appraisals,  in  Glen  O.
Robinson and Kenneth S. Abraham, Collective Justice in Tort Law, 78 Va.
L. Rev. 1481, 1490 (1992).

105  See  Chapman  and  Bornstein,  The  More  You  Ask  For,  The  More

You Get, 10 Applied Cognitive Psych. 519 (1996).

48

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

conversion function (depending on whether the defendant firm
was  large  or  medium-sized).  To  measure  the  accuracy  of  a
simulated  jury  as  an  estimate  of  the  population  median,  we
computed the discrepancy between the dollar award set by a
jury  (for  punishment  juries  we  used  the  dollar  value  from  the
conversion  function)  and  the  overall  median  dollar  award  for
that  case.  From  these  discrepancies  we  can  compute  the
root-mean-squared-error  (RMSE),  which  is  a  conventional
measure  of  accuracy  of  estimation,  and  is  analogous  to  the
standard error of the estimate in a regression model.

for  estimates  derived 

This analysis provides two values of RMSE for each of the
28  cases  in  our  study,  one  from  dollar  juries  and  one  from
punishment  juries.  In  25  of  the  28  cases,  RMSE  is  smaller
(indicating  higher  accuracy) 
from
punishment juries. To assess the magnitude of the effect, we
computed  the  ratio  of  the  two  values  of  RMSE  for  each
scenario  (listed  in  the  last  column  of  Table  2).  The  median
ratio  was  2.18,  which  is  interpreted  to  mean  that  for  the
median case, using dollar juries leads to over  twice as much
juries  and  a
prediction  error 
conversion function. For example, for the case of Joan with a
medium firm size and high harm, the ratio is 2.27, the median
award  is  $1,000,000,  and  the  estimates  of  dollar  juries  have
an  average  error  from  this  value  of  $913,481  compared  to
$402,414 for estimates based on punishment juries.

than  using  punishment 

In simple language, this means that unpredictability could
be  greatly  reduced,  and  population-wide  judgments  about
dollar  awards  would  be  estimated  far  more  precisely,  if  the
legal  system  used  punishment  juries  and  a  conversion
function  rather  than  dollar  juries.  Indeed,  as  can  be  seen  in
Table 2, the median probably understates the decisive overall
advantage of using predictions based on punishment ratings,
since  for  some  individual  cases  the  reduction  in  error  is
extremely large.

One note of caution is in order here. The fact that punitive
damages  share  the  known  deficiencies  of  magnitude  scaling
is  likely  to  be  a  significant  cause  of  unpredictable  punitive

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

49

awards—but  it  is  not  the  only  one.  Other  factors  include
regional  differences,  plaintiff’s  demand,  anchors  of  various
sorts,  differences  in  social  norms  over  both  time  and  space,
the quality of the lawyers on both sides, and doubtless others.
We take up some of these points below.

G. Context, Harm, Firm Size, and Other Findings

In  this  section  we  briefly  report  our  findings  on  our  other
hypotheses, and discuss some issues of particular relevance
to punitive damage reform.106

1. The effect of context
Unlike real jurors, who are exposed to a single case for a
long time, the participants in our study responded to a total of
10  product  liability  cases  in  quick  succession,  and  had  an
opportunity to compare most of these scenarios to each other.
To  examine  the  effect  of  this  unusual  procedure,  every
participant  first  encountered  one  of  the  first  six  scenarios,
which  was  presented  in  a  separate  envelope  and  was
evaluated  in  isolation  from  the  others.  The  experimental
design provides a comparison of the distribution of judgments
to each scenario when it is judged in isolation or in the context
of other scenarios.

judgments; 

the  distribution  of 

We  examined  whether  the  availability  of  a  context  of
the
comparison  affected 
question  is  important,  since  the  legal  system  often  forces
juries  to  evaluate  cases  without  a  set  of  comparison.  Our
basic finding was that in a no-comparison condition, there is a
cautious  tendency  to  diminished  differentiation  in  judgments
about different cases. The availability of a context apparently
makes a serious cases appear more serious than it would on
its  own,  and  makes  a  milder  case  appear  milder.  Thus  the
most  consistent  effect  of  a  context  of  similar  cases  is  to
increase 
judgments  across  different
scenarios.  We  conclude  that  the  availability  of  a  context  of
                                                                                                   
106  A  detailed  analysis  can  be  found  in  Daniel  Kahneman,  David

the  range  of 

the 

Schkade, and Cass R. Sunstein, supra note.

50

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

similar cases improves people’s ability to discriminate among
these cases, but does not affect the basic moral intuitions that
the  cases  evoke.  This  point  is  connected  to  the  topic  of
punitive damage reform below.

2. From outrage to punishment: the harm effect
An action can be judged more or less outrageous without
reference to its consequences; certainly it is possible to think
that  the  outrageousness  of  an  action  does  not  depend  on
what  actually  happened.  Consequences,  however,  are
 
important to punishment in law,
107 and we suspected that they
would  also  be  important  to  lay  intuitions  about  the  proper
punishment for reprehensible actions. These predictions were
tested  by  constructing  alternative  versions  of  four  additional
vignettes,  which  differed  in  the  harm  that  the  plaintiff  had
suffered. Note that the difference was measured qualitatively
rather  than  in  dollar  terms;  in  all  of  the  cases,  the  jury  had
awarded $200,000 in compensatory damages, but in some of
them,  the  description  of  the  injury  suggested  less  in  the  way
of  qualitative  loss,  as  for  example  in  the  case  of  a  burned
child. (See the Appendix for examples.)

the  significant  harm  effect 

As predicted, we found that the degree of outrage evoked
by the defendant’s behavior was not affected by the harm that
occurred.  In  contrast,  varying  the  harm  had  a  small  but
statistically  significant  effect  on  punishment  ratings,  where
defendants  who  had  done  more  harm  to  the  plaintiff  were
judged  to  deserve  greater  punishment.  As  predicted  by  the
for
outrage  model, 
punishment ratings carried through to dollar awards. Thus low
harm produced an average award of $727,599 and high harm
an  average  award  of  a  substantially  greater  amount:
$1,171,251.
                                                                                                   
107 Thus there is a great deal of discussion whether attempted crimes
should be punished less severely than well-executed crimes, if both show
the same state of mind, and if an unsuccessful attempt failed because of
some accident. See, e.g., Steven Shavell, Deterrence and the Punishment
of Attempts, 19 J. Legal Stud. 435 (1990).

found 

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

51

in 

think 

3. The effect of firm size
Within the academic community, opinion is sharply divided
on the question whether the amount of punitive awards should
depend on the size of the defendant firm.108 Lay intuitions, in
contrast,  are  quite  clear.  A  psychological  analysis  suggests
than
that  people 
deterrence, and the intention to punish is an intention to inflict
pain; this means that the size of the defendant matters a good
deal.  (We  do  not  deny  that  there  is  a  plausible  account  of
deterrence  that  would  make  firm  size  pertinent.109)  Our
hypothesis was that firm size would affect neither outrage nor
punitive  intent,  but  that  the  same  degree  of  punitive  intent
would  be  translated  into  a  larger  amount  of  damages  when
the firm is larger than when it is smaller.

terms  of  retribution  rather 

As expected, we found no statistically significant effects of
firm  size  on  either  outrage  or  punishment  judgments.  But
large firms were punished with much larger dollar awards (an
average of $1,009,994) than medium firms ($526,398). This is
substantial  evidence  that  equivalent  outrage  and  punitive
intent  will  produce  significant  higher  dollar  awards  against
wealthy defendants.

                                                                                                   
108  See  Polinsky  &  Shavell,  supra  note;  Galanter  and  Luban,  supra
note;  Kenneth  Abraham  and  John  Jeffries,  Punitive  Damages  and  the
Rule of Law: The Role of Defendant’s Wealth, 18 J. Legal Stud. 415, 415-
19 (1989); Dan Dobbs, Ending Punishment in “Punitive”  Damages, 40 Ala.
L. Rev. 831, 871-72 (1989).

109  That  account  might  stress  the  organizational  structure  of  the  firm
and  suggest  that  high-level  managers  will  not  alter  policies  unless  an
award  is  sufficient  to  “get  their  attention.”  Polinsky  and  Shavell,  supra
note,  suggest  that  this  view  is  implausible,  but  that  question  cannot  be
resolved  a  priori;  it  is  an  empirical  issue.  Compare  Robert  MacCoun,
Differential  Treatment  of  Corporate  Defendants  by  Juries,  30  Law  &
Society Review 121, 133-39 (1996) (finding effects from corporate identity
and commercial activity, but not from wealth per se).

52

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

IV. POLICY REFORMS: COMMUNITY JUDGMENTS
WITH MEANING AND WITHOUT NOISE?

A. General Observations, Anchoring, and a Roadmap

it 

that  question 

1. Experiments and the real world
What  are  the  implications  of  our  findings  for  punitive
damage  reform?  Before  answering 
is
necessary  to  emphasize  that  those  findings  do  not  replicate
the  real  world  of  punitive  damage  awards.  Ours  was  an
experimental  study,  and  our  “juries”  consisted  of  individuals
who  were  given  brief  narrative  descriptions  of  cases.  They
were  not  presented  with  full  accounts,  much  less  with
adversary  arguments  on  both  sides.  These  arguments  could
introduce  additional  variance;  they  could  tend  to  reduce
disparities.  The  fact  that  lawyers  on  both  sides  can  typically
exclude  certain  jurors  may  possibly  reduce  the  degree  of
variance  in  real-world  awards,  at  least  if  lawyers  can
anticipate  which  people  will  have  outlier  moduli.  Nor  did  our
“juries”  deliberate.110  As  a  statistical  matter,  the  median  vote
is not a bad prediction, but it is certainly a crude one, at least
for individual cases.

2. Anchors and their effects
Our study did refer to compensatory damages and also to
firm  size,  but  it  did  not  contain  two  usual  “anchors”:111
plaintiff’s  demand  and  the  jury’s  own  prior  determination  of
compensatory  damages.  Such  anchors  are  likely  to  matter  a
great  deal  to  actual  awards.  There  is  experimental  evidence
that  the  plaintiff’s  demand  has  considerable  importance,112
                                                                                                   
110  We  are  now  embarking  on  a  follow-up  study  that  does  involve
mock juries, and hence that attempts to be more precise about the effects
of deliberation.

111 With the exception of firm size and also compensatory damages,
which  might  serve  as  an  anchor,  but  probably  less  than  in  real  world
cases, whether those damages are chosen by deliberating juries and thus
may have special salience.

112 See Hastie, Schkade, and Payne (forthcoming).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

53

and experimental evidence too of the effect of anchors in pain
and  suffering  cases,  which  are  analogous.113  There  is  real-
world as well as experimental evidence of an anchoring effect
from  the  compensatory  award.114  Other  anchors  may  well
emerge  during  the  lawyers’  advocacy.  Notably,  there  is
evidence of a correlation between anchoring and confidence,
that is, when people are not confident of their judgments, they
are more susceptible to anchoring effects.115 We suspect that
people are not confident of the dollar amounts they award,116
and  this  lack  of  confidence  increases  the  likely  use  of
anchors.  It  is  natural  to  think  that  the  process  of  magnitude
scaling  without  a  modulus  will  encourage  people  to  seize  on
whatever  anchors  are  available,  whether  or  not  they  are
sensible  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  goals  of  the  legal
system.

How  does  the  existence  of  real-world  anchors  affect  our
findings? The answer is that anchors may or may not increase
predictability.  If  it  is  hard  to  know  in  advance  what  will  be
used  as  the  anchor,  predictability  will  be  absent;  if  everyone
knows what the anchor is likely to be, there will be less in the
way of unpredictable outcomes. But if this is so, this particular
form of predictability comes with a cost of its own: introducing
an additional layer of arbitrariness, if (as if likely) the anchor
is itself arbitrary on normative grounds. There is no reason to
think  that  the  plaintiff’s  demand  should  carry  a  great  deal  of
weight  in  determining  the  proper  punitive  award.  And  if  the
compensatory  award  anchors  the  punitive  award,  there  is  a
kind  of  arbitrariness  to  the  extent  that  anchor  is  arbitrary,  as
                                                                                                   
113 See Michael Saks et al., Reducing Variability in Civil Jury Awards,

21 Law and Human Behavior 243, 254 (1997).

114 See Theodore Eisenberg et al., supra note.
115  See  Karen  E.  Jacowitz  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  Measures  of
Anchoring  in  Estimation  Tasks,  21  Personality  and  Social  Psychology
Bulletin 1165 (1995).

116 There is some support for this in our study; we asked people to say
what they thought was the most difficult part of the task, and their answers
emphasized the assignment of dollar amounts.

54

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

deterrence  theory  suggests  that  it  is.  We  suspect  that  juries
lacking evident anchors will suffer from the problems we have
described,  whereas  juries  resorting  to  anchors  will  produce
arbitrariness of a different sort.

3.  The  rule  of  law  and  how  to  obtain  (and  how  not  to

obtain) its virtues

Many  concerns  about  punitive  damage  awards  point  to
their  apparently  arbitrary  character,  and  many  proposed
remedies  attempt  to  promote  rule  of  law  values  through,  for
example, more careful and more specific judicial instructions.
In the BMW case, Justice Breyer spoke in some detail of the
failure of Alabama law sufficiently to discipline jury discretion
with  clear  criteria  about  the  grounds  of  awards.117  Thus  a
likely  response  to  complaints  about  arbitrary  awards  is  to
increase the specificity of instructions to juries.

Our  study  strongly  supports  Justice  Breyer’s  general
concern,  but  it  points  to  a  source  of  variability  very  different
from  that  emphasized  by  Justice  Breyer.  Contrary  to  the
common  view,  the  problem  does  not  lie  in  insufficiently  clear
instructions  to  juries.  The  problem  is  instead  the  effort  to
measure  attitudes  in  dollars.  Even  general  and  open-ended
instructions can produce a high degree of predictability if the
response  mode  is  appropriate.  Even  specific  and  tailored
to  produce  a  high  degree  of
instructions  are 
unpredictability if the wrong response mode is used. 118

likely 

For  purposes  of  obtaining  the  virtues  associated  with  the
rule  of  law,  emphasized  by  Justice  Breyer  and  many  others,
the solution lies in counteracting the arbitrariness that comes
from the unbounded dollar scale of dollars. Of course rule of
law  virtues  are  not  the  only  virtues  of  a  legal  system,119  and
                                                                                                   

117 116 S. Ct. at 1605-1607.
118 There is the further problem that juries do not always follow even

detailed instructions. See Hastie, Schkade, and Payne (forthcoming).

119  Cf.  Joseph  Raz,  The  Rule  of  Law  and  Its  Virtue,  in  Joseph  Raz,

The Autonomy of Law (1986).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

55

constraints  on  erratic  awards  may  not  produce  all  of  the
necessary reform. We will shortly turn to these issues.

4. Deterrence and retribution
We have noted that some observers think that the purpose
of punitive damages is to provide optimal deterrence, and we
have referred to a standard economic argument based on this
claim.  Our  findings  here  strongly  support  the  following
conclusion: If optimal deterrence is the purpose of the award
of  punitive  damages,  the  jury  system  is  an  extremely  bad
institution. This is so for two reasons. The first has to do with
the  jury’s  motivations.  The  second  has  to  do  with  the  jury’s
capacities.

in 

those 

intuitions  can  be  overcome 

First, ordinary people do not spontaneously think in terms
of  optimal  deterrence  when  asked  questions  about
appropriate  punishment,  and  it  is  very  hard  to  get  them  to
think  in  these  terms.  People  come  to  the  role  of  juror  with
retributive  intuitions,  and  it  remains  unclear  whether  and  to
what  extent 
the
courtroom.  Perhaps  deterrence  plays  some  role  in  actual
awards,  and  perhaps  it  would  be  possible  to  shift  the  jury’s
attention in the direction of deterrence through more insistent
and  more  carefully  designed  jury  instructions.120  Our  study
does not rule this possibility out of bounds. But together with
follow
other  studies 
instructions on the purpose of punitive awards,121 it does give
                                                                                                   
120  See  Polinsky  and  Shavell,  and  in  particular  the  model  jury
instructions offered as Appendix A. Polinsky and Shavell want the judge to
say:  “Your  principal  task  is  to  estimate  the  likelihood  that  the  defendant
might have escaped having to pay for the harm for which he or she should
be  responsible.  .  .  .  You  should  use  the  Table  below  to  determine  the
punitive  damage  multiplier  that  corresponds  to  your  estimated  probability
of escaping liability.”

jury’s  reluctance 

that  show  a 

to 

121  See  Reid  Hastie,  David  Schkade  &  John  Payne  (forthcoming),
reporting  the  outcomes  of  mock  jury  tests  of  punitive  damages.  After
deliberating  during  which  the  “jurors”  received  copies  of  the  judge’s
instructions,  participants  were  asked  specific  questions  on  the  important
elements  on  which  they  make  judgments  of  punitive  damages.  A  lenient

56

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

reason to questions whether large-scale shifts are likely. Even
if  focused  on  deterrence,  a  jury  will  be  influenced  by  moral
judgments  with  a  retributive  dimension,  and  these  judgments
will  point  in  the  direction  of  high  awards  for  conduct  that  is
outrageous but likely to be detected (perhaps a murder or an
environmental disaster).

Second,  jurors  are  not  likely  to  be  good  at  the  task  of
promoting  optimal  deterrence  even  if  this  is  what  they  are
seeking  to  do.  If,  for  example,  punitive  damage  awards  are
supposed  to  be  grounded  in  the  probability  of  escaping
detection,  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  ordinary  people  are  very
bad  at  making  post  hoc  probability  judgments.  In  order  to
assess the probability of detection with any precision, people
have to master a high degree of technical knowledge about a
wide  variety  of  subjects.  Hindsight  bias  will  almost  inevitably
confuse  the  assessment:122  A  jury  is  likely  to  find  a  bad
outcome  to  have  been  likely  to  occur  if  it  in  fact  occurred.
Various  heuristics  and  confusion  will  in  all  probability  infect
the  assessment.  If  optimal  deterrence  is  the  goal,  some
institution  other  than  a  jury,  probably  an  administrative  body
composed  of  experts  and  charged  with  the  specific  task,
would be much better.

Our  findings  strongly  suggest  that  the  best  justification  of
continued  use  of  the  jury  involves  the  desire  to  elicit,  and  to
make  relevant  for  law,  the  community’s  judgment  about
                                                                                                   
grading of this written, recall-comprehension test yielded a mediam score
of only 5% correct.

Note  also  Anderson  and  MacCoun,  Goal  Conflict 

in  Juror’s
Assessments  of  Compensatory  and  Punitive  Damages  (unpublished
manuscript 1997), showing leakage between compensatory damages and
punitive damages.

122  On  the  general  topic  of  hindsight  bias,  see  Baruch  Fischoff,
Hindsight  =  Foresight:  The  Effect  of  Outcome  Knowledge  on  Judgment
Under Uncertainty, 1 J of Experimental Psychology 288 (1975). See also
Reid Hastie, David Schkade, and John Payne, (forthcoming 1997), which
shows  a  hindsight  bias  directly  for  punitive  damages—a  difference,  in  an
experimental  setting,  of  a  probability  judgment  of  37%  without  hindsight,
and a probability judgment of 71% after hindsight.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

57

appropriate retribution. For those who believe that retribution
is not a good use of the system of civil and criminal law, this
justification will of course be unconvincing. And for those who
believe  that  deterrence  is  the  most  important  ground  for  civil
law, with retribution playing a modest or supplementary role, a
system  that  elicits  and  uses  community  judgments  without
noise will at best produce a modest improvement.

We therefore arrive at a simple conclusion. To the extent
that there is an argument for continued reliance on the jury in
awarding punitive damages, it must depend on the possibility
of  obtaining,  in  individual  cases,  an  understanding  of  the
public’s  judgment  about  the  egregiousness  of  the  wrong  and
the  appropriate  degree  of  response.123  The  task  is  to  find  a
method 
introducing
arbitrariness and noise.

judgment  without 

to  obtain 

that 

5. Isolating objections to the current system
Punitive  damages  reform  should  attempt  to  ensure  that
juries are charged with performing tasks that they can perform
well,  and  should  relieve  juries  from  having  to  perform  tasks
that  they  perform  poorly,  in  a  way  that  produces  excessive
unpredictability,124  confusion,  and  arbitrariness.  And  it  would
be  reasonable  to  react  to  our  study  by  suggesting  a  simple
reform: Juries should decide questions of civil liability, just as
                                                                                                   

in  order 

123 See Galanter and Luban, supra note.
124 Of course there is a question how bad it is for jury judgments to be
unpredictable,  and  what  kinds  of  unpredictability  are  acceptable.  If
prospective  defendants  can  assess  judgments  that  are  unpredictable  in
particular  cases 
to  get  a  sense  of  “expected  value,”
unpredictability  may  not  be  so  bad  from  the  standpoint  of  optimal
deterrence.  One  reason  that  unpredictability  is  bad  is  that  it  may  make
planning  more  difficult  if  expected  value  is  costly  or  impossible  to
calculate, and it may create overdeterrence in risk-averse actors; another
reason  is  that  it  makes  for  a  form  of  unfairness,  since  people  who  are
similarly  situated  are  not  treated  similarly.  Of  course  predictability  is  not
the  only  value.  A  modest  degree  of  unpredictability  may  well  be  better
than  a  system  in  which,  for  example,  jury  judgments  are  predictably  too
low or too high.

58

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

they  do  questions  of  criminal  liability.  But  judges  should
decide  on  the  appropriate  level  of  punitive  damages,  just  as
they  do  criminal  punishment,  subject,  in  both  cases,  to
guidelines  laid  down  in  advance.125  Of  course  there  is  a
possible  problem  with  judicial  judgments  about  punitive
awards,  just  as  in  the  case  of  judicial  choice  of  criminal
sentences:  In  both  cases,  judges  are  scaling  without  a
modulus, and different judges will reach different conclusions,
thus  producing  arbitrariness.  Hence  there  is  good  reason  for
guidelines  and  constraints  on  judges.  In  any  case  our  study
provides strong support for the practice, found in some courts,
of  reviewing  punitive  awards 
they  are
consistent  with  general  outcomes  in  other  cases.  Judges
need not fear that this practice is antipopulist, for as we have
seen,  the  award  of  any  particular  jury  may  well  fail  to  reflect
the  community’s  sentiment  on  the  topic  of  appropriate  dollar
award.

to  ensure 

that 

To  evaluate  these  and  other  possible  reforms,  it  is
important to distinguish, more carefully than we have thus far,
among  three  possible  objections  to  the  idea  of  using  the
juries’  dollar amounts, as the legal system currently does.

The first objection emphasizes sheer unpredictability. The
problems here are that potential defendants are not given fair
notice  and  similarly  situated  people  are  not  treated  similarly,
in large part because any particular jury’s judgment about the
appropriate  dollar  award  is  unlikely  to  reflect  the  judgment  of
the community as a whole about the appropriate dollar award.
The  second  objection  points  to  defective  calibration,  that
is,  to  a  poor  translation  of  punitive  intent  into  dollars.  The
problem  is  that  juries  lack  the  information  that  would  enable
them  to  undertake  a  good  or  accurate  translation,  since
ordinary people cannot know the effects of a particular dollar
award on a particular class of defendants.
                                                                                                   
125  See  Symposium,  The  Federal  Sentencing  Guidelines:  Ten  Years
Later, 91 Nw. L. Rev. 1231 (1997), for various views on the guidelines now
in place.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

59

The  third  objection  is  directed  against  punitive  intent  and
points to improper grounds for judgment.  Here  the  complaint
is that the jury is focusing on irrelevant factors, giving undue
weight to relevant factors, giving insufficient weight to relevant
factors,  or  even 
If  optimal
deterrence is the goal of punitive damages, the outrage model
will  be  quite  unappealing.  Moreover,  public  judgments  are
mediated  by  social  norms,  and 
those  norms  are
objectionable  (as  they  might  be,  for  example,  in  the  area  of
sexual harassment), a noise-free punitive damage judgment is
objectionable too.

ignoring 

relevant 

factors. 

if 

More  particularly,  three  objections  lead  naturally  to  three
different  directions  for  possible  reform.  We  should  stress  at
the outset that all three reforms allow the jury not to focus on
dollars, though for quite different reasons.

We  offer  these  reforms  partly  as  thought  experiments,
designed to help specify problems with the current system. To
evaluate  any  of  them,  and  to  choose  among  them  and  more
familiar  alternatives,  a  great  deal  of  additional  work  would
have to be done, much of it involving a comparative analysis
of different institutions. What we claim to do is to show, on the
basis  of  our  study,  how  legal  goals  mesh,  and  fail  to  mesh,
with  an  understanding  of  the  psychological  underpinnings  of
punitive awards. An important  point in  this connection is that
ordinary  people  are  intuitive  retributivists,  and  there  is  a
serious  question  about  the  role  of  retribution  with  respect  to
corporations  and  firms.126  The  retributive 
is  most
naturally  and  simply  introduced  with  respect  to  people  who
have  imposed  harms;127  the  goal  is  to  make  wrongdoers
suffer. But firms are not persons, and when punitive damages
are  imposed,  the  people  who  are  injured,  or  made  to  suffer,
may not be wrongdoers at all. Thus a punitive damage award
imposed  on  a  firm  may  well  end  up  injuring  not  “the  firm”  so
much as consumers, stockholders, employees, and managers
                                                                                                   

idea 

126 See Polinsky and Shavell, supra note.
127 See Jean Hampton, supra note, at 111.

60

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

who had nothing to do with the underlying wrong. It is far from
clear that juries awarding punitive damages are aware of this
point,  and  it  is  also  far  from  clear  that  they  can  be  easily
convinced that the point is correct.

B. Punitive Damages Reform, I: Community Judgments about

Dollars, or Predictable Populism

1. A modest proposal
From what we have said thus far, the most modest reform
proposal is straightforward, and it is modest indeed. The goal
of  the  modest  reform  is  to  get  a  true  understanding  of
community judgments—true in the sense that it filters out the
noise and arbitrariness that come from asking random groups
of twelve people to come up with (the community’s judgments
about)  dollar  amounts.  If  this  could  be  done  successfully,  it
would, 
the  problem  of
unpredictability by a large factor (in the illustrative data used
here, by a factor of 2.18).

in  one  simple  stroke,  reduce 

We have seen that if particular juries are asked to produce
a dollar award, as an indicator of community sentiment, there
will  be  a  great  deal  of  variability,  and  that  there  is  also  a
degree  of  susceptibility  to  anchors  that  have  little  or  no
normative weight. But if juries are asked to produce not dollar
amounts  but  either  punishment  ratings  or  punishment
rankings, the number that results can be turned into what we
might call “true dollar awards,”  by the simple step of taking the
jury’s  rating  or  ranking  and  using  a  population-based
calibration  function  like  that  described  above  to  produce  a
dollar value.

Because  this  approach  does  what  the  current  system
seeks  to  do  with  so  much  less  noise  and  arbitrariness,  it
should be counted as a nearly unambiguous improvement. It
accepts the sovereignty of community judgments with respect
to punitive damages, even dollar awards, and it uses the jury
to  obtain  an  estimate  of  what  the  population  as  a  whole,  if
equally  informed,  would  want  to  have  done.  The  use  of  a

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

61

calibration  function  obtains  a  more  accurate  reading  of  the
population’s  dollar  judgment,  in  a  way  that  eliminates  errors
introduced by reliance on individual juries for dollar amounts.
Through this route it would be possible to produce much more
predictability without sacrificing anything else.

2. Administrative issues
There is, to be sure, a serious administrative challenge in
generating  and  using  a  calibration  function.  An  especially
hard question is how to define the category of cases against
which any particular case would be assessed.128 There is also
a  question  whether  to  alter  the  calibration  function  when
social norms have changed. But these difficulties may not be
insuperable;  at  least  experimentation  along  these  lines  may
be worthwhile. A set of common scenarios would be devised
in different areas of the law, for which both punishments and
awards  would  be  determined.129  The  calibration  could  be
done  (say)  every  five  years,  to  take  account  of  changing
social norms.

As Part III above shows, the most important step would not
be  especially  difficult  to  carry  out.  Data  would  also  be
collected  on  the  effects  of  firm  size  and  any  other  pertinent
factors. Once this has been done, the procedure in individual
cases  would  be  simple.  The  court  would  elicit  the  jury’s
intention  to  punish;  this,  in  addition  to  firm  size  and  other
factors,  would  be  used  to  come  up  with  an  estimate  of  the
population’s median judgment for that scenario.
                                                                                                   
128  We  have  dealt  here  with  products  liability  cases;  but  is  this  too
narrow  or  too  broad  a  category?  In  the  context  of  discrimination,  for
example,  should  race  and  sex  discrimination  cases  be  separated?  How
neatly  can  contract  and  tort  law  be  separated,  and  what  subdivisions  are
appropriate within those categories?

129  Some  cautionary  notes,  in  the  context  of  pain  and  suffering,
emerge  from  David  Baldus  et  al.,  Improving  Judicial  Oversight  of  Jury
Damages  Assessments:  A  Proposal 
the  Comparatrive
Additur/Remittitur Review of Awards for Nonpecuniary Harms and Punitive
Damages, 80 Iowa Law Review 1109, 1125 (1995), which discuss possible
problems with jury understanding of cases.

for 

62

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

3. Two phases
To  accomplish  this  task,  the  judge  would  be  required  to
put the jury’s focus on intended judgments about punishment
rather than dollars; it is the calibration function that would turn
those  judgments  into  dollars.  Thus  a  two-phase  process
would  be  required.  The  jury  instruction  in  Phase  One  might
read  roughly  like  this:  “Usually,  the  legal  system  awards
damages  in  order  to  compensate  the  plaintiff  for  the  wrong
the  defendant.  These  damages  are  called
done  by 
compensatory damages. But in cases of severe wrongdoing—
extreme  recklessness  or  intentional  harm—the  legal  system
also  allows  you  to  impose  a  punishment,  one  that  goes
beyond  the  amount  necessary  to  compensate  the  plaintiff.
The purpose of this punishment is to deter future wrongdoing
and to reflect your view about the need just for compensation
but  also 
the  special
circumstances  of  the  case.  Any  punishment  will  eventually
take the form of dollars. Your judgment will be translated into
an appropriate dollar amount by taking account of the general
population’s views on how to turn you ranking [or rating] into
dollars.”  The  judge  might  conclude:  “Your  choice  is  very
important. It will be the basis for the financial punishment that
will ultimately be imposed on the defendant.”

for  punishment,  because  of 

4. Ratings and rankings
For the first phase, it is necessary to make two judgments:
about the wording of any questions to be put to the jury, and
about  the  relevant  scale  on  which  the  jury’s  normative
judgment  will  be  expressed. 
to  promote
predictability  in  awards,  perhaps  the  most  obvious  route
would  be  to  require  juries  to  make  judgments  along  a
bounded numerical scale. A jury might, for example, be asked
to  decide  where  the  case  falls  on  a  scale  of  0  to  6  or  0  to
10.130 The advantage of this approach is that it would lead to
                                                                                                   
130 Relevant discussion and a related proposal can be found in David
Improving  Judicial  Oversight  of  Jury  Damages

Baldus  et  al., 

If  a  goal 

is 

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

63

It  may 

greater  predictability  with  respect  to  damage  awards,  and  it
would thus avoid much of the randomness that characterizes
jury  selection  of  dollar  amounts. 
therefore  be
worthwhile for states to experiment with some such approach,
at least in some of the settings that call for punitive damages.
But there are problems with a bounded numerical scale. At
least  if  they  are  accompanied  only  by  verbal  descriptions  of
the sort we have given here, the relevant numbers (0 to 6, 0
to  10)  are  likely  to  be  perceived  as  having  a  highly  artificial
quality.131  In  practice  such  scales  can  work  quite  well;
consider  the  existence  of  popular  and  relatively  informative
movie ratings that use such scales, or ask whether it might be
possible  to  rate  judges,  lawyers,  or  law  review  articles  on
such  a  scale.  But  juries  are  likely  to  be  skeptical  that  the
numbers  have  much  meaning.  There  is  a  further  problem:
With  a  relatively  vague  scale,  different  people  are  free  to
interpret the labels in different ways. Perhaps most important,
our  data  show  that  there  is  more  (implicit)  agreement  on
rankings  than  on  absolute  numbers.  Hence  the  use  of
less  predictability  (though  more
numbers  will  produce 
precision)  than  an  attempt  to  produce  rankings,  though  it  is
still far better than dollars.132
                                                                                                   
Assessments: A Proposal for the Comparatrive Additur/Remittitur Review
of  Awards  for  Nonpecuniary  Harms  and  Punitive  Damages,  80  Iowa  Law
Review  1109  (1995).  The  authors  propose  judicial  review  of  awards  by
reference  to  comparison  cases,  building  on  existing  practice.  Our
proposals represent a more dramatic departure from existing practice.

131 There is also a risk that a small set of numbers will make it difficult
for  the  jury  to  make  enough  distinctions  among  cases;  a  large  set  of
numbers  will  reintroduce  some  of  the  problems  of  an  unbounded  dollar
scale. In some especially heinous cases—for example, O.J. Simpson-style
murders—the jury may well be drawn to the largest possible number (6 or
10),  and  it  is  possible  that  this  will  make  it  harder  to  make  relevant
discussions.

132 The intuition behind this judgment should be straightforward. If you
are  asked  to  assess  something—a  meal,  a  conference,  a  lecture,  a
concert, a brief, a law review article, a judicial opinion—you may well have
a hard time making use of a bounded numerical scale. (On a scale of 0 to

64

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

to  very  egregious  wrongdoing, 

It follows that a superior alternative is probably to provide
juries  not  with  a  bounded  numerical  scale  but  with  a
calibrated  set  of  scenarios  of  punitive  damage  cases,  set  so
as to show mild wrongdoing, not subject to any award, all the
way 
requiring  a  very
substantial  award.133  The  jury  would  be  asked  to  assess  the
case at hand in terms of the sample cases, not with any dollar
amounts  or  even  numbers.  The  jury  could  be  given  a  set  of,
say,  ten  scenarios,  provided  without  any  preset  ordering
(although  the  scenarios  would  have  been  ranked  in  a  large
                                                                                                   
10, how was last night’s dinner?) It is much easier to make comparisons—
to  compare  meals,  conferences,  lecture,  briefs,  and  the  like  against  one
another.  Comparisons  avoid  the  need  to  generate  uniformity  among
heterogeneous people with respect to the meaning of the key terms.

133  See  the  detailed  and  instructive  discussion  of  comparison  cases
for additur and remittitur judgments, in Baldus et al., supra note, at 1153-
1160;  see  also  the  discussion  of  pain  and  suffering  schedules  in  Robert
Bovbjerg  et  al.,  Valuing  Life  and  Limb  in  Tort:  Scheduling  “Pain  and
Suffering,”  83 NW L Rev 908 (1989).

Note, however, that a great deal depends on the choice of the relevant
comparison  set.  If  the  comparison  cases  are  extremely  outrageous,  it
would be possible to lower punitive damages award in a systematic way. If
the comparison cases are not so bad, it should be possible to ensure high
awards.  There  is  also  a  possibility  of  framing  effects.  The  phenomena  of
“tradeoff contrast”  and “extremeness aversion”  may  well  play  a  large  role
in  jury  determination.  Mark  Kelman,  Yuval  Rottenstreich,  and  Amos
Tversky, Context-Dependence in Legal Decisionmaking, 25 J Legal Stud.
287,  288  (1996).  Extremeness  aversion  refers  to  the  fact  that  people  do
not  like  to  take  a  position  that  falls  on  a  pole  on  a  continuum;  hence
people like an option better if it is intermediate. Extremeness aversion can
produce  “compromise  effects,”  as  when  people  rank  an  option  under
consideration  in  between  the  poles.  Tradeoff  contrast  arises  when  the
option under consideration is evaluated more favorably in the presence of
similar  but  clearly  inferior  options  than  it  appears  in  the  absence  of  such
options. Id. at 288-289. (The option can also be evaluated less favorably
in  the  presence  of  similar  but  clearly  superior  options.)  A  good  way  to
handle  extremeness  aversion  is  with  cases  that  are  genuinely  extreme—
involving,  for  example,  high  outrage  numbers  for  genuinely  rare  and
outrageous  cases,  and  low  outrage  numbers  for  cases  that  do  not
plausibly involve intentional or even reckless wrongdoing.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

65

pretest).  The  jury’s  task  would  be  to  compare  the  case  at
hand successively to each of the ten scenarios, to determine
whether it is worse or less bad. The relevant score would be
the number of scenarios that are better, plus 1. This gives you
a  ranking  of  the  case  in  the  set  of  11,  without  requiring  the
jury to rank all 11. There is no real need for the jury to spend
time  discussing  the  details  of  the  orderings  of  fictitious
scenarios. Different scenarios would be provided for different
areas  of  the  law:  libel,  products  liability,  damages  to  natural
resources,  assault,  and  so  forth.134  The  jury  could  say,  for
example,  that  of  the  six  cases  provided,  the  case  at  hand  is
the next-to-worst, or closer to 5 than to 4. The jury would also
be  allowed  to  go  off  the  scale,  by  deciding  that  the  case  at
hand  is  less  deserving  of  punishment  than  the  least  serious
cases,  and  also  that  it  is  deserves  more  severe  punishment
than the most serious case.

A key advantage of this approach is that the jury would be
selecting  a  dollar  amount  only  implicitly,  and  not  explicitly.135
As compared to a bounded scale, it requires a more concrete
and  intuitive  task,  and  thus  may  stand  as  the  best  way  of
promoting  predictability  while  maintaining  a  substantial  role
for the jury. There are some disadvantages too. It is possible
that  with  rankings,  the  jury  will  disagree  with  the  legal
the  whole
system’s  rankings,  and 
                                                                                                   
134  Thus,  for  example,  Baldus  et  al.,  supra,  at  1154-1155,  discuss
certain grounds for creating a typology for purposes of additur or remititur
intentional
for  medical  malpractice, 
wrongdoing,  (1)  obstruction  of  justice,  such  as  destruction  of  evidence  of
negligence,  (2)  other  dishonesty,  such  as  failure  to  disclose  to  patient
available  options,  (3)  delivery  of  nonapproved  care,  (4)  intent  to  cause
harm in delivery of care. There is a similar hierarchy for willful disregard.
Id.  What  we  are  suggesting  is  that  ideas  of  this  kind  might  be  used  to
develop scenarios for jury use.

this  may  confound 

the  context  of 

including, 

in 

135  If  the  no-comparison  effect  had  been  stronger,  this  procedure
would have been clearly superior. The limited effect of the no- comparison
condition merely removes one reason for adopting the procedure, but it is
still  far  better  than  the  status  quo,  and  seems  better  than  any  alternative
that seeks to maintain a role for the jury in registering its moral judgment.

66

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

enterprise. It could be argued that the ranking might serve to
educate jurors about community values and judgments, but it
cannot be denied that some juries might reject what they are
told.  On  this  count  ratings  have  an  advantages.  Another
disadvantage of this approach is that it requires a legislature
or commission to generate the scenarios, a more complex and
contested  task  than  that  involved  in  using  a  bounded
numerical  scale.  Our  overall  judgment  is  that  rankings  are
likely  to  work  better  than  ratings;  doubtless  a  fair  bit  of
experimentation  would  make  sense  to  find  what  works  best.
An  experimental  study,  in  the  context  of  pain  and  suffering
awards,  has  shown  that  the  practice  of  offering  examples  of
in  similar  cases  can  dramatically  decrease
awards 
variability.136  Our  own  study  of  context  provides  additional
support  for  the  general  idea  of  providing  a  context  of  cases,
and the benefits would extend to both rankings and ratings.

5. Using Scenarios and Cases: A Note on Existing Practice
Some  aspects  of  these  proposals  may  seem  unusual.
Indeed,  it  has  long  been  impermissible  to  describe  award
amounts to juries through actual or hypothetical cases, mostly
because  of 
the  allegedly  prejudicial  effect  of  such
references.137  Moreover,  judicial  review  of  punitive  damage
judgments tends to be highly individualized, and hence to rely
on context-independent intuitions (putting to one side the fact
that  past  experience  may  produce  a  sense  of  context  and
comparison).138  Thus  adjustments  are  often  made  by
reference  to  the  ratio  between  compensatory  and  punitive
                                                                                                   
136  Michael  Saks  et  al.,  Reducing  Variability  in  Civil  Jury  Awards,  21
Law and Human Behavior 243, 250-51 (1997). Of course there is a risk of
strategic  behavior  on  the  jury’s  part  if  the  jury  becomes  aware  of  the
relevant  conversion  function,  and  steps  must  be  taken,  perhaps  through
jury instructions, to counter this risk if it materializes.

137 D.C. Barrett, Annotation, 15 A.L. R. 3d 1144 (1967).
138 See Baldus et al., supra note, at 1132-1133.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

67

damages (a crude test, for reasons suggested above) and ad
hoc judgments about what seems “shocking.”139

The idea of examining comparison cases is not, however,
entirely  foreign  to  the  legal  culture.  Damage  schedules  and
scaling through examples have been used successfully in the
settlement of mass tort cases.140 Such ideas have often been
discussed in the context of pain and suffering awards.141 In a
prominent case involving such awards, Judge Kearse, writing
for the Second Circuit, attempted a careful comparison of the
case at hand with twelve other cases.142 Nor has comparison
been unavailable in the context of punitive damages, at least
in the process of judicial review.143 In an influential case, the
court of appeals for the Ninth Circuit said that a district court
should  compare  other  punitive  damage  cases  to  a  “a  figure
derived 
the  case  at  hand.”144  And
comparison of cases is a pervasive aspect of appellate review
of  punitive  awards,  furnishing  a  constraint  on  arbitrariness
and  inequality.145  Of  course  the  Supreme  Court  has  not
                                                                                                   
139  See,  e.g.,  Malandris  v.  Merrill  Lynch,  703  F.2d  1152,  1177  (10th

facts  of 

from 

the 

Cir. 1981); Baldus et al., supra note, at 1133.

140  See  Francis  McGovern,  The  Alabama  DDT  Settelment  Fund,  53
Law  &  Contemp.  Probs.  61  (1990):  Francis  McGovern,  Resolving  Mass
Tort Litigation, 69 B. U. L. Rev. 659 (1989).

141 David Baldus et al., Improving Judicial Oversight of Jury Damages
Assessments: A Proposal for the Comparative Additur/Remittur Review of
Awards For Nonpecuniary Harms and Punitive Damages, 80 Iowa L. Rev.
1109,  1122-1225,  1134-1137  (1995);  Robert  Bovbjerg  et  al.,  Valuing  Life
and  Limb  in  Tort:  Scheduling  “Pain  and  Suffering,”  83  NW  L  Rev  908
(1989).

142 748 F.2d 740 (2d Cir. 1980).
143  See,  e.g.,  Bogan  v.  Stroud,  958  F.2d  180,  186  (7th  Cir.  1992);
Cash  v.  Beltmann  N.  Am.  Co.,  800  F.2d  109,  111  n.  3  (7th  Cir.  1990);
Estate of Korf v . A. O. Smith, 917 F.2d 480, 485 (10th Cir. 1990); Ismail
v.  Cohen,  899  F.2d  183,  186  (2d  Cir.  1990);  Schultz  v.  Thomas,  649  F.
Supp. 620, 624-25 (E.D. Wis. 1986); Sherrod v. Piedmont Aviation, 516 F.
Sup. 46, 56 (E. D. Tenn. 1978).

144 Morgan v. Woessner, 997 F.2 1244, 1257 (9th Cir. 1993).
145 See Klein v. Grynberg, 44 F. 3d 1497 (10th Cir. 1995);Stafford v.
Puro,  63  F.3d  1436  (7th  Cir.  1995):  Allahar  v.  Zahora,  59  F.3d  693  (7th

68

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

juries 

insisted on this requirement as a matter of constitutional law.
In  an  echo  of  some  early  death  penalty  cases,146  the  Court
said  that  each  case  might  be  taken  as  sui  generis.  Because
to  “make  a
punitive  damage 
judgments  require 
facts  and
qualitative  assessment  based  on  a  host  of 
it.
to 
circumstances  unique 
Because  no 
identical,  meaningful
comparisons of such awards are difficult to make.”147 Thus the
Court said that a comparative approach cannot be a “  ‘test’  for
assessing  the  constitutionality  of  punitive  damage  awards”
even though it would not “rule out the possibility that the fact
that  an  award  is  significantly  larger  than  those  in  apparently
similar circumstances”  might  be  relevant  to  the  constitutional
issue.148

the  particular  case  before 

two  cases  are 

truly 

to 

reluctance 

The  Court’s 

impose  a  constitutional
requirement of comparing cases is understandable in light of
the  Court’s  caution  about  proceeding  at  the  constitutional
level  in  the  face  of  principles  of  federalism  and  gaps  in  the
                                                                                                   
Cir. 1995): Ross v. Black and Decker, Inc., 977 F.2d 1178 (7th Cir. 1992):
Vasbinder  v.  Scott,  976  F.2d  118  (2nd  Cir.  1992);  Kimzey  v.  Wal-Mart
Stores, Inc., 107 F.3d 568 (8th Cir. 1997): Lee v. Edwards, 101 F.3d 805
(2nd Cir. 1996): King v. Macri, 993 F.2d 294 (2nd Cir. 1993): Michelson v.
Hamada, 36 Cal.Rptr.2d 343 (Cal. Ct. App. 1994): Wollersheim v. Church
of  Scientology,  6  Cal.Rptr.2d  532  (Cal.  Ct.  App.  1992):  Baume  v.  212  E.
10  N.Y.  Bar  Ltd.,  634  N.Y.S.  2d  478  (N.Y.  App.  Div.  1995);  Parkin  v.
Cornell University Inc., 581 N.Y.S.2d 914 (N.Y. App. Div. 1992):

146 See Woodson v. North Carolina, 428 U.S. 280 (1976) (invalidating

a mandatory death penalty statute).

147  TXO  Production  Corp.  v.  Alliance  Resources,  509  US  443,  457

(1993).

148  Concurring,  Justice  Kennedy  pointed  to  the  high  likelihood  of
legitimate inconsistency in jury results. Partly this is, in his view, a function
of the fact that a jury is empanneled in a single case, not as a permanent
body; partly this is a function of the generality of of jury instructions. 509
U.S.  at  472.  Thus  a  lower  court  suggested  that  review  of  other  jury
determination “would undercut the jury system”  and that various numbers
are  based  on  the  fact  that  “juries  hear  unique  facts  and  are  given
dissimilar instructions.”  In Re Exxon Valdez, 1995 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 12952,
12959 n. 7 (D. Ala. 1995).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

69

Court’s  knowledge  of  the  actual  world  of  punitive  damage
that  such  a
awards.  Nothing  said  here  demonstrates 
requirement  would  be  sensible  as  a  matter  of  constitutional
law.  But  it  is  clear  that  a  principal  concern  with  the  existing
system  stems  from  inadequate  constraints  on  jury  discretion,
and  it  is  now  clear  that  a  serious  problem  arises  from  the
response  mode  of  dollars  and  the  difficulty  of  generating
predictable dollar amounts. Our findings fortify the wisdom of
the appellate practice of comparing punitive damage awards,
and  they  suggest  the  possibility  of  a  constitutional  problem
with awards that appear, in practice, to be stabs in the dark.

C. Punitive Damages Reform, II: Using Punitive Intent but not

Dollars, or Technocratic Populism
The  second  kind  of  reform,  we  have  suggested,  would
attempt to elicit the jury’s punitive intent, or its judgment about
appropriate  punishment,  but  would  not  ask  the  community  to
make  decisions  about  dollar  amounts.  On  this  view,  it  is
agreed  that  the  jury’s intention  to  punish  is  what  should
govern  punitive  damage  awards.  In  this  way,  the  outrage
model is accepted on normative grounds. The problem is that
the most modest reform proposal, just described, perpetuates
the crucial defect of the current system, that is, it relies on the
abilities  of  ordinary  citizens  and  hence  the  community  to
translate  punitive  intention  into  dollars  (which,  we  have
argued,  results  largely  in  stabs  in  the  dark).  There  is  an
analogy here with the criminal justice system as it now stands:
Juries  make  decisions  about  criminal  liability  (decisions  that
undoubtedly  have  a  dimension  of  “punitive  intent”);  but
judges,  within  the  constraints  of  applicable  guidelines,  make
decisions  about  sentencing,  presumably  because  of  their
greater expertise and insulation from irrelevant or illegitimate
factors.

Here  is  a  simple  argument  for  the  second  kind  of  reform.
People  are  unlikely  to  know  what  it  takes  to  hurt  different
people of different means through financial punishment. They
certainly  do  not  know  what  it  takes  to  hurt  an  organization.

70

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

Whether  or  not  an  organization  is  involved,  they  are  also
using unbounded dollar scales, lacking a modulus that would
give  meaning  to  their  estimates  of  different  magnitudes.
Hence  it  would  be  necessary  to  devise  a  translation  formula
that depends on the community’s normative judgments about
intended punishment, which are not only predictable but also
worth  using,  but  not  on  community  judgments  about  dollar
amounts, which can be made more predictable but which may
not  be  worth  using.  To  do  this  well,  it  would  be  desirable  to
translate the jury’s intention to punish with expert assistance.
Here are the two phases of a possible reform.

1. Phase one in the two-phase system: the jury’s role
If the legal system is interested in the jury’s punitive intent,
but  not  in  the  community’s  judgments  about  dollar  awards,
phase  one  would  look  very  much  like  phase  one  in  the
modest recommendation described above. The goal here too
would  be  to  obtain  the  jury’s  judgment  about  ratings  or
rankings. Thus the judge’s instruction might be similar to that
described above, but with a different ending, such as “It is the
job of the judge and the legislature, and not the jury, to decide
on specific dollar amounts. Your job is to help in that task by
informing  the  court  of  how  severely,  in  your  view,  the
defendant deserves to be punished.”  Here too there is a good
argument  that  rankings  are  preferable  to  ratings,  because
they  are  less  artificial  and  do  not  run  up  against  a  judgment
that  the  numbers  on  a  bounded  scale  are  arbitrary  and
meaningless.

2.  Calibration  and  phase  two:  translating  jury  judgments

into dollars

Phase  two,  we  have  noted,  involves  the  translation  of  a
jury’s  normative  judgment—of  intent  to  punish—into  dollars.
We  assume  that  the  jury’s  judgment  about  appropriate
punishment  is  the  appropriate  foundation  for  the  award  and
that  the  problem  for  correction  is  that  a  jury  is  in  a  poor
position  to  know  what  dollar  awards  will  actually  do.  In  that

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

71

case,  the  point  of  a  good  translation  is  to  ensure  that  the
expressed  punitive  intention  is  turned  into  awards  that  are
both  predictable  and  faithful  to  what  the  jury  truly  intends  to
happen. The translating institution would have to know a great
deal about the effects of dollar awards on both individuals and
firms. It would also have to make judgments about the effects
of the defendant’s income and wealth. Of course the judgment
about  how  to  translate  would 
involve  many  evaluative
judgments.  A  legislature  or  commission  charged  with  making
those  judgments  might  ask,  for  example,  about  the  effects  of
various kinds of awards on both individuals and firms. When
high  punitive  awards  are  given,  how  exactly  do  firms  suffer,
and  are  the  people  who  suffer  high-level  officials,  clerical
workers,  or  consumers?  The  judgment  about  dollar  awards
would emerge through engagement with such issues.

D.  Improper  Grounds  for  Judgment  and  the  Partial  or
Complete Elimination of Juries: Bureaucratic Rationality?

1. An insufficiently explored problem
Our findings put in sharp relief a large and almost entirely
unexplored  problem:  Whether,  in  light  of  what  is  or  might  be
known about human psychology and cognition, lay people are
willing  and  able  to  make  judgments  in  the  way  that  the  legal
system deems desirable. There is good reason to believe, for
example,  that  if  punitive  damages  are  designed  to  produce
optimal  deterrence,  juries  should  be  eliminated,  for  it  is
doubtful that they can be made to carry out that task. If this is
the goal of punitive damages, surely it would be better for the
judgment  to  be  made  by  a  judge  or  (better  still)  by  a
specialized  regulatory  agency  entrusted  with  precisely  that
task.

Under  the  most  natural  justification  for  allowing  punitive
damages to be awarded by juries, punitive awards should be
seen as serving a retributive or expressive function, in which
social norms are brought to bear on certain behavior, offering
a  public  “statement”  about  appropriate  outrage  and

72

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

punishment.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  judgments  about
outrage  and  punishment  may  diverge  from  judgments  about
optimal deterrence; people may want to punish a murderer via
punitive  damages  even  if  the  probability  of  detection  was
100%.  Our  discussion  thus  far  suggests  a  simple  idea:  if
juries are appropriately used, it is because their intuitions are
more  or 
they  can  be
adequately  disciplined.  We  know  a  good  deal  about  these
intuitions:  high  sensitivity  to  outrage  (which  probably  implies
low  sensitivity  to  detection  probability),  substantial  sensitivity
to  harm  (which  may  not  be  fully  expressed  in  the  amount  of
compensatory  damages),  great  sensitivity  to  firm  size,  and  a
retributive focus.

less  acceptable,  assuming 

that 

A  decision  to  retain  the  jury  system  means  that  these
intuitions  are  appropriately  used 
for  purposes  of  civil
punishment, at least as a good first approximation. But if our
diagnosis  of  the  intuitions  is  correct,  there  is  a  risk  from  a
translation  formula:  juries  may  feel  exposed  to  the  possibility
of being ignored, and may respond by behaving strategically.
Thus  there  is  a  limit  to  the  extent  to  which  the  translation
formula can stray from common intuitions.

2.  Improper  grounds  for  judgment?  Punitive  damages

reform, III

The  most  serious  objection  to  our  second  proposal
therefore  comes  from  the  view  that  juries  do  not  and  cannot
easily  be  made  to  base  their  decisions  on  the  proper
grounds.149  On  this  view,  the  problem  is  that  the  intention  to
punish,  even  if  well-translated,  is  not  an  adequate  way  to
assess  punitive  damage  awards,  because  it  is,  from  the
                                                                                                   
149  See  Hastie  et  al.,  supra  note.  In  that  study,  two-thirds  of  mock-
juries  that  deliberated  to  a  verdict  decided  that  punitive  damages  were
warranted  in  actual  cases  in  which  appellate  and  trial  judges  had
concluded  otherwise.  This  strong  tendency  to  find  liability  for  punitive
damages was partly a product of the jurors’  failure to consider the judge’s
instructions;  juries  that  discussed  those  instructions  more  fully  were  less
likely to impose punitive damage liability. Id.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

73

normative point of view, too sensitive to irrelevant factors, and
too  insensitive  to  relevant  factors.  In  the  criminal  law,  juries
are not asked to identify their punitive intent, with a separate
calibration by the judge; instead the determination is made by
the judge subject to the sentencing guidelines. Why, it might
be  asked,  wouldn’t  the  same  approach  make  sense  for
punitive awards?

in 

least 

The basic claim here would be that juries cannot be used
to  promote  the  aims,  properly  understood,  of  the  system  of
three  possible
punitive  damages.  There  are  at 
objections.  The  first  is  that  retributive  or  expressive  goals
would  be  better  carried  out  via  the  criminal  law,  or  even  by
regulatory  law  at  the  local,  state,  and  national  levels.
Certainly 
the  environmental  area,  expressive  and
retributive  motivations  have  played  a  large  role  in  areas  not
involving 
issue  whether
retributive judgments by juries can be sufficiently informed by
relevant  facts,  and  made  reliably  to  express  relevant  values,
so to serve as a sensible adjunct to the remaining fabric of the
law.  Even  if  we  focus  on  retributive  goals,  can  punitive
damages be paid to fit with the rest of the law, so as to create
a sensible regime of retribution?

is  a  continuing 

juries.  There 

The  second  objection  would  be  that  deterrence  is  the
appropriate  goal  of  punitive  damages  and  that  juries  cannot
be  made  willing  and  able  to  inquire  reliably  into  how  to
achieve deterrent goals. It appears that outrage is inattentive,
or insufficiently attentive, to factors that are central to the goal
of  optimal  deterrence,  most  prominently  the  probability  of
detection.  If  this  is  so,  then  an  administrative  or  regulatory
body would be better. Certainly it would seem that the inquiry
into the probability of detection is a factual one that juries lack
the  information  to  undertake  properly.  And  if  outrage  is
attentive to irrelevant factors, the case for abandoning the jury
is  strong,  even  or  perhaps  especially  when  some  form  of
punishment  is  desirable.  Predictability  is  obtainable,  as
suggested  in  our  earlier  reform  proposals,  but  perhaps

74

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

without  satisfying  the  substantive  goals  of  a  well-functioning
system of punishment.

intended  punishment  should, 

The  third  objection  would  be  that  existing  community
judgments  about 
in  some
contexts,  be  “impeached”  by  legislative  deliberation.  The
community’s  sentiment  might  depend,  for  example,  on  social
norms  that  the  legal  system  should  not  recognize.  Thus  it
might  be  thought  that  in  some  cases,  the  community’s
judgments are too lenient or too severe. In the area of racial
discrimination or sexual harassment, a legislative body might
question what juries are likely to do; perhaps juries would be
insufficiently  sympathetic  to  plaintiffs  who  suffer  from  injuries
not  fully  recognized  as  such  by  existing  social  norms.  Juries
are  emphatically  populist  institutions;  in  a  way  our  study’s
basic  point  has  been  to  give  more  precise  content  to  this
commonplace.  In  a  nonpopulist  republic  that  sometimes
distrust community norms, displacement of general sentiment
is hardly rare.

If  we  agree  that  the  intention  to  punish  is  relevant  to  the
punitive  award,  but  not  decisive,  there  is  a  simple  response:
Use  the  jury’s  intention  to  punish  as  one  among  a  set  of
factors for judicial consideration in imposing punitive damage
awards.  The  judge  might  be  required  to  consider  as  well  the
size  of  the  defendant,  the  probability  of  detection,  the  illicit
character  of  the  defendant’s  gains,  and  other  factors.  A
general requirement of this kind would not impose enormous
demands  on  the  legislature  involved  in  punitive  damage
reform. As just stated, however, a risk with such an approach
arises  from  the  fact  that  weights  have  not  been  given  to  the
various factors; the absence of weights raises the danger that
judicial  determinations  will  also  suffer  from  unpredictability.
Hence  the  legislature  or  commission  might  attempt  to  give
greater  guidance,  by, 
for  example,  offering  scenarios
accompanied  by  dollar  awards,  creating  ranges,  or  providing
floors and ceilings.

Certainly  more  dramatic  alternatives  can  be  imagined,
jury  entirely.  An

that  dispense  with  a 

those 

including 

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

75

administratively-operated  schedule  of  fines  and  penalties
would  seem  better  than  juries  at  producing  deterrence,  for
such  a  system  would  reduce  the  costs  of  decision  and
probably  reduce  the  costs  of  error  as  well.  There  are  many
analogies.  Discussion  of  pain  and  suffering  awards  has
included “technocratic”  suggestions  designed  substantially to
reduce  the  jury’s  role  in  the  interest  of  more  consistent  and
more  expert  judgments.150  In  the  context  of  damages  to
natural  resources,  it  has  been  suggested  that  contingent
valuation  should  be  replaced  by  a  schedule  of  damages
based on categories of harm;151 in this way an antecedent set
of  administrative  or  legislative  judgments  would  form  the
it
backdrop 
unnecessary  to  ask  what  may  be  hopelessly  uninformative
questions of individuals about their willingness to pay.

judgments  by  a 

thus  making 

trustee, 

for 

There are real-world precedents for this kind of approach
in many domains of law, in which ad hoc determinations have
been replaced with a system designed to produce more in the
way  of  coherence  and  rationality.  The  system  of  workers’
the  high
compensation  was  created  partly  because  of 
decision  costs  and  randomness  produced  by  case-by-case
jury judgments about, for example, the value of a lost limb.152
In  its  current  form,  workers’  compensation  attempts  to  deal
with  problems  of  valuation  by  placing  a  fixed  dollar  value  on
various injuries through a pre-determined schedule produced
by a legislature or administrative agency.153 The problem with
the workers’  compensation system is its crudeness; it ignores
                                                                                                   
150 See Baldus, supra note, at 1125-1131; Bovjberg et al., supra note,

at 923

151  See  Richard  B.  Stewart,  Damages  to  Natural  Resources,  in
Analyzing  Superfund  219,  241-44  (Richard  L.  Revesz  and  Richard  B.
Stewart eds. 1995).

152  See  Richard  Epstein,  Cases  and  Materials  on  Torts  1014-1038

(1994).

153 Id. at 1035-1038.

76

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

possibly  relevant  individual  variations.  Its  virtue  lies  in  its
speed, inexpensiveness, predictability, and consistency.154

In a related but more recent shift, the process of case-by-
case judgment with respect to sentencing has been replaced
by  the  more  standardized  Sentencing  Guidelines.  A  central
goal of the guidelines is to discipline the process of “mapping”
complex  normative  judgments  onto  a  relatively  less  bounded
scale of criminal punishments.155  The  fact  that  judges,  rather
than 
traditionally  made  decisions  about
appropriate  sentences  raises  a  question  about  why  a  similar
course  is  not  followed  for  punitive  damages.156  The  basic
point is that in both of these cases, a process of bureaucratic
rationalization  has  replaced  one  of  relatively  ad  hoc
judgments;  it  is  easy  to  imagine  a  similar  development  with
punitive damages.

juries,  have 

An  even  more  relevant  model  can  be  found  in  the  “grid”
used  for  social  security  disability  determinations,  which  uses
age,  educational  attainment,  and  residual  functional  capacity
to  produce  standardized 
judgments  about  disability.157
Administrative  law  judges  are  asked  to  make  case-specific
judgments, which become part of an assessment governed by
the rule-like “grid.”  It is useful to ask, as a thought experiment,
why  juries,  rather  than  grid-governed  administrative  law
judges,  are  not  asked  to  make  disability  determinations.
                                                                                                   

154 See id.
155 See Mashaw, supra note, at 150-165.
156  There  are  of  course  differences  between  the  two  settings.  The
distinctive stigma associated with criminal punishment may make it seem
especially  important  to  insulate  judgments  from  the  kinds  of  passion  and
zeal that might operate in a jury. That stigma may also make a degree of
specialized  experience,  and  even  guidelines,  especially  important.  And
juries  do,  of  course,  have  some  control  over  sentencing  through  choices
about  criminal  liability,  especially  when  there  are  different  theories  of
liability.

157  See  generally  Jerry  Mashaw,  Due  Process  in  the  Administrative
State  (1984);  see  also  Rubin,  supra,  discussing  administrative  fines
(without,  however,  showing  that  the  problems  posed  by  scaling  without  a
modulus have been overcome).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

77

Surely  the  answer  is  that  jury  determinations  would  suffer
from a range of problems, including insufficient specialization
and  expertise,  inevitable  arbitrariness  and  unpredictability,
and confusion stemming from the use of an unfamiliar scale.
But  if  jury  judgments  would  be  inappropriate  for  disability
for  punitive
determinations,  why  do 
damages,  or 
judgments  about
compensation  in  cases  involving  pain  and  suffering  or  libel?
Any  answer  would  have  to  refer  to  the  legitimate  domain  of
populism in law, an issue to which we return below.

they  make  sense 

that  matter 

for 

for 

the 

Radical  changes  of  the  kind  just  discussed  call  for  a
likely  performance  of  different
comparison  of 
institutions.  Dramatic  changes  might  be
governmental 
criticized  on  the  ground  that  the  populist  elements  of  jury
assessment should be retained, in order to ensure that public
outrage  plays  a  significant  role  in  the  legal  system.  It  is  also
possible to fear that technocratic substitutes for the jury would
be  subject  to  pathologies  of  their  own,  perhaps  because  of
their  own  biases,  and  because  of  the  pressures  likely  to  be
imposed  by  well-organized  private  groups.  If  so,  the  more
modest reforms are better. We have sought to undertake the
first  step  toward  that  evaluation:  specifying  the  underlying
considerations  with  a  better  understanding  of  what  produces
punitive  awards.  The  disadvantage  of  the  most  extreme
departures  from  the  current  system  is  also  their  advantage:
They  would  not  rely  on  the  jury’s  normative  judgment  about
outrageousness  and  intended  punishment.  What  we  have
proposed is that there are ways to retain this goal while also
diminishing the unpredictability of punitive damage awards.

E. Mixed Approaches, Caps, and Multipliers

It  is  possible  to  imagine  mixed  approaches,  drawing  on
different  aspects  of  our  proposals.  For  example,  a  jury  might
be  provided  with  a  preselected  set  of  exemplar  cases,
accompanied by the damages actually or reasonably awarded
in  these  cases;  its  job  might  be  to  assess  damages  by
comparing  the  case  at  hand  to  the  preselected  cases.  This

78

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

approach  would  not  take  the  whole  subject  of  dollar  awards
away from the jury; it would attempt to root punitive awards in
a  set  of  antecedents  judgments  that  could  reasonably  be
compared  with  the  case  at  hand.  The  damages  in  the
exemplar cases might be based on actual past judgments, on
judgments  of  mock  juries,  or  on  judgments  of  experts  in  the
particular area.

Other mixed approaches might attempt to supply a kind of
modulus.  Juries  might,  for  example,  be  given  average  dollar
awards  for  the  type  of  injury  at  issue,  or  intervals  (showing
where a certain percentage of awards for similar injuries fell),
or  both  average  dollar  awards  and  intervals.158  Doubtless  a
degree  of  experimentation  would  help  show  which  approach
works best.

Currently, both the federal government and the states are
discussing  more  conventional  reforms,  which  would  impose
caps, or require punitive damages to be within some multiple
of  compensatory  damages,  or  allow  judges  to  have  a  larger
role in disciplining jury awards.159 We might compare various
reform  proposals  by  asking  which  would  contain  the  lowest
sum of decision costs and error costs, recognizing that there
is  no  simple  metric  for  assessing  these  kinds  of  “costs.”  It  is
clear that the chief advantage of caps and multipliers is their
simplicity and low administrative cost; their chief disadvantage
is  that  they  are  unlikely  to  do  much  to  decrease  error  costs,
and they may even increase them.

If  the  problem  is  that  juries  are  not  now  made  to  think  in
terms  of  optimal  deterrence,  both  caps  and  multipliers  are
extremely  crude.  There  is  no  reason  to  think  that  either  of
these reforms would ensure that punitive awards are tailored
to  compensate  for  the  likelihood  that  injured  parties  will  not
bring  suit.  If  optimal  deterrence  is  the  goal,  the  best  solution
would  be  to  abandon  the  jury  and  to  delegate  power  to  an
institution  willing  and  able  to  think  well  about  optimal
                                                                                                   

158 See Michael Saks et al., supra note, at 149.
159 See note supra.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

79

deterrence. If the problem is that isolated juries come up with
arbitrary  or  unpredictable  outcomes,  and  if  the  purpose  of
reform  is  to  ensure  that  punitive  damage  awards  capture
either the community’s intentions with respect to dollar awards
or the community’s  judgments  with  respect  to  punitive  intent,
the  conventional  proposals  are  also  far  inferior  to  those  we
have discussed here.

A  cap,  a  multiplier,  or  judicial  oversight  will  obviously  do
little  to  ensure  expression  of  community  will  with  respect  to
either  dollars  or  punitive  intent.  A  cap  has  one  important
advantage;  it  is  easily  administered,  and  it  may  prevent
awards  that  are  plainly  excessive.  But  a  cap  is  of  course
crudely  tailored,  and  it  may  even  increase  variability,  partly
because the cap may serve to anchor jury judgments and thus
draw jurors to the upper bound.160 The best that can be said
about  a  cap  is  that  with  little  administrative  cost,  it  will
eliminate the most egregiously large judgments, but this virtue
comes with many vices.

A damage multiplier might be a bit better, in the sense that
it  would  also  have  low  decision  costs  while  allowing  more
flexibility than a cap by permitting very high awards when the
compensatory  damages  are  especially  serious—while  also
having  the  advantage  of  preventing  a  jury  from  imposing
unreasonable  punishments  on  a  individual  or  a  corporation.
But any multiplier would have crudeness of its own. No theory
of punitive damages justifies a multiplier approach.

Of  the  proposed  reforms,  a  shift  from  jury  to  judicial
determinations  of  punitive  damages  appears  to  the  most
promising. Such a shift may well produce improvements over
the current system, at least if it were thought that the relative
populism of the jury allows illegitimate or irrelevant factors to
                                                                                                   
160 See Michael Saks et al., Reducing Variability in Civil Jury Awards,
21  Law  and  Human  Behavior  243  (1997  (finding  that  caps  are  likely  to
increase  variability  in  the  context  of  noneconomic  compensatory  losses).
See  also  V.B.  Hinsz  and  K.  E.  Indahl,  Assimilation  To  Anchors  for
Damage  Awards  in  a  Mock  Civil  Trial,  25  J.  Applied  Social  Psych.  991
(1995) (finding anchoring effect from caps).

80

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

play  a  role,  or  that  a  judge,  because  of  her  experience  with
multiple  cases,  can  make  more  informed  judgments.  (Again
compare criminal sentencing, of course undertaken by judges
rather  than  juries.)  Judges  do  reduce  punitive  awards  that
appear  excessive,  and  because  of  their  experiences  judges
have some comparative advantages;161 it is likely that a more
general  shift 
to
comparison  cases  would  produce  improvements.  But  judges
are  not  likely  to  be  able 
the  community’s
sentiments with respect to either dollars or punitive intent, and
if the community’s sentiments are irrelevant or only part of the
appropriate  inquiry,  probably  an  administrative  agency,  with
regulatory  goals  and
more  detailed  understanding  of 
instruments, should discipline the judge’s inquiry.

judicial  control  with  reference 

to  capture 

toward 

The  most  important  point  is  that  judges  too  are  likely  to
have  difficulty  in  mapping  normative  judgments  onto  dollar
amounts,  and  hence  while  judicial  judgments  may  reduce
variance,  there  is  likely  to  be  a  continuing  problem  of  erratic
judgments  or  use  of  anchors  that  introduce  arbitrariness  of
their  own.  Judicially  assessed  punitive  awards  might  well
replicate  some  of  the  problems  with  judicially  determined
sentences. Thus any movement from jury to judicial control of
punitive damage awards might well be accompanied by some
form  of  scaling  or  scheduling,  perhaps  building  on  the  old
practices  of  additur  and  remittitur 
is
psychologically  well-informed.162  As  we  have  suggested,
various  reform  combinations  and  alternatives  might  be
imagined,  including  dollar  awards  that  are  chosen  after
exposure to comparison cases.163

in  a  way 

that 

We  do  not  have  sufficient  information  to  evaluate  all  the
possible  alternatives  here.  But  we  can  offer  two  general
                                                                                                   

161 See note supra.
162 See Baldus et al., supra note, at 1125-1131.
163 Cf. Saks et al., supra, at 251 (discussing dollar awards in pain and
suffering  cases  that  are  chosen  after  exposure  to  scales  and  similar
disciplining devices).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

81

conclusions. First, there is much to be said on the behalf of an
incremental  step,  building  on  current  practice:  ensuring,  in
every  jurisdiction,  a  serious  oversight  role  for  judges,  calling
not  for  individual  judicial  judgments  about  individual  cases,
but  for  judicial  comparisons  among  various  similar  cases,  so
as  to  ensure  against  dramatic  outliers.164  This  incremental
step  would  produce  some  of  the  gains  sought  by  the  first
reform  proposal  discussed  above.  Second,  the  ideal  system
of  punitive  damage  awards  would  not  involve  juries  or  even
judges, but specialists in the subject matter at hand, who are
able  to  create  clear  guidelines  for  punitive  awards.  These
guidelines  would  be  laid  down  in  advance  and  based  on  a
clear  understanding  of  different  forms  of  wrongdoing  and  of
the  consequences,  for  defendants,  of  different  awards.  Of
course  these  specialists  would  make  several  judgments  of
value,  and  those  judgments  should  be  subject  to  democratic
control.  The  practical  question  is  whether  it  is  possible  to
design that ideal system. Experiments in this direction can be
found in the workers’  compensation system and in the system
of administrative penalties and fines.

Table  4  summarizes  what  has  been  a  complicated
discussion; our overall evaluations must be tentative because
much  depends  on  some  unanswered  empirical  questions
about the likely operation of the different systems.

F. A Note on the Constitution

How,  if  at  all,  does  what  we  have  said  bear  on  the
constitutional analysis of punitive damage awards, an issue of
fresh importance in the aftermath of BMW v. Gore? The most
important  point  is  that  we  have  identified  a  source  of  those
jury  judgments  that  may  be  both  unconstitutionally  excessive
and  unconstitutionally  arbitrary.  When  a  particular  jury’s
judgment  is  extreme,  an  underlying  reason  may  well  be  the
                                                                                                   
164  Compare  Judge  Weinstein’s  fascinating  discussion  of  use  of
comparison cases in the context of pain and suffering, in Geresy v. Digital
Equipment, 1997 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14332 (Sept. 16, 1997).

82

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

difficulty faced by the jury in  using an unbounded scale. Our
findings  certainly  do  not  resolve  the  constitutional  issue,
which  depends  on  the  appropriate  approach  to  the  due
process clause; but they do help to fortify the view that some
awards  should  be  taken  to  unacceptably  arbitrary.  We  have
shown that it cannot confidently be said that high jury awards,
requiring  payment  of  some  amount  $X,  reflect  a  well-
considered  community  judgment  in  favor  of  $X,  or  that  jury
encounters with the particulars of cases will lead to a situation
in  which  particular  facts  are  matched  to  dollar  awards  of  X,
1/2 of X, and 1/4 of X. Indeed, our findings and our first reform
proposal  demonstrate  that  the  populist  credentials  of  any
particular  jury  award  may  be  overstated;  any  particular  jury’s
award may poorly measure the judgment of the community as
a whole. As noted, moreover, we have found reason to doubt
the  suggestion  that  this  problem  can  be  cured  by  more
those
detailed 
instructions  do  not  solve  the  problem  of  scaling  without  a
modulus.

the  court,  at 

instructions 

least 

from 

if 

Of course the Supreme Court cannot by itself require one
of  our  three  proposals,  or  some  variant;  the  selection  of
reform  methods  is  for  legislatures  rather  than  courts.  Mostly
the  judicial  role  should  come  at  the  subconstitutional  level,
through  review  of  punitive  awards  corresponding  to  the
standards outlined above. But the availability of these routes
suggests  the  possibility  of  retaining  a  significant  role  for  the
jury without providing so large a risk of arbitrariness. None of
our  three  proposals  should  raise  constitutional  problems.  On
the  contrary,  each  of 
the
difficulties to which the Court attempted to respond in BMW v.
Gore.

them  attempts  to  overcome 

Table 4. Punitive Damage Reform Possibilities

Description

Analogies

Virtues

Vices

1. Current
system

2. Caps

3. Damage
multipliers

ad hoc
judgments
about
particular
events, with a
populist
aspiration

prevents the
most
excessive
awards

ties punitive
awards to
compensatory
awards

“Kadi justice”
(as discussed
by Max
Weber)

allows a role for
popular convictions

current civil
rights statutes,
which also
impose a cap

easy to administer,
would prevent
egregiously large
awards

Sherman
Antitrust Act

more flexible than
caps, also easy to
administer

Evaluation

hard to defend
from any
standpoint; the
best that can be
said is that the
current problems
are not so serious

unlikely to make
things much better
and may in some
ways make things
worse

a little better than
caps, but not much
better

unpredictability,
susceptibility to
arbitrary anchors,
jury ignorance
about effects of
dollar awards

may increase
variability; crudely
tailored to any view
of the problem or
the purpose of
punitive awards

crude, since
compensatory
award is a rough
guide to
appropriate
punitive award

4. Provide
juries with
other cases
and their

retains jury
authority over
dollars

Proposals in
the area of
pain and
suffering

Should improve
predictability and
increase rationality

Unclear how jury
will respond to prior
awards if it
disagrees with

promising way of
providing context
and cabining
judgment, but may

83

Description

Analogies

Virtues

Vices

awards

accompanying
punitive
awards, in
dollars

5.
Strengthened
or exclusive
judicial  control

“civil
sentencing”
model

current system
of criminal
justice

may reduce
unpredictability,
also produce more
overall rationality

6. Population-
wide
calibration
function

7. Expert
calibration
function

a form of
“predictable
populism”

a form of
“technocratic
populism”

None

None

reduces variability,
increases
predictability

solves problem of
jury ignorance
about effects of
punitive awards
while preserving
centrality of
punitive intent

them; unclear how
to make sure the
prior awards
contain the right
amounts
may also involve
scaling without a
modulus;
eliminates or
reduces populist
elements; need to
ensure judicial
comparison of
cases

complicated
administrative task

might not trust
either punitive
intent of juries or
the experts

Evaluation

be too complex

modest but  quite
promising response
to problems of
unpredictability and
irrationality

intriguing, but
probably too
complex and novel

intriguing and
promising, but less
feasible than 5
above and
probably less
promising than 8
below

Description

Analogies

Virtues

Vices

8.
Administrative
penalties

bureaucratic
rationality

could produce both
predictability and
rationality

experts may not be
trustworthy

workers’
compensation
system; social
security “grid”;
administrative
penalties and
fines

Evaluation

in principle, the
most promising of
all, as a way of
reducing decision
costs and error
costs

85

86

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

V. IMPLICATIONS, EXTENSIONS, SPECULATIONS

Our  central 

finding—about 

the  difficulty  of  mapping
normative  judgments  onto  an  unbounded  dollar  scale—is
relevant  to  a  number  of  issues  now  facing  law  and  policy.  In
this  section,  we  briefly  describe  areas  on  which  our  data
directly bear.

There  is  a  unifying  theme,  having  to  do  with  the  largely
unexplored connection between actual or potential descriptive
findings  in  psychology  and  the  normative  goals  of  the  legal
system.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  an  understanding  of
human  psychology  shows  that  in  certain  settings  people
cannot  do,  or  will  refuse  to  do,  some  or  all  of  what  the  legal
system wants them to do. If this is true, the normative goals of
law  will  be  systematically  frustrated.  (To  paraphrase  Herbert
Simon,  people  will  not  do  what  they  cannot  do.)  At  least  to
some  extent,  this  appears  to  be  so  in  the  context  of  punitive
damages;  the  psychology  of  “mapping”  confounds  some  of
the goals of the award of punitive damages. In the context of
jury  determinations, 
to
it  would 
disentangle—as we have attempted to do here—the possible
problems with the existing system, problems revealed as such
by  bringing  normative  analysis  to  bear  on  the  descriptive
account.  Thus  it  may  emerge  that  a  single  jury  will  deviate
erratically  from  population-wide  judgments,  or  that  those
judgments  are  flawed  because  they  require  judgments  on
intent to be mapped onto dollars, or that those judgments are
flawed because they do not and cannot be made to grow out
of what is, and should be, the basic goal of the legal system.

then  be  desirable 

In  many  areas,  an  analysis  of  this  basic  sort  may  well
apply.  We  do  not  know,  for  example,  about  the  actual
ingredients  of  a 
the  appropriate
compensatory damages for a  libelous statement are, say, $1
million—though  we  do  have  reason  to  think  that  outrage  is
highly  relevant  and  that  the  compensatory  award  will  be

judgment 

jury’s 

that 

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

87

inflated  if  punitive  damages  are  unavailable.165  In  theory,  of
course, the law wants compensatory judgments in the area of
libel to reflect the monetary value of what has been lost as a
result of reputational harm. In practice, it is notoriously difficult
to calculate that value—what evidence could reliably establish
it?—and thus the law relies on crude surrogates. This leaves
the following question: As a psychological matter, do juries do
what they are supposed to do? Might they instead be making
normative 
the
defendant’s  conduct,  or  the  innocence  of  the  plaintiff,  and
base  libel  awards  on  some  combination  of  these  judgments
and  arbitrary  anchors?  It  is  predictable,  at  least,  that  the
psychology of libel awards and the goals of the legal system
are  in  some  tension.  There  is  a  large  research  agenda,  and
what  we  have  done  here  is  only  a  start.  We  outline  a  few
possible  areas  for  future  investigation.  We  also  offer  a  brief
note  on  contingent  valuation,  which  raises  overlapping  but
somewhat different issues.

the  outrageousness  of 

judgments  about 

A. Difficult Damage Determinations

Many  damage  determinations  require  juries  to  undertake
magnitude scaling without a modulus, and to do so in settings
that  lack  clear  market  measures.  We  offer  several  examples
from the law of compensatory damages, concluding with some
general remarks about the relationship between punitive and
compensatory  damages  in  terms  of  our  discussion  here.  A
basic underlying question has to do with the appropriate role
of  normative  judgments  in  settling  on  the  apparently  but  (as
we  shall  see)  controversially  “factual”  question  of  what
amount would provide “compensation.”  Thus there are serious
issues  about  the  populist  and  technocratic  dimensions  of
compensatory awards in these domains of the law.
                                                                                                   
165  Anderson  and  MacCoun,  Goal  Conflict  in  Jurors’  Assessments  of

Compensatory and Punitive Damages (unpublished manuscript 1997),

88

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

1. Pain and suffering
Awards  for  pain  and  suffering  raise  many  of  the  same
questions as punitive damages. To be sure, and importantly,
such awards are nominally compensatory rather than punitive;
they  ask  the  jury  to  uncover  a  “fact.”  But  they  also  involve
goods  that  are  not  directly  traded  on  markets,  and  require  a
jury to turn into dollars a set of judgments that are, at the very
least, hard to monetize, Thus a standard jury instruction says:
“[T]he  law  allows  you  to  award  a  plaintiff  a  sum  that  will
reasonably  compensate  him  for  any  past  physical  pain.  .  .  .
There are no objective guidelines by which you can measure
the  money  equivalent  of  this  type  of  injury;  the  only  real
measuring  stick,  if  it  can  be  so  described,  is  your  collective
enlightened conscience. You should consider all the evidence
bearing  on  the  nature  of  the  injuries,  the  certainty  of  future
pain,  the  severity  and  the  likely  duration  thereof.”166  An
instruction  of  this  kind  offers  little  more  guidance  than  a
typical punitive damage instruction. What is the psychological
process by which such awards are constructed? Can juries or
judges  make  predictable  or  otherwise  sensible  judgments
about  dollar  amounts?  What  are  the  ingredients  of  those
judgments,  whatever  the  instructions  say?  Perhaps  most
important: What does “compensate”  mean, exactly?

Judgments about pain and suffering require juries to make
a decision about harm (with a likely ingredient, in practice, of
intended punishment) and to map that judgment onto a dollar
scale.  In  the  absence  of  uncontroversial  market  measures  to
make  the  mapping  reliable,167  the  resulting  verdicts  are
notoriously variable, in a way that raises questions very much
like  those  in  the  punitive  damage  setting.168  In  particular,
                                                                                                   
166  G.  Douthwaite,  Jury  Instructions  on  Damages  in  Tort  Actions

section 6-17, at 274 (2d ed. 1988).

167  An  effort  at  disciplining  decision  is  made  in  W.  Kip  Viscusi,

Reforming Products Liability 99-116 (1991)

168 See G.A.O., Medical Malpractice: Characteristics of Claims Closed
in 1984, 1-3, 18-19, 23-24, 40-42 (1987); Mark Geistfeld, Placing A Price

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

89

people  with  similar  injuries  are  often  awarded  very  different
amounts of damages.169 Studies have found that plaintiffs with
relatively small losses tend to be overcompensated and those
with large losses tend to be undercompensated, and also that
there is a significant degree of randomness here.170 Our study
suggests  one  of  the  sources  of  the  variability.  A  judgment
about harm, perhaps made in a predictable way on a bounded
numerical  scale,  becomes  unpredictable  and  arbitrary  when
translated into an unbounded dollar scale lacking a modulus.

if 

important,  even 

to  be  especially 

In  the  context  of  pain  and  suffering  awards,  anchors
appear 
they  carry
arbitrariness of their own. Thus some jurors appear to split the
difference between the figures suggested by the plaintiff and
the  defendant,  whereas  others  use  some  (fairly  random)
multiple of medical expenses, and still others fasten on other
aspects  of  the  case  as  anchors.171  One  study  suggests  that
severity  of  injury  explains  only  40%  of  the  variation  in
awards.172
                                                                                                   
On Pain and Suffering, 83 Cal L Rev 773 (1995); Randall Bovbjerg et al.,
Valuing Life and Limb in Tort: Scheduling “Pain and Suffering,”  83  NW  L
Rev  908  (1989);  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Pain  and  Suffering  in  Product  Liability
Cases: Systematic Compensation of Capricious Awards, 8 Int’l Rev. of L.
& Econ. 203, 204-208, 214-19 (1988).

169 Saks et al., supra note, at 243; Geistfeld, supra note, at 784.
170 Saks et al., supra note, at 245.
171 Id.
172  Bovjberg  et  al.  at  923.  A  recent  study  shows  an  additional  point:
Judgments  about  pain  and  suffering  are  highly  sensitive  to  framing
effects.  Edward  McCaffery,  Matthew  Spitzer,  and  Daniel  Kahneman,
Framing  the  Jury,  81  Va.  L  Rev  1341  (1995).  In  particular,  they  are
sensitive to the endowment effect—the fact that people are willing to pay
less  to  purchase  a  good  than  they  must  be  paid  in  order  to  get  the  very
same  good  if  it  has  been  initially  allocated  to  them.  Thus  losses  are
disvalued more than gains are valued. In the context of pain and suffering
awards,  the  question  is  whether  the  plaintiff  should  be  entitled  to  (a)  the
amount  that  he  would  have  to  be  paid,  before  the  fact,  to  allow  the
relevant pain and suffering to occur (his selling price) or instead to (b) the
amount that he would be willing to pay, after the fact, to restore his health
to  its  previous  place  (his  “make  whole”  price).  The  recent  study  shows

90

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

There  is  the  additional  problem  that  pain  and  suffering
awards  are  made  in  a  no-comparison  condition,  and  hence
juries  may  fail  to  provide  the  kinds  of  distinctions  that  would
emerge if a set of cases were offered at the time of decisions.
And  although  pain  and  suffering  awards  are  essentially
compensatory,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  such  awards
sometimes reflect jury judgments about the egregiousness of
the defendant’s behavior. Hence such judgments are likely to
have a punitive component. Much further work remains to be
done in disaggregating the factors that produce large or small
awards for pain and suffering.

If  the  psychology  of  such  awards  is  similar  to  that  of
punitive  damage  awards,  it  will  make  sense  to  consider
reforms  of  the  sort  discussed  here.  This  could  be  done  by
moving  in  the  direction  of  a  damage  schedule  to  cabin  the
jury’s  judgment173  or  by  using  a  set  of  comparison  cases  for
jury or judicial guidance.174 As we shall shortly  see,  a choice
among the relevant possibilities depends on a judgment about
what might be distrusted in a jury’s determination of pain and
suffering  awards—the  possibility  that  isolated  juries  will
diverge  from  population-wide  convictions,  the  difficulty  faced
by  lay  people  in  generating  a  dollar  number  for  certain
classes of injuries, or something else.
                                                                                                   
substantial  differences  between  (a)  and  (b),  and  thus  sugggests  that
people  are  highly  subject  to  framing  effects  in  assessing  appropriate
awards  for  damages.  Among  one  group,  the  “selling  price”  award  was
about double the “making whole”  award. See id at 1388.

173 See Geistfeld, supra note.
174  See  Patricia  Danzon,  Medical  Malpractice  Liability,  in  Liability:
Perspectives and Policy 101, 121-24 (Robert E. Liton and Cliford Winston
eds.  1988);  Kenneth  S.  Abraham  and  Glen  O.  Robinson,  Aggregative
Valuation  of  Mass  Tort  Claims,  53  Law  &  Contemp.  Probs.  137,  141-46
(1990);  Peter  Schuck,  Scheduled  Damages  and  Insurance  Contracts  for
Future  Services,  8  Yale  J.  on  Reg.  213,  215-19  (1990);  David  Baldus  et
al.,  Improving  Judicial  Oversight  of  Jury  Damages  Assessments:  A
Proposal  for  the  Comparative  Additur/Remittur  Review  of  Awards  For
Nonpecuniary  Harms  and  Punitive  Damages,  80  Iowa  L.  Rev.  1109,
1123(1995).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

91

2. Libel
Similar  issues  arise  in  the  law  of  libel,  which  notoriously
lacks clear measures of damages.175 In fact the common law
rules  governing  libel  reflect  the  difficulty  of  generating
monetary  amounts.176  Juries  are  asked  to  decide  how  much
loss has been inflicted as a result of reputational injury; thus
plaintiffs  are  able  to  recover  both  for  identifiable  pecuniary
loss  (“special  damages”)  and  also  for  damages,  stemming
that  cannot  be  easily
from  general  reputational  harm, 
correlated  with  monetary  measures  (“general  damages”).177
Sometimes  plaintiffs  are  allowed  to  recover  “presumed”
general damages, that is, damages that are awarded without
proving  that  they  have  suffered  any  actual  damages,  special
or general.178 Evidence from the plaintiff and the defendant is
not  likely  to  establish  this  amount  with  any  accuracy;  if  a
movie  star  has  been  said  to  have  engaged  in  adultery,  what
In
kind  of  award  would  provide  actual  compensation? 
practice,  the  resulting  verdicts  are  unlikely  to  draw  a  sharp
line between compensatory and punitive damages.179

For  present  purposes  let  us  notice  that  libel  awards  are
likely  to  reflect  effects  similar  to  those  we  have  discussed.
Here the jury is likely be mapping a complex judgment, about
the quality of the harm and perhaps the nature of the plaintiff
and the defendant, onto an unbounded dollar scale.180 A great
                                                                                                   
175  See  Richard  Epstein,  Was  New  York  Times  v.  Sullivan  Wrong?,

53 U Chi L Rev 782 (1986).

176 Id.
177  See  Marc  Franklin  and  David  Anderson,  Mass  Media  Law  214

(1995).

178 Id.
179  See  Anderson  and  MacCoun,  supra  note  x,  showing  “leakage”
between  punitive  and  compensatory  awards:  Where  punitive  awards
cannot be provided, compensatory awards are higher.

180  There  is  also  a  predictable  difference  between  the  amount  that
would  compensate  a  libel  plaintiff  for  injury  inflicted  and  the  amount  that
would  persuade  a  libel  plaintiff  to  allow  his  reputation  to  be  damaged  in
the relevant way. See McCaffery, Spitzer, and Kahneman, supra note.

92

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

deal of work remains to be done here as well, to understand
the  psychology  of  libel  awards  and  their  relationship  to  what
the legal system is actually attempting to do.

The results of combining a psychological understanding of
juries  with  an  evaluation  of  the  goals  of  libel  law  will  even
bear  on  the  law  of  free  speech.  It  is  not  at  all  clear  that  the
significant  problem  with  libel  law,  for  a  system  of  free
expression,  consists  of  findings  of  liability,  which  might  be
accompanied by simple retractions; the most serious problem
is  probably  the  award  of  exorbitant  sums  of  money.181  An
understanding  of  the  sources  of  any  such  exorbitant  awards
will  in  turn  bear  on  constitutional  judgments  about  the
relationship between libel and the first amendment.

What reforms would be appropriate? Damage caps, often
proposed  in  the  context,182  would  have  the  same  kind  of
crudeness  for  libel  as  in  the  context  of  punitive  damages.
Perhaps the three kinds of reforms discussed above, suitably
adapted  for  the  purposes  of  libel  law,  could  be  explored  to
reduce  the  unpredictable  quality  of  libel  judgments,  or  to
make  them  a  steadier  and  more  realistic  reflection  of  the
actual goals, compensatory and deterrent, of the law of libel.

3.  Intentional  infliction  of  emotional  distress  and  sexual

harassment

The  latter  half  of  the  twentieth  century  has  witnessed  the
rise of two important new legal wrongs: intentional infliction of
emotional distress183 and sexual harassment.184 Both of these
are accompanied by damage remedies. With respect to such
remedies,  the  basic  story  should  be  familiar.  Monetization  is
                                                                                                   

181 Franklin and Anderson, supra note, at 337, 342-46.
182  See  William  Van  Alstyne,  Reputation,  Compensation,  and  Proof,
25 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 793 (1984); Stanley Ingber, Rethinking Intangible
Injuries, 73 Cal. L. Rev. 772 (1985).

183  See  Robert  Keeton  and  William  Prosser,  The  Law  of  Torts  54-66

(1984), for an overview.

Women (1979).

184  See  Catharine  MacKinnon,  Sexual  Harassment  of  Working

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

93

extremely  difficult.  Significant  arbitrariness  is  entirely  to  be
expected;  similar  cases  may  well  give  rise  to  dramatically
different  awards.  How  does  a  jury  know  what  amount  would
provide  an  employee,  or  a  student,  with  adequate
compensation  for  quid  pro  quo  or  hostile  environment
harassment?  In  both  of  these  contexts,  compensatory  and
punitive  damages  are  likely  to  entangled,  in  the  sense  that
juries  probably  do  not  sharply  separate  the  one  from  the
other.

In  the  areas  of  intentional  infliction  of  emotional  distress
and sexual harassment, there may well be a relatively uniform
set  of  underlying  judgments  among  different  demographic
groups,  though  with  sexual  harassment  it  would  be  most
interesting to see whether there are differences between men
and women or among other groups. This is an intriguing and
entirely feasible empirical project along the lines of our study
here. A principal source of unpredictability is likely to involve
the  translation  of  the  underlying  moral  judgments  into  dollar
amounts.  Here  too  reform  strategies  might  be  based  on  a
particular  conclusion  about  what  is  wrong  with  the  outcomes
of 
inadequate
understanding  of  the  effects  of  dollar  amounts,  or  a  reliance
on improper factors.

jury  deliberations—unpredictable  awards, 

4.  Compensatory  vs.  punitive  damages:  general

considerations

We  can  bring  together  some  of  the  strands  of  this
discussion  by  noting  how  the  reform  proposals  discussed
above may or may not bear on compensatory damage awards
that  are  especially  likely  to  be  erratic.  The  most  important
feature of compensatory damages is that they are intended to
restore the status quo ante.185 Punitive damages, by contrast,
are  intended  to  reflect  a  normative  judgment  about  the
                                                                                                   
185  Note  in  this  regard  the  difference  between  the  amount  a  plaintiff
would require to deem himself restored, and the amount a plaintiff would
demand  to  incur  the  injury  in  the  first  instance.  See  McCaffery,  Spitzer,
and Kahneman, supra note.

94

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

outrageousness  of  the  defendant’s  conduct  (together  with  a
judgment about deterrence). Thus the compensatory decision,
far more than the punitive decision, reflects an assessment of
fact  (at  least  in  theory186).  At  first  glance  this  is  a  sharp
distinction between the two. In this light would it make sense
to  consider  reforms  designed  respectively  to  (a)  capture  a
population-wide  judgment  about  appropriate  compensation,
(b) capture a “compensatory intent”  that would be mapped, by
experts,  onto  dollar  amounts,  and  (c)  dispense  partly  or
entirely  with  juries  on  the  ground  that  juries  are  unlikely  to
have  the  competence  to  make  accurate  judgments  about  the
factual questions involved?

To  answer  this  question  it  is  necessary  to  ask  why  juries
are  now  charged  with  the  task  of  making  judgments  about
appropriate  compensation  in  cases  in  which  that  inquiry
strains  their  factual  capacities.  The  most  straightforward
answer  is  self-consciously  populist.  In  cases  involving  libel,
pain  and  suffering,  sexual  harassment,  and  the  intentional
infliction  of  emotional  distress,  no  institution  is  likely  to  be
especially good at uncovering the “fact”  about compensation,
if there is indeed any such “fact.”187 Moreover, it is appropriate
(on this view) to let the underlying decision reflect not merely
facts  but  also  the  judgments  of  value  that  are  held  by  the
                                                                                                   
186  There  are  many  complications  here,  some  of  them  addressed
below.  An  obvious  issue  is  what,  in  this  context,  compensation  is
compensation  for. 
is
compensation supposed to restore the plaintiff hedonically? To give dollar
equivalents  for  injury  to  capabilities  and  functionings,  to  be  assessed  in
part objectively rather than subjectively? See Amartya Sen, Commodities
and  Capabilities  (1985),  for  a  defense  of  a  “capability”  approach  to  an
assessment  of  well-being.  Because  the  idea  of  “compensation”  does  not
inescapably  creates
answer  such  question, 
normative  issues.  There  is  much  room  here  for  further  descriptive  work
(what  are  the  components  of  that  assessment,  in  fact?)  and  normative
work as well (what should the question of compensation be taken to mean
in these various contexts?).
187 See note supra.

If  someone  has  suffered  a  month  of  pain, 

jury’s  assessment 

the 

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

95

community  as  a  whole.188  Whatever  fact-finding  deficiencies
the  jury  may  have  (as  compared  to,  say,  a  specialized
agency)  are  overcome  by 
incorporating
community  sentiments  into  the  decision  about  appropriate
compensation  for  injuries  that  are  not  easily  monetized.  On
this view, compensatory judgments, at least in these contexts,
are  not  so  different  from  punitive  judgments  after  all;  both  of
them have important normative components.

the  value  of 

in 

and 

certainly 

includes  and 

appropriately—not 

Thus  the  simplest  argument  on  behalf  of  jury  judgments
about  compensation  is  that  any  such  judgment  is—perhaps
inevitably 
solely
compensatory. It has evaluative dimensions, both in deciding
imposing
what  compensation  properly 
burdens  of  proof  and  persuasion  and  resolving  reasonable
doubts. The evaluative judgments, it might be thought, should
be  made  by  an  institution  with  populist  features  and  virtues.
The  point  may  well  apply  to  judgments  about  compensation
for  pain  and  suffering,  libel,  intentional  infliction  of  emotional
distress, and sexual harassment. A populist institution, on this
view,  should  be  permitted  to  undertake  evaluative  judgments
about  what  amount  would  “compensate”  someone  who  has
suffered  as  a  result  of  an  improper  medical  procedure,  a  lie
about his private life, or an unwanted sexual imposition by an
employer or teacher.
                                                                                                   
188 An underlying question, in all of these areas, involves the extent to
which  the  damage  judgment  should  be  person-specific.  Suppose,  for
example,  that  an  especially  sensitive  plaintiff  has  suffered  an  especially
severe  hedonic  loss  as  a  result  of  libel  or  sexual  harassment—or,  by
contrast,  that  an  especially  tough-skinned  plaintiff  has  suffered  an
unusually  small  hedonic  loss  as  a  result  of  the  same  torts.  Should  a  jury
consider  the  extent  to  which  the  plaintiff’s 
injury  was  objectively
reasonable,  independent  of  purely  hedonic  factors?  Officially  tort  law
incorporates a reasonable person inquiry at the level of liability, but once
the defendant has been found liable, the defendant must take the plaintiff
as 
in  other  words,  damages
determinations are supposed to be person-specific. But we do not know if
juries  are  willing  to  think  in  these  terms,  and  it  is  also  unclear  that  they
should.

the  plaintiff  experienced 

injury; 

the 

96

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

In  the  relevant  cases,  however,  the  problem  of  erratic
from  magnitude  scaling  without  a
judgments,  emerging 
modulus, remains. This problem would not be severe (indeed,
it would not be a problem at all) if what appeared to be erratic
judgments were really a product of careful encounters with the
particulars of individual cases, producing disparate outcomes
that  are  defensible  as  such  because  they  are  normatively
laden. But our study suggests grave reasons to doubt that this
is in fact the case. Thus there is a serious question of reform
strategies.  How  would  the  proposals  discussed  above  work
here?  The  first  point  to  notice  is  that  for  compensatory
damages, ranking is far preferable to rating along a bounded
scale; it is certainly useful to see how a jury believes that the
injury at issue compares with other injuries, but far less useful,
when punishment is not involved. to get a sense of the jury’s
numerical rating. A ranking might be used in various ways. If
the  basic  problem  is  erratic  judgments  in  the  context  of
compensatory  damages,  it  might  be  desirable  to  use  a
conversion  formula  to  obtain  a  population-wide  judgment
about appropriate compensation.

A  problem  with  this  approach  is  that  a  population-wide
judgment about appropriate dollar compensation might be ill-
informed;  it  might  not  reflect  “true”  compensation.  If  the
normative  dimensions  of  that  judgment  seem  to  deserve  a
good  deal  of  weight—if  we  see  the  jury’s  judgment  about
compensation  as  appropriately  reflecting  considerations  not
involving the apparently factual question of “compensation”—
this  approach  might  well  make  sense.  But  if  the  factual
dimensions  deserve  to  predominate,  the  jury’s  ranking  might
be  understand  as  a  kind  of  “compensatory  intent,” 
to  be
converted  to  compensatory  awards  not  by  population-wide
data but instead by an administrative or legislative conversion
formula, rooted in a judgment of the appropriate treatment of
the  cases  against  which  the  case  at  hand  has  been  ranked.
This kind of reform seems somewhat awkward, for the notion
of  “compensatory  intent,”  supposedly  rooted  in  a  judgment
about  the  facts,  is  less  straightforward  than  that  of  “punitive

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

97

intent,”  which  is  an  unmistakably  normative  judgment.  But  it
would mix populist and technocratic elements in a way that is
mildly reminiscent of the treatment of social security disability
cases—though  there  the  jury  is  not  of  course  given  a  role,
displaced as it is by an administrative law judge.189

analogy, 

technocratic 

considerations 

If the social security disability cases are really taken as a
good 
should
predominate,  and  the  third  kind  of  reform  proposal  might
seem best. On this view, an administrative or legislative body
might create a kind of “pain and suffering grid,” “libel grid,”  or
“sexual  harassment  grid,”  combining  the  basic  elements  of
disparate  cases  into  presumptively  appropriate  awards.190  A
judge would produce a dollar award by seeing where the case
at hand fits in the grid and perhaps by making adjustments if
the  details  of  the  case  strongly  call  for  them.  A  technocratic
approach  of  this  kind  could  eliminate  or  at  least  greatly
reduce  the  problem  of  erratic  awards.191  Whether  it  is
desirable  depends  on  the  value  of  incorporating  populist
elements in the way that the more modest reforms promise to
do.
                                                                                                   
189 Note in this regard that many administrative agencies impose civil
and  criminal  penalties,  and  they  are  also  in  a  position  to  scale  without  a
modulus. It would be extremely valuable to have a sense of their practice,
and  to  know  whether  they  have  created  some  of  the  same  kind  of
variability  discussed  here.  See  Rubin,  supra  note,  for  a  discussion  of  the
similarity between punitive damages and administrative penalties.

190  Compare  the  analogous  proposal  for  additur  and  remittitur  in

Baldus et al., supra note.

191  There  is  also  an  underlying  question  about  the  relationship
between rule-bound judgment and particularistic judgment. Standards laid
down  in  advance  may  leave  room  for  erratic  particularistic  judgments  if
they are open-ended; but if they are rigid and rule-like, they may prevent
the  reasonable  exercise  of  discretion  to  adapt  to  the  particulars  of  the
individual  case.  One  issue  here  is  how  to  minimize  both  decision  costs
and error costs, and in the abstract it is hard to know how much constraint
on  particularistic  judgment  will  accomplish  that  task.  For  a  good
discussion,  see  Louis  Kaplow,  Rules  vs.  Standards:  An  Economic
Analysis, 43 Duke LJ 557 passim (1992).

98

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

Elements  of  these  various  approaches  can  be  found  in
reform proposals, thus far restricted to the pain and suffering
context, that attempt to cabin the jury’s judgment by requiring
it  to  decide  in  accordance  with  damage  schedules  and  to
place  the  case  at  hand  in  the  context  of  other  cases.192  In
view of the fact that similar problems beset other areas of the
law, there is no reason not to consider similar reforms in the
contexts of libel, sexual harassment, and intentional infliction
of  emotional  distress.  A  key  issue  is  the  appropriate  role  of
technocratic  and  populist  elements  in  the  compensatory
judgment.  A  judgment  about  that  issue  will  go  a  long  way
toward shaping reforms.

B. Regulatory Expenditures

In the last decade there has been a great deal of interest
in the problem of setting priorities for regulatory expenditures,
the  month”
both  public  and  private.  The  “pollutant  of 
syndrome  has  given  rise  to  a  fear  that  priorities  are  set  in  a
random  fashion,  and  hence  that  expenditures  per  life  saved
are unpredictable.193 Disparities between different live-saving
programs are quite common and very substantial, to the point
where  reallocation  of  resources  could  save  60,000  lives  per
year (given the same investment as is currently made) or $31
billion  per  year  (given  the  same  number  of  lives  as  are
currently saved).194

Frequently,  then,  government  must  decide  how  much  to
expend  per  unit  of  regulatory  benefit,  and  it  is  entirely  to  be
expected  that  the  phenomena  that  we  have  discussed  here
will  come  into  play.  Arbitrariness  results  partly  from  the
                                                                                                   
192 See Saks et al., supra note, at 246; Bovbjerg et al., supra note, at

953,

(1993).

193  See,  e.g.,  Stephen  Breyer,  Breaking  the  Vicious  Circle  1-15

194 See Tammy Tengs et al., Five Hundred Life-Saving Interventions
and  Their  Cost-Effectiveness,  15  Risk  Analysis  369  (1995);  see  also  W.
Kip  Viscusi,  Fatal  Tradeoffs  261-63  (1992)  (discussing  differences  in
expenditure per life saved).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

99

to  pay”  criterion 

difficulty  of  mapping  normative 
judgments  onto  dollar
amounts,  and  many  regulatory  problems  are  assessed  in  a
no-comparison condition. Some of the most prominent efforts
at  regulatory  reform  can  be  understood  as  self-conscious
responses.  The  attempt  to  value  regulatory  benefits  through
introduces  a  budget
the  “willingness 
constraint,  with  accompanying  comparative  judgments,  into
governmental  decisionmaking.195  And  Justice  Breyer’s
influential  proposal  of  a  special  regulatory  working  group,196
entrusted  with  the  task  of  allocating  resources  to  large
problems  rather  than  small  ones,  is  of  a  piece  with  his
concerns  about  rule-free  punitive  damage  awards.  The
proposal is designed to ensure risk comparisons and to allow
judgments  about  dollars  to  be  made  by  people  with  a  good
deal  of  experience  in  the  task  of  “mapping”  normative
judgments onto a dollar scale. Justice Breyer’s proposal is in
this sense parallel to the third kind of reform strategy that we
have  traced,  designed  to  ensure  an  institutional  reform  that
captures 
risk
regulation: extending human life.

the  goal,  appropriately  understood,  of 

Justice  Breyer’s  proposal  has  been  criticized  as
excessively 
technocratic.197  Perhaps  risk  regulation  has
multiple  goals,  and  the  extension  of  human  life  does  not
adequately  capture  them.198  Drawing  on  the  second  reform
strategy  described  above—one  that  attempts  to  elicit  the
community’s normative judgments—we can imagine initiatives
that  would  ensure  a  greater  role 
for  population-wide
judgments  while  also  promoting  more  expert
normative 
“mapping”  onto dollars.199
                                                                                                   

195 See W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs 42-49 (1992).
196 See Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle 59-72 (1993).
197  See  Lisa  Heinzerling,  Politial  Science,  62  U.  Chi.  L.  Rev.  258

(1995).

198  Id.;  Richard  Pildes  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Reinventing  the

Regulatory State, 62 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1, 86-88 (1995)

199 This is a goal of Richard Pildes and Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing

the Regulatory State, 62 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1, 86-95 (1995).

100

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

C. Mapping onto a Scale of Years

Our  emphasis  throughout  has  been  on  an  unbounded
dollar scale, but the legal system makes use of another scale:
years.  Criminal  punishment  of  course  requires  a  decision
about how to map a normative judgment onto a scale of years.
That  scale  is  not  unbounded,  in  the  sense  that  capital
punishment,  or  life  imprisonment,  may  be  taken  as  extreme
ends;  but  it  presents  a  similar  difficulty  of  scaling  without  an
obvious  modulus.200  Thus  the  use  of  the  scale  of  years
presents some of the same questions as magnitude scaling in
the  absence  of  a  modulus.  Before  the  enactment  of  the
Sentencing  Guidelines,  there  were  serious  problems  of
arbitrary and unpredictable sentences,201 leading to dissimilar
treatment of the similarly situated. It is reasonable to think that
some of these problems resulted from the difficulty of mapping
normative judgments onto a scale of years.

Is it true that, with respect to criminal punishment, people
have  predictable 
judgments  about  outrageousness  and
intention  to  punish,  but  unpredictable  judgments  about  years
of  sentence?  Our  findings  here  suggest  the  possibility  of  an
affirmative answer, but much work remains to be done on this
question.  The  answer  obviously  bears  on  the  need  for,  and
appropriate  content  of,  any  sentencing  guidelines,  and  also
on the general question of sentencing reform. Thus those who
challenge  the  sentencing  guidelines  might  be  taken  to  be
complaining,  among  other  things,  about  the  absence  of  an
appropriate  modulus  around  which 
to  organize  diverse
sentences.202
                                                                                                   
200 See  Stevens  (1975)  did  magnitude  scaling  on  jail  sentences,  and
cross-modality  matching  against  the  severity  of  crimes.  See  also  S.S.
Stephens, (1966, Science, I believe) on ‘scaling the social consensus’  that
was dedicated to that.

201  See  Jon  Newman,  Federal  Sentencing  Guidelines:  A  Risk  Worth
Taking,  Brookings  Rev.  29  (Summer  1987);  Sandra  Shane-DuBow,  Alice
P.  Brown,  and  Erik  Olsen,  Sentencing  Reform  in  the  United  States  (U.S.
Dept. of Justice, National Institute of Justice 1985).

202  See  generally  Albert  W.  Alschuler,  The  Failure  of  Sentencing

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

101

D. A Note on Contingent Valuation

The  topic  of  contingent  valuation  of  course  raises  the
question  whether  people  can  turn  their  judgments  about
regulatory  goods  into  nonarbitrary  dollar  awards.203  This
problem  is  well  worth  considering,  both  because  it  is  of
interest in its own right and because it is closely related to the
issue  of  punitive  damages  in  the  particular  sense  that  it
involves the mapping of a kind of attitude, desire, or judgment
onto an unbounded dollar scale.204

The  goal  of  contingent  valuation  methods  is  of  course  to
decide  how  much  to  value  goods  that  are  not  traded  on
markets.  Some  people 
that  valuation  might  be
think 
ascertained by looking at how people value goods that are in
fact traded on markets.205  But  judgments  about  how  much  to
spend to reduce statistical risks are highly contextual, and it is
not clear that a decision to purchase a smoke alarm tells us a
sufficient  amount  about  how  much  people  are  willing  to
reduce (for example) a risk of death from excessive levels of
sulfur  dioxide.  The  use  of  contingent  valuation  methods  is
inspired  by  a  desire  to  obtain  more  specific,  contextual
assessments.  Rather  than  looking  at  actual  choices,  these
methods  ask  people  hypothetical  questions  about  how  much
they  would  be  willing  to  pay  to  avoid  certain  harms  or
conditions.206
Despite 

their  apparent  promise,  contingent  valuation
methods  have  serious  limitations,  involving  the  difficulty  of
mapping  normative  judgments  onto  dollars  and  the  problems
                                                                                                   
Guidelines: A Plea for Less Aggregation, 58 U. Chi. L. Rev. 901 (1991).

203  See  the  various  perspectives  in  Symposium,  8  J.  Econ.  Persp.  3

(1994).

204  There  is  also  a  question  whether  it  is  sensible  to  assume  that

people have well-formed judgments on such questions.

205 See Viscusi, supra.
206  See  William  H.  Desvouges  et  al.,  Measuring  Non-Use  Damages
Using  Contingent  Valuation,  Research  Triangle  Monograph  92-1;  George
Tolley  et  al.,  Valuing  Health  for  Policy  290-94  (1994);  Symposium,
Contingent Valuation, J Econ Persp 3 (Fall 1994).

102

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

created  by  framing  effects.  A  special  problem  is  that  of
indifference  to  quantity,  or  inadequate  sensitivity  to  scope,
reflected  in  the  fact  that  people  will  give  the  same  dollar
number  to  save  2000,  20,000,  and  200,000  birds—or  the
same number to save one, two, or three wilderness areas.207
Consider  the  fact  that  Toronto  residents  are  willing  to  pay
almost as much to maintain fishing by cleaning up the lakes in
a small area of Ontario as they are willing to pay to maintain
fishing in all Ontario lakes.208 Thus a similar WTP was found
to preserve 110 or 10,000 acres of wetland in New Jersey.209
Relatedly, the valuation of a resource is affected by whether it
is  offered  alone  or  with  other  goods.  Willingness  to  pay  for
spotted owls drops significantly when the spotted owl is asked
to  be  valued  with  and  in  comparison  to  other  species.  It  is
pertinent  in  this  connection  that  the  order  and  number  of
questions  seems  crucial  in  determining  valuation.  When
asked  for  their  willingness  to  pay  to  preserve  visibility  in  the
Grand Canyon, people offer a number five times higher when
this is the first question than when it is the third question.210

What  unifies  contingent  valuation  and  punitive  damage
assessment is the problem of mapping a normative judgment
onto  an  unbounded  dollar  scale.  Let  us  notice,  then,  some
similarities and differences between contingent valuation and
punitive damages. CV studies are sometimes understood as a
method  of  ascertaining  private  willingness  to  pay  for  public
goods. Despite the flaws of the method if so seen, contingent
valuation  is  intended  as  a  substitute  for  market  measures.211
                                                                                                   
207 See Peter Diamond & Richard Hausman, Contingent Valuation, 8
J Econ Persp 45 (1994); Daniel Kahneman & Iiana Ritov, Determinants of
Stated Willingness to Pay, 9 J Risk & Uncertainty 5 (1994).

208  Daniel  Kahneman  and  Jack  Knetch,  Valuing  Public  Goods,  22  J

Env Econ and Management 57 (1992).

209 William H. Desvousges et al., Measuring Non-Use Damages Using

Contingent Valuation, Research Triangle Monograph 92-1.

210 See id.
211 Of course a large question is whether the answers received in the
contingent  valuation  setting  do  reflect  private  willingness  to  pay  in  the

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

103

By contrast, punitive damages are awarded on the basis of a
community  judgment  of  some  sort;  jurors  are  not  asked  their
willingness  to  pay  for  any  commodity.  They  are  asked  to
generate  a  dollar  amount  that  reflects  not  the  value  of  what
has  been  lost,  but  that  provides  adequate  deterrence  or
reflects  social  opprobrium  about  bad  conduct.  On  the  other
hand,  in  both  cases  similar  biases  and  distorting  influences
may be at work. As noted, both contexts present problems of
mapping  morally  laden  valuations  onto  dollar  amounts.
People  may  have  predictable  and  nonrandom  judgments
about  which  species  are  most  important,  for  example,  and
they  may  be  able  to  compare  various  bodies  of  water;  but  a
judgment  about  monetary  valuation  may  be  essentially
arbitrary.  And 
isolated
judgments—how  much  is  a  certain  species  worth?  how  bad
was  an  oil  spill?—should  make  individual  judgments  less
reliable.212 In fact our findings here have a parallel in the key
conclusions  of  a  study  of  contingent  valuation,213  which  also
found  that  rating  scales  (e.g.,  of  importance  of  the  problem,
moral  satisfaction  with  contributing  to  its  solution,  or  support
for  government  action)  are  highly  correlated  with  WTP,  and
confirmed  that  the  amount  of  systematic  variance  was  much
lower 
these  scales.  Furthermore,
transformations to logs or ranks improve things there, just as
they do here.214

the  acontextual  character  of 

for  WTP 

than 

for 

As  with  punitive  damages,  it  may  well  make  sense  to
consider  substitutes  for  the  current  system  of  contingent
valuation, perhaps rooted in the same considerations that we
                                                                                                   
market sense or instead sometimes else.

212 Judgments are also sensitive to framing effects. When asked how
much they are willing to pay to allow a species to be lost, they will offer a
much  lower  amount  that  when  asked  how  much  they  would  have  to  be
paid  to  allow  a  species  to  be  lost.  See  Richard  Thaler,  Quasi-Rational
Economics 167-177 (1994).

213  See  Daniel  Kahneman  &  Iiana  Ritov,  Determinants  of  Stated

Willingness to Pay, 9 J Risk & Uncertainty 5 (1994).

214 Id.

104

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

have discussed here.215 Perhaps policymakers could develop
a  small  number  of  scenarios  for  environmental  damages,  or
use public judgments on a bounded scale, to begin a process
by  which  such  judgments  might  be  translated  into  dollar
amounts. New issues could be valued by a survey of attitudes
that would include explicit comparisons to the scenarios in the
original scale.216 Rather than asking people for dollar values,
people would make assessments in terms of importance, and
those  judgments  would  then  be  mapped  onto  dollars  by
reference  to  the  standard  scale.  Obviously  proposals  of  this
kind raise complex questions that we cannot resolve here;217
we  signal  the  issue  only  to  emphasize  the  linkage  with
punitive damages and the general problem of mapping in the
face  of  (potentially)  shared  moral  judgments  and  (likely)
erratic dollar amounts.

VI. CONCLUSION

Why  are  jury  determinations  about  punitive  damages
sometimes  erratic  and  arbitrary?  A  large  part  of  the  answer
lies  in  the  difficulty  of  “mapping”  normative  judgments,
including  those  of  outrage  and  punishment,  onto  dollar
amounts.  This  answer  operates  against  an 
important
backdrop:  with  respect  to  judgments  of  both  outrage  and
punishment,  important  domains  of  law  may  show  substantial
agreement  in  normative  judgments,  and  the  consensus
operates  across  differences  of  gender,  race,  age,  education,
and income.

The fact that people have difficulty in making judgments on
an  unbounded  scale  of  dollars  helps  fortify  and  specify  the
basis for Justice Breyer’s complaint,218 grounded in rule of law
                                                                                                   
215  See  Daniel  Kahneman  &  Iiana  Ritov,  Determinants  of  Stated

Willingness to Pay, 9 J Risk & Uncertainty 5, 29-30 (1994).

216 Id. at 30.
217 For further discussions see citations in notes infra.
218 See BMW of North America v. Gore, 116 S. Ct. 1589, 1604-1609

(1996) (Breyer, J., concurring).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

105

that  some 

considerations, 
jurisdictions  do  not  provide
sufficient  constraints  on  jury  discretion.  The  point  also
suggests  that  the  solution  does  not  lie  in  clearer  jury
instructions. Any effort to increase  predictability in the award
of punitive damages will be successful if and only if it assists
with the task of mapping. If community judgments matter, legal
reform should attempt to elicit the community’s punitive intent,
and do so in terms of some response mode other than dollars.
When  the  legal  system  translates  punitive  intent  into
dollars,  it  must  answer  questions  about  the  extent  to  which
the law should incorporate, qualify, or work against the jury’s
determination.  We  have  suggested  reforms  that  embody
different answers to those questions. Any ultimate conclusion
depends  on  a  specific  assessment  of  what  is  wrong  with
current  punitive  damage  awards.  We  have  suggested  three
general 
inadequate
sheer 
assessment,  by  ordinary  people,  of  what  different  dollar
awards  will  accomplish;  or  a  focus,  by  ordinary  people,  on
improper  factors  as  the  foundation  for  punitive  awards.  Thus
requires  an
the  normative 
an  assessment  of 
identification of the nature of the populist ideals that underlie
the  institution  of  the  jury,  and  a  judgment  about  what  place,
exactly,  those  ideals  deserve  to  have  in  light  of  juror
psychology.

possibilities: 

variability; 

issues 

Our study shows that the characteristics of jury judgments
include high sensitivity to outrage (and likely low sensitivity to
the  probability  of  detection),  substantial  sensitivity  to  harm,
substantial  sensitivity  to  firm  size,  susceptibility  to  anchors,
and  a  backward-looking  focus  on  retribution.  A  translation
phase  might  incorporate  or  reject  one  or  all  of  these
characteristics;  it  may  or  may  not  be  founded  on  the  jury’s
punitive intention. At a minimum, our study strongly suggests
that  appellate  judges  and  district  courts  should  continue  the
practice,  found  in  some  courts,  of  rejecting  punitive  awards
that  are  out  of  line  with  general  practice  and  relevant

106

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

comparison  cases219—especially  because,  as  we  have
shown, the dollar awards of any particular jury are not likely to
reflect  the  population’s  judgment  about  appropriate  dollar
awards. A more dramatic approach—probably the best for the
long term, though not without risks of its own—would  involve
the  development  of  a  system  of  administrative  penalties  for
serious  misconduct,  based  on  judgments  made  in  advance
and subject to democratic control.

Our  findings  have  implications  well  beyond  the  area  of
implications  are  of  special
punitive  damages.  Three 
importance. First, there is, in the personal injury cases studied
here, a high degree of agreement within diverse demographic
groups  with  respect  to  both  outrage  and  punishment.  It  is
possible  that  there  is  a  similar  consensus  across  other
domains; thus ample room remains for further related work. It
would  be  valuable  to  see,  for  example,  whether  such  a
consensus exists across gender with respect to compensatory
damage  awards,  or  punitive  damage  awards,  for  pain  and
suffering  or  sexual  harassment;  it  would  be  valuable  too  to
see  whether  there  are  substantive  areas  in  which  race,
education,  age,  and  wealth  have  measurable  effects.
Relatively  simple  studies  could  produce  evidence  on  some
much-disputed questions.

Second,  our  study  raises  serious  doubts  about  whether
jurors  are  able  to  make  sensible  judgments  about  dollar
                                                                                                   
219 See Klein v. Grynberg, 44 F. 3d 1497 (10th Cir. 1995); Stafford v.
Puro,  63  F.3d  1436  (7th  Cir.  1995):  Allahar  v.  Zahora,  59  F.3d  693  (7th
Cir. 1995): Ross v. Black and Decker, Inc., 977 F.2d 1178 (7th Cir. 1992):
Vasbinder  v.  Scott,  976  F.2d  118  (2nd  Cir.  1992);  Kimzey  v.  Wal-Mart
Stores, Inc., 107 F.3d 568 (8th Cir. 1997): Lee v. Edwards, 101 F.3d 805
(2nd Cir. 1996): King v. Macri, 993 F.2d 294 (2nd Cir. 1993): Michelson v.
Hamada, 36 Cal.Rptr.2d 343 (Cal. Ct. App. 1994): Wollersheim v. Church
of  Scientology,  6  Cal.Rptr.2d  532  (Cal.  Ct.  App.  1992):  Baume  v.  212  E.
10  N.Y.  Bar  Ltd.,  634  N.Y.S.  2d  478  (N.Y.  App.  Div.  1995);  Parkin  v.
Cornell University Inc., 581 N.Y.S.2d 914 (N.Y. App. Div. 1992). As noted,
our evidence suggests that if community-wide judgments are the goal, it is
important to have a mechanism for additur as well as remittitur.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

107

awards  in  cases  in  which  market  measures  are  unavailable,
and  it  throws  into  sharp  relief  the  question  whether  this  task
should not be given to judges or to some other institution. The
legal  system  is  not  occasionally  but  pervasively  in  the
business  of  requiring  people  to  map  their  judgments  onto
dollar  amounts,  and  outside  of  the  context  of  punitive
damages,  the  translation  is  likely  to  suffer  from  the  same
problems  found  here.  In  particular,  difficulties  with  mapping
probably  affect  jury  awards  of  damages  for  libel,  pain  and
suffering,  sexual  harassment  and  other  civil  rights  violations,
and  intentional  infliction  of  emotional  distress—all  of  which
notoriously suffer from unpredictability, in part, we believe, as
a result of unbounded dollar scales. The consequence is that
rule of law values are badly compromised. Reform proposals
might  ensure  against  unfairness  (in  the  form  of  dissimilar
treatment  of  the  similarly  situated)  and  unpredictability  for
both  individuals  and  firms,  plaintiffs  and  defendants  alike.
More particularly, reforms involving “compensatory”  awards in
these  controversial  areas  must  be  evaluated  by  an
factual
assessment  of 
judgments,  for  which  juries  are  not  especially  well-suited.
Thus  the  three  kinds  of  punitive  damage  reforms  may  well
have parallels in each of these areas.

the  appropriate  place  of  purely 

Third,  our  findings  support  the  general  proposition,  on
which  there  is  growing  consensus,  that  both  values  and
preferences  are  often  constructed,  rather  than  elicited,  by
social situations.220 In their various social roles, people lack a
preexisting “master list”  of values and preferences from which
to  make  selections  in  situations  of  choice.  This  is  true  for
consumer  choices,  which  depend  on  context  and  alternative
options,  as  well  as  for  medical  decisions,221  politics,  and
                                                                                                   
220  See  Amos  Tversky,  Rational  Theory  and  Constructive  Choice,  in
The  Rational  Foundations  of  Economic  Behavior  185  (Kenneth  Arrow  et
al. eds. 1997).

221 See A. Bastardi and Eldar Shafir, On the search for and misuse of

useless information (forthcoming 1997).

108

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

law.222 It is true as well for judgments made by jurors, judges,
representatives, and citizens generally. Rather than emerging
from some menu in the mind, these judgments are a function
of procedure, description, and context. In the legal context in
particular,  participants  are  pervasively  in  the  business  of
contexts.
constructing  procedures,  descriptions,  and 
Frequently  they  have  not  been  self-conscious  about  that
point.

To be sure, there is no uncontroversial way to develop the
context  and  frames  for  eliciting,  or  constructing,  social
preferences  and  values.  But  some  ways  are  worse  than
others,  because  they  make  people  perform  tasks  for  which
they  are  ill-equipped—or,  more  specifically,  produce  poor
translation  of  some  plausible  “bedrock”  set  of  normative
judgments,  generate  arbitrariness,  aggravate  the  problem  of
selective  attention,  exploit  heuristic  devices  that  produce
error,  or  provide  people  with  too  little  understanding  to  yield
sensible  or  consistent  decisions.  We  have  suggested  some
ways  to  handle  these  problems  with  the  award  of  punitive
damages,  where  bedrock  judgments  do  seem  discoverable
through the right methods, and where the legal system allows
those  judgments  to  be  transformed  into  dollar  amounts  in
erratic  ways.  Both  the  problem  and  the  potential  solutions
bear on many issues now facing the legal system.
                                                                                                   
222  See  Mark  Kelman,  Yuval  Rottenstreich,  and  Amos  Tversky,
Context-Dependence  in  Legal  Decisionmaking,  25  J  Legal  Stud.  287
(1996).

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

109

APPENDIX 1. EXCERPTS FROM INSTRUCTIONS

In  this  study  we  would  like  you  to  imagine  that  you  are  a
juror for a legal case in a civil court. Civil law suits can involve
individuals,  companies,  or
disputes  between  private 
individuals  and  companies,  in  which  the  plaintiff  alleges  that
the defendant harmed them or their property in some way. A
civil  suit  is  brought  by  a  plaintiff  for  the  purpose  of  gaining
compensation from the defendant for the alleged harm.

Civil  suits  involve  two  different  types  of  penalties  that
could  be  imposed  upon  a  defendant  that  is  found  liable  for
damages.  Compensatory  damages  are  intended  to  fully
compensate a plaintiff for the harm suffered as a result of the
defendant’s  actions.  Punitive  damages  are 
to
achieve two purposes: (1) to punish the defendant for unusual
misconduct,  and  (2)  to  deter  the  defendant  and  others  from
committing the same actions in the future.

intended 

In the cases you will consider, the defendant has already
been  ordered  to  pay  compensatory  damages  to  the  plaintiff.
This  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  punitive  damages  must
also be awarded. Whether or not punitive damages should be
awarded  and,  if  so,  how  large  they  should  be,  is  completely
separate from compensatory damages.

Punitive  damages  should  be  awarded  if  a  preponderance
of  the  evidence  shows  that  the  defendants  either  acted
maliciously  or  with  reckless  disregard  for  the  welfare  of
others.  Defendants  are  considered  to  have  acted  maliciously
if  they  intended  to  injure  or  harm  someone.  Defendants  are
considered  to  have  acted  with  reckless  disregard  for  the
welfare  of  others  if  they  were  aware  of  the  probable  harm  to
others  but  disregarded  it,  and  their  actions  were  a  gross
deviation  from  the  standard  of  care  that  a  normal  person
would use.

Civil  suits  differ 

the
government  prosecutes  an  individual  or  a  company  for

from  criminal  cases, 

in  which 

110

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

alleged  violations  of  the  law.  Plaintiffs  in  a  civil  trial  must
prove their claim by “a preponderance of the evidence,”  which
means that it is more likely than not that the plaintiff’s claim is
justified. 
the
prosecution  must  prove  the  defendant’s  guilt  “beyond  a
reasonable doubt.”

  This  differs 

from  criminal 

trials,  where 

In  each  of  the  cases  you  will  consider,  the  jury  (of  which
you  are  a  member)  has  already  decided  to  accept  the
plaintiff's  claim.  As  a  consequence  the  jury  has  ordered  the
defendant  to  pay  $200,000  in  compensatory  damages  to  the
plaintiff  as  full  compensation.  The  defendants  are  large
[medium-sized]  companies  with  profits  of  $100-200  [$10-20]
million per year.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

111

APPENDIX 2. PERSONAL INJURY SCENARIOS

Mary Lawson

Mary Lawson, a manufacturing worker, developed chronic
anemia. Although after a hospital  stay she is now  better,  the
condition  has  not  been  fully  cured.  She  believes  that
exposure to benzene in her work place caused the condition
and sued her employer, TGI International. The jury (of which
you  are  a  member)  ordered  TGI  International  to  pay  her
$200,000 in compensation.

TGI International is a large company (with profits of $100-
200  million  per  year)  that  manufactures  high-tech  machine
parts.  Some  years  ago  the  scientists  at  TGI  International
discovered  that  manufacturing  workers  at  Mary  Lawson’s
plant  were  often  exposed  to  benzene,  a  substance  that  can
cause  anemia,  leukemia  and  cancer.  Internal  documents
show  that  the  top  management  at  TGI  International  decided
not  to  do  anything  about  the  problem,  because  benzene
levels  in  the  plant  were  slightly  below  the  maximum  level
allowed by OSHA regulations. They thought that the risk was
worth taking and that “with any luck no one will get sick”. They
also decided against warning the workers, because “warnings
would just create panic”.

Frank Williams

Frank Williams suffered serious internal injuries when the
braking  system  on  his  motorcycle  failed  to  work  at  a  traffic
light.  He  felt  that  that  the  brakes  were  defective,  and  sued
National Motors, the company that manufactures and sells his
motorcycle.  The  jury  (of  which  you  are  a  member)  ordered
National Motors to pay him $200,000 in compensation.

National  Motors  is  a  large  company  (with  profits  of  $100-
200  million  per  year)  that  makes  motorcycles,  scooters,  and
other motorized single person vehicles. The evidence showed
that the braking system used by National Motors has a basic
design defect. National Motors was aware that “there might be

112

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

a problem with our brakes,”  because in  pre-market tests, the
defect  appeared  on  several  occasions.  But  the  pre-market
tests  were  not  extensive,  despite  the  fact  that  auto  industry
regulations  require  elaborate 
Internal  company
documents show National Motors’  belief that “it would be quite
expensive for us to do much more now, we can't be certain we
have  a  serious  problem  here,  and  anyway  we  can  fix  the
problem afterwards if it really does turn out to be serious.”

testing. 

Thomas Smith

While  he  was  visiting  the  circus,  Thomas  Smith  was  shot
in  the  arm  by  a  security  guard  who  mistakenly  thought  that
Smith had threatened another customer with bodily harm. The
security  guard  was  drunk  at  the  time.  Smith  sued  Public
Entertainment, the company that operates the circus. The jury
(of which you are a member) ordered Public Entertainment to
pay him $200,000 in compensation.

Public  Entertainment  is  a  large  company  (with  profits  of
$100-200 million per year) which operates circuses and public
fairs.  Fred  Williams,  the  security  guard  who  was  involved  in
the  incident,  is  an  alcoholic  with  a  history  of  incidents  of
drunkenness  on  the  job.  During  one  of  these  incidents
Williams took out his gun and started waving it around wildly,
but  he  did  not  shoot  anyone.  Public  Entertainment  had
repeatedly warned Williams to “clean  up  his act”  but took no
other  action.  In  his  company  personnel  file  Williams  was
described  as  “basically  a  good  guy  with  a  bit  of  a  drinking
problem, but not enough of a risk to fire him.”

Susan Douglas

Susan Douglas suffered significant injuries to her legs and
neck  when  an  airbag  in  her  car  opened  unexpectedly  while
she was driving the vehicle. She believes that the airbag was
defective and sued the manufacturer, Coastal Industries. The
jury  (of  which  you  are  a  member)  ordered  Coastal  Industries
to pay her $200,000 in compensation.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

113

Coastal  Industries  is  a  large  company  (with  profits  of
$100-200  million  per  year)  that  specializes  in  parts  and
accessories  that  can  be  added  to  existing  vehicles,  such  as
adding  the  latest  safety  equipment  to  older  cars.  While  its
airbag  conforms  to  the  requirements  stated  in  government
regulations,  it  does  not  include  certain  additional  “fail-safe”
systems  that  are  used  in  other  airbags  to  ensure  against
accidental  opening.  Internal  documents  show  that  most  but
not all of the Coastal Industries designers believed that their
system “is certainly safe enough, even if it does not include all
possible safeguards”  and that their marketing department said
that “there will be no market for our airbag if we raise its price
by adding more safety bells and whistles.”

Carl Sanders

Carl  Sanders  used  Nalene,  an  over-the-counter  baldness
treatment  available  at  drugstores.  While  a  small  amount  of
hair  did  grow  back,  he  also  developed  severe  side-effects,
including open sores on the scalp and permanent brown spots
over  his 
the  manufacturer,  A&G
Cosmetics.  The  jury  (of  which  you  are  a  member)  ordered
A&G Cosmetics to pay him $200,000 in compensation.

forehead.  He  sued 

A&G  Cosmetics  is  a  large  company  (with  profits  of  $100-
200  million  per  year)  that  sells  many  different  cosmetic
products,  including  wigs,  “weaves”  and  chemical  solutions
designed to combat baldness. Nalene has proven effective in
promoting  hair  growth  in  30%  of  people  in  clinical  trials.
However,  Nalene  caused  unpleasant  side  effects  in  some
cases, although none were as severe as those Carl Sanders
experienced.  When  marketing  Nalene,  A&G  Cosmetics  did
not  fully  disclose  these  findings.  It  only  said  “minor  side
effects have been observed in a very small number of people
tested.”  While  this  amount  of  disclosure  was  within  legal
limits,  other  companies  that  make  hair  products  voluntarily
disclosed more about their products.

114

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

Sarah Stanley

Sarah  Stanley,  a  seventy-five  year  old  woman,  suffered
serious  back  injuries  as  a  result  of  following  an  exercise
video, “Good Health For All,”  that she purchased through her
local  community  health  center.  When  Stanley  attempted  to
perform the exercises, she found herself unable to do so, but
she pressed on beyond her physical capacities. She claimed
that  she  was  not  adequately  warned  of  these  dangers  and
sued the producer of the video, Gersten Productions. The jury
(of which you are a member) ordered Gersten Productions to
pay her $200,000 in compensation.

that  produces 

Gersten  Productions  is  a  large  company  (with  profits  of
informational
$100-200  million  per  year) 
materials  in  health-related  fields,  including  videos  on  many
topics concerning healthy lifestyles. The “Good Health for All”
video contains a series of exercises suitable mostly for people
in  good  shape  and  good  health.  The  exercise  coaches  and
models in the video are all relatively young, and no federal or
state  law  requires  exercise  videos  to  come  with  any  special
warning for elderly people. The witnesses in the case testified
that Gersten Productions believed that most people would be
able to tell when the exercises were beyond their capacities,
that Good Health for All has produced good results for almost
all  people  who  have  seen  it,  and  that  very  few  people  had
reported injuries of any type from doing so.

Jack Newton

Jack  Newton,  a  five  year  old  child,  was  playing  with
matches when his cotton flannel pajamas caught fire. He was
severely  burned  over  a  significant  portion  of  his  body  and
required several weeks in the hospital and months of physical
therapy.  His  parents  sued  the  manufacturer  of  the  pajamas,
Novel Clothing. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered
Novel  Clothing 
in
compensation.

the  Newtons  $200,000 

to  pay 

Novel  Clothing  is  a  large  company  (profits  of  $100-200
million  per  year)  that  specializes  in  making  clothes  for

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

115

in 

the 

industry 

for  problems 

children. Before marketing the pajamas, Novel conducted the
like
tests  normally  used 
flammability,  and  observed  no  incidents  like  the  Newtons
experienced.  Companies  in  the  industry  as  well  as  federal
regulators  have  known  for  a  while  that  it  is  possible  to  add
extra  fire-retardant  chemicals  to  their  fabrics  (in  addition  to
those  specified  in  current  regulations),  but  these  extra
measures  are  not  required.  The  process  is  very  expensive,
and  no  other  manufacturers  currently  use 
Internal
documents show that the management of Novel Clothing had
decided  that  “when  it  comes  to  costly  safety  innovations  we
will follow our competitors. We don't want to be less safe than
anyone else but we don't have to lead the way either.”

it. 

Low Harm version:
Jack  Newton,  a  five  year  old  child,  was  playing  with
matches  when  his  cotton  flannel  pajamas  caught  fire.  His
hands  and  arms  were  badly  burned,  and  required  regular
professional medical treatment for several weeks.

Joan Glover

Joan Glover, a six year old child, ingested a large number
of  pills  of  Allerfree,  a  non-prescription  allergy  medicine,  and
required an extensive hospital stay. The overdose weakened
her respiratory system, which will make her more susceptible
to  breathing-related  diseases  such  as  asthma  and
emphysema  for  the  rest  of  her  life.  The  Allerfree  bottle  used
an inadequately designed child-proof safety cap. The Glovers
sued  the  manufacturer  of  Allerfree,  the  General  Assistance
company.  The  jury  (of  which  you  are  a  member)  ordered
General  Assistance 
in
compensation.

the  Glovers  $200,000 

to  pay 

General  Assistance  is  a  large  company  (with  profits  of
$100-200 million per year) that manufactures a variety of non-
prescription  medicines.  A  federal  regulation  requires  “child-
proof”  safety caps on all medicine bottles. General Assistance
has  systematically  ignored  the  intent  of  this  regulation  by

116

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

selling tens of thousands of bottles of medicines with a child-
proof safety cap that was generally effective, but had a failure
rate much higher than any others in the industry. An internal
company  document  says  that  “this  stupid,  unnecessary
federal regulation is a waste of our money”;  it  acknowledges
the  risk  that  Allerfree  may  be  punished  for  violating  the
regulation but says, “the  federal government has many other
things  to  worry  about  and  probably  won't  bother  us  on  this”
and in any case “the punishments for violating the regulation
are  extremely  mild;  basically  we'd  be  asked  to  improve  the
safety  caps  in  the  future.”  An  official  at  the  Food  and  Drug
Administration  had  previously  warned  a  vice  president  of
General Assistance that they were “on shaky ground”  but the
company decided not to take any corrective action.

Low Harm version:
Joan Glover, a six year old child, ingested a large number
of  pills  of  Allerfree,  a  non-prescription  allergy  medicine.  She
had  to  spend  several  days  in  a  hospital,  and  is  now  deeply
traumatized by pills of any kind. When her parents try to get
her  to  take  even  beneficial  medications  such  as  vitamins,
aspirin,  or  cold  remedies,  she  cries  uncontrollably  and  says
that she is afraid.

Martin West

Martin West, a right-handed disabled veteran who lived in
a  two  story  house,  was  seriously  injured  in  a  fall  when  the
chain  broke  on  his  electric  lift-chair  (a  device  that  allows
someone to be carried up stairs in a chair that moves up and
down an angled track). He fell from near the top of the stairs
and  tumbled  awkwardly  all  the  way  to  the  bottom  landing,
damaging  his  spinal  cord  in  the  process.  As  a  result  he  now
has  only  partial  control  of  his  right  arm,  a  condition  which
doctors  believe  is  permanent.  He  sued  the  manufacturer  of
the lift-chair, MedTech Products. The jury (of which you are a
member)  ordered  MedTech 
in
compensation.

to  pay  him  $200,000 

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

117

MedTech Products is a large company (profits of $100-200
million  per  year)  that  manufactures  many  types  of  medical
equipment, including wheelchairs, car-lifts, and other devices
used  by  the  disabled.  The  lift-chair  is  a  new  product  for
MedTech,  and  instead  of  producing  a  new  design,  company
engineers decided to adapt the design of the hydraulic lifts for
cars  already  on  the  market.  Unfortunately,  there  are  several
unique  problems  in  designing  a  safe  and  effective  lift-chair
that  are  beyond  the  experience  of  the  company’s  engineers.
Product  managers  said  that  hiring  new  engineers  with  the
proper expertise was “too expensive, and would take too long”
and  ordered  current  engineers  to  “just  do  the  best  you  can,
but  be  sure  you  meet  our  deadline  for  announcing  the
product.”  The  inexperience  of  the  engineers  and  the  rush  to
meet 
testing
procedures  that  were  less  rigorous  than  those  required  by
federal medical product regulations.

the  product  announcement  date 

led 

to 

Low Harm version:
Martin West, a left-handed disabled veteran who lived in a
two story house, was injured in a fall when the chain broke on
his  electric  lift-chair  (a  device  that  allows  someone  to  be
carried up stairs in a chair that moves up and down an angled
track). He fell from near the bottom of the stairs and tumbled
to the bottom landing, injuring his spinal cord in the process.
His  right  arm  was  paralyzed  for  several  weeks,  after  which
doctors  were  able  to  repair  most  of  the  injury,  and  he  was
able  to  regain  most  of  the  previous  range  of  motion  in  the
arm.

Janet

Janet  Windsor,  a  secretary  who  works  on  computer
equipment, developed a rare form of skin cancer. After a long
course of painful chemotherapy, doctors were able to cure the
cancer,  although  they  cannot  be  sure  that  it  will  not  return.
She  believed  that  it  had  been  caused  by  the  computer
monitors  that  she  worked  on  and  sued  the  manufacturer,

118

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

International  Computers.  The  jury  (of  which  you  are  a
to  pay  her
member)  ordered 
$200,000 in compensation.

International  Computers 

International  Computers  is  a  large  company  (profits  of
$100-200  million  per  year)  that  manufactures  components  of
computer  systems.  The  type  of  International  Computers
monitor that Ms. Windsor used emits an unusually high level
of  radiation  compared  to  other  similar  monitors,  a  level  that
pushes  the  limit  in  government  safety  guidelines.  Internal
company  documents  cite  experts  who  concluded  that  “the
evidence  that  this  level  of  radiation  could  create  any  serious
risk  to  health  and  life  is  weak  and  tentative”.  The  company
was  not  legally  required  to  disclose  the  unusual  level  of
radiation, and it did not do so.

Low Harm version:
Janet  Windsor,  a  secretary  who  works  on  computer
equipment,  suffered  from  frequent  and  severe  migraine
headaches.  As  a  result, 
for  several  years  she  often
experienced  nausea,  insomnia  and  depression,  and  missed
many workdays and family events.

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

119

APPENDIX 3. RESPONSE MODE MANIPULATION

Outrage

Which of the following best expresses your opinion of the

defendant’s actions? (please circle your answer)

Completely
Acceptable

Objectionable

Shocking

Absolutely
Outrageous

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Punishment

In  addition  to  paying  compensatory  damages,  how  much
should the defendant be punished?  Please circle the number
that  best  expresses  your  opinion  of  the  appropriate  level  of
punishment.

No
Punishmen
t

Mild
Punishmen
t

Severe
Punishmen
t

Extremely Severe
Punishment

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

$ Damages

In  addition 

to  paying  compensatory  damages,  what
amount of  punitive damages (if any) should the defendant be
required to pay as punishment and to deter the defendant and
others  from  similar  actions  in  the  future?  (please  write  your
answer in the blank below)

$ _____________________

120

CHICAGO WORKING PAPER IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

APPENDIX 4: EXPERIMENT DESIGN

Samples and Procedures

The  sample  had  good  representation  from  various
demographic  and  socio-economic  groups.  For  example,
respondents  were  44%  male;  64%  Caucasian,  16%  African-
American,  15%  Hispanic;  median  income  =  $30K-$50K;
median  education  =  some  college;  median  age  =  30-39.
the  sample
Thirty-two  respondents  were  dropped 
because 
to
failed 
understand the task.

incomplete  responses  or 

they  gave 

from 

The  survey  was  conducted  at  a  downtown  hotel.
Participants  were  run  in  large  groups  at  pre-arranged  times
over a four day period. Most respondents completed their task
in 30 to 45 minutes.

Each  respondent  received  three  pages  of  general
instructions  and  four  numbered  envelopes.  The  first  three
envelopes contained the materials for Parts 1, 2 and 3 of the
study,  as  described  below.  The  fourth  envelop  contained
information.  The
demographic  question  and  debriefing 
instructions  (which  are  excerpted  in  Appendix  1)included  (1)
an overview of the survey procedure, (2) an explanation of the
task  of  jurors  in  civil  (as  opposed  to  criminal)  trials,  (3)
definitions  of  and  distinctions  between  compensatory  and
punitive  damages,  including  the  fact  that  compensatory
damages had already been awarded in the cases they would
consider,  (4)  a  summary  of  standard  legal  conditions  for
punitive damages (maliciousness or reckless disregard for the
welfare  of  others),  and  (5)  a  reminder  about  the  standard  of
evidence  required  in  this  situation  (preponderance  of  the
evidence).

Design and Stimuli

Ten  scenarios  describing  personal  injury  cases  were
constructed.  The  first  six  were  used  in  Parts  1  and  2  of  the
procedure and the other four in Part 3. Each respondent rated
some  version  of  all  ten  scenarios.  Envelope  #1  contained

ASSESSING PUNITIVE DAMAGES

121

material  about  one  of  the  scenarios.  Envelope  #2  contained
four
five  other  scenarios.  Envelope  #3  contained 
scenarios used in Part 3 of the experiment.

the 

In  Parts  1  and  2,  between-subjects  manipulations  were
response  mode  (Outrage,  Punishment  or  $  Damages)  and
firm size (annual profits of $10-$20 million (Medium) or $100-
$200 million (Large)), and scenario sequence, including which
scenario  was  evaluated  first,  in  isolation  from  the  others  (in
Part 1 of the procedure). Scenario order was counterbalanced
using a Latin square so that each scenario appeared in each
ordinal  position  with  equal  frequency.  Table  2  shows  the
wording  of  the  evaluation  questions  in  the  three  response
modes. Instructions in all scenarios stated that compensatory
damages of $200,000 had already been awarded.

isolation  manipulation  was 

Part 3 had the same structure as Parts 1 and 2, except
that 
replaced  by  a
the 
manipulation  in  which  the  degree  of  harm  suffered  by  the
plaintiff  was  varied.  For  each  of  the  four  scenarios  used  in
Part  3,  we  formulated  a  high-harm  and  a  low-harm  version.
For  example,  in  the  case  in  which  a  child  playing  with
matches  was  burned  when  his  pajamas  caught  fire,  the
injuries  were  described  as  “He  was  severely  burned  over  a
significant  portion  of  his  body  and  required  several  weeks  in
the  hospital  and  months  of  physical  therapy”  (high  harm)  or
“His hands and arms were badly burned, and required regular
professional medical treatment for several weeks”  (low harm).

This  Working  Paper  is  a  tentative  and  preliminary  version  of
an article that will be published in the Yale Law Journal. The
research  on  which  the  article  is  based  will  be  described  in
detail  in  a  forthcoming  article  by  Daniel  Kahneman,  David
Schkade,  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein  in  the  Journal  of  Risk  and
Uncertainty. Readers with comments should address them to:

Cass R. Sunstein
Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of
Jurisprudence
The Law School
The University of Chicago

1111 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics
(Second Series)

1. William  M.  Landes,  Copyright  Protection  of  Letters,
Diaries  and  Other  Unpublished  Works:  An  Economic
Approach (July 1991).

2. Richard  A.  Epstein,  The  Path  to  The  T. J.  Hooper:  The
Theory and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August
1991).

3. Cass  R.  Sunstein,  On  Property  and  Constitutionalism

4. Richard  A.  Posner,  Blackmail,  Privacy,  and  Freedom  of

(September 1991).

Contract (February 1992).

5. Randal  C.  Picker,  Security  Interests,  Misbehavior,  and

Common Pools (February 1992).

6. Tomas  J.  Philipson  &  Richard  A.  Posner,  Optimal

Regulation of AIDS (April 1992).

7. Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April

1992).

8. William  M.  Landes,  Sequential  versus  Unitary  Trials:  An

Economic Analysis (July 1992).

9. William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of
Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992).
10. Alan  O.  Sykes,  The  Welfare  Economics  of  Immigration
Law:  A  Theoretical  Survey  With  An  Analysis  of  U.S.
Policy (September 1992).

11. Douglas  G.  Baird,  1992  Katz  Lecture:  Reconstructing

Contracts (November 1992).

12. Gary  S.  Becker,  The  Economic  Way  of  Looking  at  Life

(January 1993).

13. J.  Mark  Ramseyer,  Credibly  Committing  to  Efficiency
Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March
1993).
14. Cass 

Endogenous 

Preferences,

Sunstein, 

R. 

Environmental Law (April 1993).

15. Richard  A.  Posner,  What  Do  Judges  and  Justices
Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April
1993).

16. Lucian  Arye  Bebchuk  and  Randal  C.  Picker,  Bankruptcy
Rules,  Managerial  Entrenchment,  and  Firm-Specific
Human Capital (August 1993).

17. J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts:
The  Legal  Logic  to  the  Japanese  Main  Bank  System
(August 1993).

18. William  M.  Landes  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The
(September

Economics  of  Anticipatory  Adjudication 
1993).

19. Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent

Law (September 1993).

20. Alan  O.  Sykes,  An  Introduction  to  Regression  Analysis

21. Richard  A.  Epstein,  The  Ubiquity  of  the  Benefit  Principle

22. Randal  C.  Picker,  An  Introduction  to  Game  Theory  and

23. William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis

(October 1993).

(March 1994).

the Law (June 1994).

(June 1994).

24. J.  Mark  Ramseyer,  The  Market  for  Children:  Evidence

from Early Modern Japan (August 1994).

25. Robert  H.  Gertner  and  Geoffrey  P.  Miller,  Settlement

Escrows (August 1994).

26. Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the
Intellectual  Property  Protection  of  Software  (August
1994).

27. Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Rules  and  Rulelessness,  (October

1994).

28. David  Friedman,  More  Justice  for  Less  Money:  A  Step

Beyond Cimino (December 1994).

29. Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational
Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995).
30. Douglas  G.  Baird,  The  Law  and  Economics  of  Contract

Damages (February 1995).

31. Daniel  Kessler,  Thomas  Meites,  and  Geoffrey  P.  Miller,
Explaining  Deviations  from  the  Fifty  Percent  Rule:  A
Multimodal  Approach  to  the  Selection  of  Cases  for
Litigation (March 1995).

32. Geoffrey  P.  Miller,  Das  Kapital:  Solvency  Regulation  of

the American Business Enterprise (April 1995).

33. Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995).
34. J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995).
35. Kenneth  W.  Dam,  Intellectual  Property  in  an  Age  of

Software and Biotechnology (November 1995).

36. Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Social  Norms  and  Social  Roles

(January 1996).

37. J.  Mark  Ramseyer  and  Eric  B.  Rasmusen,  Judicial  Inde-
pendence  in  Civil  Law  Regimes:  Econometrics  from
Japan (January 1996).

38. Richard  A.  Epstein,  Transaction  Costs  and  Property
Rights:  Or  Do  Good  Fences  Make  Good  Neighbors?
(March 1996).

39. Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996).
40. William  M.  Landes  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The
Economics  of  Legal  Disputes  Over  the  Ownership  of
Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996).

41. John  R.  Lott,  Jr.  and  David  B.  Mustard,  Crime,
Deterrence,  and  Right-to-Carry  Concealed  Handguns
(August 1996).

42. Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Health-Health  Tradeoffs  (September

43. Douglas G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An
la  and  Economics  of  Financially

the 

Overview  of 
Distressed Firms (March 1997).

44. Richard  A.  Posner,  Community,  Wealth,  and  Equality

(March 1997).

45. William  M.  Landes,  The  Art  of  Law  and  Economics:  An

Autobiographical Essay (March 1997).

46. Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Behavioral  Analysis  of  Law  (April

1996).

1997).

47. John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Elec-
toral  Competitiveness:  Evidence  from  California’s  State
Legislative Races (May 1997).

48. Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A
Generative  Approach  to  the  Adoption  of  Norms  (June
1997).

49. Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large:
Contract  law  Through  the  Lens  of  Laissez-Faire  (August
1997).

50. Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Daniel  Kahneman,  and  David
Schkade,  Assessing  Punitive  Damages  (with  Notes  on
Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)

