 University of Chicago Law School Chicago Unbound Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics Assessing Punitive Damages... Cass R. Sunstein Daniel Kahneman David Schkade Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman & David Schkade, "Assessing Punitive Damages..." (Coase-Sandor Institute for Law & Economics Working Paper No. 50, 1997). Cass R. Sunstein,1 Daniel Kahneman,2 and David Schkade3 This Article has two goals. The first is to investigate the sources of arbitrariness in punitive damage awards.4 This investigation, which we believe to be the first of its kind, helps to answer an important question: What are the sources of unpredictability in punitive damage awards?5 On the basis of 1 Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. Affairs, Princeton University. responses from 899 jury-eligible citizens, we estimate the results of deliberations consisting of all-white juries, allAfrican-American juries, all-female juries, all-male juries, allwealthy juries, all-poor juries, and juries of widely diverse degrees of age and education. law, wide range of relevant discussions. Research on Judgment and Decisionmaking (1997). These insights very much bear on law. Our study helps show what might be missing, impractical, or wrong in standard economic approaches to punitive damage awards, and in a way that bears on a range of additional issues as well.9 B. Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards The award of punitive damages has become one of the most controversial and important uses of the tort law, extending well beyond the common law to such statutory areas as environmental protection and employment discrimination.10 Punitive damages are allowed in forty-seven of the fifty states,11 and over sixty federal statutes now permit the award of punitive damages, making judicial review of punitive awards a significant part of federal law.12 The purposes of such awards are not obscure. Sometimes compensatory awards provide insufficient deterrence of private behavior, simply because injured parties do not detect and seek compensation for all injuries. Punitive damages can, in theory, take account of the infrequency of private suits by penalizing the defendant to the point where it will undertake optimal precautions.13 Moreover, punitive damages may have a retributive or expressive function, designed to embody social outrage at the actions of serious wrongdoers.14 They may reflect the “sense of the community” about the egregious character of the defendant’s action. the elaborate network of Understood in these terms, however, punitive awards raise several puzzles. Such awards interact in complex ways with public regulatory requirements and criminal prohibitions that overlap with the tort law. These requirements and prohibitions also have deterrent, retributive, and expressive functions. It is not clear how they can best be brought together with tort law to produce a coherent whole. 13 See William Landes & Richard Posner, The Economic Structure of On the basis of evidence of this kind, many people have that punitive awards have a “lottery-like” complained character21 and require legislative or judicial remedy.22 Thus it is said, in well-publicized documents, that the arbitrary character of punitive damage awards is “news to no one,” that they produce an affront to the rule of law by “distributing awards in a random and capricious manner,”23 and that they should be subject to a cap of three times the actual harm.24 Congress continues to debate bills that would limit the availability and amount of punitive damages.25 It is not difficult to understand the widespread concern with erratic punitive damage awards. If similarly situated people— plaintiffs and defendants alike—are not treated similarly, erratic awards are unfair. As a matter of fairness, the evidence suggests that some awards are too low, while others are too high. From the standpoint of economic efficiency, unpredictable awards need not be troublesome; perhaps individual awards cannot be calculated in advance, but if people can calculate the expected value of the relevant risks, there should be no efficiency If awards are unpredictable, however, resources are likely to be wasted on that calculation, and as a practical matter a risk of extremely high awards is likely to produce excessive caution in riskaverse managers and companies.26 Hence unpredictable reasonable awards create both unfairness and assumptions) inefficiency, 27 in a way that may create overdeterrence of desirable activity.28 loss. Our principal interest here is in identifying some of the sources of unpredictability in jury judgments. On the basis of a study of 899 jury-eligible citizens, we offer the following major findings. awards are fairly predictable. But defendants and plaintiffs live in a world of dollars, not of log dollars. In terms of dollars the judgments of our respondents and of the juries examined by Eisenberg et al. are correctly described as erratic and unpredictable, because the severe skewness creates the possibility of either modest or disastrous losses in identical cases. This produces unfairness, because the similarly situated are treated differently, and also might induce risk aversion even in very large firms. punitive intent are turned into highly erratic judgments about appropriate dollar punishment. A basic source of arbitrariness with the existing system of punitive damages (and a problem not limited to the area of punitive damages) is the use of an unbounded dollar scale. 30 Of course there is a large question about the importance of predictability in an assessment of punitive damage awards. Such awards may be predictable but nonetheless problematic, because (for example) they are too high or too low to produce optimal deterrence, or they do not reflect the right theory of retribution. Our focus here is on the problem of unpredictability, which is an affront to the rule of law and a particular problem under the due process clause and associated principles. See TAN infra. But we discuss below the relationship between unpredictability and other possible problems with damage awards. about punishment, subject to guidelines and constraints. If juries cannot consistently or sensibly “map” their judgments onto an unbounded dollar scale, might it follow that judges, rather than juries, should be making decisions about punitive awards? Should the legal system shift to a system of civil sentencing? Might the same conclusion make sense for compensatory awards in cases in which dollar awards are also likely to be arbitrary? Might the current system of civil liability, both punitive and compensatory, sometimes be displaced by an administrative process, one that can aspire to more in the way of coherence and rationality? The choice of reform of course depends on an assessment of precisely what defects ought to be corrected, and thus on a set of normative judgments about the problems with punitive awards in their current form. We attempt to disaggregate three possible judgments here, partly as thought experiments, and partly to raise some questions about the appropriate domain of populist elements in the legal system. dollar amount would mean for, or do to, the defendant or those in the position of the defendant. On this view, the jury should also rank the case at hand in comparison to preselected cases or come up with a number on a bounded scale. A conversion formula, based not on population-wide data but on expert judgments about what various awards would actually mean or do, would be used to produce rational judgments about dollar amounts. The result would be a form of technocratic populism—populist in the sense that normative judgments of the jury would be the foundation of decision, technocratic in the sense that experts would translate those judgments into legal awards. the the and findings empirical policy recommendations have implications well beyond the problem of punitive damages. The problem of “mapping” onto a dollar scale arises not only in the setting of punitive damages, but also in damages for “pain and suffering,” libel actions, sexual harassment cases, intentional infliction of emotional distress, administrative penalties, and judgments about the appropriate focus of the regulatory state. About one-half of tort law involves monetary awards for injuries that are hard to monetize.31 From our findings, it is reasonable to infer that the phenomenon of shared judgments and erratic or arbitrary32 dollar amounts create a serious and unaddressed problem in many areas.  Very typically, juries and judge are mapping judgments onto an unbounded dollar scale; the phenomenon of widespread and predictable judgments, combined with the demonstrable cognitive difficulty of translating preferences and values into dollar amounts, has wide-ranging implications for the operation of both private and public law. This Article comes in six parts. Part II outlines existing understandings about punitive damages, showing how the sources of variable judgments are relevant to constitutional issues and also to existing theories of deterrence and the basic retribution. Part conclusions. Part recommendations IV presents policy designed to provide a role for community judgments without the “noise” and arbitrariness that accompany the current system. What is important is not the details of the proposals 31 See W. Kip Viscusi, Reforming Products Liability 102-104 (1993). 32 They may be arbitrary either in the sense of erratic or in the sense of a product of a normatively questionable “anchor” on which the jury has seized. See TAN infra. but their basic goal and direction: to provide juries with an opportunity to do what they are capable of doing relatively well, without requiring juries to do what they are bound to do badly. the general problem of Part V briefly discusses some analogies and implications, jury dealing above all with determination of dollar amounts in which monetization is unfamiliar and difficult. We show how an evaluation of appropriate to compensatory awards call for an ambitious decision about role of “compensation” judgments—or, in other words, a decision about what the vexing idea of “compensation” should be taken to mean. We also outline a possible research agenda to see how actual or potential descriptive findings in psychology might bear on the normative goals of the legal system. Part VI is a conclusion. technocratic ingredients populist respect and of It is not our purpose to resolve the debate about whether and why a court should award punitive damages.33 Our modest goal is to outline some of the relevant arguments by way of introduction. It is important to provide those arguments here, since they provide the foundation for the constitutional law governing punitive damage awards, and because the arguments play a large role in our empirical study. The traditional view is that punitive awards serve deterrent and retributive goals. Thus a standard jury instruction says, “In determining whether or not you should award punitive damages, you should bear in mind that the purpose of such an award is to punish the wrongdoer and to deter that wrongdoer from repeating such wrongful acts. In addition, such damages are also designed to serve as a warning to others, and to prevent others from committing such wrongful acts.”34 there 1. Deterrence (a) Conventional arguments. With respect to the goal of deterrence, is a simple and standard economic argument for punitive damages: Compensatory damages work well for deterrence if and only if it is easy to identify and to bring suit against the injurer, and to collect full damages. Under these conditions, the wrongdoer faces liability for the full social costs of the wrong. Thus there is no need for additional damages the probability of detection and successful suit for compensation is 100%. But sometimes it is difficult to identify the injurer, perhaps because the tort has occurred surreptitiously. In such cases, adequate deterrence will not be provided, since wrongdoers will be able to continue to engage in conduct whose social costs exceed social benefits. Punitive damages are necessary to pick up the slack for undetected wrongdoers.35 if that the award of compensatory damages Under this view, the goal of punitive damages is to is ensure supplemented by an amount reflecting the fact that the probability of that award is less than 100%. The simplest conclusion is that total damages should be the harm multiplied by the reciprocal of the probability than the 34 Ronald Eades, Jury Instructions of Damages in Tort Actions 98 (3d defendant will be found liable when he should be found liable; punitive damages would then consist of the excess of total damages over compensatory damages.36 We will suggest some institutional and psychological reasons to doubt that jurors can or will make judgments of this kind; let us continue the simple account for now. 36 See Polinsky & Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic Analysis, Harv. L. Rev., forthcoming. because they do not have this effect; they require the defendant to internalize the victim’s costs without also eliminating the hedonic effects of the defendant’s benefits. it On this view, intentional torts, involving deliberate infliction of an injury, may well provide good cases for punitive damages. Of course it is in such cases that socially illicit gains are most likely to be involved. In such cases, the probability of obtaining damages from the injurer may well be less than 100%; intentional torts frequently (though not always) involve a form of concealment. But an important implication is that punitive damages generally do not make sense for highly visible torts where the probability of detection and compensation is extremely high; there, compensatory damages are all that is required.40 (b) Puzzles and problems. Even from the economic point of view, these arguments for punitive damages raise some serious puzzles. An important question, not yet taken up in the economic literature, is the relation between this rationale for punitive damages and the existence of other regulatory controls, for example those created by administrative and criminal law. Both administrative and criminal law are often to compensate defended as an effort for private underenforcement of law;41 if the tort system also attempts to pick up the slack via punitive damages, overdeterrence may well result. A system containing compensatory and punitive damages may be both necessary and sufficient taken by itself, but if it is complemented by administrative and criminal law, it is likely to become incoherent. 41 See, e.g., Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law 220 (4th ed. 1994). A general discussion is Edward Rubin, Punitive Damages: Reconceptualizing the Runcible Remedies of Common Law, Wisconsin Law Review (forthcoming 1997). reason that the strongest cases involve intentional torts, and the weakest case involves negligence. In cases involving negligence, punitive damages would be likely to reduce desirable activity. This is much less likely for intentional wrongdoing, where desirable activity by hypothesis is not at issue. Reckless behavior is of course an intermediate case. engage in optimal behavior, whatever its wealth (assuming risk neutrality).46 But there is a question whether this is realistic; we take up this issue below. fact empirical evidence, including terms. Regrettably, the legal culture lacks a careful normative account of the relationship between retributive goals and punitive damages. Those who emphasize retribution are seeking to ensure that the community’s outrage about certain acts is reflected in punishment. Probably the retributive idea would focus on two principal factors: the defendant’s state of mind and the degree of harm actually caused or likely to be caused by defendant’s behavior. The first point is especially important. Retributists who are moral egalitarians48 attempt, through civil or criminal punishment, to capture the intuition that certain intentional states are especially bad because they reflect abhorrent and false views about the moral worth of persons.49 In cases where one person murders another, or Shavell, supra note. acts with gross negligence that produces another’s death, the wrongdoer reveals a belief that some people do not matter very much.50 Public outrage is the appropriate response. 50 See id.; Jean Hampton, Correcting Harms Versus Righting Wrongs: The Goal of Retribution, 39 UCLA L Rev 1659 (1992). Hampton discusses punitive damage awards in particular in id. at 1687-89; see also the illuminating discussion in Marc Galanter and David Luban, Poetic Justice: Punitive Damages and Legal Pluralism, 42 Am Univ L Rev 1393 (1993) (connecting punitive awards with retributive goals and community outrage). sense of outrage and their judgments about appropriate punishment. The question then becomes whether dollar amounts are a sensible register of that sense and those judgments. 1. Options What is the relationship between the award of punitive damages and the Constitution? Because punitive damage awards have been so controversial, and because the Supreme Court has been effectively forced to evaluate a range of punitive damage judgments, this question has become one of the more complex and pressing in modern constitutional law. There are three possible answers: (a) Punitive damages awards are always constitutional. (b) Such awards are unconstitutional, as violations of the due process clause in its substantive dimension, when they are “grossly excessive.” (c) Such awards are unconstitutional, as violations of the due process clause in its procedural dimension, when they are too likely to be arbitrary, because, for example, they are unaccompanied by procedures that sufficiently confine the discretion of the jury. Our findings here are directed principally toward proposition (c) and to the general question whether, why, and in what sense punitive damage awards are likely to be unpredictable and arbitrary. The constitutional judgment overlaps with the more mundane work of district judges and appellate courts, which set aside many punitive awards (as high as 20%) as arbitrary because out of step with the facts of the case or with comparison cases.53 A majority of the Supreme Court has recently converged on proposition (b), though propositions (a) and (c) have also received significant support, and though (c) is highly likely to be a prime area for future contestation.54 In fact the majority’s recent endorsement of a version of (b) is accompanied by an understanding that a major problem with excessive awards is that they fail to provide sufficient predictability.55 Hence a majority of justices—most prominently Justices O’Connor and Breyer, but at different times also Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Souter, White, Brennan, Marshall, Stevens, Kennedy, and Blackmun—have argued that the due process clause requires constraints on jury discretion that will provide fair notice and limit the role of arbitrary or irrelevant factors. The Court has not given much of an account of how juries might be led in the direction of arbitrariness or unpredictability; our findings offer the elements of such an account, one that attempts to specify and model some of the concerns voiced by Justices O’Connor and Breyer. is a clear parallel here insufficiently about whether the problem with the death penalty is that it is sometimes or always excessive or instead that it is produced by reliable procedures. After seriously considering both routes, the Court eventually converged on the procedural option, and it is possible that this will happen with punitive damage awards as well. And as we will see, the choice of substantive rather than procedural due process is of great importance; empirical evidence suggests some advantages to the procedural route. where our findings about jury judgments connect with existing law. The first factor, in the Court’s view, is an effort to ensure some proportionality, in which damages reflect the extent of the offense.65 Here retributive goals appear central. In the Court’s view, this was a serious problem with the jury’s award, because no special aggravating considerations were present in Gore’s case. The injury was purely economic. There was no effect on performance or safety of the car, or even its appearance for a significant period. There was no indifference to or reckless disregard for health and safety. The failure to disclose the relevant material was very plausibly a wrong, especially insofar as it formed part of a national pattern, but it was not a matter of outrageous behavior, deliberate false statements, concealment of evidence of improper motive, or affirmative misconduct.66 to actual In discussing the second factor, the Court said that the ratio of punitive damages (or potential) compensatory damages was especially bad: over 500 to 1. This was worse than that in previous cases.67 Importantly, the Court did not say that the ratio would be decisive. If an especially egregious act produced a small amount of economic damage, high punitive damages would be legitimate; so too where “the injury is hard to detect or the monetary value of noneconomic harm might have been difficult to determine.”68 But 500 to 1 is “breathtaking.”69 Third, the civil and criminal penalties that could be imposed for comparable misconduct were far more limited, involving, for example, a maximum civil penalty for deceptive trade practices of $2000.70 Thus the punitive damage award was quite inconsistent with legislative judgments about the relevant conduct as seen in other areas of the law. The point matters as a means of checking jury determinations against the assessments of democratically elected legislatures. in reduce decisionmaker discretion and hence caprice. The central problem, for Justice Breyer, was unlimited jury discretion. Here the relevant standards “are vague and openended to the point where they risk arbitrary results.”72 The jury operated under no statute with standards distinguishing among permissible punitive damage awards. In the Green Oil case,73 decided in 1989, Alabama set out seven factors to be used by appellate courts to constrain punitive damages awards. These included: a reasonable relation to actual and likely harm; degree of reprehensibility; removal of profit; the financial position of the defendant; costs of litigation and need to create incentives for private litigants; the imposition, or not, of criminal sanctions on the defendant; and the existence of mitigation from other civil penalties.74 In this case, however, the seven factors were not applied in a way that made for actual constraint. Nor have the state courts made any effort to discipline those factors in such a way as to generate a legally constraining standard. In so saying, Justice Breyer referred to the economic test referred to above, in particular to the possibility of permitting “juries to calculate punitive damages by making a rough estimate of global harm, dividing that estimate by a similarly rough estimate of the number of lawsuits that would likely be brought, and adding generous attorneys frees and other costs.”75 Here there was no evidence that the Alabama Supreme Court applied “any economic theory” to explain the $2 million recovery.76 Nor was there a community understanding or historic practice that would provide background standards exemplified in that recovery. The general problem lay in the violation of the Rule of Law. “The upshot is that the rules that purport to channel discretion in this kind of case, here did not do so in fact.”77 Thus Justice Breyer’s opinion can be understood as connecting the outcome in BMW with void for vagueness cases78 and the constitutional attack on the death penalty in in Furman v. Georgia.79 The central problem unconstrained discretion. For Justice Breyer, the outcome in the BMW case is not best understood simply by reference to excessiveness. We will refer to Justice Breyer’s approach in a number of places below. The problems identified here connect directly with his procedural concerns; but they also suggest a distinctive source of discretion, one very different from that emphasized in his opinion. 80 lies 77 Id. at 1609. 78 See, e.g., Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville, 405 US 156 (1972). 79 408 US 238 (1972). 80 Two other cases should be briefly discussed. In Pacific Mutual Life Insurance Co. v. Haslip, 499 US 1 (1991), Haslip complained of the lapsing of his health insurance policy as a result of misconduct by one Ruffin, an agent for Pacific Mutual and also for another, unaffiliated company. Ruffin had misappropriated premiums issued by Haslip’s employer for payment to the other insurer. The trial court instructed the jury that it could award punitive damages against Pacific Mutual if it found liability for fraud. The jury awarded a general verdict of $1,040,000, with a likely division of $200,000 for compensatory damages and $840,000 for punitive damages. The Court held that the award was acceptable: the instructions referred to deterrent and redistributive goals, pointed to the character and degree of the wrong, and excluded evidence of Pacific Mutual’s wealth; the Supreme Court of Alabama had established post-trial procedures for scrutinizing punitive damage awards; and that Supreme Court provided an additional check by examining whether there is a reasonable relation between the award the actual and likely harm, the degree and duration of the defendant’s conduct, the defendant’s state of mind, any concealment by the defendant, and the frequency of past similar conduct; the profitability to the defendant; and other factors. Id. at 17-20. C. Valuation, Variability, and Constraints the After BMW, and the unruly precedents on which it is based, law governing constitutional constraints on punitive damage awards is in a state of considerable uncertainty and flux.81 It is clear that due process questions are raised by any awards that are unaccompanied by limitations on jury discretion and that exhibit striking ratios between punitive damages and compensatory damages (of, say, 10 to 1 or more). It is equally clear that striking ratios are not (and should not be) decisive, that a jury is entitled to consider the wealth of the defendant, and that a plaintiff might be able to eliminate constitutional doubts by showing, for example, that the likely harm was higher than the actual harm, that the defendant engaged in a long course of misconduct, or that the defendant’s state of mind was especially bad. And in Honda Motor Co. v. Oberg,82 the Court held, in a way that bears a good deal on our study, that the due process clause requires judicial review of the size of punitive damage awards, to ensure that they are not arbitrary or excessive. The Court said that a state that failed to provide judicial review violated damages. The Court upheld the award. Justice Stevens, writing as well for Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justice Blackmun, wrote the plurality opinion, holding that the TXO award was not excessive merely because the potential harm was much higher than the actual harm. Id. at 459-62. If TXO had succeeded, it could have produced a multimillion dollar reduction in its own royalty obligations to Alliance, and Alliance could have suffered a multimillion dollar loss. Id. at 462. In any case TXO’s pattern of behavior threatened millions of dollars in losses to others. Id. Thus there was no grotesque disparity between punitive damages and threatened harm. In a lengthy dissenting opinion, Justice O’Connor, mostly joined by Justices White and Souter, complained about the procedures underlying the $10 million award, which, in her view, raised a serious risk of arbitrariness. Id. at 474. procedural due process, because it risked a “lawless, biased, or arbitrary” result.83 But all this leaves many open questions. It is hardly certain that the Court will embark on the project of creating a detailed form of constitutional “common law” to control punitive damages. But the BMW case practically forces lower courts to begin to do exactly that, and this is what is now emerging.84 What the Court lacks, and what bears on constitutional controls, is an understanding of the source of jury variability. Where jurors’ judgments range over a wide range, what is the reason? Are jurors reacting to fine-grained judgments about particular cases? What is the source of unpredictable or erratic judgments? What strategies might work, or fail to work, in counteracting the problem? These are the questions on which we will try to make some progress here. in 86 See David Baldus et al., Improving Judicial Oversight of Jury Damages Assessments: A Proposal for the Comparative Additur/Remittur appellate judges need some understanding of what makes awards unreasonable, and hence an understanding of the sources of variability. Trial courts are in a similar position, both in offering instructions and in reducing awards after they have been made. It is predictable that even when the due process clause is not at issue, both trial courts and appellate courts will struggle with questions very much like those raised in BMW as they continue to devise principles by which to constrain awards. The governing principles have yet to be well-settled and clear standards have yet to emerge. Indeed, it is not at all clear why the legal system should not generally contain a mechanism for increasing punitive damage awards when a particular jury has imposed an unduly low award87—a question to which we will return. If variable and erratic judgments are the problem, the legal system should correct awards that are both unreasonably low and unreasonably high, for both of these are likely to occur.88 Of course the whole question of punitive damages is under active consideration in many states as well as at the national level.89 States are considering caps in the form of ratios or flat dollar limitations; many states are attempting to require bifurcated trials in which judges rather than juries determine the level of punitive damages.90 These are somewhat crude and categorical efforts to respond to the general fear that punitive damages are “out of control.”91 An understanding of the source of variability would lead in the direction of more finely tuned remedies, or at least toward a fuller sense of why the crude alternatives would be acceptable. It is this fuller sense that our study is designed to provide. We designed a study to examine hypotheses about three topics: (i) the psychology of the sequence of judgments and attitudes that produce individual judgments about punitive awards in particular cases; (ii) the sources of variability in these judgments; (iii) the implications of these findings for the unpredictability of jury awards, and for possible reforms in the tasks assigned to juries. We propose a descriptive theory of the psychology of punitive awards, called the outrage model.92 The essential claim is that the moral transgressions of others evoke an attitude of outrage, which combines an emotional evaluation 92 For further discussion see Kahneman, Schkade, and Sunstein, supra note. and a response tendency. The rules that govern outrage present an important problem that we do not address in this paper. We assume that outrage is largely governed by social norms. Judged by reference to these norms, a particular person's expressions of indignation may be deemed too intense for its cause, or not intense enough. Social as well as legal norms also regulate the mapping from transgressions to punishment. is not directly is a mental state, and observable. The various aspects of an attitude can, however, be “mapped” onto diverse responses, which might include facial expressions, verbal statements of opinion, gestures— even physical assault.  Response “modes” might include a judgment about the degree outrageousness on a numerical scale. Under the outrage model, punitive damages are considered an expression of an angry or indignant attitude toward a transgressor. The evaluative aspect of the attitude is labeled outrage; the response tendency is labeled punitive intent. Outrage is basic, and punitive intent is measured by outrage and additional factors, such as harm. As we will see, the verbal indication of the desired severity of punishment (punitive intent) is affected both by the outrage that an action evokes and by the severity of its consequences (“harm”). This retributive aspect of punishment is incorporated in many aspects of the law, such as the large discrepancy between sentences for murder and sentences for attempted murder. The relationship between victim and juror was manipulated in an experiment by Hastie, Schkade, and Payne.93  Under experimental conditions, larger awards were made when the plaintiff was located in the jurors' community than when the plaintiff was from a remote location.  We speculate that this factor affects punitive intent: the retributive urge is stronger 93 See Reid Haste, David Schkade, and John Payne (forthcoming). when the victim belongs to one's group than when the victim is a stranger.94 In some situations the expression of an attitude is restricted to a particular scale of responses. For example, in the situation with which we are concerned here, the responses of juries are restricted to a scale of dollars. Dollar amounts of punitive awards (like the length of prison sentences in criminal cases) are just one of a number of possible scales on which outrage might be expressed. A bounded numerical scale would be another obvious possibility. We propose that some factors affect the mapping of punitive intent onto the dollar scale, but do not affect punitive intent on a bounded numerical scale. For example, the size of the defendant firm is an important factor in translating punitive intent into dollars; a judgment that appears severe when the defendant is a small firm may appear grossly inadequate when the defendant is a giant. Thus firm size will affect dollar awards even if it does not affect punitive intent as measured on a bounded numerical scale. 94 The size of the awards was also affected by the amount demanded by plaintiff.  This observation is most likely to be an anchoring effect, which influences the dollar award directly, independently of punitive intent. The anchoring effect may be quite important in light of the unfamiliarity of the dollar scale as a scale of punishment, a point that we will discuss in some detail. 1. Shared outrage The outrage evoked by different scenarios of tortious behavior is governed by a bedrock of broadly shared social norms. We also examined three other hypotheses: 3. The harm effect Punitive intent—as measured on a bounded numerical the the outrageousness of scale—is determined by defendant’s behavior and by other including the harm suffered by the defendant. The prediction that harm affects punitive intent but not outrage was tested by presenting alternative versions of some scenarios, in which the severity of the harm suffered by the plaintiff was varied. This prediction was tested by presenting each scenario in two versions, in which the size of the defendant was varied. isolation and in the context of other cases. Our first question was whether the degree of outrage is consistent across individuals and across possible juries. A simple way to answer this question is to examine whether rankings of different scenarios are generally similar for different demographic groups. We therefore computed the means of the three responses (outrage, punitive intent and dollar awards), separately for groups of respondents defined by demographic variables (men, women, white, Hispanics, African-Americans, different levels of income and education). To measure the level of agreement across disjoint categories (e.g., men and women) we computed the correlation between their average responses,95 over the set of 28 cases. 95 We used means for outrage and punishment and medians for dollar awards. scenarios of product liability cases evidently rest on a bedrock of moral intuitions that are broadly shared in society. We also looked for differences among groups in the average severity of their judgments (i.e., the level of the average rating), and here too found no significant differences (with the one exception of gender, to be taken up below). This striking finding may not generalize to all domains of the law.97 We might expect to find larger differences between communities and social categories in other domains of the law, perhaps including attitudes toward civil rights violations and environmental harms; at least it is possible that, for example, African-Americans would rate civil rights cases more severely than whites do. We expect, however, that within the same category of cases, rankings may remain the same across different groups, so that different demographic groups would agree on which defendants have behaved least and most egregiously. Here there is a great deal of room for further empirical work. Gender Ethnicity category. Our analysis simply shows that identifiable groups have similar distributions, not that all individuals are alike. 97 There is also a question whether the competing narratives of the real world of juries might create more heterogeneity than is revealed by the responses to our fairly stark case descriptions. In some cases, it it imaginable that members of different groups would be especially alert to some facet of the narrative of one or another side. Experiments involving mock juries might be designed to test for this possibility. Hispanic * Entries are correlations between mean responses to scenarios by respondents in the indicated demographic categories. C. The Exception of Gender Ratings As noted, the only statistically significant difference in average ratings was between women and men. While women and men ranked the scenarios identically (as indicated by the extremely high correlations), men were somewhat more lenient and women were somewhat more severe: women rated the plaintiff’s behavior as more outrageous (a mean difference of .52 scale units, p < .001), expressed more punitive intent (a mean difference of .37 scale units, p < .001), and set higher log dollar awards (p < .01). There was also an interaction between scenarios and gender, in which women assigned even higher ratings of outrage and punishment (but not higher awards) to cases in which the plaintiff was female (p < .05). This the differences in ratings were relatively small. But it bears on legal and social disputes about jury composition, providing some empirical evidence that women do reach different conclusions from those reached by men and in particular that they seek more severe punishment of civil defendants. The fact that women tend to favor stiffer punishments—and that men tend to favor more lenient punishments—is in one sense counter to folk wisdom, which sees women as particularly lenient. But our finding is in line, broadly speaking, with other research suggesting that women and men view social risks differently and, in particular, that women tend to view such risks as more serious than men do.98 finding should not be overemphasized; D. Unpredictable Dollar Awards Our central hypothesis was that dollar awards are erratic because of individual differences in the mapping of punitive intent onto the dollar scale. To test this hypothesis we produced simulated juries by randomly sampling, with 98 See Paul Slovic, University of Chicago Legal Forum (forthcoming replacement, groups of 12 responses to each case for each response scale. In this manner we constructed a large number of three types of simulated juries: “outrage juries,” “punishment juries,” and “dollar juries.” Of course there is a large question about how a set of individual judgments will produce a jury verdict. No doubt group dynamics can push deliberations in unexpected directions, sometimes toward the most extreme member of the group. As a statistical matter, however, the experimental literature on the relationship between prior individual judgments and the outcomes of group deliberation suggests that the median judgment is a good predictor,99 and indeed may even understate our ultimate conclusion.100 We therefore used the median judgment of each simulated jury as an estimate of what the judgment of that jury would have been. Without losing sight of the limitations of our 99 See James Davis, Group Decision Making and Quantitative Judgments, in Understanding Group Behavior (E. Witte and James Davis eds. 1996); Shari Diamond and Jonathan Casper, Blindfolding the Jury to Verdict Consequences, 26 Law and Society Review 513 (1992). Clearly, the appropriateness of this measure may depend on the task structure of the group (e.g., whether or not a unanimous decision is required). However, in our study, replacing the median of juror’s individual judgments as the group decision with the mean, has little effect on the results for outrage and punishment, but makes dollar awards even less predictable. estimation procedure, we apply the label “jury judgment” to for simplicity of exposition. Table 2 these estimates summarizes the simulated jury judgments for punishment and dollar awards. Jury judgments can be considered shared and therefore predictable, in our use of that term, if there is high agreement between juries randomly selected from the population. In order to find a source of erratic judgments, we attempted to compare judgments made by simulated dollar juries, outrage juries, and punishment juries. First, we imagined that all of our case scenarios were tried on the same day by independent juries, analogous to how jury judgments for different cases are produced in practice. We then asked the question, “If these same cases were tried again independently, how likely are we to get the same ratings and rankings as in this first set of trials?” the To answer this question we conducted an analysis requiring 4 steps. (1) We created a randomly selected jury for each of the 28 cases, and computed the median judgment for each. (2) We then imagined that a time machine allowed us to replay each case again independently of the first trial, including the random selection of a new jury. We therefore created a second set of 28 randomly selected juries and corresponding median judgments. The correlation between these and the first set of jury judgments is a measure of how erratic or consistent juries are. (3) To get a more reliable indication of the typical correlation between juries, we performed Step 1 60 times for each of the three response modes. This produced 180 columns of data, each of which contained one set of 28 jury judgments. (4) We then computed the correlations between every pair of sets of simulated jury judgments (i.e., correlations between the columns). This computation was performed both within response (e.g., the correlation between two sets of 28 outrage ratings) and across responses (e.g., the correlation between a set of 28 outrage ratings and a set of 28 punishment ratings). The data shown in Table 3 are medians of the correlations obtained combination. As we had hypothesized, the individual differences in dollar awards produce severe unpredictability, and highly erratic outcomes, even in the medians of 12 judgments (the results would be even more extreme with smaller samples such as 6-person juries). While there is strong agreement between independent sets of outrage or punishment juries (r = .87 and .89), agreement between independent sets of dollar juries is quite weak (r = .42). The variability of individual dollar judgments is so large that even the medians of 12 judgments are quite unstable. The problem could be reduced, of course, by taking larger samples. For example, we found that the median correlation between sets of dollar juries rises to .80 when the size of the juries is increased to 30 (median correlations for 30-person outrage and punishment juries rise to .95 and .97). Lower 95% Confidence Bound Median Upper 95% Confidence Bound Mean Jury Punishment Prediction Error Ratio ($/Punish) Martin Medium Scenario Medium Thomas Medium Thomas Martin Martin Martin Medium Medium Medium Medium Scenario Susan Firm Size Medium Medium Medium Medium Medium Medium Medium Harm Level — Mean Jury Punishment 3.03 Prediction Error Ratio ($/Punish) infinity Median Table 3. Median Correlations Between Sets of Simulated Juries Outrage Punishment $ Awards Outrage Punishment $ Awards Overall Median Award.71 How do these findings bear on the appropriate role of juries in setting punitive damage awards? As we have seen, a conventional understanding of such awards sees the jury as a sample from the community whose function is to provide an estimate of community sentiment. If jury judgments are erratic, this function is badly compromised, for any particular jury’s judgment may not reflect community sentiment at all. The bottom row of Table 3 presents the median correlations between sets of simulated jury judgments for the 28 scenarios and the corresponding estimates of community sentiment, for which we used the overall median of dollar awards for each scenario. It is obvious that the judgments of dollar juries provide a poor estimate of overall community sentiment. Indeed, the unreliability of dollar juries is so pronounced that the dollar awards that would be set by the larger community are predicted more accurately by punishment juries. This is a counterintuitive to a possible recommendation, which we explore below: juries instructed to state their punitive intent could be used, in conjunction with a preset conversion function, to generate punitive awards that would accurately thus reducing much of the unpredictability of awards. leads directly finding. E. The Underlying Problem: “Scaling without a Modulus” A key to our analysis is a distinction that psychologists draw between two types of scales. (i) Category scales are bounded and anchored in verbal descriptions at both ends; scales of this type are often used in public opinion surveys, and were used here to measure outrage and punitive intent. (ii) Magnitude scales are unbounded and are defined by a meaningful zero point. These scales are often used in the psychological laboratory, for example to scale the brightness of lights or the loudness of sounds. Magnitude scales have occasionally been used to measure the intensity of response to socially relevant stimuli, such as the severity of crimes and the severity of punishments.101 The dollar scale of punitive awards is obviously not a category scale; it satisfies the defining characteristics of a magnitude scale, for the zero point is meaningful and the scale is unbounded. Although the relations between the two types of scales have been topic of much controversy,102 some characteristic differences between them are well established. (i) The distributions of judgments on magnitude scales are generally positively skewed, with a long right tail (this is a consequence of the fact that the scale is bounded by zero at the low end); (ii) judgments on magnitude scales are often erratic, in the sense of highly variable; (iii) the standard deviations of individual judgments of different objects (a measure of variability) is often roughly proportional to the mean judgments of these objects. 101 Stanley S. Stevens, Psychophysics (1975); see also note infra. 102 See, e.g., R. Duncan Luce and Carol Krumhansl, Measurement, Scaling, and Psychophysics, in Stevens’ Handbook of Experimental Psychology, Vol 1: Perception and Motivation 3-74 (Richard Atkinson, Richard Herrnstein, Gardner Lindzey, and R Duncan Luce eds. 1988); L.E. Marks, Magnitude Estimation and Sensory Matching, 43 Perception and Psychophysics 511 (1988); Stanley S. Stevens, Psychophysics (1975). assign a particular rating to a “standard” stimulus, defined as the modulus, and to assign ratings to other stimuli in relation to that modulus. Thus, for example, a modulus of “5” might be assigned to a noise of a certain volume, and other noises might be assessed in volume by comparison with the modulus. An experiment can, however, be conducted without specifying a modulus. In this situation of magnitude scaling without a modulus, different respondents spontaneously adopt different moduli, but their responses generally preserve the same ratios even when the moduli differ. For example, one observer may assign a judgment of 200 to a stimulus that another observer rates as 10. If the first observer now assigns a rating of 500 to a new stimulus, we may expect the second to assign to that stimulus a value of 25. 103 In the legal context, some moduli might even be insufficiently informative even for example, $0 means entirely acceptable, and $200 means objectionable (as in for example a reckless act causing minimal harm), the jury would probably continue to be at a loss for most punitive damage cases. A modulus would have to provide a standard around which judgments could be managably organized in the likely comparison set. 104 Similar evidence emerges from Michael Saks et al., Reducing Variability in Civil Jury Awards, 21 Law and Human Behavior 243 (1997). Saks et al. show that under experimental conditions, variability can be reduced in the context of pain and suffering awards by telling people average dollar awards for the type of injury at issue, intervals (where 80% of awards for similar injuries fell), average--plus-intervals, and examples (awards for four similar cases). Id. at 249. Without using the concepts, Saks et al. in effect supply a modulus in each of these conditions, and the result is dramatically to decrease variability Id. at 250-51. See also the F. A simple way to improve predictability Is it possible to improve the predictability of dollar awards? How might this be done? We performed a statistical analysis designed to answer these questions. improving for To test the effect of this procedure in our data, we first estimate the conversion function separately for medium and for large firms, since there was a significant effect of firm size on dollar awards. Following Stevens,105 power functions were estimated, which related the mean punishment jury response for each case to the corresponding overall median of individual dollar awards, our measure of community sentiment. We then generated two sets of simulated jury judgments for each case. The first set consisted of the median judgments of 100 randomly sampled dollar juries. The second set was obtained by taking the median judgments of 100 randomly selected punishment juries, and transforming this value to dollars, separately for each jury, by the appropriate conversion function (depending on whether the defendant firm was large or medium-sized). To measure the accuracy of a simulated jury as an estimate of the population median, we computed the discrepancy between the dollar award set by a jury (for punishment juries we used the dollar value from the conversion function) and the overall median dollar award for that case. From these discrepancies we can compute the root-mean-squared-error (RMSE), which is a conventional measure of accuracy of estimation, and is analogous to the standard error of the estimate in a regression model. This analysis provides two values of RMSE for each of the 28 cases in our study, one from dollar juries and one from punishment juries. In 25 of the 28 cases, RMSE is smaller (indicating higher accuracy) from punishment juries. To assess the magnitude of the effect, we computed the ratio of the two values of RMSE for each scenario (listed in the last column of Table 2). The median ratio was 2.18, which is interpreted to mean that for the median case, using dollar juries leads to over twice as much juries and a prediction error conversion function. For example, for the case of Joan with a medium firm size and high harm, the ratio is 2.27, the median award is $1,000,000, and the estimates of dollar juries have an average error from this value of $913,481 compared to $402,414 for estimates based on punishment juries. In simple language, this means that unpredictability could be greatly reduced, and population-wide judgments about dollar awards would be estimated far more precisely, if the legal system used punishment juries and a conversion function rather than dollar juries. Indeed, as can be seen in Table 2, the median probably understates the decisive overall advantage of using predictions based on punishment ratings, since for some individual cases the reduction in error is extremely large. awards—but it is not the only one. Other factors include regional differences, plaintiff’s demand, anchors of various sorts, differences in social norms over both time and space, the quality of the lawyers on both sides, and doubtless others. We take up some of these points below. In this section we briefly report our findings on our other hypotheses, and discuss some issues of particular relevance to punitive damage reform.106 1. The effect of context Unlike real jurors, who are exposed to a single case for a long time, the participants in our study responded to a total of 10 product liability cases in quick succession, and had an opportunity to compare most of these scenarios to each other. To examine the effect of this unusual procedure, every participant first encountered one of the first six scenarios, which was presented in a separate envelope and was evaluated in isolation from the others. The experimental design provides a comparison of the distribution of judgments to each scenario when it is judged in isolation or in the context of other scenarios. the distribution of We examined whether the availability of a context of the comparison affected question is important, since the legal system often forces juries to evaluate cases without a set of comparison. Our basic finding was that in a no-comparison condition, there is a cautious tendency to diminished differentiation in judgments about different cases. The availability of a context apparently makes a serious cases appear more serious than it would on its own, and makes a milder case appear milder. Thus the most consistent effect of a context of similar cases is to increase judgments across different scenarios. We conclude that the availability of a context of 106 A detailed analysis can be found in Daniel Kahneman, David the range of the Schkade, and Cass R. Sunstein, supra note. similar cases improves people’s ability to discriminate among these cases, but does not affect the basic moral intuitions that the cases evoke. This point is connected to the topic of punitive damage reform below. important to punishment in law, 107 and we suspected that they would also be important to lay intuitions about the proper punishment for reprehensible actions. These predictions were tested by constructing alternative versions of four additional vignettes, which differed in the harm that the plaintiff had suffered. Note that the difference was measured qualitatively rather than in dollar terms; in all of the cases, the jury had awarded $200,000 in compensatory damages, but in some of them, the description of the injury suggested less in the way of qualitative loss, as for example in the case of a burned child. (See the Appendix for examples.) the significant harm effect As predicted, we found that the degree of outrage evoked by the defendant’s behavior was not affected by the harm that occurred. In contrast, varying the harm had a small but statistically significant effect on punishment ratings, where defendants who had done more harm to the plaintiff were judged to deserve greater punishment. As predicted by the for outrage model, punishment ratings carried through to dollar awards. Thus low harm produced an average award of $727,599 and high harm an average award of a substantially greater amount: $1,171,251. in think 3. The effect of firm size Within the academic community, opinion is sharply divided on the question whether the amount of punitive awards should depend on the size of the defendant firm.108 Lay intuitions, in contrast, are quite clear. A psychological analysis suggests than that people deterrence, and the intention to punish is an intention to inflict pain; this means that the size of the defendant matters a good deal. (We do not deny that there is a plausible account of deterrence that would make firm size pertinent.109) Our hypothesis was that firm size would affect neither outrage nor punitive intent, but that the same degree of punitive intent would be translated into a larger amount of damages when the firm is larger than when it is smaller. As expected, we found no statistically significant effects of firm size on either outrage or punishment judgments. But large firms were punished with much larger dollar awards (an average of $1,009,994) than medium firms ($526,398). This is substantial evidence that equivalent outrage and punitive intent will produce significant higher dollar awards against wealthy defendants. A. General Observations, Anchoring, and a Roadmap it that question 1. Experiments and the real world What are the implications of our findings for punitive damage reform? Before answering is necessary to emphasize that those findings do not replicate the real world of punitive damage awards. Ours was an experimental study, and our “juries” consisted of individuals who were given brief narrative descriptions of cases. They were not presented with full accounts, much less with adversary arguments on both sides. These arguments could introduce additional variance; they could tend to reduce disparities. The fact that lawyers on both sides can typically exclude certain jurors may possibly reduce the degree of variance in real-world awards, at least if lawyers can anticipate which people will have outlier moduli. Nor did our “juries” deliberate.110 As a statistical matter, the median vote is not a bad prediction, but it is certainly a crude one, at least for individual cases. 110 We are now embarking on a follow-up study that does involve mock juries, and hence that attempts to be more precise about the effects of deliberation. and experimental evidence too of the effect of anchors in pain and suffering cases, which are analogous.113 There is realworld as well as experimental evidence of an anchoring effect from the compensatory award.114 Other anchors may well emerge during the lawyers’ advocacy. Notably, there is evidence of a correlation between anchoring and confidence, that is, when people are not confident of their judgments, they are more susceptible to anchoring effects.115 We suspect that people are not confident of the dollar amounts they award,116 and this lack of confidence increases the likely use of anchors. It is natural to think that the process of magnitude scaling without a modulus will encourage people to seize on whatever anchors are available, whether or not they are sensible from the point of view of the goals of the legal system. 113 See Michael Saks et al., Reducing Variability in Civil Jury Awards, deterrence theory suggests that it is. We suspect that juries lacking evident anchors will suffer from the problems we have described, whereas juries resorting to anchors will produce arbitrariness of a different sort. obtain) its virtues Many concerns about punitive damage awards point to their apparently arbitrary character, and many proposed remedies attempt to promote rule of law values through, for example, more careful and more specific judicial instructions. In the BMW case, Justice Breyer spoke in some detail of the failure of Alabama law sufficiently to discipline jury discretion with clear criteria about the grounds of awards.117 Thus a likely response to complaints about arbitrary awards is to increase the specificity of instructions to juries. likely For purposes of obtaining the virtues associated with the rule of law, emphasized by Justice Breyer and many others, the solution lies in counteracting the arbitrariness that comes from the unbounded dollar scale of dollars. Of course rule of law virtues are not the only virtues of a legal system,119 and detailed instructions. See Hastie, Schkade, and Payne (forthcoming). constraints on erratic awards may not produce all of the necessary reform. We will shortly turn to these issues. those intuitions can be overcome First, ordinary people do not spontaneously think in terms of optimal deterrence when asked questions about appropriate punishment, and it is very hard to get them to think in these terms. People come to the role of juror with retributive intuitions, and it remains unclear whether and to what extent the courtroom. Perhaps deterrence plays some role in actual awards, and perhaps it would be possible to shift the jury’s attention in the direction of deterrence through more insistent and more carefully designed jury instructions.120 Our study does not rule this possibility out of bounds. But together with follow other studies instructions on the purpose of punitive awards,121 it does give 120 See Polinsky and Shavell, and in particular the model jury instructions offered as Appendix A. Polinsky and Shavell want the judge to say: “Your principal task is to estimate the likelihood that the defendant might have escaped having to pay for the harm for which he or she should be responsible. . . . You should use the Table below to determine the punitive damage multiplier that corresponds to your estimated probability of escaping liability.” jury’s reluctance that show a to 121 See Reid Hastie, David Schkade & John Payne (forthcoming), reporting the outcomes of mock jury tests of punitive damages. After deliberating during which the “jurors” received copies of the judge’s instructions, participants were asked specific questions on the important elements on which they make judgments of punitive damages. A lenient reason to questions whether large-scale shifts are likely. Even if focused on deterrence, a jury will be influenced by moral judgments with a retributive dimension, and these judgments will point in the direction of high awards for conduct that is outrageous but likely to be detected (perhaps a murder or an environmental disaster). grading of this written, recall-comprehension test yielded a mediam score of only 5% correct. in Juror’s Assessments of Compensatory and Punitive Damages (unpublished manuscript 1997), showing leakage between compensatory damages and punitive damages. appropriate retribution. For those who believe that retribution is not a good use of the system of civil and criminal law, this justification will of course be unconvincing. And for those who believe that deterrence is the most important ground for civil law, with retribution playing a modest or supplementary role, a system that elicits and uses community judgments without noise will at best produce a modest improvement. to obtain that 5. Isolating objections to the current system Punitive damages reform should attempt to ensure that juries are charged with performing tasks that they can perform well, and should relieve juries from having to perform tasks that they perform poorly, in a way that produces excessive unpredictability,124 confusion, and arbitrariness. And it would be reasonable to react to our study by suggesting a simple reform: Juries should decide questions of civil liability, just as in order 123 See Galanter and Luban, supra note. 124 Of course there is a question how bad it is for jury judgments to be unpredictable, and what kinds of unpredictability are acceptable. If prospective defendants can assess judgments that are unpredictable in particular cases to get a sense of “expected value,” unpredictability may not be so bad from the standpoint of optimal deterrence. One reason that unpredictability is bad is that it may make planning more difficult if expected value is costly or impossible to calculate, and it may create overdeterrence in risk-averse actors; another reason is that it makes for a form of unfairness, since people who are similarly situated are not treated similarly. Of course predictability is not the only value. A modest degree of unpredictability may well be better than a system in which, for example, jury judgments are predictably too low or too high. they do questions of criminal liability. But judges should decide on the appropriate level of punitive damages, just as they do criminal punishment, subject, in both cases, to guidelines laid down in advance.125 Of course there is a possible problem with judicial judgments about punitive awards, just as in the case of judicial choice of criminal sentences: In both cases, judges are scaling without a modulus, and different judges will reach different conclusions, thus producing arbitrariness. Hence there is good reason for guidelines and constraints on judges. In any case our study provides strong support for the practice, found in some courts, of reviewing punitive awards they are consistent with general outcomes in other cases. Judges need not fear that this practice is antipopulist, for as we have seen, the award of any particular jury may well fail to reflect the community’s sentiment on the topic of appropriate dollar award. that To evaluate these and other possible reforms, it is important to distinguish, more carefully than we have thus far, among three possible objections to the idea of using the juries’ dollar amounts, as the legal system currently does. The third objection is directed against punitive intent and points to improper grounds for judgment. Here the complaint is that the jury is focusing on irrelevant factors, giving undue weight to relevant factors, giving insufficient weight to relevant factors, or even If optimal deterrence is the goal of punitive damages, the outrage model will be quite unappealing. Moreover, public judgments are mediated by social norms, and those norms are objectionable (as they might be, for example, in the area of sexual harassment), a noise-free punitive damage judgment is objectionable too. relevant factors. More particularly, three objections lead naturally to three different directions for possible reform. We should stress at the outset that all three reforms allow the jury not to focus on dollars, though for quite different reasons. idea who had nothing to do with the underlying wrong. It is far from clear that juries awarding punitive damages are aware of this point, and it is also far from clear that they can be easily convinced that the point is correct. Dollars, or Predictable Populism 1. A modest proposal From what we have said thus far, the most modest reform proposal is straightforward, and it is modest indeed. The goal of the modest reform is to get a true understanding of community judgments—true in the sense that it filters out the noise and arbitrariness that come from asking random groups of twelve people to come up with (the community’s judgments about) dollar amounts. If this could be done successfully, it would, the problem of unpredictability by a large factor (in the illustrative data used here, by a factor of 2.18). We have seen that if particular juries are asked to produce a dollar award, as an indicator of community sentiment, there will be a great deal of variability, and that there is also a degree of susceptibility to anchors that have little or no normative weight. But if juries are asked to produce not dollar amounts but either punishment ratings or punishment rankings, the number that results can be turned into what we might call “true dollar awards,” by the simple step of taking the jury’s rating or ranking and using a population-based calibration function like that described above to produce a dollar value. calibration function obtains a more accurate reading of the population’s dollar judgment, in a way that eliminates errors introduced by reliance on individual juries for dollar amounts. Through this route it would be possible to produce much more predictability without sacrificing anything else. 129 Some cautionary notes, in the context of pain and suffering, emerge from David Baldus et al., Improving Judicial Oversight of Jury Damages Assessments: A Proposal the Comparatrive Additur/Remittitur Review of Awards for Nonpecuniary Harms and Punitive Damages, 80 Iowa Law Review 1109, 1125 (1995), which discuss possible problems with jury understanding of cases. 3. Two phases To accomplish this task, the judge would be required to put the jury’s focus on intended judgments about punishment rather than dollars; it is the calibration function that would turn those judgments into dollars. Thus a two-phase process would be required. The jury instruction in Phase One might read roughly like this: “Usually, the legal system awards damages in order to compensate the plaintiff for the wrong the defendant. These damages are called done by compensatory damages. But in cases of severe wrongdoing— extreme recklessness or intentional harm—the legal system also allows you to impose a punishment, one that goes beyond the amount necessary to compensate the plaintiff. The purpose of this punishment is to deter future wrongdoing and to reflect your view about the need just for compensation but also the special circumstances of the case. Any punishment will eventually take the form of dollars. Your judgment will be translated into an appropriate dollar amount by taking account of the general population’s views on how to turn you ranking [or rating] into dollars.” The judge might conclude: “Your choice is very important. It will be the basis for the financial punishment that will ultimately be imposed on the defendant.” for punishment, because of 4. Ratings and rankings For the first phase, it is necessary to make two judgments: about the wording of any questions to be put to the jury, and about the relevant scale on which the jury’s normative judgment will be expressed. to promote predictability in awards, perhaps the most obvious route would be to require juries to make judgments along a bounded numerical scale. A jury might, for example, be asked to decide where the case falls on a scale of 0 to 6 or 0 to 10.130 The advantage of this approach is that it would lead to 130 Relevant discussion and a related proposal can be found in David Improving Judicial Oversight of Jury Damages Baldus et al., If a goal is It may greater predictability with respect to damage awards, and it would thus avoid much of the randomness that characterizes jury selection of dollar amounts. therefore be worthwhile for states to experiment with some such approach, at least in some of the settings that call for punitive damages. But there are problems with a bounded numerical scale. At least if they are accompanied only by verbal descriptions of the sort we have given here, the relevant numbers (0 to 6, 0 to 10) are likely to be perceived as having a highly artificial quality.131 In practice such scales can work quite well; consider the existence of popular and relatively informative movie ratings that use such scales, or ask whether it might be possible to rate judges, lawyers, or law review articles on such a scale. But juries are likely to be skeptical that the numbers have much meaning. There is a further problem: With a relatively vague scale, different people are free to interpret the labels in different ways. Perhaps most important, our data show that there is more (implicit) agreement on rankings than on absolute numbers. Hence the use of less predictability (though more numbers will produce precision) than an attempt to produce rankings, though it is still far better than dollars.132 Assessments: A Proposal for the Comparatrive Additur/Remittitur Review of Awards for Nonpecuniary Harms and Punitive Damages, 80 Iowa Law Review 1109 (1995). The authors propose judicial review of awards by reference to comparison cases, building on existing practice. Our proposals represent a more dramatic departure from existing practice. to very egregious wrongdoing, It follows that a superior alternative is probably to provide juries not with a bounded numerical scale but with a calibrated set of scenarios of punitive damage cases, set so as to show mild wrongdoing, not subject to any award, all the way requiring a very substantial award.133 The jury would be asked to assess the case at hand in terms of the sample cases, not with any dollar amounts or even numbers. The jury could be given a set of, say, ten scenarios, provided without any preset ordering (although the scenarios would have been ranked in a large 10, how was last night’s dinner?) It is much easier to make comparisons— to compare meals, conferences, lecture, briefs, and the like against one another. Comparisons avoid the need to generate uniformity among heterogeneous people with respect to the meaning of the key terms. pretest). The jury’s task would be to compare the case at hand successively to each of the ten scenarios, to determine whether it is worse or less bad. The relevant score would be the number of scenarios that are better, plus 1. This gives you a ranking of the case in the set of 11, without requiring the jury to rank all 11. There is no real need for the jury to spend time discussing the details of the orderings of fictitious scenarios. Different scenarios would be provided for different areas of the law: libel, products liability, damages to natural resources, assault, and so forth.134 The jury could say, for example, that of the six cases provided, the case at hand is the next-to-worst, or closer to 5 than to 4. The jury would also be allowed to go off the scale, by deciding that the case at hand is less deserving of punishment than the least serious cases, and also that it is deserves more severe punishment than the most serious case. 134 Thus, for example, Baldus et al., supra, at 1154-1155, discuss certain grounds for creating a typology for purposes of additur or remititur intentional for medical malpractice, wrongdoing, (1) obstruction of justice, such as destruction of evidence of negligence, (2) other dishonesty, such as failure to disclose to patient available options, (3) delivery of nonapproved care, (4) intent to cause harm in delivery of care. There is a similar hierarchy for willful disregard. Id. What we are suggesting is that ideas of this kind might be used to develop scenarios for jury use. the context of including, in 135 If the no-comparison effect had been stronger, this procedure would have been clearly superior. The limited effect of the no- comparison condition merely removes one reason for adopting the procedure, but it is still far better than the status quo, and seems better than any alternative that seeks to maintain a role for the jury in registering its moral judgment. enterprise. It could be argued that the ranking might serve to educate jurors about community values and judgments, but it cannot be denied that some juries might reject what they are told. On this count ratings have an advantages. Another disadvantage of this approach is that it requires a legislature or commission to generate the scenarios, a more complex and contested task than that involved in using a bounded numerical scale. Our overall judgment is that rankings are likely to work better than ratings; doubtless a fair bit of experimentation would make sense to find what works best. An experimental study, in the context of pain and suffering awards, has shown that the practice of offering examples of in similar cases can dramatically decrease awards variability.136 Our own study of context provides additional support for the general idea of providing a context of cases, and the benefits would extend to both rankings and ratings. 136 Michael Saks et al., Reducing Variability in Civil Jury Awards, 21 Law and Human Behavior 243, 250-51 (1997). Of course there is a risk of strategic behavior on the jury’s part if the jury becomes aware of the relevant conversion function, and steps must be taken, perhaps through jury instructions, to counter this risk if it materializes. damages (a crude test, for reasons suggested above) and ad hoc judgments about what seems “shocking.”139 The idea of examining comparison cases is not, however, entirely foreign to the legal culture. Damage schedules and scaling through examples have been used successfully in the settlement of mass tort cases.140 Such ideas have often been discussed in the context of pain and suffering awards.141 In a prominent case involving such awards, Judge Kearse, writing for the Second Circuit, attempted a careful comparison of the case at hand with twelve other cases.142 Nor has comparison been unavailable in the context of punitive damages, at least in the process of judicial review.143 In an influential case, the court of appeals for the Ninth Circuit said that a district court should compare other punitive damage cases to a “a figure derived the case at hand.”144 And comparison of cases is a pervasive aspect of appellate review of punitive awards, furnishing a constraint on arbitrariness and inequality.145 Of course the Supreme Court has not facts of from the juries insisted on this requirement as a matter of constitutional law. In an echo of some early death penalty cases,146 the Court said that each case might be taken as sui generis. Because to “make a punitive damage judgments require facts and qualitative assessment based on a host of it. to circumstances unique Because no identical, meaningful comparisons of such awards are difficult to make.”147 Thus the Court said that a comparative approach cannot be a “ ‘test’ for assessing the constitutionality of punitive damage awards” even though it would not “rule out the possibility that the fact that an award is significantly larger than those in apparently similar circumstances” might be relevant to the constitutional issue.148 the particular case before two cases are truly to reluctance The Court’s impose a constitutional requirement of comparing cases is understandable in light of the Court’s caution about proceeding at the constitutional level in the face of principles of federalism and gaps in the a mandatory death penalty statute). Court’s knowledge of the actual world of punitive damage that such a awards. Nothing said here demonstrates requirement would be sensible as a matter of constitutional law. But it is clear that a principal concern with the existing system stems from inadequate constraints on jury discretion, and it is now clear that a serious problem arises from the response mode of dollars and the difficulty of generating predictable dollar amounts. Our findings fortify the wisdom of the appellate practice of comparing punitive damage awards, and they suggest the possibility of a constitutional problem with awards that appear, in practice, to be stabs in the dark. Dollars, or Technocratic Populism The second kind of reform, we have suggested, would attempt to elicit the jury’s punitive intent, or its judgment about appropriate punishment, but would not ask the community to make decisions about dollar amounts. On this view, it is agreed that the jury’s intention to punish is what should govern punitive damage awards. In this way, the outrage model is accepted on normative grounds. The problem is that the most modest reform proposal, just described, perpetuates the crucial defect of the current system, that is, it relies on the abilities of ordinary citizens and hence the community to translate punitive intention into dollars (which, we have argued, results largely in stabs in the dark). There is an analogy here with the criminal justice system as it now stands: Juries make decisions about criminal liability (decisions that undoubtedly have a dimension of “punitive intent”); but judges, within the constraints of applicable guidelines, make decisions about sentencing, presumably because of their greater expertise and insulation from irrelevant or illegitimate factors. Whether or not an organization is involved, they are also using unbounded dollar scales, lacking a modulus that would give meaning to their estimates of different magnitudes. Hence it would be necessary to devise a translation formula that depends on the community’s normative judgments about intended punishment, which are not only predictable but also worth using, but not on community judgments about dollar amounts, which can be made more predictable but which may not be worth using. To do this well, it would be desirable to translate the jury’s intention to punish with expert assistance. Here are the two phases of a possible reform. into dollars Phase two, we have noted, involves the translation of a jury’s normative judgment—of intent to punish—into dollars. We assume that the jury’s judgment about appropriate punishment is the appropriate foundation for the award and that the problem for correction is that a jury is in a poor position to know what dollar awards will actually do. In that case, the point of a good translation is to ensure that the expressed punitive intention is turned into awards that are both predictable and faithful to what the jury truly intends to happen. The translating institution would have to know a great deal about the effects of dollar awards on both individuals and firms. It would also have to make judgments about the effects of the defendant’s income and wealth. Of course the judgment about how to translate would involve many evaluative judgments. A legislature or commission charged with making those judgments might ask, for example, about the effects of various kinds of awards on both individuals and firms. When high punitive awards are given, how exactly do firms suffer, and are the people who suffer high-level officials, clerical workers, or consumers? The judgment about dollar awards would emerge through engagement with such issues. 1. An insufficiently explored problem Our findings put in sharp relief a large and almost entirely unexplored problem: Whether, in light of what is or might be known about human psychology and cognition, lay people are willing and able to make judgments in the way that the legal system deems desirable. There is good reason to believe, for example, that if punitive damages are designed to produce optimal deterrence, juries should be eliminated, for it is doubtful that they can be made to carry out that task. If this is the goal of punitive damages, surely it would be better for the judgment to be made by a judge or (better still) by a specialized regulatory agency entrusted with precisely that task. punishment. There can be little doubt that judgments about outrage and punishment may diverge from judgments about optimal deterrence; people may want to punish a murderer via punitive damages even if the probability of detection was 100%. Our discussion thus far suggests a simple idea: if juries are appropriately used, it is because their intuitions are more or they can be adequately disciplined. We know a good deal about these intuitions: high sensitivity to outrage (which probably implies low sensitivity to detection probability), substantial sensitivity to harm (which may not be fully expressed in the amount of compensatory damages), great sensitivity to firm size, and a retributive focus. that A decision to retain the jury system means that these intuitions are appropriately used for purposes of civil punishment, at least as a good first approximation. But if our diagnosis of the intuitions is correct, there is a risk from a translation formula: juries may feel exposed to the possibility of being ignored, and may respond by behaving strategically. Thus there is a limit to the extent to which the translation formula can stray from common intuitions. The most serious objection to our second proposal therefore comes from the view that juries do not and cannot easily be made to base their decisions on the proper grounds.149 On this view, the problem is that the intention to punish, even if well-translated, is not an adequate way to assess punitive damage awards, because it is, from the 149 See Hastie et al., supra note. In that study, two-thirds of mockjuries that deliberated to a verdict decided that punitive damages were warranted in actual cases in which appellate and trial judges had concluded otherwise. This strong tendency to find liability for punitive damages was partly a product of the jurors’ failure to consider the judge’s instructions; juries that discussed those instructions more fully were less likely to impose punitive damage liability. Id. normative point of view, too sensitive to irrelevant factors, and too insensitive to relevant factors. In the criminal law, juries are not asked to identify their punitive intent, with a separate calibration by the judge; instead the determination is made by the judge subject to the sentencing guidelines. Why, it might be asked, wouldn’t the same approach make sense for punitive awards? in least The basic claim here would be that juries cannot be used to promote the aims, properly understood, of the system of three possible punitive damages. There are at objections. The first is that retributive or expressive goals would be better carried out via the criminal law, or even by regulatory law at the local, state, and national levels. Certainly the environmental area, expressive and retributive motivations have played a large role in areas not involving issue whether retributive judgments by juries can be sufficiently informed by relevant facts, and made reliably to express relevant values, so to serve as a sensible adjunct to the remaining fabric of the law. Even if we focus on retributive goals, can punitive damages be paid to fit with the rest of the law, so as to create a sensible regime of retribution? is a continuing juries. There The second objection would be that deterrence is the appropriate goal of punitive damages and that juries cannot be made willing and able to inquire reliably into how to achieve deterrent goals. It appears that outrage is inattentive, or insufficiently attentive, to factors that are central to the goal of optimal deterrence, most prominently the probability of detection. If this is so, then an administrative or regulatory body would be better. Certainly it would seem that the inquiry into the probability of detection is a factual one that juries lack the information to undertake properly. And if outrage is attentive to irrelevant factors, the case for abandoning the jury is strong, even or perhaps especially when some form of punishment is desirable. Predictability is obtainable, as suggested in our earlier reform proposals, but perhaps without satisfying the substantive goals of a well-functioning system of punishment. The third objection would be that existing community judgments about in some contexts, be “impeached” by legislative deliberation. The community’s sentiment might depend, for example, on social norms that the legal system should not recognize. Thus it might be thought that in some cases, the community’s judgments are too lenient or too severe. In the area of racial discrimination or sexual harassment, a legislative body might question what juries are likely to do; perhaps juries would be insufficiently sympathetic to plaintiffs who suffer from injuries not fully recognized as such by existing social norms. Juries are emphatically populist institutions; in a way our study’s basic point has been to give more precise content to this commonplace. In a nonpopulist republic that sometimes distrust community norms, displacement of general sentiment is hardly rare. that dispense with a those including administratively-operated schedule of fines and penalties would seem better than juries at producing deterrence, for such a system would reduce the costs of decision and probably reduce the costs of error as well. There are many analogies. Discussion of pain and suffering awards has included “technocratic” suggestions designed substantially to reduce the jury’s role in the interest of more consistent and more expert judgments.150 In the context of damages to natural resources, it has been suggested that contingent valuation should be replaced by a schedule of damages based on categories of harm;151 in this way an antecedent set of administrative or legislative judgments would form the it backdrop unnecessary to ask what may be hopelessly uninformative questions of individuals about their willingness to pay. thus making trustee, for There are real-world precedents for this kind of approach in many domains of law, in which ad hoc determinations have been replaced with a system designed to produce more in the way of coherence and rationality. The system of workers’ the high compensation was created partly because of decision costs and randomness produced by case-by-case jury judgments about, for example, the value of a lost limb.152 In its current form, workers’ compensation attempts to deal with problems of valuation by placing a fixed dollar value on various injuries through a pre-determined schedule produced by a legislature or administrative agency.153 The problem with the workers’ compensation system is its crudeness; it ignores possibly relevant individual variations. Its virtue lies in its speed, inexpensiveness, predictability, and consistency.154 In a related but more recent shift, the process of case-bycase judgment with respect to sentencing has been replaced by the more standardized Sentencing Guidelines. A central goal of the guidelines is to discipline the process of “mapping” complex normative judgments onto a relatively less bounded scale of criminal punishments.155 The fact that judges, rather than traditionally made decisions about appropriate sentences raises a question about why a similar course is not followed for punitive damages.156 The basic point is that in both of these cases, a process of bureaucratic rationalization has replaced one of relatively ad hoc judgments; it is easy to imagine a similar development with punitive damages. An even more relevant model can be found in the “grid” used for social security disability determinations, which uses age, educational attainment, and residual functional capacity to produce standardized judgments about disability.157 Administrative law judges are asked to make case-specific judgments, which become part of an assessment governed by the rule-like “grid.” It is useful to ask, as a thought experiment, why juries, rather than grid-governed administrative law judges, are not asked to make disability determinations. Surely the answer is that jury determinations would suffer from a range of problems, including insufficient specialization and expertise, inevitable arbitrariness and unpredictability, and confusion stemming from the use of an unfamiliar scale. But if jury judgments would be inappropriate for disability for punitive determinations, why do damages, or judgments about compensation in cases involving pain and suffering or libel? Any answer would have to refer to the legitimate domain of populism in law, an issue to which we return below. that matter for for the Radical changes of the kind just discussed call for a likely performance of different comparison of institutions. Dramatic changes might be governmental criticized on the ground that the populist elements of jury assessment should be retained, in order to ensure that public outrage plays a significant role in the legal system. It is also possible to fear that technocratic substitutes for the jury would be subject to pathologies of their own, perhaps because of their own biases, and because of the pressures likely to be imposed by well-organized private groups. If so, the more modest reforms are better. We have sought to undertake the first step toward that evaluation: specifying the underlying considerations with a better understanding of what produces punitive awards. The disadvantage of the most extreme departures from the current system is also their advantage: They would not rely on the jury’s normative judgment about outrageousness and intended punishment. What we have proposed is that there are ways to retain this goal while also diminishing the unpredictability of punitive damage awards. It is possible to imagine mixed approaches, drawing on different aspects of our proposals. For example, a jury might be provided with a preselected set of exemplar cases, accompanied by the damages actually or reasonably awarded in these cases; its job might be to assess damages by comparing the case at hand to the preselected cases. This approach would not take the whole subject of dollar awards away from the jury; it would attempt to root punitive awards in a set of antecedents judgments that could reasonably be compared with the case at hand. The damages in the exemplar cases might be based on actual past judgments, on judgments of mock juries, or on judgments of experts in the particular area. deterrence. If the problem is that isolated juries come up with arbitrary or unpredictable outcomes, and if the purpose of reform is to ensure that punitive damage awards capture either the community’s intentions with respect to dollar awards or the community’s judgments with respect to punitive intent, the conventional proposals are also far inferior to those we have discussed here. 160 See Michael Saks et al., Reducing Variability in Civil Jury Awards, 21 Law and Human Behavior 243 (1997 (finding that caps are likely to increase variability in the context of noneconomic compensatory losses). See also V.B. Hinsz and K. E. Indahl, Assimilation To Anchors for Damage Awards in a Mock Civil Trial, 25 J. Applied Social Psych. 991 (1995) (finding anchoring effect from caps). play a role, or that a judge, because of her experience with multiple cases, can make more informed judgments. (Again compare criminal sentencing, of course undertaken by judges rather than juries.) Judges do reduce punitive awards that appear excessive, and because of their experiences judges have some comparative advantages;161 it is likely that a more general shift to comparison cases would produce improvements. But judges are not likely to be able the community’s sentiments with respect to either dollars or punitive intent, and if the community’s sentiments are irrelevant or only part of the appropriate inquiry, probably an administrative agency, with regulatory goals and more detailed understanding of instruments, should discipline the judge’s inquiry. to capture toward The most important point is that judges too are likely to have difficulty in mapping normative judgments onto dollar amounts, and hence while judicial judgments may reduce variance, there is likely to be a continuing problem of erratic judgments or use of anchors that introduce arbitrariness of their own. Judicially assessed punitive awards might well replicate some of the problems with judicially determined sentences. Thus any movement from jury to judicial control of punitive damage awards might well be accompanied by some form of scaling or scheduling, perhaps building on the old practices of additur and remittitur is psychologically well-informed.162 As we have suggested, various reform combinations and alternatives might be imagined, including dollar awards that are chosen after exposure to comparison cases.163 in a way that We do not have sufficient information to evaluate all the possible alternatives here. But we can offer two general conclusions. First, there is much to be said on the behalf of an incremental step, building on current practice: ensuring, in every jurisdiction, a serious oversight role for judges, calling not for individual judicial judgments about individual cases, but for judicial comparisons among various similar cases, so as to ensure against dramatic outliers.164 This incremental step would produce some of the gains sought by the first reform proposal discussed above. Second, the ideal system of punitive damage awards would not involve juries or even judges, but specialists in the subject matter at hand, who are able to create clear guidelines for punitive awards. These guidelines would be laid down in advance and based on a clear understanding of different forms of wrongdoing and of the consequences, for defendants, of different awards. Of course these specialists would make several judgments of value, and those judgments should be subject to democratic control. The practical question is whether it is possible to design that ideal system. Experiments in this direction can be found in the workers’ compensation system and in the system of administrative penalties and fines. How, if at all, does what we have said bear on the constitutional analysis of punitive damage awards, an issue of fresh importance in the aftermath of BMW v. Gore? The most important point is that we have identified a source of those jury judgments that may be both unconstitutionally excessive and unconstitutionally arbitrary. When a particular jury’s judgment is extreme, an underlying reason may well be the difficulty faced by the jury in using an unbounded scale. Our findings certainly do not resolve the constitutional issue, which depends on the appropriate approach to the due process clause; but they do help to fortify the view that some awards should be taken to unacceptably arbitrary. We have shown that it cannot confidently be said that high jury awards, requiring payment of some amount $X, reflect a wellconsidered community judgment in favor of $X, or that jury encounters with the particulars of cases will lead to a situation in which particular facts are matched to dollar awards of X, 1/2 of X, and 1/4 of X. Indeed, our findings and our first reform proposal demonstrate that the populist credentials of any particular jury award may be overstated; any particular jury’s award may poorly measure the judgment of the community as a whole. As noted, moreover, we have found reason to doubt the suggestion that this problem can be cured by more those detailed instructions do not solve the problem of scaling without a modulus. instructions least from if Of course the Supreme Court cannot by itself require one of our three proposals, or some variant; the selection of reform methods is for legislatures rather than courts. Mostly the judicial role should come at the subconstitutional level, through review of punitive awards corresponding to the standards outlined above. But the availability of these routes suggests the possibility of retaining a significant role for the jury without providing so large a risk of arbitrariness. None of our three proposals should raise constitutional problems. On the contrary, each of the difficulties to which the Court attempted to respond in BMW v. Gore. Table 4. Punitive Damage Reform Possibilities Description Analogies Virtues 1. Current system 3. Damage multipliers ad hoc judgments about particular events, with a populist aspiration prevents the most excessive awards ties punitive awards to compensatory awards “Kadi justice” (as discussed by Max Weber) allows a role for popular convictions current civil rights statutes, which also impose a cap easy to administer, would prevent egregiously large awards Sherman Antitrust Act more flexible than caps, also easy to administer Evaluation hard to defend from any standpoint; the best that can be said is that the current problems are not so serious unlikely to make things much better and may in some ways make things worse a little better than caps, but not much better unpredictability, susceptibility to arbitrary anchors, jury ignorance about effects of dollar awards may increase variability; crudely tailored to any view of the problem or the purpose of punitive awards crude, since compensatory award is a rough guide to appropriate punitive award 4. Provide juries with other cases and their retains jury authority over dollars Proposals in the area of pain and suffering Should improve predictability and increase rationality Unclear how jury will respond to prior awards if it disagrees with promising way of providing context and cabining judgment, but may Description Analogies Virtues awards accompanying punitive awards, in dollars 5. Strengthened or exclusive judicial control “civil sentencing” model current system of criminal justice may reduce unpredictability, also produce more overall rationality 6. Populationwide calibration function 7. Expert calibration function a form of “predictable populism” a form of “technocratic populism” reduces variability, increases predictability solves problem of jury ignorance about effects of punitive awards while preserving centrality of punitive intent them; unclear how to make sure the prior awards contain the right amounts may also involve scaling without a modulus; eliminates or reduces populist elements; need to ensure judicial comparison of cases complicated administrative task might not trust either punitive intent of juries or the experts Evaluation be too complex modest but quite promising response to problems of unpredictability and irrationality intriguing, but probably too complex and novel intriguing and promising, but less feasible than 5 above and probably less promising than 8 below Description Analogies Virtues 8. Administrative penalties bureaucratic rationality could produce both predictability and rationality experts may not be trustworthy workers’ compensation system; social security “grid”; administrative penalties and fines Evaluation in principle, the most promising of all, as a way of reducing decision costs and error costs Our central finding—about the difficulty of mapping normative judgments onto an unbounded dollar scale—is relevant to a number of issues now facing law and policy. In this section, we briefly describe areas on which our data directly bear. In many areas, an analysis of this basic sort may well apply. We do not know, for example, about the actual ingredients of a the appropriate compensatory damages for a libelous statement are, say, $1 million—though we do have reason to think that outrage is highly relevant and that the compensatory award will be judgment jury’s that inflated if punitive damages are unavailable.165 In theory, of course, the law wants compensatory judgments in the area of libel to reflect the monetary value of what has been lost as a result of reputational harm. In practice, it is notoriously difficult to calculate that value—what evidence could reliably establish it?—and thus the law relies on crude surrogates. This leaves the following question: As a psychological matter, do juries do what they are supposed to do? Might they instead be making normative the defendant’s conduct, or the innocence of the plaintiff, and base libel awards on some combination of these judgments and arbitrary anchors? It is predictable, at least, that the psychology of libel awards and the goals of the legal system are in some tension. There is a large research agenda, and what we have done here is only a start. We outline a few possible areas for future investigation. We also offer a brief note on contingent valuation, which raises overlapping but somewhat different issues. judgments about A. Difficult Damage Determinations Many damage determinations require juries to undertake magnitude scaling without a modulus, and to do so in settings that lack clear market measures. We offer several examples from the law of compensatory damages, concluding with some general remarks about the relationship between punitive and compensatory damages in terms of our discussion here. A basic underlying question has to do with the appropriate role of normative judgments in settling on the apparently but (as we shall see) controversially “factual” question of what amount would provide “compensation.” Thus there are serious issues about the populist and technocratic dimensions of compensatory awards in these domains of the law. Compensatory and Punitive Damages (unpublished manuscript 1997), 1. Pain and suffering Awards for pain and suffering raise many of the same questions as punitive damages. To be sure, and importantly, such awards are nominally compensatory rather than punitive; they ask the jury to uncover a “fact.” But they also involve goods that are not directly traded on markets, and require a jury to turn into dollars a set of judgments that are, at the very least, hard to monetize, Thus a standard jury instruction says: “[T]he law allows you to award a plaintiff a sum that will reasonably compensate him for any past physical pain. . . . There are no objective guidelines by which you can measure the money equivalent of this type of injury; the only real measuring stick, if it can be so described, is your collective enlightened conscience. You should consider all the evidence bearing on the nature of the injuries, the certainty of future pain, the severity and the likely duration thereof.”166 An instruction of this kind offers little more guidance than a typical punitive damage instruction. What is the psychological process by which such awards are constructed? Can juries or judges make predictable or otherwise sensible judgments about dollar amounts? What are the ingredients of those judgments, whatever the instructions say? Perhaps most important: What does “compensate” mean, exactly? Judgments about pain and suffering require juries to make a decision about harm (with a likely ingredient, in practice, of intended punishment) and to map that judgment onto a dollar scale. In the absence of uncontroversial market measures to make the mapping reliable,167 the resulting verdicts are notoriously variable, in a way that raises questions very much like those in the punitive damage setting.168 In particular, 166 G. Douthwaite, Jury Instructions on Damages in Tort Actions people with similar injuries are often awarded very different amounts of damages.169 Studies have found that plaintiffs with relatively small losses tend to be overcompensated and those with large losses tend to be undercompensated, and also that there is a significant degree of randomness here.170 Our study suggests one of the sources of the variability. A judgment about harm, perhaps made in a predictable way on a bounded numerical scale, becomes unpredictable and arbitrary when translated into an unbounded dollar scale lacking a modulus. important, even to be especially In the context of pain and suffering awards, anchors appear they carry arbitrariness of their own. Thus some jurors appear to split the difference between the figures suggested by the plaintiff and the defendant, whereas others use some (fairly random) multiple of medical expenses, and still others fasten on other aspects of the case as anchors.171 One study suggests that severity of injury explains only 40% of the variation in awards.172 There is the additional problem that pain and suffering awards are made in a no-comparison condition, and hence juries may fail to provide the kinds of distinctions that would emerge if a set of cases were offered at the time of decisions. And although pain and suffering awards are essentially compensatory, there can be little doubt that such awards sometimes reflect jury judgments about the egregiousness of the defendant’s behavior. Hence such judgments are likely to have a punitive component. Much further work remains to be done in disaggregating the factors that produce large or small awards for pain and suffering. 2. Libel Similar issues arise in the law of libel, which notoriously lacks clear measures of damages.175 In fact the common law rules governing libel reflect the difficulty of generating monetary amounts.176 Juries are asked to decide how much loss has been inflicted as a result of reputational injury; thus plaintiffs are able to recover both for identifiable pecuniary loss (“special damages”) and also for damages, stemming that cannot be easily from general reputational harm, correlated with monetary measures (“general damages”).177 Sometimes plaintiffs are allowed to recover “presumed” general damages, that is, damages that are awarded without proving that they have suffered any actual damages, special or general.178 Evidence from the plaintiff and the defendant is not likely to establish this amount with any accuracy; if a movie star has been said to have engaged in adultery, what In kind of award would provide actual compensation? practice, the resulting verdicts are unlikely to draw a sharp line between compensatory and punitive damages.179 For present purposes let us notice that libel awards are likely to reflect effects similar to those we have discussed. Here the jury is likely be mapping a complex judgment, about the quality of the harm and perhaps the nature of the plaintiff and the defendant, onto an unbounded dollar scale.180 A great 175 See Richard Epstein, Was New York Times v. Sullivan Wrong?, deal of work remains to be done here as well, to understand the psychology of libel awards and their relationship to what the legal system is actually attempting to do. harassment The latter half of the twentieth century has witnessed the rise of two important new legal wrongs: intentional infliction of emotional distress183 and sexual harassment.184 Both of these are accompanied by damage remedies. With respect to such remedies, the basic story should be familiar. Monetization is extremely difficult. Significant arbitrariness is entirely to be expected; similar cases may well give rise to dramatically different awards. How does a jury know what amount would provide an employee, or a student, with adequate compensation for quid pro quo or hostile environment harassment? In both of these contexts, compensatory and punitive damages are likely to entangled, in the sense that juries probably do not sharply separate the one from the other. 4. Compensatory vs. punitive damages: general considerations We can bring together some of the strands of this discussion by noting how the reform proposals discussed above may or may not bear on compensatory damage awards that are especially likely to be erratic. The most important feature of compensatory damages is that they are intended to restore the status quo ante.185 Punitive damages, by contrast, are intended to reflect a normative judgment about the 185 Note in this regard the difference between the amount a plaintiff would require to deem himself restored, and the amount a plaintiff would demand to incur the injury in the first instance. See McCaffery, Spitzer, and Kahneman, supra note. outrageousness of the defendant’s conduct (together with a judgment about deterrence). Thus the compensatory decision, far more than the punitive decision, reflects an assessment of fact (at least in theory186). At first glance this is a sharp distinction between the two. In this light would it make sense to consider reforms designed respectively to (a) capture a population-wide judgment about appropriate compensation, (b) capture a “compensatory intent” that would be mapped, by experts, onto dollar amounts, and (c) dispense partly or entirely with juries on the ground that juries are unlikely to have the competence to make accurate judgments about the factual questions involved? To answer this question it is necessary to ask why juries are now charged with the task of making judgments about appropriate compensation in cases in which that inquiry strains their factual capacities. The most straightforward answer is self-consciously populist. In cases involving libel, pain and suffering, sexual harassment, and the intentional infliction of emotional distress, no institution is likely to be especially good at uncovering the “fact” about compensation, if there is indeed any such “fact.”187 Moreover, it is appropriate (on this view) to let the underlying decision reflect not merely facts but also the judgments of value that are held by the 186 There are many complications here, some of them addressed below. An obvious issue is what, in this context, compensation is compensation for. is compensation supposed to restore the plaintiff hedonically? To give dollar equivalents for injury to capabilities and functionings, to be assessed in part objectively rather than subjectively? See Amartya Sen, Commodities and Capabilities (1985), for a defense of a “capability” approach to an assessment of well-being. Because the idea of “compensation” does not inescapably creates answer such question, normative issues. There is much room here for further descriptive work (what are the components of that assessment, in fact?) and normative work as well (what should the question of compensation be taken to mean in these various contexts?). 187 See note supra. jury’s assessment the community as a whole.188 Whatever fact-finding deficiencies the jury may have (as compared to, say, a specialized agency) are overcome by incorporating community sentiments into the decision about appropriate compensation for injuries that are not easily monetized. On this view, compensatory judgments, at least in these contexts, are not so different from punitive judgments after all; both of them have important normative components. in and certainly includes and appropriately—not Thus the simplest argument on behalf of jury judgments about compensation is that any such judgment is—perhaps inevitably solely compensatory. It has evaluative dimensions, both in deciding imposing what compensation properly burdens of proof and persuasion and resolving reasonable doubts. The evaluative judgments, it might be thought, should be made by an institution with populist features and virtues. The point may well apply to judgments about compensation for pain and suffering, libel, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and sexual harassment. A populist institution, on this view, should be permitted to undertake evaluative judgments about what amount would “compensate” someone who has suffered as a result of an improper medical procedure, a lie about his private life, or an unwanted sexual imposition by an employer or teacher. injury; the In the relevant cases, however, the problem of erratic from magnitude scaling without a judgments, emerging modulus, remains. This problem would not be severe (indeed, it would not be a problem at all) if what appeared to be erratic judgments were really a product of careful encounters with the particulars of individual cases, producing disparate outcomes that are defensible as such because they are normatively laden. But our study suggests grave reasons to doubt that this is in fact the case. Thus there is a serious question of reform strategies. How would the proposals discussed above work here? The first point to notice is that for compensatory damages, ranking is far preferable to rating along a bounded scale; it is certainly useful to see how a jury believes that the injury at issue compares with other injuries, but far less useful, when punishment is not involved. to get a sense of the jury’s numerical rating. A ranking might be used in various ways. If the basic problem is erratic judgments in the context of compensatory damages, it might be desirable to use a conversion formula to obtain a population-wide judgment about appropriate compensation. intent,” which is an unmistakably normative judgment. But it would mix populist and technocratic elements in a way that is mildly reminiscent of the treatment of social security disability cases—though there the jury is not of course given a role, displaced as it is by an administrative law judge.189 analogy, technocratic considerations If the social security disability cases are really taken as a good should predominate, and the third kind of reform proposal might seem best. On this view, an administrative or legislative body might create a kind of “pain and suffering grid,” “libel grid,” or “sexual harassment grid,” combining the basic elements of disparate cases into presumptively appropriate awards.190 A judge would produce a dollar award by seeing where the case at hand fits in the grid and perhaps by making adjustments if the details of the case strongly call for them. A technocratic approach of this kind could eliminate or at least greatly reduce the problem of erratic awards.191 Whether it is desirable depends on the value of incorporating populist elements in the way that the more modest reforms promise to do. Baldus et al., supra note. Elements of these various approaches can be found in reform proposals, thus far restricted to the pain and suffering context, that attempt to cabin the jury’s judgment by requiring it to decide in accordance with damage schedules and to place the case at hand in the context of other cases.192 In view of the fact that similar problems beset other areas of the law, there is no reason not to consider similar reforms in the contexts of libel, sexual harassment, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. A key issue is the appropriate role of technocratic and populist elements in the compensatory judgment. A judgment about that issue will go a long way toward shaping reforms. In the last decade there has been a great deal of interest in the problem of setting priorities for regulatory expenditures, the month” both public and private. The “pollutant of syndrome has given rise to a fear that priorities are set in a random fashion, and hence that expenditures per life saved are unpredictable.193 Disparities between different live-saving programs are quite common and very substantial, to the point where reallocation of resources could save 60,000 lives per year (given the same investment as is currently made) or $31 billion per year (given the same number of lives as are currently saved).194 Frequently, then, government must decide how much to expend per unit of regulatory benefit, and it is entirely to be expected that the phenomena that we have discussed here will come into play. Arbitrariness results partly from the 194 See Tammy Tengs et al., Five Hundred Life-Saving Interventions and Their Cost-Effectiveness, 15 Risk Analysis 369 (1995); see also W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs 261-63 (1992) (discussing differences in expenditure per life saved). to pay” criterion difficulty of mapping normative judgments onto dollar amounts, and many regulatory problems are assessed in a no-comparison condition. Some of the most prominent efforts at regulatory reform can be understood as self-conscious responses. The attempt to value regulatory benefits through introduces a budget the “willingness constraint, with accompanying comparative judgments, into governmental decisionmaking.195 And Justice Breyer’s influential proposal of a special regulatory working group,196 entrusted with the task of allocating resources to large problems rather than small ones, is of a piece with his concerns about rule-free punitive damage awards. The proposal is designed to ensure risk comparisons and to allow judgments about dollars to be made by people with a good deal of experience in the task of “mapping” normative judgments onto a dollar scale. Justice Breyer’s proposal is in this sense parallel to the third kind of reform strategy that we have traced, designed to ensure an institutional reform that captures risk regulation: extending human life. Justice Breyer’s proposal has been criticized as excessively technocratic.197 Perhaps risk regulation has multiple goals, and the extension of human life does not adequately capture them.198 Drawing on the second reform strategy described above—one that attempts to elicit the community’s normative judgments—we can imagine initiatives that would ensure a greater role for population-wide judgments while also promoting more expert normative “mapping” onto dollars.199 199 This is a goal of Richard Pildes and Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing C. Mapping onto a Scale of Years Our emphasis throughout has been on an unbounded dollar scale, but the legal system makes use of another scale: years. Criminal punishment of course requires a decision about how to map a normative judgment onto a scale of years. That scale is not unbounded, in the sense that capital punishment, or life imprisonment, may be taken as extreme ends; but it presents a similar difficulty of scaling without an obvious modulus.200 Thus the use of the scale of years presents some of the same questions as magnitude scaling in the absence of a modulus. Before the enactment of the Sentencing Guidelines, there were serious problems of arbitrary and unpredictable sentences,201 leading to dissimilar treatment of the similarly situated. It is reasonable to think that some of these problems resulted from the difficulty of mapping normative judgments onto a scale of years. 200 See Stevens (1975) did magnitude scaling on jail sentences, and cross-modality matching against the severity of crimes. See also S.S. Stephens, (1966, Science, I believe) on ‘scaling the social consensus’ that was dedicated to that. D. A Note on Contingent Valuation The topic of contingent valuation of course raises the question whether people can turn their judgments about regulatory goods into nonarbitrary dollar awards.203 This problem is well worth considering, both because it is of interest in its own right and because it is closely related to the issue of punitive damages in the particular sense that it involves the mapping of a kind of attitude, desire, or judgment onto an unbounded dollar scale.204 The goal of contingent valuation methods is of course to decide how much to value goods that are not traded on markets. Some people that valuation might be think ascertained by looking at how people value goods that are in fact traded on markets.205 But judgments about how much to spend to reduce statistical risks are highly contextual, and it is not clear that a decision to purchase a smoke alarm tells us a sufficient amount about how much people are willing to reduce (for example) a risk of death from excessive levels of sulfur dioxide. The use of contingent valuation methods is inspired by a desire to obtain more specific, contextual assessments. Rather than looking at actual choices, these methods ask people hypothetical questions about how much they would be willing to pay to avoid certain harms or conditions.206 Despite their apparent promise, contingent valuation methods have serious limitations, involving the difficulty of mapping normative judgments onto dollars and the problems people have well-formed judgments on such questions. created by framing effects. A special problem is that of indifference to quantity, or inadequate sensitivity to scope, reflected in the fact that people will give the same dollar number to save 2000, 20,000, and 200,000 birds—or the same number to save one, two, or three wilderness areas.207 Consider the fact that Toronto residents are willing to pay almost as much to maintain fishing by cleaning up the lakes in a small area of Ontario as they are willing to pay to maintain fishing in all Ontario lakes.208 Thus a similar WTP was found to preserve 110 or 10,000 acres of wetland in New Jersey.209 Relatedly, the valuation of a resource is affected by whether it is offered alone or with other goods. Willingness to pay for spotted owls drops significantly when the spotted owl is asked to be valued with and in comparison to other species. It is pertinent in this connection that the order and number of questions seems crucial in determining valuation. When asked for their willingness to pay to preserve visibility in the Grand Canyon, people offer a number five times higher when this is the first question than when it is the third question.210 What unifies contingent valuation and punitive damage assessment is the problem of mapping a normative judgment onto an unbounded dollar scale. Let us notice, then, some similarities and differences between contingent valuation and punitive damages. CV studies are sometimes understood as a method of ascertaining private willingness to pay for public goods. Despite the flaws of the method if so seen, contingent valuation is intended as a substitute for market measures.211 Contingent Valuation, Research Triangle Monograph 92-1. By contrast, punitive damages are awarded on the basis of a community judgment of some sort; jurors are not asked their willingness to pay for any commodity. They are asked to generate a dollar amount that reflects not the value of what has been lost, but that provides adequate deterrence or reflects social opprobrium about bad conduct. On the other hand, in both cases similar biases and distorting influences may be at work. As noted, both contexts present problems of mapping morally laden valuations onto dollar amounts. People may have predictable and nonrandom judgments about which species are most important, for example, and they may be able to compare various bodies of water; but a judgment about monetary valuation may be essentially arbitrary. And isolated judgments—how much is a certain species worth? how bad was an oil spill?—should make individual judgments less reliable.212 In fact our findings here have a parallel in the key conclusions of a study of contingent valuation,213 which also found that rating scales (e.g., of importance of the problem, moral satisfaction with contributing to its solution, or support for government action) are highly correlated with WTP, and confirmed that the amount of systematic variance was much lower these scales. Furthermore, transformations to logs or ranks improve things there, just as they do here.214 the acontextual character of than for As with punitive damages, it may well make sense to consider substitutes for the current system of contingent valuation, perhaps rooted in the same considerations that we market sense or instead sometimes else. have discussed here.215 Perhaps policymakers could develop a small number of scenarios for environmental damages, or use public judgments on a bounded scale, to begin a process by which such judgments might be translated into dollar amounts. New issues could be valued by a survey of attitudes that would include explicit comparisons to the scenarios in the original scale.216 Rather than asking people for dollar values, people would make assessments in terms of importance, and those judgments would then be mapped onto dollars by reference to the standard scale. Obviously proposals of this kind raise complex questions that we cannot resolve here;217 we signal the issue only to emphasize the linkage with punitive damages and the general problem of mapping in the face of (potentially) shared moral judgments and (likely) erratic dollar amounts. Why are jury determinations about punitive damages sometimes erratic and arbitrary? A large part of the answer lies in the difficulty of “mapping” normative judgments, including those of outrage and punishment, onto dollar amounts. This answer operates against an important backdrop: with respect to judgments of both outrage and punishment, important domains of law may show substantial agreement in normative judgments, and the consensus operates across differences of gender, race, age, education, and income. 215 See Daniel Kahneman & Iiana Ritov, Determinants of Stated that some considerations, jurisdictions do not provide sufficient constraints on jury discretion. The point also suggests that the solution does not lie in clearer jury instructions. Any effort to increase predictability in the award of punitive damages will be successful if and only if it assists with the task of mapping. If community judgments matter, legal reform should attempt to elicit the community’s punitive intent, and do so in terms of some response mode other than dollars. When the legal system translates punitive intent into dollars, it must answer questions about the extent to which the law should incorporate, qualify, or work against the jury’s determination. We have suggested reforms that embody different answers to those questions. Any ultimate conclusion depends on a specific assessment of what is wrong with current punitive damage awards. We have suggested three general inadequate sheer assessment, by ordinary people, of what different dollar awards will accomplish; or a focus, by ordinary people, on improper factors as the foundation for punitive awards. Thus requires an the normative an assessment of identification of the nature of the populist ideals that underlie the institution of the jury, and a judgment about what place, exactly, those ideals deserve to have in light of juror psychology. variability; issues Our study shows that the characteristics of jury judgments include high sensitivity to outrage (and likely low sensitivity to the probability of detection), substantial sensitivity to harm, substantial sensitivity to firm size, susceptibility to anchors, and a backward-looking focus on retribution. A translation phase might incorporate or reject one or all of these characteristics; it may or may not be founded on the jury’s punitive intention. At a minimum, our study strongly suggests that appellate judges and district courts should continue the practice, found in some courts, of rejecting punitive awards that are out of line with general practice and relevant comparison cases219—especially because, as we have shown, the dollar awards of any particular jury are not likely to reflect the population’s judgment about appropriate dollar awards. A more dramatic approach—probably the best for the long term, though not without risks of its own—would involve the development of a system of administrative penalties for serious misconduct, based on judgments made in advance and subject to democratic control. awards in cases in which market measures are unavailable, and it throws into sharp relief the question whether this task should not be given to judges or to some other institution. The legal system is not occasionally but pervasively in the business of requiring people to map their judgments onto dollar amounts, and outside of the context of punitive damages, the translation is likely to suffer from the same problems found here. In particular, difficulties with mapping probably affect jury awards of damages for libel, pain and suffering, sexual harassment and other civil rights violations, and intentional infliction of emotional distress—all of which notoriously suffer from unpredictability, in part, we believe, as a result of unbounded dollar scales. The consequence is that rule of law values are badly compromised. Reform proposals might ensure against unfairness (in the form of dissimilar treatment of the similarly situated) and unpredictability for both individuals and firms, plaintiffs and defendants alike. More particularly, reforms involving “compensatory” awards in these controversial areas must be evaluated by an factual assessment of judgments, for which juries are not especially well-suited. Thus the three kinds of punitive damage reforms may well have parallels in each of these areas. Third, our findings support the general proposition, on which there is growing consensus, that both values and preferences are often constructed, rather than elicited, by social situations.220 In their various social roles, people lack a preexisting “master list” of values and preferences from which to make selections in situations of choice. This is true for consumer choices, which depend on context and alternative options, as well as for medical decisions,221 politics, and 220 See Amos Tversky, Rational Theory and Constructive Choice, in The Rational Foundations of Economic Behavior 185 (Kenneth Arrow et al. eds. 1997). useless information (forthcoming 1997). law.222 It is true as well for judgments made by jurors, judges, representatives, and citizens generally. Rather than emerging from some menu in the mind, these judgments are a function of procedure, description, and context. In the legal context in particular, participants are pervasively in the business of contexts. constructing procedures, descriptions, and Frequently they have not been self-conscious about that point. In this study we would like you to imagine that you are a juror for a legal case in a civil court. Civil law suits can involve individuals, companies, or disputes between private individuals and companies, in which the plaintiff alleges that the defendant harmed them or their property in some way. A civil suit is brought by a plaintiff for the purpose of gaining compensation from the defendant for the alleged harm. In the cases you will consider, the defendant has already been ordered to pay compensatory damages to the plaintiff. This does not necessarily mean that punitive damages must also be awarded. Whether or not punitive damages should be awarded and, if so, how large they should be, is completely separate from compensatory damages. the government prosecutes an individual or a company for from criminal cases, in which alleged violations of the law. Plaintiffs in a civil trial must prove their claim by “a preponderance of the evidence,” which means that it is more likely than not that the plaintiff’s claim is justified. the prosecution must prove the defendant’s guilt “beyond a reasonable doubt.” This differs from criminal trials, where In each of the cases you will consider, the jury (of which you are a member) has already decided to accept the plaintiff's claim. As a consequence the jury has ordered the defendant to pay $200,000 in compensatory damages to the plaintiff as full compensation. The defendants are large [medium-sized] companies with profits of $100-200 [$10-20] million per year. Mary Lawson Mary Lawson, a manufacturing worker, developed chronic anemia. Although after a hospital stay she is now better, the condition has not been fully cured. She believes that exposure to benzene in her work place caused the condition and sued her employer, TGI International. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered TGI International to pay her $200,000 in compensation. Frank Williams suffered serious internal injuries when the braking system on his motorcycle failed to work at a traffic light. He felt that that the brakes were defective, and sued National Motors, the company that manufactures and sells his motorcycle. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered National Motors to pay him $200,000 in compensation. a problem with our brakes,” because in pre-market tests, the defect appeared on several occasions. But the pre-market tests were not extensive, despite the fact that auto industry regulations require elaborate Internal company documents show National Motors’ belief that “it would be quite expensive for us to do much more now, we can't be certain we have a serious problem here, and anyway we can fix the problem afterwards if it really does turn out to be serious.” testing. While he was visiting the circus, Thomas Smith was shot in the arm by a security guard who mistakenly thought that Smith had threatened another customer with bodily harm. The security guard was drunk at the time. Smith sued Public Entertainment, the company that operates the circus. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Public Entertainment to pay him $200,000 in compensation. Susan Douglas Susan Douglas suffered significant injuries to her legs and neck when an airbag in her car opened unexpectedly while she was driving the vehicle. She believes that the airbag was defective and sued the manufacturer, Coastal Industries. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Coastal Industries to pay her $200,000 in compensation. Coastal Industries is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that specializes in parts and accessories that can be added to existing vehicles, such as adding the latest safety equipment to older cars. While its airbag conforms to the requirements stated in government regulations, it does not include certain additional “fail-safe” systems that are used in other airbags to ensure against accidental opening. Internal documents show that most but not all of the Coastal Industries designers believed that their system “is certainly safe enough, even if it does not include all possible safeguards” and that their marketing department said that “there will be no market for our airbag if we raise its price by adding more safety bells and whistles.” Carl Sanders Carl Sanders used Nalene, an over-the-counter baldness treatment available at drugstores. While a small amount of hair did grow back, he also developed severe side-effects, including open sores on the scalp and permanent brown spots over his the manufacturer, A&G Cosmetics. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered A&G Cosmetics to pay him $200,000 in compensation. A&G Cosmetics is a large company (with profits of $100200 million per year) that sells many different cosmetic products, including wigs, “weaves” and chemical solutions designed to combat baldness. Nalene has proven effective in promoting hair growth in 30% of people in clinical trials. However, Nalene caused unpleasant side effects in some cases, although none were as severe as those Carl Sanders experienced. When marketing Nalene, A&G Cosmetics did not fully disclose these findings. It only said “minor side effects have been observed in a very small number of people tested.” While this amount of disclosure was within legal limits, other companies that make hair products voluntarily disclosed more about their products. Sarah Stanley Sarah Stanley, a seventy-five year old woman, suffered serious back injuries as a result of following an exercise video, “Good Health For All,” that she purchased through her local community health center. When Stanley attempted to perform the exercises, she found herself unable to do so, but she pressed on beyond her physical capacities. She claimed that she was not adequately warned of these dangers and sued the producer of the video, Gersten Productions. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Gersten Productions to pay her $200,000 in compensation. Gersten Productions is a large company (with profits of informational $100-200 million per year) materials in health-related fields, including videos on many topics concerning healthy lifestyles. The “Good Health for All” video contains a series of exercises suitable mostly for people in good shape and good health. The exercise coaches and models in the video are all relatively young, and no federal or state law requires exercise videos to come with any special warning for elderly people. The witnesses in the case testified that Gersten Productions believed that most people would be able to tell when the exercises were beyond their capacities, that Good Health for All has produced good results for almost all people who have seen it, and that very few people had reported injuries of any type from doing so. Jack Newton, a five year old child, was playing with matches when his cotton flannel pajamas caught fire. He was severely burned over a significant portion of his body and required several weeks in the hospital and months of physical therapy. His parents sued the manufacturer of the pajamas, Novel Clothing. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Novel Clothing in compensation. to pay Novel Clothing is a large company (profits of $100-200 million per year) that specializes in making clothes for in the industry for problems children. Before marketing the pajamas, Novel conducted the like tests normally used flammability, and observed no incidents like the Newtons experienced. Companies in the industry as well as federal regulators have known for a while that it is possible to add extra fire-retardant chemicals to their fabrics (in addition to those specified in current regulations), but these extra measures are not required. The process is very expensive, and no other manufacturers currently use Internal documents show that the management of Novel Clothing had decided that “when it comes to costly safety innovations we will follow our competitors. We don't want to be less safe than anyone else but we don't have to lead the way either.” Joan Glover, a six year old child, ingested a large number of pills of Allerfree, a non-prescription allergy medicine, and required an extensive hospital stay. The overdose weakened her respiratory system, which will make her more susceptible to breathing-related diseases such as asthma and emphysema for the rest of her life. The Allerfree bottle used an inadequately designed child-proof safety cap. The Glovers sued the manufacturer of Allerfree, the General Assistance company. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered General Assistance in compensation. to pay General Assistance is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that manufactures a variety of nonprescription medicines. A federal regulation requires “childproof” safety caps on all medicine bottles. General Assistance has systematically ignored the intent of this regulation by selling tens of thousands of bottles of medicines with a childproof safety cap that was generally effective, but had a failure rate much higher than any others in the industry. An internal company document says that “this stupid, unnecessary federal regulation is a waste of our money”; it acknowledges the risk that Allerfree may be punished for violating the regulation but says, “the federal government has many other things to worry about and probably won't bother us on this” and in any case “the punishments for violating the regulation are extremely mild; basically we'd be asked to improve the safety caps in the future.” An official at the Food and Drug Administration had previously warned a vice president of General Assistance that they were “on shaky ground” but the company decided not to take any corrective action. Martin West, a right-handed disabled veteran who lived in a two story house, was seriously injured in a fall when the chain broke on his electric lift-chair (a device that allows someone to be carried up stairs in a chair that moves up and down an angled track). He fell from near the top of the stairs and tumbled awkwardly all the way to the bottom landing, damaging his spinal cord in the process. As a result he now has only partial control of his right arm, a condition which doctors believe is permanent. He sued the manufacturer of the lift-chair, MedTech Products. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered MedTech in compensation. MedTech Products is a large company (profits of $100-200 million per year) that manufactures many types of medical equipment, including wheelchairs, car-lifts, and other devices used by the disabled. The lift-chair is a new product for MedTech, and instead of producing a new design, company engineers decided to adapt the design of the hydraulic lifts for cars already on the market. Unfortunately, there are several unique problems in designing a safe and effective lift-chair that are beyond the experience of the company’s engineers. Product managers said that hiring new engineers with the proper expertise was “too expensive, and would take too long” and ordered current engineers to “just do the best you can, but be sure you meet our deadline for announcing the product.” The inexperience of the engineers and the rush to meet testing procedures that were less rigorous than those required by federal medical product regulations. led to Low Harm version: Martin West, a left-handed disabled veteran who lived in a two story house, was injured in a fall when the chain broke on his electric lift-chair (a device that allows someone to be carried up stairs in a chair that moves up and down an angled track). He fell from near the bottom of the stairs and tumbled to the bottom landing, injuring his spinal cord in the process. His right arm was paralyzed for several weeks, after which doctors were able to repair most of the injury, and he was able to regain most of the previous range of motion in the arm. Janet Windsor, a secretary who works on computer equipment, developed a rare form of skin cancer. After a long course of painful chemotherapy, doctors were able to cure the cancer, although they cannot be sure that it will not return. She believed that it had been caused by the computer monitors that she worked on and sued the manufacturer, International Computers. The jury (of which you are a to pay her member) ordered $200,000 in compensation. International Computers is a large company (profits of $100-200 million per year) that manufactures components of computer systems. The type of International Computers monitor that Ms. Windsor used emits an unusually high level of radiation compared to other similar monitors, a level that pushes the limit in government safety guidelines. Internal company documents cite experts who concluded that “the evidence that this level of radiation could create any serious risk to health and life is weak and tentative”. The company was not legally required to disclose the unusual level of radiation, and it did not do so. Outrage Which of the following best expresses your opinion of the defendant’s actions? (please circle your answer) Completely Acceptable Objectionable Shocking Absolutely Outrageous Punishment In addition to paying compensatory damages, how much should the defendant be punished? Please circle the number that best expresses your opinion of the appropriate level of punishment. Mild Punishmen t Severe Punishmen t Extremely Severe Punishment $ Damages In addition to paying compensatory damages, what amount of punitive damages (if any) should the defendant be required to pay as punishment and to deter the defendant and others from similar actions in the future? (please write your answer in the blank below) Samples and Procedures The sample had good representation from various demographic and socio-economic groups. For example, respondents were 44% male; 64% Caucasian, 16% AfricanAmerican, 15% Hispanic; median income = $30K-$50K; median education = some college; median age = 30-39. the sample Thirty-two respondents were dropped because to failed understand the task. they gave from The survey was conducted at a downtown hotel. Participants were run in large groups at pre-arranged times over a four day period. Most respondents completed their task in 30 to 45 minutes. Ten scenarios describing personal injury cases were constructed. The first six were used in Parts 1 and 2 of the procedure and the other four in Part 3. Each respondent rated some version of all ten scenarios. Envelope #1 contained material about one of the scenarios. Envelope #2 contained four five other scenarios. Envelope #3 contained scenarios used in Part 3 of the experiment. In Parts 1 and 2, between-subjects manipulations were response mode (Outrage, Punishment or $ Damages) and firm size (annual profits of $10-$20 million (Medium) or $100$200 million (Large)), and scenario sequence, including which scenario was evaluated first, in isolation from the others (in Part 1 of the procedure). Scenario order was counterbalanced using a Latin square so that each scenario appeared in each ordinal position with equal frequency. Table 2 shows the wording of the evaluation questions in the three response modes. Instructions in all scenarios stated that compensatory damages of $200,000 had already been awarded. Part 3 had the same structure as Parts 1 and 2, except that replaced by a the manipulation in which the degree of harm suffered by the plaintiff was varied. For each of the four scenarios used in Part 3, we formulated a high-harm and a low-harm version. For example, in the case in which a child playing with matches was burned when his pajamas caught fire, the injuries were described as “He was severely burned over a significant portion of his body and required several weeks in the hospital and months of physical therapy” (high harm) or “His hands and arms were badly burned, and required regular professional medical treatment for several weeks” (low harm). Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence The Law School The University of Chicago Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics (Second Series) 1. William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 4. Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Endogenous Preferences, Sunstein, Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication 1993). 21. Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle 22. Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and 23. William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis the American Business Enterprise (April 1995). Software and Biotechnology (November 1995). 43. Douglas G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An la and Economics of Financially the Overview of Distressed Firms (March 1997). Autobiographical Essay (March 1997).