Cass R. Sunstein
Everyone agrees that the job a constitutional court is to interpret the constitution. But the fact that constitutional courts are entrusted with this job can create two kinds of problems for politicians and, above all, for leaders of the executive and legislative branches of government. The first kind of problem arises when a constitutional court invokes the unambiguous language of the constitution to invalidate a political act. The second kind of problem arises when a constitutional court invokes the ambiguous language of the constitution to invalidate a political act.
These problems are quite different, and their differences bear very much on the issues discussed in this symposium. When a court invokes unambiguous constitutional language to prevent politicians from doing what they want, politicians may suffer intense frustration. And if the court has the strength to resist politicians, constitutional amendment may be the only course. But from the standpoint of the rule of law, and constitutionalism itself, the politicians' frustration is no cause for alarm. It is part of the point. If a constitutional amendment is necessary, and the constitutional court invokes unambiguous language to say so, constitutional democracy is working very well. Frustrated politicians who attempt to "tame" the court, by bending it to their wishes, are making a travesty of the rule of law and the whole project of constitutional democracy. They may also
be harming their long-term interests. Politicians can
benefit from an independent court such a court can
enable politicians to insulate themselves from pressures that they would like to avoid, and such a court
can allow politicians the potential advantage of pointing to constitutional constraints, enforced by the
court, as a limitation on their power of action.
Things are different when the governing constitutional provision is ambiguous-when reasonable
people can interpret that provision in diverse ways.
If a court invokes ambiguous language to strike
down a political act, politicians may claim that the
court's interpretation is erroneous, that the court is
following not law but personal predilection, and
hence that the politicians, rather than the judges,
are the constitution's true loyalists. Of course many
constitutional provisions are ambiguous. How do
social and economic guarantees bear on political
effort to change the fabric of socialist law? Does a
constitutional ban on inequality, or a requirement
of equal treatment, forbid discrimination on the
basis of sex? In education? In the military? Does an
equality provision forbid discrimination on the
basis of homosexuality, or disability? Does a right to
free speech protect the right to urge crime, revolution, or hatred of ethnic and religious groups? Does
it include the right to engage in unrestricted commercial advertising or to spread pornography?
These-are questions on which constitutional provisions are frequently ambiguous, and when politicians disagree with the Court, they may well claim to do so in the constitution's name. Their objection is to the court, not to the constitution.
These observations show the complexity of the notions of "judicial activism" or "an activist court." A court that invokes the unambiguous language of the constitution may be described as "activist" if and in the sense that it invalidates acts of public officials. But this form of activism is far from troubling. On the contrary, it is a tribute to the rule of law. Hence a court that ignores the unambiguous language of the constitution in order to permit public officials to do as they choose might also be described as "activist," though in a very different sense. Such a court is capitulating to the political winds it is allowing the constitution to dissipate under pressure. We can conclude that when a constitution is clear, it should be obeyed that the minimal role of a constitutional court lies here and that the proper question to ask of such a court in such a case is whether it has or has not capitulated to politics.
A court that deals with ambiguous provisions is much harder to evaluate. Some people think that courts should consider themselves the special guardians of their constitutions, so thatjudicial use of ambiguous provisions, to invalidate public acts, is entirely acceptable. (In the United States, this position is sometimes associated with Ronald Dworkin it is also one view of the situation in Hungary.) But some people think that the court should uphold public acts if the constitution contains any uncertainty. (In the United States, this position is sometimes associated with James Bradley Thayer it is one view of the situation in Russia.) (Table 1)
Cells (1) and (2) are simple the most serious
question is whether the court will capitulate, and
the answer is that it should not if constitutional
democracy is to prevail. The hardest puzzles arise
for constitutional courts when those courts are
asked to invoke the ambiguous language of the constitution to invalidate acts of public officials. Whypoliticians might and will predictably ask-should
courts be allowed to interpret ambiguous language
as they wish, especially in light of the fact that the
interpretation of such language will inevitably
-involve not merely "law" but also the judges' own
judgments of policy or principle? Interpretation of
ambiguous language cannot avoid some such judgments. The vice of "formalism" can be found whenever judges claim, falsely, that they are simply
speaking for "the law," and deny the role of their
own values in interpretation. Formalism is a pervasive risk for cells (2) and (3).
But there are some answers to the politician's
question about why courts should feel free to interpret ambiguous language to invalidate acts of other
public officials. In ordinary life, we frequently confront ambiguous language, and we know that some
interpretations are better than others. So, too,
ambiguous constitutional language can be interpreted well or poorly much depends on the context and
the purposes of the relevant language. And perhaps
judges are in an especially good position to interpret
ambiguous provisions, precisely because they are
insulated from political forces. In other words,
judges' comparative independence may be a virtue,
not a vice, even or perhaps especially if the interpretation calls for a judgment of principle. If the question is the scope of religious liberty, it is possible that
courts are in a particularly good position to make
reasonable judgments, and hence that while
respectful of the decisions of public officials, courts
charged with constitutional
interpretation should feel to
reject those decisions if they
seem inconsistent with the
best understanding of the
constitutional guarantee.
There is a more fundamental point. We should
