 Feature: Questioning Constitutional Justice Introduction The Legitimacy of Constitutional Courts: Notes on Theory and Practice Cass R. Sunstein Everyone agrees that the job a constitutional court is to interpret the constitution. But the fact that constitutional courts are entrusted with this job can create two kinds of problems for politicians and, above all, for leaders of the executive and legislative branches of government. The first kind of problem arises when a constitutional court invokes the unambiguous language of the constitution to invalidate a political act. The second kind of problem arises when a constitutional court invokes the ambiguous language of the constitution to invalidate a political act. be harming their long-term interests. Politicians can benefit from an independent court; such a court can enable politicians to insulate themselves from pressures that they would like to avoid, and such a court can allow politicians the potential advantage of pointing to constitutional constraints, enforced by the court, as a limitation on their power of action. These-are questions on which constitutional provisions are frequently ambiguous, and when politicians disagree with the Court, they may well claim to do so in the constitution's name. Their objection is to the court, not to the constitution. Cells (1) and (2) are simple; the most serious question is whether the court will capitulate, and the answer is that it should not if constitutional democracy is to prevail. The hardest puzzles arise for constitutional courts when those courts are asked to invoke the ambiguous language of the constitution to invalidate acts of public officials. Whypoliticians might and will predictably ask-should courts be allowed to interpret ambiguous language as they wish, especially in light of the fact that the interpretation of such language will inevitably -involve not merely "law" but also the judges' own judgments of policy or principle? Interpretation of ambiguous language cannot avoid some such judgments. The vice of "formalism" can be found whenever judges claim, falsely, that they are simply speaking for "the law," and deny the role of their own values in interpretation. Formalism is a pervasive risk for cells (2) and (3). Constitution unambiguous against act in question Constitution ambiguous Invalidate act Validate act (1) Rule of Law (2) Cowardice; capitulation to politics not be too quick to identify the outcomes of any particular political process with democracy. Perhaps the best course isfor a constitutional court to interpret ambiguous provisions by reference to democratic ideals themselves-by, for example, assuming an especially large role when rights central to democratic government are at stake, or when groups not able to protect themselves through ordinary politics are at risk. This view, associated with both John Hart Ely (in the United States) and Jurgen Habermas (in Germany), lays great stress on what might be called the internal morality of democracy. Thus it might be said that courts should aggressively review any effort to stifle political dissent (by, for example, limiting criticism of public officials, or reducing the areas where dissenters can make their view heard), and also take strong steps to ensure full political participation and to counteract discrimination against groups at systematic risk in the political process, such as religious and ethnic minorities. Mikhail Chudakou was born in 1949. In 1972, he graduated from Belarusian State University (BSU), worked in the attorney general's office as assistant counsel in civil matters from 1972-1976, and completed his doctorate, 'The Legal Problems of Individual Participation in Direct Democracy in the USSR," in 1982. From 1977 to the presen4 he has taught at BSU. From 1990 to 1994 he was a member of the Constitutional Commission ang in June 1996, he became a member of the Constitutional Court. In protest against the president's December 1996 referendum, Justice Chudakov resignedfrom the Court on January 23, 1997 Before the referendum the Court had 11 members. Following the referendum seven members resigned or were fired. On January 4, the president reappointed the four remaining justices to the Court and appointed two others. On January 24, the Council of the Republic (the upper house of the National Assembly) appointed five more justices. The post-referendum Court has 12 seats, although to date only 11 seats have been fied Alexander Lukashuk: The first Constitutional Court of Belarus existed for two and a half years. What favored and what hampered the work of the Court? Mikhail Chudakou: First, the executive branch's antagonism toward thejudiciary made it impossible to work in a normal way. Our invalidation of presidential decrees was invariably perceived by the executive as intentionally hostile. The executive viewed the Court as a functionary of the opposition. Another factor was that, in the majority of cases, one ofthejustices always would deliver a "special opinion." Today, the author of these "special opinions" is the new chairman of the Court, Ryhor Vasilevich. The purpose of these "special opinions" was to argue in legal terms why the president was always right. They had a particularly detrimental effect on the Court. AL: Were these "special opinions" political rather than legal arguments? MC: Yes. The public perception was that while one group of justices supported one approach,