 In the last two decades, social scientists have learned a great deal about how people actually make decisions and choices.' Much of this work requires qualifications of rational choice models.2 Those models are often wrong in the simple sense that they yield inaccurate predictions. Decisions are affected by cognitive limitations and motivational distortions that press choices in unanticipated directions. It follows that a normative account of rational choice (such as expected utility theory) may well lack descriptive accuracy. 3 But it does not follow that people's behavior is unpredictable, systematically irrational, random, rule-free, or elusive to social scientists. On the contrary, the departures from rational choice can be described, used, and sometimes even modeled, at least in broad outline. One of the most important findings-and the one I will emphasize here-is that preferences and values often do not predate the moment of choice. Often preferences and values are constructed, rather than elicited, by social situations.4 People do not generally consult a freestanding "preference menu" from which selections are made at the moment of choice; preferences can be a product of procedure, description, and context, and * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This essay was the basis for the Ryan Lecture, delivered at Georgetown University Law Center on October 8, 1997. It draws on Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, & David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages: (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law), 107 YALE L.J. 2071 (1998); Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law, 64 U. CHI. L. REV. 1175 (1997); Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, & Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics, 50 STAN. L. REV. (forthcoming May 1998). The author would like to thank the members of the Georgetown community for their extraordinary hospitality on that occasion. The reader is asked to make allowances for remarks originally written for oral presentation. I am also very grateful to Christine Jolls, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Richard Thaler for their help with joint work and for many discussions; none of them is responsible for errors here. all three of these may take different forms. "Alternative descriptions of the same choice problems lead to systematically different preferences; strategically equivalent elicitation procedures give rise to different choices; and the preference between x and y often depends on the choice set within which they are embedded.", This point is especially important for law. The legal system is pervasively in the business of constructing procedures, descriptions, and contexts for choice. Of course the legal system creates procedures" descriptions, and contexts in the course of litigated cases. For example, the alternatives (selected to be) placed before the jury or judge may matter a great deal. Because people seek to avoid the extremes, liability or conviction on some count A may very much depend on the nature of counts B, C, and D. In this respect the preferences and values of juries and judges may well be constructed by law. But similar points hold outside of the courtroom as well. The allocation of legal entitlements and the structures created for exchange (or nonexchange) by law may well affect both preferences and values. Prescriptive work is concerned with showing how society might actually reach shared goals; this is a central purpose of economic analysis of law. Consider the following information campaigns, which conventional analysis deems equivalent: (a) If you use energy conservation methods, you will save $X per year; and (b) If you do not use energy conservation methods, you will lose $X per year. It turns out that information campaign (b) is far more effective than information campaign (a). 8 Some features of human judgment, properly understood, undermine conventional economic prescriptions about what will work best; they help explain, to take just one example, precisely why the public service advertising slogan "drive defensively; watch out for the other guy" is particularly ingenious. A. PUNITIVE DAMAGES My principal emphasis here is on the broader implications of a recent empirical study of punitive damages, undertaken by Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and me.9 Our study involved about 900 jury-eligible citizens in Texas; each was asked to evaluate punitive damage cases, by saying: (a) how outrageous the defendant's conduct was, on a bounded scale of 0 to 6; (b) how much the defendant should be punished, on the same bounded scale; and (c) how much in the way of punitive damages the defendant should be expected to pay on an unbounded scale of dollars. There were twenty-eight total scenarios. The questions allowed measurement of the effects of the defendant firm's size (which was varied), the effects of harm (in all cases, compensatory damages were $200,000, but in some, the harm seemed qualitatively worse), and the effects of context (all participants read one case in isolation, others together). 9. See Cass R. Sunstein et al., Assessing Punitive Damages: (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law), 107 YALE L.J. 2071 (1998). The full study, with accompanying statistical analysis, appears in Daniel Kahneman et al., Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards: The Psychology of Punitive Damages, 16 J. RiSK AND UNCERTAINTY 49 (1998). My discussion of our findings is my own, and Kahneman and Schkade should not be blamed for errors. Our basic findings were as follows: 1. People have a remarkably high degree of moral consensus on the degree of outrage and punishment that is appropriate for punitive damage cases.' ° At least in the personal injury cases we offered, this moral consensus, on what might be called outrage and punitive intent, cuts across differences in gender, race, income, age, and education. For example, our study shows-through the construction of "synthetic juries"-that all-white, all-female, all-Hispanic, allmale, all-poor, all-wealthy, all-black, all-old, and all-young juries are likely to come to similar conclusions about how to rank and how to rate a range of cases. There is one exception to this generalization. Though women and men rank cases in the same way, women tend to rate cases more severely on the bounded scales, and this effect is heightened when the plaintiff is female. (It could as accurately be said that men tend to rate cases more leniently than women, and this effect is heightened when the plaintiff is female.) But this modest difference does not undermine our basic finding, which involves a striking consensus. wide data but on expert judgments about what various awards would actually mean or do, would be used to produce rational judgments about dollar amounts. This approach is a mixture of populist and technocratic elements. It is populist insofar as it relies on the community's punitive intent; it is technocratic insofar as experts come up with the relevant conversion formula. The result would be a form of technocratic populism. Awards for compensatory damages raise many of the same questions as punitive damages. Consider, for example, the issue of pain and suffering. To be sure, such awards are nominally compensatory rather than punitive; they ask the jury to uncover a "fact." But they also involve goods that are not directly traded on markets, and they require a jury to convert into dollars a set of judgments that are, at the very least, hard to monetize. In the absence of uncontroversial market measures to make the mapping reliable,' l the resulting verdicts are notoriously variable, in a way that raises questions'very much like those in the punitive damages setting.1 2 Similar issues arise in the law of libel, which notoriously lacks clear measures of damages.13 Here the jury is likely to be (discussing liability and damages in libel cases). The latter half of the twentieth century has also witnessed the rise of two important new torts: intentional infliction of emotional distress 15 and sexual harassment.' 6 Both of these torts are accompanied by damage remedies. With respect to such remedies, the basic story should be familiar. Monetization is extremely difficult. Significant arbitrariness is entirely to be expected; similar cases may well give rise to dramatically different awards. With sexual harassment, variable awards are pervasive, and it is likely that some plaintiffs are receiving too much and others too little. 17 How does a jury know what amount would provide an employee, or a student, with adequate compensation for quid pro quo or hostile environment harassment? What does compensation mean, in practice? In both of these contexts, compensatory and punitive damages are likely to be entangled, in the sense that juries probably do not sharply separate the one from the other. in many different ways. 14. There is also a predictable difference between the amount that would compensate a libel plaintiff for injury inflicted and the amount that would persuade a libel plaintiff to allow his reputation to be damaged in the relevant way. See generally Edward J. McCaffery et al., Framing the Jury: Cognitive Perspective on Pain and Suffering Awards, 81 VA. L. REv. 1341 (1995). the competence To answer this question, it is necessary to ask why juries are now charged with the task of making judgments about appropriate compensation in cases in which that inquiry strains their factual capacities. The most straightforward answer is self-consciously populist. In cases involving libel, pain and suffering, sexual harassment, and the intentional infliction of emotional distress, no institution is likely to be especially good at uncovering the "fact" about compensation, if there is indeed any such "fact." Moreover, it is appropriate (on this view) to let the underlying decision reflect not merely facts but also judgments of value that are held by the community as a whole. 20 Whatever fact-finding deficiencies the jury may have (as compared to, say, a specialized agency) are overcome by the value of incorporating community sentiments into the decision about appropriate compensation for injuries that are not easily monetized. On this view, compensatory judgments, at least in these contexts, are not so different from punitive judgments after all; both of them have important normative components. is that any such judgment is-perhaps inevitably and certainly appropriatelynot solely compensatory. It has evaluative dimensions, both in deciding what 19. There are many complications here. An obvious issue is what, in this context, compensation is compensation for. If someone has suffered a month of pain, is compensation supposed to restore the plaintiff hedonically? To give dollar equivalents for injury to capabilities and functionings, to be assessed in part objectively rather than subjectively? Because the idea of "compensation" does not answer such questions, the jury's assessment inescapably creates normative issues. There is much room here for further descriptive work (what are the components of that assessment, in fact?) and normative work as well (what should the question of compensation be taken to mean in these various contexts?). See AMARTYA SEN, COMMODITIES AND CAPABILITIES (1985) (defending a "capability" approach to an assessment of well-being). If the social security disability cases are really taken as a good analogy, technocratic considerations should predominate, and the third kind of reform proposal might seem best. In this view, an administrative or legislative body might create a kind of "pain and suffering grid," "libel grid," or "sexual harassment grid," combining the basic elements of disparate cases into presumptively appropriate awards. A judge would produce a dollar award by seeing where the case at hand fits in the grid and perhaps by making adjustments if the details of the case strongly call for them. A technocratic approach of this kind could eliminate or at least greatly reduce the problem of erratic awards.2 2 Whether such an approach is desirable depends on the value of incorporating populist elements in the way that the more modest reforms promise to do. tive character: aversion to losses and aversion to extremes. Loss aversion also raises serious questions about the goals of the tort system. Should damages measure the amount that would restore an injured party to the 25. Daniel Kahneman et al., Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem, 98 status quo ante, or should they reflect the amount that an injured party would demand to be subject to the injury before the fact? Juries appear to believe that the amount that would be demanded pre-injury is far greater than the amount that would restore the status quo ante.34 The legal system appears generally to see the compensation question as the latter one, though it does not seem to have made this choice in any systematic way. The disparity has large implications for the choice between liability rules and property rules. Property rules allow a taking only via "willingness to accept;" liability rules frame the question in terms of "willingness to pay." The economic literature on the choice between the two generally does not recognize that the resulting valuations may be dramatically different.3 5 As car salespeople and good advertisers well know, people are averse to extremes. Whether an option is extreme depends on the stated alternatives. Extremeness aversion gives rise to compromise effects.36 In this as in other respects, the framing of choice matters; the introduction of (unchosen, apparently irrelevant) alternatives into the frame can alter the outcome. When, for example, people are choosing between some small radio A and a mid-size radio B, most may well choose A; but the introduction of a third, large radio C is likely to lead many people to choose B instead.3 7 Thus the introduction of the third, unchosen (and in that sense irrelevant) option may produce a switch in choice as between two options. Almost everyone has had an experience of switching to (say) the second most expensive item on some menu of options, and of doing so partly because of the presence of the very most expensive item. People make judgments about probability on the basis of heuristic devices, responsive perhaps to high costs of inquiry and decision, that may often work well but that tend to lead to systematic errors. The use of heuristics may not reflect irrationality (especially if they minimize decision costs), but it may produce serious problems at the individual and social levels. This work bears on the demand for (and hence also the supply of) government services, including regulation. Heuristic devices are often used when the costs of deliberation are high; in such cases, second-order decisions, operating as default rules, can make particularized assessments less necessary.4 2 An important way of reducing decision costs is to make assessments on the basis of previous cases rather than through calculation of relevant costs and benefits.4 3 In fact people often reason by calling to mind particular cases and seeing how the problem at hand compares with those cases; this can be an important method of reducing decision costs. 44 The construction of preferences and values stems from the law's selection of salient cases. People tend to think that risks are more serious when an incident is readily called to mind or "available."- 45 If pervasive, the availability heuristic will produce systematic errors. Assessments of risk will be pervasively biased, in the sense that people will think that some risks (of a nuclear accident, for example) are high, whereas others (of a stroke, for example) are relatively low. "Availability cascades" can produce a large demand for law, as in the familiar "pollutant of the month" syndrome in environmental law. We lack a firm understanding of how availability cascades occur and of how institutions might be designed to produce appropriate responses.4 6 C. ANCHORING Often people make probability judgments on the basis of an initial value, or "anchor," for which they make insufficient adjustments.4 7 The initial value may have an arbitrary or irrational source. When this is so, the probability assessment may go badly wrong. This point bears on jury and judge deliberations reconstructing the facts. It also suggests possible problems with damage determinations, where arbitrary anchors can have large effects. Judgments about probability are often judgments about the likelihood that some process A will bring about some event B. Under what circumstances will driving produce significant increases in air pollution, or fatal accidents? When will airbags produce risks to children? Do disposable diapers cause pollution problems? In answering such questions, people ask about the extent to which A is representative of B in the sense that it resembles B. This point suggests that people will be insensitive to the sample size, misunderstand the phenomenon of regression to the mean, have excessive confidence in their own judgments, and misunderstand the effect on probability of base-rate frequency. 48 As a result, people may systematically misunderstand risk levels. Risk regulation in general and in particular cases may go awry. I have attempted to sketch some of the ways that the legal system helps construct preferences and Values-both by creating procedures, descriptions, and contexts in courts themselves, and by creating entitlements that help shape preferences and values in domains that might appear to have nothing to do with law. In the area of punitive and compensatory damages, the legal system helps construct the key variables by selecting the response mode, here one of dollars, and also the context in which dollar awards are chosen. We have seen that people's normative judgments, at least in personal injury cases, appear to be remarkably uniform; their dollar judgments are not. Different response modes might well work better, by diminishing arbitrariness or enabling people to do something that they do well. Similar points apply in areas involving compensatory damages where erratic judgments are also likely. In those areas, large questions involve the appropriate role of technocratic and populist features in the operation of the legal system. is an effort to deal with these issues.