Bad Deaths
Author(s): CASS R. SUNSTEIN
Source: Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 14, No. 3, Special Issue on the Value of Life
(May/June 1997), pp. 259-282
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/41760855 .
Accessed: 21/06/2014 13:47

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 

14:259-282 

(1997) 

© 1997 Kluwer Academic Publishers 

CASS R. SUNSTEIN 
University 

of Chicago Law School, Chicago, 

Illinois 6063 7 

Bad  Deaths 

Abstract 

is presented 

to show that people are willing to pay a premium 

to avoid "bad deaths" - deaths that are 
Evidence 
of this 
distributed. 
especially dreaded, uncontrollable, 
incurred, 
kind help explain the demand for regulation. But some of these judgments do not justify current policies, 
and confusion. Few causes of death are entirely uncontrollable 
because they stem from selective attention 
faced wholly involuntarily; 
"bad deaths" deserve special attention: 
suffering, 

or 
they can be controlled but at what cost. But three kinds of 
those preceded by unusual pain and 

and those producing distributional 

those imposing high externalities, 

the issue is not whether 

Public judgments 

and inequitably 

involuntarily 

inequity. 

Key words: Value of life, safety regulation, 

cost-benefit 

analysis 

II, K2 
JEL Classification: 

Many people think that it is best to die quickly, quietly, and in one's sleep at night. People 
often say they have a special fear of certain deaths, including those from cancer and AIDS. 
All deaths are bad. But some deaths seem worse than others. 

These points have important implications for both positive and normative work about 
the value of life. People's beliefs about the special badness of certain deaths should have 
consequences for occupational choice, life style, and the demand for government regula- 
tion. If deaths from automobile accidents involve minimal suffering, and elicit relatively 
little public concern, manufacturers 
less_ 
intense pressure to make cars safe. If, by contrast, AIDS deaths, and deaths from airplane 
accidents, are especially adhorrent, we can predict a strong demand for AIDS prevention 
programs and for regulation of airlines. There are normative implications as well. If some 
deaths are particularly bad, government should devote additional resources to preventing 
them. 

and relators will be under corresppridin^v, 

My purpose in this essay is to investigate the place of bad deaths in the valuation of 
life.1 Much psychological work emphasizes apparent public concern with "qualitative" 
factors aggravating certain deaths. I show how this concern helps explain some conspicu- 
ous anomalies in current government regulation. Despite its explanatory power, I conclude 
that the psychological evidence does not justify those anomalies, because the public 
concern probably depends on selective attention, mistakes, and confusions. On the other 
hand, I argue that four sources of public concern should play a role in regulatory policy: 
these involve deaths accompanied by unusual pain and suffering, deaths concentrated 
among socially disadvantaged groups, deaths involving especially high costs of risk avoid- 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

260 

SUNSTEIN 

ance, and deaths that produce unusually high externalities. Further research is necessary 
to identify the actual sources of public judgments and to see if those judgments can 
survive critical scrutiny. 

1. Lives and (decently livable) life years 

1.1. Starting points 

When government is trying to maximize the value of life, what, exactly, should it be 
maximizing? Any answer should meet two constraints. First, it should be acceptable from 
the theoretical point of view. Second, it should be administrable, that is, it should be 
something that real-world officials can actually use. The two constraints are mutually 
checking. A practically useful answer might be indefensible from the standpoint of theory. 
A theoretically appealing answer might be rejected because it is too complex or unwieldy, 
because it imposes unrealistic informational demands on government, or because it is an 
struggle. Any judgment about what government should maxi- 
invitation to interest-group 
mize might also attempt to be minimally contentious, that is, it might attempt to put to one 
side the largest theoretical disputes and to attract support from widely divergent starting- 
points. A degree of philosophical parsimony, achieved through bracketing large-scale 
controversies, would be promising if it is possible (see Sunstein, 1996). 

In recent years many observers and some regulators, seeking a practical answer to the 
question what they should maximize, have focussed on numbers of lives saved (Breyer, 
1993). They decide how to proceed largely by exploring the aggregate number of deaths 
to be prevented by a regulatory initiative. This is a promising start. But it is increasingly 
recognized that the idea of "lives saved" has considerable crudeness as the regulatory 
maximand. Of course no program "saves lives"; at best it extends them. Other things 
being equal, a regulation that "saves" 100 children seems better than one that "saves" 1 10 
elderly people, because it saves more years of life. Thus, for example, the recent EPA 
regulation of particulates extends the lives of a large number of terminally ill elderly 
people by a short period; the resulting modest gains should not be valued at the same rate 
as any lives "saved." And if government has a choice between preserving lives in a way 
that ensures decently livable years and preserving lives in a way that ensures a barely 
functional and extremely painful continued existence, it should do the former. The influ- 
ential notion of quality-adjusted life years (Zeckhauser and Shepherd, 1976) (QALYs) is 
intended to account for these judgments, by suggesting that government should pay 
attention not to the number of lives saved but to both the number and the quality of years 
saved. People in fact trade off the quantity of life for the quality of life, and vice-versa; it 
seems reasonable to say that government should do the same in allocating resources. 

The use of QALYs is controversial, partly because of the difficulty of deciding how 
much to count a qualitatively impaired life, and a wide range of variations can be imag- 
ined on the basic notion, to be evaluated by examining both theoretical appeal and 
administrability. 
years than to extend one from sixty to eighty-five years. Perhaps officials should start with 

It may, for example, be better to extend a life from five to twenty-five 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BAD DEATHS 

261 

a notion of "decently livable life years," which is designed to bypass some of the more 
controversial questions and to set a floor of basic functional capacity, above which each 
life-year saved should count for no less and no more than one (Sunstein, 1997). 

For present purposes let us put to one side the associated controversies and begin with 
the simple suggestion that government should attend to life-years rather than lives, and 
make adjustments in that figure when the lives saved either contain severe health impair- 
ments or fall below a certain floor. Thus it would be necessary to see what causes of death 
are most common and to devote resources to addressing the most common causes. (On 
causes of death, see Appendix A.) The question then becomes how the resulting judgments 
might be affected if we attend to the perceived fact that some deaths are especially bad. 

1.2. Different deaths, different preferences and judgments 

There is considerable evidence that when voting, responding to questions, or engaging in 
market behavior, people evaluate different deaths differently. On this there seems to be 
general agreement. I summarize some of the relevant evidence here. 

in the transportation 

1. Government performance. A recent study of different life-saving interventions on the 
part of government shows dramatic disparities in expenditures per life-year saved (Tengs 
et al., 1996). Thus the median intervention 
sector costs $56,000/life 
year, whereas the median in the occupational sector is $350,000/life year. If the occupa- 
tional interventions are divided into those that prevent fatal injuries and those that involve 
control of toxic substances, the medians are even more strikingly different: $68,000/life 
year versus $l,400,000/life year. Agency performance reflects the dramatically different 
degrees of attention given to different deaths. For the Federal Aviation Administration, 
the 
median cost is $23,000/life year; for the Consumer Product Safety Commission, $68,000/ 
life year; for the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, $78,000/life year; for 
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, $88,000/life year; and for the Envi- 
ronmental Protection Agency, no less than $7,600,000/life year. 

These numbers are highly suggestive. They fit with both ordinary intuition and psy- 
chological studies insofar as they show special concern with cancer-causing substances, 
especially in the workplace and in air and water. To be sure, the numbers should not be 
taken to reveal people's actual valuations of different kinds of death. Government policy 
may well reflect interest-group power, media sensationalism, ignorance, error-producing 
heuristics, or other factors bearing an imperfect connection with actual preferences and 
values. Perhaps more interestingly, government policy may be affected by the length of 
time between learning of the relevant disease and the time of death. If, for example, 
people with cancer or AIDS have a long period of life with the disease, it is predictable 
that they will lobby hard for government help. In any case it is certainly revealing that 
sudden unanticipated deaths (typically produced by car and airplane crashes) receive far 
less attention than cancer-related risks, which are frequently involved in the work of 
OSHA and the EPA. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

262 

SUNSTEIN 

2. Survey data . There is substantial evidence that people perceive certain hazards as worse 
than others. Several studies indicate, even if they do not prove, that people are especially 
averse to some deaths. A recent study (Savage, 1993) concludes that people are willing to 
pay significantly more to contribute to lower the risks of cancer than they are willing to 
contribute to lower the risks posed by automobile accidents, home fires, and aviation. In 
terms of willingness to pay, cancer ranks first, followed in order by automobile accidents, 
home fires, and aviation. (As noted above, government expenditures per life year saved 
correlate with these findings.) 

A national survey in England offers evidence on how people compare deaths from 
cancer, heart disease, and motor vehicle accidents (Jones-Lee, Hammerton, and Philips, 
1985). Respondents were asked whether they would prefer to save 100 lives from one or 
another of these three causes. Nearly three-quarters of people ranked a cancer death as 
worse than a death from heart disease or motor vehicle accidents. The authors conclude 
that people "would be willing to pay very substantial sums to avoid the protracted period 
of physical and psychological pain prior to cancer death" (id., p. 68). These findings have 
been taken to show that people are willing to pay nearly twice as much to reduce heart 
disease deaths as motor vehicle deaths, and that they are willing to pay nearly three times 
as much to prevent a death from cancer as a death from motor vehicle accidents (Tolley, 
Kenkel, and Fabian, 1994 at 339). Consider Table 1: 

Table 1. Ratings of serious conditions by cause of death 

Cause of death 

Motor accidents 
Heart disease 
Cancer 

% Ranking 
disutility highest 
1 1 
13 
76 

Mean willing to pay for 
reduction 

(in millions of £)° 

7.53 
13.23 
23.12 

Using similar data, private willingness to pay to avert cancer deaths (from S 1.5 million 
to $9.5 million) has been found to be systematically higher than private willingness to pay 
to avert unforeseen instant deaths (from $1 million to $5 million). More specifically 
(Tolley, Kenkel, and Fabian, 1994, at 342) Table 2: 

Table 2. Mortality values by cause of death 

(per statistical 
life) 
Category 
Unforeseen 
instant death 
asthma/bronchitis 
heart disease 
emphysema 
lung cancer 

1 
1.3 
1.25 
1.4 
1.5 

Value estimates, 

in million $, low, medium, 

and high 

2 
2.5 
2.75 
3.5 
4 

5 
5.5 
6 
9 
9.5 

These findings strongly suggest that people view some deaths as worse than others, but 
for purposes of both positive and normative work, they should be taken with many grains 
of salt. It is not clear that people in good health have adequate information from which to 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BAD DEATHS 

263 

assess deaths from diverse causes. The notion of a "cancer death" may produce irrational 
and ill-considered fear, perhaps because people call to mind especially stressful periods of 
pain and suffering that are not representative, or because those incidents may assume 
undue salience (dwarfing the very fact of death itself) when the relevant question is asked. 
I return to these points below. 

A study of 1 ,000 randomly chosen American citizens showed related results (Cropper 
in peoples' preferences 

& Subramanian, 1995). The study revealed significant differences 
among programs that would save exactly the same number of lives at exactly the same 
cost. Thus 55% of respondents chose a program controlling industrial air pollution over 
one involving smoking education; 54% chose a program reducing water pollution over 
one involving colon cancer screening; 54% chose one controlling auto emissions over one 
involving colon cancer screening; 63% chose one involving industrial air pollution over 
one involving pneumonia vaccination; 65% chose a smoking ban in the workplace over 
controls on radon in homes; and 72% chosen a program banning pesticides in fruit over 
one regulating radon in homes. A pattern emerges from these choices. Important variables 
in the disparity were the ease with which the risk can be avoided and the extent to which 
beneficiaries of the program were to blame for their deaths. 

I conducted a survey (see Appendix B) of 116 University of Chicago law students, 

designed to obtain further information on "risk-risk tradeoffs."2 Students were asked how 
many heart attack deaths would equal 100 deaths saved from cancer. Sixty-three students 
answered 100; seven answered less than 100; forty-eight, or 40.2%, answered more than 
100. Students were also asked how many deaths from airplane crashes would equal 100 
or 44.4%, answered 100. Thirty-two, or 27.4%, 
deaths saved from cancer. Fifty-students, 
answered less than 100. Thirty-four, or 27.2%, answered more than 100. 

Students were also asked to choose among a set of policy options involving how to 
allocate $100 million among various life-saving "policy options." The first policy option 
would involve spending the entire sum on AIDS-related policies, for a total saving of 120 
lives. The second option involved spending the entire sum on smoking-related policies, for 
a total saving of 200 lives (this was by a significant margin the best policy in terms of total 
lives saved and cost per life saved). The third option involved $50 million for AIDS- 
related policies and $50 million for antismoking policies, for a total estimated savings of 
160 lives. The fourth option was a mixture: $20 million on AIDS-related policies, $25 
million on antismoking policies, $20 million on airport security, and $10 million on 
nuclear power plant inspections, for a total saving of 79.5 lives. The fifth option involved 
$50 million for preventing lead ingestion by children in the inner city and $50 million on 
smoking policies, for estimated savings of 150 lives. The last option involved $50 million 
for preventing lead ingestion and $50 million for AIDS policies, for estimated savings of 
110 lives. Here are the results: 

Respondents were asked, finally, about whether to chlorinate drinking water. They were 
told that chlorination can cause a small cancer risk, but that it also can prevent acute 
illness, which can also be fatal. They were asked whether to chlorinate the 
gastrointestinal 
water if the lifetime fatality risks were the same. Thirty-nine percent said yes, 29.7% said 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

lives saved/cost  first choice 

weighted 
second  ranking of 
choice  options 

1 (.8%) 
7(5.9%) 
25(21.2%)  7(5.9%) 

24 (20.3%)  42 (35.6%) 

SUNSTEIN 

last choice 

23 (19.5%) 
15(12.7%) 

7 (5.9%) 

264 

Table 3. 

policy option 
AIDS prevention  120/5100 million 
smoking prevention 200/$ 100 million 
AIDS and smoking 160/$50 million on 

each 
air-  79.5/S20 million on 

AIDS, smoking, 
AIDS, $25 
port security, 
nuclear power 
million on smok- 
plant inspections  ing, $20 million 

on airport 
security, $10 mil- 
lion on plant in- 
spection 

lead 
ingestion/smoking million on each 
lead ingestion/AIDS 1 10/$50 million on 

150/S50 

22 
(18.6%) 
32 
(27.1%) 

17 
(14.4%) 
20 
(16.9%) 

51 
(43.2%) 
16 
(13.6%) 

each 

14(11.9%)  24(20.3%) 

6(5.1%) 

6 
4 

1 

5 
2 

3 

no, and 30.5% had no preference. They were also asked about many deaths from microbial 
illness would equal 100 deaths from cancer. Of the 116 respondents, 56, or 47.5%, said 
100; 31, or 25.4%, said more than 100; exactly the same number said less than 100. 

There are several notable features of this study. First is the fact that substantial numbers 
of respondents thought that cancer deaths were worse than heart attacks; substantial 
numbers of respondents said the same thing for airplane deaths. But many respondents 
also thought that airplane deaths were worse than cancer deaths. Thus while cancer deaths 
were disfavored compared to heart attack deaths, there was no general preference as 
between airplane and cancer deaths. This may be because airplane deaths seem more 
it may be because airplane deaths seem more likely to befall and more tangible 
terrifying; 
to the respondents themselves (most of whom were in their twenties); it may be because 
cancer deaths and heart attack deaths involve, on average, older people, and thus more 
life-years can be saved by saving people from airplane deaths; it may be because heart 
attack and cancer deaths seem more voluntary and controllable. 

Perhaps the most striking finding of the "policy options" study is that only about a 
quarter of students chose the option that would save the most lives. Lives saved was not 
even a primary factor in choice. Surprisingly, the correlation between the lives saved 
number and the mean rating for each policy is only 0.5 12, that is, lives saved explains only 
about 25% of the variance in mean ratings. A correlation between lives saved and each 
subject's rating for the policy was small, at 0.159, which means that only 2.5% of the 
variance in individual subject responses can be explained by reference to lives saved. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BAD DEATHS 

265 

It is also interesting to find a general conclusion that addressing two problems by half 
is better than curing only one problem in full -  accompanied by a judgment that address- 
ing too many problems at small fractions each (spreading too thin) is worse still. AIDS 
policies were perceived as important, but less important than smoking, and apparently are 
most attractive only in conjunction with some other problem. The most popular option - 
combining saving children in the inner city and would-be smokers -  may have been 
well-regarded because it involved a large number of life-years and also reflected distri- 
butional considerations. AIDS-related policies were in one sense a distinctly unpopular 
option, as can be seen from the fact that only one respondent favored an AIDS-only choice 
(though this choice was pretty good in terms of aggregate lives saved and also life-years 
saved) and the fact that the inner city children plus AIDS policies option did much worse, 
as first choice, that the inner city children plus smoking policies option. On the other hand, 
the "lowest lives" option was also the most frequently cited last choice, and option five 
received significant support as a second choice. There is a great deal of "noise" in the 
study, however, and because many variables change across the comparisons, it would be 
hazardous to say what factors actually accounted for choice. Here much room remains for 
further work. 

From this discussion a general conclusion emerges. Much existing evidence suggests 
that people view some deaths as especially bad and that people are willing to do and pay 
a nontrivial amount to avoid such deaths. These judgments appear to help account for 
current disparities in expenditures per life-year saved. But the actual grounds for these 
judgments remain unclear, and it is also unclear whether those grounds, once identified, 
can survive scrutiny. A great deal of positive and normative work remains to be done. 
With that qualification, let us proceed to examine some of the underlying questions. 

2. Positive accounts: Lay vs. expert judgments, selective attention, and contextual 
cues 

In identifying what makes certain deaths seem especially bad, a natural place to look is in 
the psychological literature showing variations between lay and expert judgments of risk. 
Some of these variations stem from heuristic devices that make ordinary people peculiarly 
prone to factual error. But some of these variations (it is widely said) come from the wide 
range of variables that ordinary people think relevant in assessing risks to life and health 
(see, e.g., Slovic, 1991). Experts tend to focus on aggregate lives or life-years at stake. 
Ordinary people -  on the now-conventional account -  look at a range of more qualitative 
variables. They care not simply about number of lives at risk but also about whether the 
risk is equitably distributed, potentially catastrophic, controllable, voluntarily incurred, 
and so forth. Here is a representative compilation (developed from the summary in 
Margolis, 1996): 

At this stage it is not clear whether and to what extent these factors actually account for 
judgment and choice; the psychological work should be seen as suggestive hypotheses 
rather than as demonstrations. Moreover, it is readily apparent that some of these factors 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

266 

Table 4. 

S UNSTEIN 

aggravating 
new 
uncontrollable 
involuntary 
focussed on by media 
unfairly distributed 
children at special risk 
at risk 
irreversible 
especially dreaded 
victims known 
benefits clear 
human origin 
institutions  lack of trust 

familiarity 
personal control 
voluntariness 
media attention 
equity 
children 
future generations 
reversibility 
dreadedness 
of victims 
identifiability 
benefits 
accompanying 
human or natural origin 
trust in applicable 
timing of effects 
understanding 

delayed 
mechanisms 
understood 

or process not 

past history 

major or minor accidents 

mitigating 
old 
controllable 
voluntary 
ignored by media 
fairly distributed 
children not at risk 
not at risk 
reversible 
not especially dreaded 
victims not identifiable 
benefits not visible 
created by nature 
good deal of trust 
immediate 
mechanism 

or process 

understood 
no past accidents 

are not helpful in suggesting which deaths should be treated as especially bad. On the 
contrary, many of them are easily accounted for under the "decently livable life years 
saved" criterion. Media attention, for example, is closely connected with the well-known 
availability heuristic, and the fact that the media are focussed on a certain risk does not 
suggest that government should give that risk special attention too. Past history should be 
similarly understood; it is a rough proxy for future probability, not a reliable guide to the 
future. So too with trust. If people do not trust an institution's assurances, they are 
thinking that the risk is more serious than they are being told. And if children and future 
generations are at risk, more life years are at stake. 

But some of these factors do suggest reasons why people might see some deaths as 
worthy of more attention than others. Deaths that are particularly "dreaded" may have 
aggravating characteristics; deaths that are concentrated among socially disadvantaged 
groups might be bad not because they are distinctly bad to experience, but because they 
injustices that policymakers might try to counteract. The 
reflect perceived distributional 
notions of voluntariness and control may also be relevant insofar as they suggest that some 
deaths are accompanied by terror, or are especially poignant or disturbing and therefore 
deserving of unusual public concern. 

There is, however, reason to question the now-conventional view that qualitative factors 
of this kind in fact explain people's disagreement with experts about certain risks of death 
(see the instructive discussion in Margolis, 1996, on which I draw here). Certainly it is 
puzzling to find that people treat as quite serious death-risks that are microscopically 
small as a statistical matter, while risks that are statistically much larger are treated as 
"just a part of life." No doubt it is possible that people's judgments about risk severity are 
a product of some of the more qualitative considerations 
listed above; this idea leads to the 
widespread view that ordinary people have a "richer" rationality than do experts, since 
ordinary people look at the nature and causes of death, not simply at aggregate deaths at 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BAD DEATHS 

267 

issue. But it is also possible that an apparently "rich" conclusion that a certain risk is 
severe, or not severe, depends not on well-considered 
judgments of value, but instead on 
an absence of ordinary contextual cues, on a failure to see that tradeoffs are inevitably 
being made, on heuristic devices that are not well-adapted to the particular context, or 
instead on a range of confusing or confused ideas that people cannot fully articulate. 
When people say, for example, that the risk of nuclear power is very serious, they may be 
responding to their intense visceral concern, possibly based on (uninformed) statistical 
judgments about likely lives at risk and on their failure to see (as they do in other contexts) 
that that risk is accompanied by a range of social benefits. The fact that nuclear power, and 
application of pesticides, produce benefits as well as risks may not "register" on the lay 
viewscreen, and this may help produce a "high risk" judgment (see Alhakami and Slovic, 
1994). 

Consider some other examples. It is clear that the risk of cancer death from the use of 
X-ray technology does not now produce an intense public outcry, perhaps because people 
know that the technology contains benefits as well; thus it is false to say that cancer- 
related risks always produce intense public concern. For automobile accidents, similarly, 
people's uninformed statistical judgments may not lead to overestimates of risk or to 
visceral judgments of great concern, partly because people are well aware that automobile 
travel produces high benefits as well as costs. Thus it is possible that a judgment that a 
certain risk of death is unusually bad is not a "rich" qualitative assessment but an (unre- 
includes perceived lives at 
liable) intuition based on a rapid balancing that prominently 
stake and the perceived presence of small or no benefits associated with the risk- 
producing activity. When, for example, nuclear power "codes" as a serious risk, this may 
be because the benefits are off the viewscreen, and the potential for catastrophe looms 
large, perhaps because of heuristic devices (such as availability). And when people are 
asked to say why they believe that some risk is especially bad, their answers may not be 
truly explanatory, but instead post hoc rationalizations of more visceral judgments (based 
partly on faulty quantitative assessments). In other words, the reasons given may not 
actually lie behind the judgments; people are not always good at giving accounts of what 
underlies their judgments (Margolis, 1996). 

All this raises the possibility that people's references to "control" and "involuntariness" 

do not explain the actual basis of their judgments. This possibility remains to be inves- 
tigated and tested. For the moment let us put this issue to one side and assume that the 
psychological evidence does suggest that certain risks are perceived as bad very much for 
the more qualitative reasons that are typically invoked. The important question is which of 
them justifies a qualification of the basic criterion of decently livable life-years. 

3. Normative issues 

By itself the fact that people perceive certain risks and deaths as especially bad should not 
be decisive for purposes of policy. Suppose, for example, that ordinary judgments stem 
from heuristic devices that produce predictable factual mistakes, so that both private 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

268 

SUNSTEIN 

behavior and the demand for regulatory protection are affected. Certainly government 
should not incorporate judgments based on mistakes -  a point that raises doubts about 
some uses of willingness to pay as a basis for regulatory policy. To the extent that WTP 
is a function of factual errors, government should not rely on it. The appropriate remedy 
is inform people of relevant facts. This general point suggests that it is important to 
examine not simply what deaths people especially abhor, but also why those deaths are 
abhorrent, and whether the underlying reasons can survive scrutiny. The American politi- 
cal system aspires to be a deliberative democracy, in which citizen preferences are sup- 
posed to be subject to a process of reflection. They are not to be automatically translated 
into law (Sunstein, 1993; Bessette, 1996). 

Thus the question becomes whether citizen judgments that certain deaths are especially 
bad can survive a process of reflection. My conclusion is that understood in a certain way, 
the notions of dreaded deaths and unfairly distributed deaths are fully reasonable, and do 
deserve a role in policy. But the special concerns about deaths stemming from involun- 
tarily run and uncontrollable risks raise serious doubts; as frequently invoked, they do not 
justify according additional concern to deaths that "code" as a product of involuntary or 
uncontrollable risks. At most, they suggest that government might spend more resources 
on deaths where the cost of risk-avoidance is especially high, and devote less attention to 
deaths where the cost of risk-avoidance is especially low. Particularly interesting is a 
question left implicit in the psychological studies: How to handle deaths that have high 
externalities. 

3.1. Dread 

It is often said, on the basis of evidence like that outlined above, that especially dreaded 
deaths deserve special attention. Deaths from cancer and AIDS fall in this category. There 
is nothing at all mysterious to this idea. The underlying point is that the relevant deaths are 
especially grueling and hence there is a kind of "pain and suffering premium" -  not 
merely a life lost, but an antecedent period of intense emotional and physical difficulty as 
well. This period of intense difficulty might impose costs on those with the illness and on 
friends and family members as well. Sudden, unanticipated deaths can be dreaded too - 
consider the extremely unpleasant idea of dying in an airplane crash. But the dread here 
stems from some factor (perhaps terror) different from and much shorter than the ex- 
tended period of suffering that precedes some deaths. Thus it might be concluded that 
dreaded deaths deserve special attention in accordance with the degree of suffering that 
precedes them. 

A special problem with cancer deaths is that people like to have upward-sloping utility. 
It is particularly bad to be in a situation in which things will constantly get worse 
(Loewenstein and Sicherman, 1991). With cancer deaths, the slope goes downward fairly 
consistently until the point of death. Since the time sequence of disutility matters a great 
deal, cancer deaths are associated with especially severe hedonic losses. 

As reasons for according special concern to deaths preceded by pain and suffering, 

these ideas seem sound. But some qualifications is necessary. First, some recent work in 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BAD DEATHS 

269 

psychology has shown that people often fear certain risks ex ante, but when those risks 
come to fruition, they are able to adapt much better than they believed possible, and the 
utility loss is less severe than they anticipated (Loewenstein and Schkade, forthcoming; 
Kahneman, 1996; see also Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarim, forthcoming). Notably, people 
think that they will respond much more negatively to a positive result for HIV than they 
do in fact (see Sieff, Dawes, and Loewenstein, forthcoming). Thus people may dread 
certain diseases more than they "should" in the sense that the lived experience of the 
disease is less horrible than was thought before the fact. If true, this point makes it 
necessary at least to question whether ex ante fear justifies the degree of attention that 
uninformed people seek from government, if ex post adaptation is possible. 

Second, some pain and suffering may well be an inevitable part of a desirable period in 
which people, including families, can plan and adapt themselves to the fact of death and 
achieve a measure of peace with it. On this count, a sudden unanticipated death may be 
worse. The desirable features of a death that is not sudden, and for which planning 
becomes possible, may not register when people are asked, in surveys, to compare an 
automobile death with a cancer death. 

Third, it seems sensible to say that the period of pain and suffering that precedes death 
ought -  in all but the most unusual cases -  to be far less important, relatively speaking, 
than the fact of death itself. Thus something appears to have gone wrong if people say that 
they would like to devote (say) three times as much to preventing cancer deaths as they 
would like to devote to preventing deaths from automobile accidents. Perhaps they are 
focussing too intensely on certain vivid instances of intense suffering. Perhaps the valu- 
ation would not survive a modest degree of information and critical reflection. Perhaps the 
fact that the relevant scale is unbounded and in dollars produces distortions. 

These points suggest the possibility of relying not on responses to survey questions, and 
perhaps not even on market behavior, but instead on a kind of "deliberative opinion poll" 
that seeks to inform answers and to allow an exchange of opinion (see Fishkin 1995). On 
this view, it is important not to ask people to offer their quick, likely uninformed reactions 
to hypothetical questions (how much worse is death from cancer than death from a heart 
attack?), but instead to offer underlying facts and to take account of informed answers. As 
noted, an extended period before death can actually contain benefits, since it allows a 
period for grief and adjustment. Much better responses might be expected after people are 
given a solid basis for assessing the relevant deaths, for making comparisons, and for 
putting the period that precedes death in context with the death itself. 

3.2. Inequitable distribution 

Some risks might be, or be thought to be, inequitably distributed, above all because the 
victims are disproportionately members of socially disadvantaged groups. Certain deaths 
might, for example, be concentrated among poor people, African-Americans, 
or homo- 
sexuals. Consider the risk of lead paint poisoning suffered by inner city children, or the 
risk of AIDS, faced disproportionately by African-Americans 
as well as homosexuals. 
Citizens or elected representatives may think that inequitably distributed risks of death 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

270 

SUNSTEIN 

deserve special attention from government. Here the relevant deaths are bad not because 
each one is especially bad to experience, but because there is social concern about the fact 
on members of certain social groups. 
that a certain cause of death falls disproportionately 
When such social concern exists, and when it is not objectionable on constitutional or 
other grounds, it is entirely legitimate for officials to respond. Thus regulators should be 
incidence is espe- 
permitted to give distributional weights to risks whose distributional 
cially troublesome. The point supports special efforts to control AIDS; environmental 
risks like asthma, which are concentrated among inner city children; and perhaps the 
spread of diseases whose incidence is concentrated among women. 

through regulation, but less effective, probably, 

Of course this idea raises familiar issues about appropriate redistributive policies. A 
scheme, likely more 

risk policy with distributional weights is an in-kind redistributive 
effective than strategies of redistribution 
than redistribution via cash. It is also possible that any distributional weighting will 
subject the political market to pressures from well-organized groups, which will predict- 
ably offer equitable arguments for their preferred outcome, perhaps at the expense of the 
weakest and least organized members of socieyy. Finally, it is hardly clear that in-kind 
benefits should generally be distributed 
in a way that benefits the less well-off. It does not 
seem to make sense to say that homosexuals and women, for example, should receive 
better transportation, better dental care, more food stamps, and better housing than het- 
erosexuals and men. In these circumstances, public judgments about the need for distri- 
butional weights in risk regulation may neglect the possibility and even the fact that 
redistributive 
efforts are being made through other routes. My minimal claim is that if 
there is a public judgment in favor of according a distributional weight to a certain 
or otherwise illegiti- 
death-reduction policy, and if that judgment is not unconstitutional 
mate, policy makers should not be barred from respecting that judgment. 

3.3. Voluntariness 

People seem to perceive voluntarily incurred risks as less troublesome than involuntarily 
incurred risks. Consider diverse public reactions to airplane crashes and automobile 
crashes. Or consider the fact that tobacco is by far the largest source of preventable deaths 
in the United States. Why do we not devote much more of our regulatory effort to 
reducing smoking? The reason seems to lie in a judgment that smoking is a voluntary 
activity and hence the resulting deaths are less troublesome than other sorts of deaths. 
Here people have voluntarily assumed the relevant risks (there is of course a detailed 
literature on this general topic; see, e.g., Viscusi, 1992). 

1. Puzzles: high cost of avoidance rather than involuntariness? 
It is tempting to think that 
the apparent lay preference for according greater weight to "involuntary" risks to life 
requires significant qualification of the criterion of lives or life-years saved. But a simple 
reference to voluntariness, 
raises many puzzles. The most important problem is that it is not simple to know when a 

if taken to suggest something special about "lay rationality," 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BAD DEATHS 

271 

risk is voluntarily incurred. "Voluntariness" may be entirely absent in the case of an 
unforeseeable collision with an asteroid; but voluntariness is not, in the cases under 
consideration, an all-or-nothing matter. Instead it is a matter of degree. Return to the 
conventional thought that airplane crashes are "involuntary" and automobile crashes more 
"voluntary." Certainly it would be possible to see the risks from air travel as voluntarily 
run; people have a choice about whether to fly, and when they do fly, they pay a certain 
amount for a certain package, including risks of various sorts. The same is true of 
automobile safety -  and it is not in any way less true, however disparate the two kinds 
of risks may "seem." Perhaps people are responding to the perceived fact that they have 
no control over the pilot's behavior, whereas they have considerable control over auto- 
mobile safety since they are themselves drivers. But airlines respond to market forces, 
including the market for safety, and many people injured in automobile accidents are not 
at fault, and thus along the dimension of voluntariness this is hardly a crisp distinction. 
The difference between the two risks is hardly so categorical as to justify an assessment 
divide. Indeed, it is not clear 
that they fall on poles of some voluntariness-involuntariness 
even what is meant by the suggestion that one is voluntary and the other is not. Something 
else appears to underlie that suggestion. 

2. Three cases. To shed some light on the issue, let us consider three classes of cases. First, 
consider the question whether workers exposed to cancer risks are voluntarily or invol- 
untarily so exposed. If workers do not know about such risks -  if they lack relevant 
-  we seem to have an easy case of involuntariness. Thus it makes sense to say 
information 
that risks are run involuntarily when the people running them do not know about them. 
Lack of adequate information provides a legitimate case for a judgment of involuntary 
itself can be obtained at some cost, pecuniary 
exposure to risk. But of course information 
or otherwise. We are thus dealing, in cases of this kind, with high costs of risk avoidance, 
in the distinctive form of high costs of acquiring relevant information. 

Second, suppose that people who are exposed to a certain risk are aware of the risk, but 
are not in a contractual relation with the risk-producer. Many victims of pollution are in 
this position; recall that in surveys air pollution is a particular source of public concern. 
People in Los Angeles may well know that they face high levels of smog. Are they 
If we conclude that they are, we may mean that a risk is incurred 
exposed involuntarily? 
involuntarily when and in the sense that it is typically very expensive for people to avoid 
it -  and when someone else can reduce the risks more cheaply. Here a claim that the risk 
is faced "involuntarily" may mean that those who "run" the risk can reduce it only at very 
high cost, at least compared to those who "produce" the risk. (The quotation marks are 
necessary for obvious Coasian reasons.) Or it is possible that we mean that on nonutili- 
tarian grounds, the people exposed to the risk have a moral entitlement to be free from it, 
at least if they have not explicitly sold it. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

272 

SUNSTEIN 

But turn now to a third class of cases, involving a wage package or contract that does 
include compensation for the relevant risks. Assuming that point, we might want to 
distinguish between two different possibilities. In a case of a high-level scientist, knowl- 
edgeable about relevant risks and involved in work that he finds rewarding, people may 
well conclude that we have an instance of voluntariness. (In the same category can be 
found the case of an astronaut.) But people might not say the same about a low-level 
worker who does not like his work at all (cf. Anderson, 1993). What distinguishes the two 
cases? If knowledge is present, or if the compensation package includes payment for the 
relevant risk, it is not clear how the two differ. The underlying judgment must be that the 
compensation is inadequate, perhaps because background inequality has produced a wage 
package that seems unfair even if voluntarily chosen by the parties. 

From this discussion it seems reasonable to speculate that any judgment that a risk is 
is probably based on 1) a lack of knowledge of the risk, or, more 

run "involuntarily" 
accurately, high costs of obtaining information about the risk, 2) a belief that information 
to one side, it would be very costly for people to avoid the risk, or 3) a belief that the risk 
a belief that the contract is 
is unaccompanied by compensating benefits, notwithstanding 
in some sense worth signing. It may seem hard to make sense of 3); what might be at work 
is a judgment that background inequalities are producing the relevant bargain (not by itself 
a good reason to disrupt the deal), or perhaps a belief that workers are competing to their 
collective detriment, and an agreement not to compete would be in their best interests 
(Frank, 1983). On this view, the question whether a risk is run voluntarily or not is often 
not a categorical one but instead a matter of degree, associated with information cost, 
risk-reduction cost, and the existence or not of accompanying benefits. Of course there are 
interesting background questions about why and when a risk "codes" as voluntary or 
involuntary; undoubtedly the answer depends a great deal on heuristic devices and selec- 
tive attention. 

3. The purpose for which the risk is incurred and problems of responsibility and blame. 
Death-risks may seem "voluntarily" run when observers do not approve of the purpose for 
which people run the relevant risks, and involuntarily run when observers think that the 
purpose for which the risk is run is laudable. It is predictable that people will not want to 
pour enormous taxpayer resources into lowering the risks associated with sky-diving, even 
if the dollars/life-years 
saved ratio is quite good. By contrast, it is doubtful that people 
think that it is wrong to spend enormous resources on the prevention of death from 
childbirth or being a police officer, even though the decision to have a child is (with 
appropriate qualifications) voluntary, and so too with the decision to become a police 
officer. People may think that when the appeal or purpose of the activity is associated with 
its very riskiness, resources should not be devoted to risk-reduction. At least this is 
plausible when the risk is an independent good or part of the benefit of the activity. And 
it is easy to imagine a belief that some activities -  unsafe sex, cigarette smoking -  are like 
the sky-diving case, perhaps because the risk is sometimes part of the benefit, perhaps 
because the risks are not incurred for a purpose that observers find worthy or valuable. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BAD DEATHS 

273 

It might seem that this consideration -  the purpose for which the risk is incurred - 
overlaps with or is even identical to the question whether there are high costs of risk- 
avoidance. When the costs are low, as in sky-diving, the purpose might seem inadequate. 
But on reflection the two ideas are hardly the same. It may well be that failing to sky-dive, 
technology, imposes high costs on sky-divers. 
or sky-diving with some safety-increasing 
There seems to be an objective judgment, not necessarily connected with subjective costs, 
in the claim that some risks are voluntary, or deserve less attention, because they are run 
for inadequate purposes. 

Relatedly, airplane accidents may seem different from automobile accidents not be- 
cause the former are less voluntary, and not because of higher costs of risk avoidance, but 
because the victims of airplane accidents are less blameworthy than the victims of auto- 
mobile accidents, in the sense that the death is not a product of their own negligence or 
misconduct. In the case of an airplane disaster, weather conditions, mechanical failure, or 
pilot error are likely causes; in the case of an automobile accident, it is more likely 
(though not of course certain) that the victim could have avoided death through more 
careful driving. The point is crude, since many victims of automobile accidents are not 
drivers, and many drivers in accidents do not behave negligently. But the perceived 
difference, in a significant number of cases, may underlie an apparent judgment of "vol- 
untariness" that is really a judgment about responsibility and blameworthiness. 

4. Underlying questions and assumption of risk. We might therefore conclude that whether 
a risk qualifies as involuntary raises many of the questions raised by the question whether 
government should regulate the market at all. A risk might be characterized as involun- 
tarily run because affected people lack relevant information; because the transactions 
costs of bargaining are high; because the risks should be seen to amount to externalities; 
because collective action problems make market outcomes unsatisfactory since (for ex- 
ample) workers are in a prisoner's dilemma best solved through law; or because some 
motivational or cognitive defect makes successful solutions through markets unlikely. 
These of course are among the conventional grounds for regulation in the first instance. 
When a risk seems voluntary, and not worthy of substantial regulatory resources, the term 
"voluntary" is serving as a placeholder for an argument that there is no sufficient ground 
for government action, because the accompanying benefits are high or the risk-reduction 
costs are low, and because market arrangements take adequate account of these facts. 

Should voluntarily run risks of death receive no public attention, on the ground that the 
relevant people have already received compensation? We might imagine a death-risk to be 
incurred voluntarily when an informed person decided to incur it in light of its costs and 
benefits. Suppose, for example, that someone purchases a small car with fewer safety 
features, or decides to become a boxer, an astronaut, or a police officer in a dangerous 
neighborhood. If a death results from such a choice, it might seem that the chooser has no 
legitimate ground for complaint; there has been ex ante compensation for the risk. But 
even in such cases, it is not clear that government lacks a role. If government can reduce 
a serious risk at low cost, and thus eliminate deaths, it should do so even if there was ex 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

274 

SUNSTEIN 

ante compensation for the relevant risk. There is a general point here. Sometimes observ- 
ers confuse two quite different questions: (1) Should people be banned from running a 
certain risk, when they have run that risk voluntarily? 
(2) Should government attempt to 
reduce a certain risk, when people have run that risk voluntarily? A negative answer to 
question (1) does not answer question (2). 

From this point we should conclude that a lay judgment that a risk is "voluntary" should 
not be decisive. A better understanding of what factors underlie and support that judgment 
should be used for purposes of regulatory policy. The basic criterion of decently livable 
life years might, then, be adjusted upward when those at risk lack relevant information or 
when the costs of risk-avoidance are especially high -  or downward when those at risk 
have the information and when the costs of risk-avoidance are low. 

3.4. Control 

People find risks less acceptable if those risks do not seem to be within their control. 
Automobile accidents may seem less troublesome than airline disasters partly for this 
reason. 

The perceived difference between "uncontrollable" 

and "controllable" deaths may stem 
from a desire to reduce the fear of dying. People who feel in control also feel less afraid. 
This feeling may be irrational, but it is not necessarily irrational to try to minimize an 
irrational feeling. Or the perceived difference may involve a distinctive utility loss at time 
of death. Perhaps a death from an airplane crash is especially horrifying because of one's 
feelings at the time the crash is happening. Undoubtedly some of the horror at airplane 
crashes has to do with empathetic identification with people in that position. Thus it would 
be reasonable to put a special premium on some deaths if informed people believe that the 
risk-reduction reduces social fear in a reasonable way, or that the terror and panic in the 
period preceding death deserves special attention. Empirical work would be necessary to 
show whether these are in fact widely held judgments. 

The reference to control is probably based above all on the perceived possibility of 
avoiding death altogether though one's own acts. But this idea links control with volun- 
tariness, and it should be clear from the previous discussion that the question is not 
whether risks can be controlled, but how expensive it is for individuals to control them. 
People can control their subjection to airplane-related risks by refusing to fly; people can 
control their subjection to risks from coal-fired power plants by living in areas served by 
solar energy. The question is not whether a risk can be controlled or not, but at what cost 
it is controllable, and with what benefits it is hard to control. Individuals tend to "frame" 
risk control in "all or nothing" terms, depending on the particular temporal event on which 
they focus. But this is an obvious form of selective attention. As with voluntariness, 
"controllability" 
factors that account for a judgment that a risk is not controllable. 

is a conclusion more than it is an analytic tool. It is best to look at the 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BAD DEATHS 

275 

3.5. High externalities, catastrophes 

, and " 

" 
meaning 

The psychological evidence suggests, thought it does not squarely identify, an important 
in the sense that they 
and relevant fact: Some deaths produce unusually high externalities, 
generate widespread losses, including those stemming from empathy and fear, in a way 
that leads to predictable pecuniary and nonpecuniary costs (see Zeckhauser, 1996, for an 
illuminating discussion of catastrophes). Consider, for example, the death of the President 
of the United States, a death that imposes a wide range of costs and that taxpayers invest 
significant resources to prevent. A parallel can be found in the relatively large level of 
resources devoted to prevent the assassination of many important public officials. But the 
point is hardly limited to the highest public officials. An airplane hijacking or crash, partly 
because it is likely to be well-publicized, may produce large externalities 
in the form of 
empathy and fear. It may even deter air travel by making people unusually frightened of 
air travel, simply because of heuristic devices (availability) and other predictable factors 
that make people's probability assessments go awry. This fear may be damaging because 
it is itself a utility loss and because it may lead people to use less safe methods of 
transportation, 
because the sudden loss of dozens or hundreds of people seems so unusually and sense- 
lessly tragic, in a way that produces large empathetic reactions, or because it signals the 
further possibility of random, apparently inexplicable events in which large numbers of 
people die. 

such as automobiles. Or an airplane crash might be especially disturbing 

Some catastrophes are especially disturbing because they appear to produce pointless 
and especially unnatural deaths. A recent airplane crash in Israel, killing over seventy 
soldiers, is an example, producing an extended period of national mourning -  stemming 
from the youth of those who were killed, the fact that they were serving their country, and 
the highly unusual character of the accident, apparently stemming from preventable hu- 
man error. These considerations suggest that special attention might justifiably be devoted 
to air safety in the time following a crash even if the relevant precautions do not cause a 
significant drop in deaths. The same idea may justify special safeguards of nuclear reac- 
tors. Even a minor and harmless accident may produce a kind of day-to-day fearfulness 
that properly places a role in an official calculus, at least if educative efforts cannot work 
against public fears to the extent that they are irrational or based on error-producing 
heuristic. 

Special public concern about catastrophic events may thus reflect a judgment that 
certain kinds of deaths have ancillary effects, well beyond the deaths themselves. Consider 
in this regard the "Buffalo Creek Syndrome," documented several times in the aftermath 
of major disasters. Nearly two years after the collapse of a dam that left 120 dead and 
4000 homeless, psychiatric researchers continued to find significant psychological and 
sociological changes; survivors were characterized by a loss of direction and energy, other 
(Fiorino, 1989). One evaluator 
disabling character changes, and a loss of communality 
attributed this loss of direction specifically to "the loss of traditional bonds of kinship and 
(Robinson et al. 1983). The non-linearity of lay evaluations of risk in the 
neighborliness" 
context of potential disasters may thus reflect a high premium on avoiding the distinctive 
kinds of losses distinctly associated with catastrophes. If so, differences between lay and 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

27 6 

SUNSTEIN 

expert assessments rest on genuine value differences 
(four times as many deaths may be 
much more than four times as bad) rather than on factual errors in cognitive processes of 
ordinary people. 

Another way to put the point is that the socially perceived "meaning" of a death, or a 
series of deaths, may affect and form part of public judgments about appropriate re- 
sponses. Some deaths are taken to be part of life, whereas others seem disruptive and 
terrifying. The point follows from the fact that people are selectively fatalistic, a phe- 
nomenon that bears on the demand and supply of regulation. If the social meaning of an 
airline disaster is that air travel has "become unsafe," government may have an obligation 
to respond with special intensity, because the social perception will produce significant 
social losses in various spheres (including, as noted, net mortality itself, if people shift to 
more dangerous forms of travel). There is a separate possibility. People may think it is 
worse for an entire family (consisting of, say, four people) to perish than for four members 
of four different families to perish; in the latter case, at least some siblings and children 
are left. A distinctive problem of a catastrophe is that it destroys whole families. 

These various points raise a number of questions. We do not yet have a full under- 
standing of the basis for special public concern with catastrophes. Moreover, the argument 
is strongest when the externali- 
for devoting special resources to deaths with externalities 
ties do not reflect irrationality or cannot be reduced through other means. For example, 
some of the fear that follows certain widely reported deaths is based on confusion or 
ignorance about actual probabilities; if it is possible to dispel the confusion, the fear 
should dissipate as well. Here the question is whether government can legitimately spend 
extra resources to avert the harms associated with irrational public attitudes. Perhaps 
strategies would be preferable to allocating additional resources to 
information-based 
deaths whose occurrence produces widespread panic. On the other hand, there are un- 
is ineffective, and there are also cases in which 
doubtedly instances in which information 
in the form of special fear, are not a product of factual ignorance. In such 
high externalities, 
is justified in giving additional resources to death-prevention. 
cases government 

Conclusion 

People do not consider all death-related events to be the same. Some deaths seem espe- 
cially bad. It follows that valuation of life should not be based on a uniform number per 
life or life year saved, but should instead incorporate different social judgments about 
different kinds of death, to the extent that these judgments can survive critical scutiny. 
Some such judgments do not really treat some deaths as worse, in themselves, than 
other deaths. They are based on {he fact that deaths of some kinds occur very early, and 
thus a large number of life-years are lost. This point can easily be incorporated by 
reference to the criterion of life-years rather than lives saved. Moreover, judgments based 
on pre-death pain and suffering do not treat death-events as themselves deserving different 
levels of attention. But when a death is preceded by a period of pain and suffering, 
it is 
appropriate to make special efforts to guard against it. Much further work remains to 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BAD DEATHS 

277 

determine the appropriate "bad death premium" to be placed on such deaths; a special 
problem stems from the fact that public judgments or private willingness to pay may be 
it may well be 
ill-informed. When people believe that deaths are inequitably distributed, 
sensible to make particular efforts to prevent them, at least if the judgments about what is 
it is appropriate to devote 
inequitable are legitimate. Finally, and perhaps most important, 
unusually high levels of resources to preventing deaths accompanied by high externalities, 
at least if those externalities cannot be reduced through education and information. 
Far harder puzzles are posed by the familiar idea that some deaths are especially bad 
If the point is that there is a 

because they involve a lack of control and involuntariness. 
-  perhaps 
special hedonic loss at the point of death -  a special feeling of powerlessness 
that loss deserves consideration in resource allocation. Or it may be that some risks are 
accompanied by especially low or especially high costs, informational and otherwise, of 
mortality avoidance. In such cases those especially low or high costs might qualify the 
starting point defined in terms of decently livable life years saved. 

Appendix A 

Sources of Deaths 

Table A. Leading Causes of Death: 1993 
Cause of Death 

All ages 
Leading causes of death: 

Number of Deaths 

Death Rate Per 100,000 Population 

Total  Male  Female  Total  Male  Female 

2,268,553 1,161,797 1,106,756  880.0  923.5  838.6 

Heart disease 
Malignant neoplasms 
disease 
Cerebrovascular 

743,460 367,479 375,981  288.4  292.1  284.9 
(cancer)  529,904 279,375 250,529  205.6  222.1  189.8 
69.0 

150,108  59,048  91,060 

58.2 

46.9 

pulmonary 101,077  54,371  46,706 

(stroke) 
Chronic obstructive 
disease 
Accidents 
90,523  60,117  30,406 
Pneumonia 
82,820  37,996  44,824 
Diabetes 
53,894  23,430  30,464 
HIV infection 
37,267  32,093  5,174 
Suicide 
31,102  25,007  6,095 
Homicide and legal intervention 26,009  20,290  5,719 

39.2 

43.2 

35.4 

35.1 
32.1 
20.9 
14.5 
12.1 
10.1 

47.8 
30.2 
18.6 
25.5 
19.9 
16.1 

23.0 
34.0 
23.1 
(NA) 
4.6 
4.3 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

278 

SUNSTEIN 

death rates, by selected causes: 1980 to 1993 [Rates per 100,000 population] 

1980 

1990 

1993 

pulmonary diseases and allied conditions 

and nephrosis 

Table B. Age-adjusted 
Cause of death 

All causes 
Major cardiovascular 
Malignancies 
Accidents 

and adverse effects 

diseases 

Motor vehicle 
All other 

and parasitic diseases 

syndrome, 

and influenza 

liver disease and cirrhosis 

Chronic obstructive 
Pneumonia 
Diabetes melitus 
Suicide 
Chronic 
Nephritis, nephrotic 
Homicide and legal intervention 
Septicemia 
Other infectious 
Benign neoplasms 
Ulcer of stomach and duodenum 
Hernia of abdominal 
Anemias 
Cholelithiasis 
Nutritional 
Infections 
Tuberculosis 
Meningitis 
Viral hepatitis 
Acute bronchitis 
Hyperplasia 
Symptoms, 
All other causes 

of prostate 
signs, and ill-defined 

deficiencies 
of kidney 

and bronchiolitis 

conditions 

cavity and intestinal 

obstruction 

and other disorders of gallbladder 

585.8 
256.0 
132.8 
42.3 
22.9 
19.5 
15.9 
12.9 
10.1 
11.5 
12.2 
4.5 
10.8 
2.6 
1.8 
2.0 
1.7 
1 .4 
0.9 
0.8 
0.5 
0.7 
0.6 
0.6 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
9.8 
36.8 

520.2 
189.8 
135.0 
32.5 
18.5 
14.0 
19.7 
14.0 
11.7 
11.3 
8.6 
4.3 
10.2 
4.1 
12.0 
1.7 
1.3 
1.1 
0.9 
0.6 
0.5 
0.2 
0.5 
0.3 
0.5 
0. 1 
0.1 
7.3 
38.4 

513.3 
181.8 
132.6 
30.3 
16.0 
14.4 
21.4 
13.5 
12.4 
11.4 
7.9 
4.5 
10.7 
4.1 
15.9 
1.7 
1.2 
1 .0 
0.9 
0.5 
0.9 
0.2 
0.4 
0.3 
0.8 
0.1 
0.1 
7.4 
39.7 

Table C. Acquired 

immunodeficiency 

syndrome 

(AIDS) deaths, by selected characteristics: 

thru 1995 

• • 
• • 
Characteristics 

Number 

Percent 
Distribution 

Total 
Age: 

1985 
Total  and 
1993- 
cases before 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1995 1995 

305,843 12,493 26,355 29,934 34,651 38,813 41,077 43,975 31,256 100.0 100.0 

13 to 29 years old 53,632 2,558 4,924 5,427 6,059 6,481 6,815 6,930 5,105 16.3 16.2 
30 to 39 years old 138,660 5,714 12,056 13,695 15,582 17,437 18,548 20,037 14,083 45.1 45.3 
40 to 49 years old 77,425 2,726 6,205 7,329 8,943 10,339 10,975 11,921 8,543 27.3 27.0 
50 to 59 years old 25,383 1,104 2,218 2,433 2,822 3,175 3,389 3,721 2,572 8.2  8.3 
60 years old & over 10,743 391  952 1,050 1,245 1,381 1,350 1,366  953  3.0  3.2 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BAD DEATHS 

Appendix B 

Questionnaire on kinds of death 

279 

1. Assume that you are entrusted with the task of allocating S 100 million among a 

number of possible regulatory activities. The possibilities include: 

1. Spend all S 100 million on AIDS education, prevention, and treatment. Estimated 

annual savings: 120 lives. 

2. Spend $50 million on enforcement activity relating to toxic air pollutants. Estimated 

annual savings: 10 lives ($5 million per life saved). 

3. Spend $50 million on safety inspections involving nuclear power plants. Estimated 
annual savings: 0 lives. Many members of the public are, however, much concerned 
about nuclear power plant safety, and are demanding greater attention to safety risks. 
4. Spend $25 million on greater security measures at airports. Estimated annual savings: 
0.5 lives. But recent, highly publicized accidents have produced a much greater public 
demand for security at airports. 

5. Spend $100 million on a vigorous anti-smoking campaign, involving education, re- 
strictions of sales to minors, and higher taxes on tobacco products. Estimated savings: 
200 lives. 

6. Spend $50 million on preventing 

lead ingestion by children in the inner city. Estimated 

savings: 50 lives. 

Your advisers have narrowed the list of "policy options" to the following: 

1. Follow option 1 in its entirety. 
2. Follow option 5 in its entirety. 
3. Spend $50 million in accordance with 1 and $50 million in accordance with 5, for a 

total estimated annual savings of 160 lives. 

4. Spend $20 million on AIDS-related policies, $25 million on anti-smoking policies, $25 
million on toxic air pollutants, $20 million on airport security, and $10 million on 
safety inspections for nuclear power plants, for a total estimated annual savings of 79.5 
lives. 

5. Spend $50 million on option 6 and $50 million on smoking policies, for estimated 

6. Spend $50 million on option 6 and $50 million on AIDS-related policies, for estimated 

annual savings of 150 lives. 

annual savings of 110 lives. 

Which is your most preferred policy? Mark here: 
Which is your second most preferred policy? Mark here: 
Which is your least preferred policy? Mark here: 

2. a. How many lives would you need to save from Heart Disease so that you would find 

it equally important to save those lives and to save 100 lives from Cancer? 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

280 

Lives saved from Heart Disease - 

SUNSTEIN 

(Note: If you find it equally important to save lives from Cancer and lives from Heart 
Disease, the number you report should be 100. If you would prefer to save lives from 
Cancer rather than from Heart Disease, the number you report should be greater than 100. 
If you would prefer to save lives from Heart Disease rather than from Cancer, the number 
you report should be smaller than 100.) 

b. How many lives would you need to save from airline crashes so that you would find 

it equally important to save those lives and to save 1 00 lives from cancer? 

Lives saved from airline crashes - 

3. Many communities treat their drinking water with chlorine to reduce microbial con- 

tamination. Microbial contamination 
tinal illness, which in some cases is fatal. But by-products of the chlorination process 
(such as trihalomethanes 
like chloroform) may create a cancer risk to those drinking 
the water. 

in drinking water can cause acute gastrointes- 

Assume that chlorination completely prevents microbial contamination, and that the 
lifetime fatal-cancer risk from chlorination is equal to the lifetime fatality risk from 
microbial contamination without chlorination. Would you prefer that your town's drinking 
water be chlorinated or not? 

Chlorinated -  Unchlorinated -  No preference - 

For every 100 deaths due to cancer from chlorination, what is the number of deaths 
from microbial illness such that you would find the risks equally serious? (Note: If you 
find the risk of chlorination more serious, your number will be greater than 100; if you 
find the risk of not chlorinating more serious, your number will be less than 100.) 

Number of microbial illness deaths - 

Acknowledgment 

I am grateful to Richard Craswell, Gertrude Fremling, John Lott, Martha Nussbaum, 
Richard Posner, Mark Ramsayer, David Strauss, W. Kip Viscusi, and Richard Zeckhauser 
for very helpful comments. I am also grateful to Jonathan Weiner for helpful discussion 
and to Christopher Houston for excellent research assistance. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BAD DEATHS 

Notes 

281 

1 . I do not deal here with the distinctive problem of deaths produced by intentional 

well be appropriate 
distinctive 

to devote special attention 
questions raised by deaths in the course of war. 

to deaths so produced 

or malicious action. It may 
(Anderson, 1992). Nor do I discuss the 

2. These students may not be representative, 

to be sure. Information 

is lacking about the students' personal 
- about whether, for example, a significant percentage were smokers. As a kind of control, 

characteristics 
part of the survey asked students a standard question involving fairness, used in psychological 
for $10; after a storm, it raises the price to $15. Respondents were asked to describe 
store sells snowshovels 
this outcome as completely unfair, acceptable, unfair, or extremely unfair. In some studies 80% of respon- 
dents consider this outcome unfair or extremely unfair. Among Chicago law students only 18.2% considered 
to the 
this outcome unfair or extremely unfair. This result certainly shows a degree of distinctiveness 
sample. It connects with work suggesting 
to cooperate 
question whether the effect observed 
effect, or an effect related to some training 

about whether 
that economics majors have different 
in prisoners' dilemma situations. See Frank, Gilovich, and Regan, 1993). It raises the further 
in my study is a law school effect, a University 

of Chicago law school 

in economics. 

inclinations 

studies: A 

3. I am grateful to Jonathan Weiner for his conference, 

fall of 1996, dealing with comparative 
drew for the "cancer deaths" and "chlorination" 
in a paper by James Hammitt. 
reported 

risk analysis, and circulating 

in the 
"Risk in the Republic," held at Duke University 
risk survey on which I 
a comparative 
questions. The results of the survey held there will be 

References 

Alhakami, Ali Siddiq and Paul Slovic. (1994). "A Psychological 

Perceived Risk and Perceived Benefit," Risk Analysis 14:1085-1105. 

Study of the Inverse Relationship Between 

(1993). Value in Ethics and Economics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

Anderson, Elizabeth. 
Bessette, William. (1995). The Mild Voice of Reason. Chicago: University 
Breyer, Stephen. 
Cropper and Subramanian. 
Saved?" The World Bank. 

of Chicago Press. 
(1993). Breaking the Vicious Circle. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

(1995). "Public Choices Between Lifesavmg Programs: How Important Are Lives 

Fiorino, Daniel. (1989). "Technical and Democratic Values in Risk Analysis." Risk Analysis 9:293-314. 
Fishkin, James. (1995). The Voice of the People. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Frank, Robert. (1983). Choosing the Right Pond. New York: Oxford University Press, 1983. 
Frank, Robert, Gilovich Thomas, and Regan Dennis. (1993). "Does Studying Economics 

Inhibit Cooperation?" 

J. of Economic Perspectives 

7:159-171. 

Jones-Lee, M.W., Hammerton, M. and Philips, P.R. (1985). "The Value of Safety: Results of a National Sample 
In Kenneth Arrow, Enrico Co- 
Kahneman, Daniel. (1996). "New Challenges to the Rationality Assumption." 

Survey." Economic Journal 95:49-72. 

lombatto, Mark Perlman and Christian Schmidt (eds.), The Rational Foundations 
New York: St. Martin's Press. 

Kahneman, Daniel, Peter Wakker, and Rakesh Sarin. "Back to Bentham? Explorations 
(forthcoming). 

Quarterly Journal of Economics 

of Economic Behaviour. 

of Experienced Utility." 

Loewenstein, George, and Nachum Sicherman. 

(1991). "Do Workers Prefer Increasing Wage Profiles?" Journal 

of Labor Economics 9:67-84. 

Loewenstein, George, and David Schkade. "Wouldn't 

In Daniel Kah- 
on 
neman, Edward Diener, and N. Schwarz (eds) Understanding Quality of Life : Scientific Perspectives 
Enjoyment 

and Suffering. New York: Russell Sage Foundation Press. 
Robinson, J., M. Higgins, and P. Bolyard. (1983). "Assessing Environmental 

It Be Nice? Predicting Future Feelings." 

Impacts on Health: A Role for 

Behavioral Science," Environmental 

Impact Assessment Review 4:41-53. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

282 

SUNSTEIN 

Savage, Ian. (1993). "An Empirical 

Investigation 

into the Effect of Psychological 

Perceptions 

on the Willingness 

6:75-90. 
to Pay to Reduce Risk." J. of Risk and Uncertainty 
Sieff, E.M., Robin M. Dawes and George Loewenstein. 
Results." Forthcoming American Journal of Psychology. 
Slovic, Paul. (1991). "Beyond Numbers: A Broader Perspective 

In Deborah Mayo and Rachelle Hollander 
Sunstein, Cass R. (1996). Legal Reasoning 
Sunstein, Cass R. (1997). "Which Risks First?" University 
Sunstein, Cass R. (1993). The Partial Constitution. 
Tengs, Tammy, et al. (1995). "Five-Hundred 

Life-Saving 

on Risk Perception 
(eds.). Acceptable Evidence. New York: Oxford University 
and Political Conflict. New York: Oxford University 

Press. 

and Risk Communication." 

Press. 

of Chicago Legal Forum (forthcoming). 

Cambridge: Harvard University 
Interventions 

Press. 

and Their Cost-Effectiveness," 

Risk 

"Anticipated 

versus Actual Reaction to HIV Test 

Analysis 15:369-384. 

Chicago Press. 

Tolley, George, Donald Kenkel and Robert Fabian. (1995). Valuing Health For Policy. Chicago: University 

of 

Viscusi, W. Kip (1992). Smoking. New York: Oxford University 
Zeckhauser, Richard and Shepard. 
Zeckhauser, Richard. 

(1996). "The Economics of Catastrophes." 

Press. 

(1976). "Where Now For Saving Lives?" Law & Contemp Probs 40:5-41. 

Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 

12:113-140. 

This content downloaded from 62.122.76.48 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 13:47:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

