 Cass R. Sunsteinf Almost everyone agrees that in controlling risks, the United States does a poor job of setting priorities. Sometimes substantial resources are devoted to controlling small or even de minimis risks. Some serious problems receive little attention. Consider the following chart, showing dramatic disparities in amounts spent per life-year saved; note especially the disparities in the environmental context: Table 1 Cost-Effectiveness of Selected Regulations1 Regulation Agency Unvented Space Heater Ban CPSC Aircraft Cabin Fire Protection Standard FAA Auto Passive Restraint/Seat Belt Standards NHTSA Steering Column Protection Standard NHTSA Underground Construction Standards OSHA-S Trihalomethane Drinking Water Standards EPA Aircraft Seat Cushion Flammability Standard FAA Alcohol and Drug Control Standards FRA Auto Fuel-System Integrity Standard NHTSA Standards for Servicing Auto Wheel Rims OSHA-S Aircraft Floor Emergency Lighting Standard FAA Concrete & Masonry Construction Standards OSHA-S Crane Suspended Personnel Platform Standard OSHA-S Passive Restraints for Trucks & Buses (Proposed) NHTSA Side-Impact Standards for Autos (Dynamic) NHTSA Children's Sleepwear Flammability Ban CPSC Auto Side Door Support Standards NHTSA Low Altitude Windshear Equipment & Training Standards Cost per premature death averted ($ millions 1990) t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of' Chicago. I am grateful to Paul Slovic and Matthew Spitzer for valuable comments on an earlier draft. Regulation Electrical Equipment Standards (Metal Mines) Trenching and Excavation Standards Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance (TCAS) Systems Hazard Communication Standard Side-Impact Standards for Trucks, Buses, and MPVs (Proposed) Grain Dust Explosion Prevention Standards Rear Lap/Shoulder Belts for Autos Standards for Radionuclides in Uranium Mines Benzene NESHAP (Original: Fugitive Emissions) Ethylene Dibromide Drinking Water Standard Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Coke Byproducts) Asbestos Occupational Exposure Limit Benzene Occupational Exposure Limit Electrical Equipment Standards (Coal Mines) Arsenic Emission Standards for Glass Plants Ethylene Oxide Occupational Exposure Limit Arsenic/Copper NESHAP Hazardous Waste Listing for Petroleum Refining Sludge Cover/Move Uranium Mill Tailings (Inactive Sites) Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Transfer Operations) Cover/Move Uranium Mill Tailings (Active Sites) Acrylonitrile Occupational Exposure Limit Coke Ovens Occupational Exposure Limit LockoutlTagout Asbestos Occupational Exposure Limit Arsenic Occupational Exposure Limit Asbestos Ban Diethylstilbestrol (DES) Cattlefeed Ban Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Waste Operations) 1,2 Dichloropropane Drinking Water Standard Hazardous Waste Land Disposal Ban (lst 3rd) Municipal Solid Waste Landfill Standards (Proposed) Formaldehyde Occupational Exposure Limit Atrazine/Alachlor Drinking Water Standard Hazardous Waste Listing for Wood-Preserving Chemicals Cost per premature death averted ($ millions 1990) We should not read this evidence for more than it is worth. There is considerable uncertainty in the numbers. Environmental protection has many purposes in addition to the protection of human life, including prevention of adverse health effects short of mortality, aesthetic goals, recreational goals, and prevention of deaths and adverse health effects in animals and plants. These purposes should also be taken into account in deciding which risks are most serious. But we know enough to approve of the general consensus that better priority setting is a crucial task for the modern regulatory state. A recent study suggests that better allocations of existing expenditures could save an additional 60,000 lives at no increased cost, and that with better allocations, we could save the same number of lives we now save with $31 billion in annual savings.2 We might even conclude that selective attention is the principal problem facing modern regulation. Too often government focuses on pieces or sides of a problem, failing to see that what is at work is a complex whole! (It is notable that the science of ecology and the discipline of economics are both fundamentally concerned with this fact.) Too often government fails to see that if it affects (or fails to affect) one aspect of an environmental problem, it will simultaneously affect other aspects as well, probably involving prices, employment, poverty, international trade, and other environmental problems. It is selective attention that, for example, produces the pervasive phenomenon of risk regulation that actually increases (some, or aggregate) risks.4 And it is selective attention that produces regulations that reduce certain environmental harms but in the process create a range of new and sometimes serious social problems. The problem of selective attention is aggravated by the role of the media, which quite generally focuses on sensationalistic pieces of problems, and by the role of powerful private groups, which can attempt to promote risk redistribution rather than risk reduction. 2 Tammy 0. Tengs, et al, Five-Hundred Life-Saving Interventions and Their Cost-Ef Protecting the Environment (Harvard 1995). " See W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs: Public and Private Responsibilities for Risk ' This is the tendency in Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle: Toward Effective Risk Regulation (Harvard 1993). the risk inequitably distributed? -Is -Is it especially dreaded? -Is it run involuntarily? -How easily can it be controlled by those exposed? Answers to these questions may call for an adjustment of the first-stage judgment. As we will see, however, the second two questions raise complex issues, for risks are not "voluntary or not" or "uncontrollable or not," but instead come with small or high costs of avoidance. The ordinary criterion of decently-livable life-years should be adjusted upward when the costs of risk avoidance are especially high, and adjusted downward when the costs of risk avoidance are especially low. The third step consists of an incorporation of effects short of mortality, including (but not limited to) morbidity, adverse effects on aesthetics and recreation, and mortality effects for plants and animals. Many economists attempt to respond to the question of how to engage in sensible priority-setting through the criterion of private willingness to pay ("WT P").8 There are several advantages to resolving environmental questions via this criterion. For one thing, WTP provides simultaneous information on costs and benefits. This is important because an emphasis on decently ' See, for example, W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs: Public and Private Responsibili I borrow in the next several paragraphs from Richard H. Pildes and Cass R. Much recent work with contingent valuation techniques has sought to elicit values for different states of health. In such studies, for example, people purport to be willing to pay a much greater amount to avert cancer deaths (from $1.5 million to $9.5 million) than unforeseen instant deaths (from $1 million to $5 million). 2 More generally, this work generates tables like the following: 3 Table 2 Mortality Values by Cause of Death Cause of Death Unforeseen Instant Death Asthma/Bronchitis Heart Disease Emphysema Lung Cancer Similarly, these survey techniques purport to show that people value days of illness-from coughing spells, headaches, nausea, sinus congestion, and so forth-in diverse amounts. 4 Despite their apparent promise, contingent valuation methods have serious limitations. For one thing, it is difficult to believe that people answering hypothetical questions can assign Would it be better to look at actual choices and thus to rely on revealed preferences? Some imaginative and provocative approaches attempt to determine the "value of life" by assessing willingness to pay for risk reductions. 9 The Office of Management and Budget has explicitly supported the willingness-to-pay criterion on the ground that it provides "an aggregate measure of what individuals are willing to forgo so as to enjoy a particular " Id at 89. The dollar figures are mean bid values, and relief means a "mild day." 16 See Peter A. Diamond and Jerry A. Hausman, Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better than No Number?, 8 J Econ Persp 45 (Fall 1994); Daniel Kahneman and Ilana Ritov, Determinants of Stated Willingness to Pay for Public Goods: A Study in the Headline Method, 9 J Risk & Uncertainty 5 (1994). But there are several problems with willingness-to-pay approaches based on actual market transactions. As noted, market behavior may reflect a lack of information about risks or cognitive problems and motivational influences that lead to inaccurate judgments about the facts.22 To be sure, workers are sometimes informed of risk levels and they can demand a risk premium; but to say the least, full information about workplace risks is rare, especially in light of the fact that some risks depend on complex causal mechanisms and take many years to come to fruition. There are possible motivational distortions as well. Wishful thinking and the desire to reduce cognitive dissonance-by thinking that you are not, in your daily work, exposing yourself to some cancer risk-may lead people to see risks as lower than they really are.' It is notable in this connection that people appear to be "risk optimists." They typically believe that they are less likely than other people to fall prey to social dangers. Thus the vast majority of drivers believe that they drive more safely than most drivers; thus most homosexuals believe that they are less likely than others to get AIDS; thus with respect to most hazards, people believe that they are at lower risk than the mean. I discuss this point in more detail below. " See Office of Management and Budget, Regulatory Program of the United States Government, 1990-1991 (GPO 1992). The Administrative Conference reached a similar conclusion, though more cautiously. See Recommendations of the Administrative Conference Regarding Administrative Practice and Procedure and Correction, Recommendation No. 88-7, 53 Fed Reg 39585, 39586-87 (1988). Akerlof and Dickens have argued that workers are unwilling to confront the real magnitude of environmental risks faced in the workplace, because it is too distressing for them to do so.29 On this view, workers, having adapted their preferences and beliefs to a relatively risky status quo, attempt to reduce cognitive dissonance by concluding that the dangers are trivial. The claim is speculative and the relevant evidence is largely anecdotal. But there is some empirical support for the general view. Consider the fact that after the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant accident, it was the people who lived on Three Mile Island 24 Tolley, Kenkel, and Fabian, eds, Valuing Health for Policy at 318 (cited in note 11). For detailed examination of the difference between individual and social perspectives on health problems, see the recent study of the external costs of smoking and drinking in Willard G. Manning, et al, The Costs of Poor Health Habits (Harvard 1991). See. also Willard G. Manning, et al, The Taxes of Sin: Do Smokers and Drinkers Pay Their Way?, 261 JAMA 1604 (1989). If the general claim is right, it would follow that the demand for environmental legislation might be relatively low among people deprived of exposure to environmental quality, and this phenomenon would be attributable to adaptation of preferences to what is available. It is extremely difficult to test this hypothesis against more 'conventional alternatives stressing learning and rational choice under conditions of deprivation. We might, however, begin to investigate the demand for environmental protection across regions and across nations. It would be especially valuable to see how the demand for environmental quality changes over time, perhaps with exposure to pristine areas, perhaps with a social belief that the degradation of environmental amenities is not inevitable, perhaps with the rise of organizations solving collective action problems of various sorts. Let us put willingness to pay to one side and ask what government should attempt to maximize in regulating risks. This is a question of great theoretical interest; but it also has considerable practical importance. Any answer should meet two constraints. First, it should be acceptable from the theoretical point of view. Second, it should be administrable, that is, it should be something that real-world officials can actually use. The two constraints are mutually checking. A theoretically excellent answer See Aronson, The Social Animal at 176-78 (cited in note 23). See also the discussion in Part III.B.1 of unrealistic optimism as a distorting factor. It is possible, of course, that the people who lived in this area were better informed. Table 3 Deaths from Preventable Risks in the U.S. There is considerable crudeness, however, in the idea of "lives saved" as the. regulatory maximand. 38 Of course no pro " This idea is emphasized in Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle: Toward Effective Risk Regulation (Harvard 1993). gram "saves lives"; at best it extends them. Compare two regulations. The first extends the lives of one hundred elderly people, but in doing so, it gives them five additional years, accompanied by considerable pain and distress. The second extends the lives of eighty children, and in doing so, it gives each of them a statistical likelihood of fifty or more years of life. The second policy seems preferable to the first along two important dimensions. First: Lives are certainly not fungible, but where regulatory resources are limited and where choices have to be made, it makes sense (other things being equal and as an administrable start) to save as many years as possible. Other things being equal, many years should be chosen over few. Second: If government has a choice between preserving lives in a way that ensures decentlylivable years and preserving lives in a way that ensures a barely functional and extremely painful continued existence, it should choose the former. To someone who has a choice between death and five years of constant and considerable pain, the latter will probably seem a lot better; but for government regulators, it is preferable to provide five good years rather than five difficult ones if there is a choice. We might conclude, then, that government agencies should shift their attention from "lives saved" to "decently-livable life-years saved." Notably, the idea of decently-livable life-years is designed to set a floor, not to give some numerical amount to each such year in terms of its overall "quality." The floor might be defined in various ways; I understand it to refer to basic functional capacity. Thus someone who has chronic asthma certainly can live a decently-livable life. Someone who is confined to a hospital cannot. It is easy to imagine borderline cases, and perhaps the floor should be moved up or down, but the notion should have a degree of simplicity and should allow administrators to put to one side some of the harder questions. It is a modest variation on the idea of life-years saved; it subtracts from that amount the number of years saved that, because of some independent condition, are not decently-livable. simpler than quality-adjusted life-years and for that reason is more easily administrable as well as less contentious. Table 4 Public 1. Hazardous waste sites 2. Exposure to worksite chemicals 3. Industrial pollution of waterways 4. Nuclear accident radiation 5. Radioactive waste 6. Chemical leaks from underground storage tanks 7. Pesticides 8. Pollution from industrial accidents 9. Water pollution from farm runoff 10. Tap water contamination 11. Industrial air pollution 12. Ozone layer destruction 13. Coastal water contamination 14. Sewage-plant water pollution 15. Vehicle exhaust 16. Oil spills 17. Acid rain 18. Water pollution from urban runoff 19. Damaged wetlands 20. Genetic alteration 21. Non-hazardous waste sites 22. Greenhouse effect 23. Indoor air pollution 24. X-ray radiation 25. Indoor radon 26. Microwave oven radiation 26. Microwave oven radiation EPA Experts Medium-to-low High Low Not ranked Not ranked Medium-to-low High Medium-to-low Medium High High High Low Medium-to-low High Medium-to-low High Medium Low Low Medium-to-low Low High Not ranked High Not ranked In this section, I discuss judgments that should not, in my view, play a role in government regulation. The most general ' See, for example, Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases 3-20 (Cambridge 1990); Paul Slovic, et al, Regulation of Risk: A Psychological Perspective, in Roger G. Noll, ed, Regulatory Policy and the Social Sciences 241 (California 1985). It is predictable that some people will find risks of special concern when they disproportionately affect white people or heterosexuals; risks that affect blacks and homosexuals may well be undervalued. Here, there is a judgment that distributional considerations properly enter into the calculus, and that some risks, because of their distribution, are properly neglected. As we will see, distributional decisions can play an appropriate role in regulatory policy. But where the relevant judgments are invidious, they do not belong. Of course, we can enter into reasonable debates about how to evaluate some judgments. The easiest cases involve a constitutional prohibition on distributional judgments, as for example in the prohibition on measures motivated by prejudice grounded in gender and race. But government might reasonably decide that certain judgments are unacceptable even if they are not unconstitutional. People frequently misstate probabilities. If people are asked to rank various risks in terms of severity, they may well make factual blunders. s7 Some of their judgments about "severity" undoubtedly turn on judgments about value." But it is safe to say that factual mistakes are often at work. "7 Of course, judgments of severity may well be based on values as well as facts, and here things are more complex. See discussion in Part V. Reflecting illusions about their own practices, gay men appear systematically to. underestimate the chance that they will get AIDS, even though they do not lack information about AIDS risks in general. 2 Older people similarly underestimate the likelihood that they will be in a car accident or contract major diseases. Unrealistic optimism appears to characterize people in most social categories." People systematically underestimate the extent to which they are at risk, and perceptions of relative invulnerability affect preventive health practices." Consider, for example, the following table, based on a random community-wide survey of attitudes toward health risks; a number below 0 suggests a belief in above-average immunity from the relevant risk: Table 5 Comparative Risk Judgments for Health Problems and Other Hazards"5 Hazard Description Drug Addiction Drinking (alcohol) problem Attempting Suicide Asthma Food Poisoning Poison Ivy rash Sunstroke Nervous breakdown Homicide victim Gallstone Deaf Pneumonia 9 See Neil D. Weinstein, Optimistic Biases About Personal Risks, 246 Science 1232 Hazard Description Lung Cancer Skin Cancer Cold Sores Senile Laryngitis Gum Disease Tooth decay Insomnia Ulcer Mugging Victim Diabetes Overweight 30 or more pounds Influenza (flu) Stroke Serious auto injury Heart attack Arthritis Falling and breaking a bone High blood pressure Cancer Evidence of this kind much complicates the view that people often overstate low-probability events. It is true that people may think that low probability events have higher probability than they in fact do. But many individual agents think that they are peculiarly less susceptible to such events, which may mean that they err in the other direction. 41 See Kahneman and Tversky, Judgment Under Uncertainty at 11-14 (cited in note 35); W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs: Public and Private Responsibilities for Risk (Oxford 1992). source. When this is so, the probability assessment may go badly wrong. Thus, for example, people may think that the probability of getting AIDS is very low, or very high, and the anchor may not be readily revised. Here we are dealing not with factual errors, but with "tastes" or preferences that lead people to favor certain approaches to risk. Probability-related tastes present harder questions for the policy analyst. 2. Ambiguity aversion. A closely related "taste" is the avoidance of ambiguity."' At least when they lack relevant knowledge, and know that they do, people prefer situations of uncertainty (defined as those in which probabilities can be assigned to outcomes) over situations of risk (defined as those in which probabilities cannot be assigned). Thus people are averse to situations of uncertain probability and try to avoid choices that place them in such situations. Often risk regulation is, of course, undertaken when probabilities cannot be assigned. If people are averse to ambiguities, they may produce an incoherent pattern of regulation, perhaps based on an illusory perception, related to all-or-nothing judgments, that some things are "safe" and others are "dangerous." 3. Status quo bias. People evaluate situations largely in accordance with their relation to a reference point; gains and losses from the reference point are crucial. An ordinary reference is the status quo, which produces status quo bias. The most dramatic example is loss aversion, in accordance with which people are made more unhappy by losses than they are made happy by equivalent gains. Peo 5 See Marc K Landy, et al, The Environmental Protection Agency: Asking the Wrong We may summarize this discussion of heuristics and judg ments about their relevance in the following way: Table 6 should not count X X X X X Availability Representativeness Anchoring "All or Nothing" Unrealistic Optimism Isolation Effects Ambiguity Aversion Status Quo Bias Selective Fatalism might possibly count hard case X (because of adaptation costs) Thus far I have been focusing on heuristic devices and other cognitive processes that lead people to misassess risks. Social psychologists have spent a great deal of time discussing these devices and processes. My basic claim has been that government should be aware of these tendencies to make factual errors and should be on guard against them. Influencing Factor Aggravating familiarity new personal control uncontrollable voluntariness involuntary media attention focussed on by media equity unfairly distributed children children at special risk future generations at risk reversibility irreversible dreadedness especially dreaded identifiability of victims victims known accompanying benefits benefits clear human or natural origin human origin trust in applicable lack of trust institutions timing of effects understanding past history Mitigating old controllable voluntary ignored by media equitable distribution children not at risk not at risk reversible not especially dreaded victims not identifiable benefits not visible created by nature good deal of trust effects delayed mechanisms or process mechanism or process not understood major or minor accidents no past accidents effects immediate understood 5 See Paul Slovic, et al, Regulation of Risk: A Psychological Perspective, in Roger G. Noll, ed, Regulatory Policy and the Social Sciences 241 (California 1985); Howard Margolis, Dealing With Risk (Chicago 1996). Note that the discussion to follow qualifies the treatment in Richard H. Pildes and Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 U Chi L Rev 1 (1995), where notions like dreaded, involuntary, and uncontrollable were left unanalyzed. Id. I borrow here from the important discussion in Margolis, Dealing With Risk (cited All this raises the possibility that people's references to "control" and "involuntariness" may not explain the actual basis of their judgments. This possibility remains to be investigated and tested. For the moment, let us put this possibility to one side and assume that the psychological evidence does suggest that certain risks are perceived as bad very much for more qualitative reasons. The important question is which reasons justify a qualification of the basic criterion of decently-livable life-years. Here are the strongest candidates. People seem to think that some risks are especially dreaded and that for this reason they deserve special attention. Deaths from cancer and AIDS fall in this category. There is nothing mysterious to this idea; it need not be taken to suggest any special conception of rationality. The underlying point is probably that the relevant deaths are especially grueling and hence that there is a kind of "pain and suffering premium" on the relevant death: not merely a life lost, but a period of intense emotional '5 See Ali S. Alhakami and Paul Slovic, A Psychological Study of the Inverse Relation Some risks are inequitably distributed. They might, for example, be concentrated among poor people or African-Americans, or instead among homosexuals. Consider, for example, the risk of lead paint poisoning suffered by inner city children, or the risk of AIDS faced disproportionately by African-Americans, poor people, and homosexuals. It is fully legitimate for citizens or for elected representatives to think that inequitably distributed risks deserve special attention from government, as a way of counteracting background injustice. If the distributional judgments are not. invidious, it makes sense to defer to democratic judgments on the point. It is clear that people perceive voluntarily incurred risks as less troublesome than involuntarily incurred risks. Consider, for example, diverse public reactions to airplane crashes and automobile crashes. Or consider the fact that tobacco is by far the largest source of preventable deaths in the United States. Why do we not devote much more of our regulatory effort to smoking? The reason seems to lie in a judgment that smoking is a voluntary activity and hence that the resulting deaths are less troublesome than are other sorts of death. But turn now to a third class of cases, involving a wage package or contract that does include compensation for the relevant risks. Assuming that point, we might want to distinguish between two different possibilities. In a case of a high-level scientist, knowledgeable about relevant risks and involved in work that he finds rewarding, we might well conclude that we have a case of voluntariness. (In the same category can be found the case of an astronaut.) But we might not say the same about a low-level worker who does not like his work at all." But what distinguishes the two cases? If knowledge is present, or if the compensation package includes payment for the relevant risk, it is not clear how the two differ. It may be that the reason for running the risk seems in some way better or more worthy in the first case than in the second, but this is not a distinction along the dimension of voluntariness. Thus a judgment that a risk is run "involuntarily" is probably based on 1) a lack of knowledge of the risk, or, more accurately, high costs of obtaining information about the risk, 2) a belief that even if information is present, it would be very costly or difficult for people to avoid the risk, or 3) a belief that the risk is unaccompanied by benefits that people incurring the relevant risks find satisfactorily compensatory in some subjective sense, notwithstanding their belief that the contract is in some sense worth signing. It may seem hard to make sense of the third alternative; what might be at work is a judgment that background inequalities are producing the relevant bargain, or a belief that workers are competing to their collective detriment, and an agreement not to compete would be in their best interests.59 On this view, the question whether a risk is run voluntarily or not usually is not a categorical one but instead is a question of degree, associated with information, risk-reduction costs, and the existence or absence of accompanying benefits. Of course there are interesting background questions about why and when a risk "codes" as voluntary or involuntary; undoubtedly the answer depends a great deal on heuristic devices and selective attention. We might therefore conclude that whether a risk qualifies as involuntary raises many of the questions raised by the question whether government should regulate the market at all. A risk might be characterized as involuntarily run because affected See Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics 196-203 (Harvard 1993). See Robert H. Frank, Choosing the Right Pond: Human Behavior and the Quest for People find risks less acceptable if those risks do not seem to be within their control. Automobile accidents may seem less troublesome than airline disasters partly for this reason. People have a sense that they cannot control the latter, which are hence wholly involuntary, whereas they can control the former, which have a voluntary element. But it should be clear from the previous discussion that the question is not whether risks can be controlled, but how expensive it is for individuals to control them. People can control their subjection to airplane-related risks by refusing to fly in planes; people can control their subjection to risks from coal-fired power plants by living in areas served by solar energy. The question is not whether a risk can be controlled or not, but at what cost it is controllable, and with what benefits. Individuals tend to "frame" risk control in "all or nothing" terms, depending on the particular temporal event on which they focus. But this is a similar form of selective attention. As with voluntariness, "controllability" is a conclusion more than it is an analytic tool. It is best to look at the factors that account for a judgment that a risk is not controllable. I have suggested that many of the "qualitative" factors that underlie lay judgments about risk can be accounted for by the criterion of decently-livable life-years. Some of those factors cannot be incorporated in this way, and this conclusion requires a "stage two" adjustment of the basic criterion. Thus, dreaded risks should be treated differently, because of the problems associated with certain illnesses and deaths. Distributional weights can be given to risks that have disproportionate effects on disadvantaged people. Certain factors underlie lay judgments about voluntariness and control; those factors should be specified and also might be given weights. Of course, numerical weights have their limitations and it is important for those assessing risk to be aware of the qualitative factors and judgments that underlie the numbers. In this section I discuss some borderline cases: factors that may or may not justify a deviation from the basic criterion of decently-livable life-years. Do risks deserve special attention when future generations are at risk? In one sense the answer is certainly yes: When future generations are at risk, more people are at risk. Of course, there are large questions about the appropriate discount rate. But it seems sensible to say that if a risk will be incurred by people not yet born, it deserves greater attention because its degree is to that extent greater. This claim is easily taken care of via the notion of decently-livable life-years. Some psychological studies suggest that people think that potentially catastrophic risks deserve special attention. People's fear of nuclear power, for example, might be attributed to an understanding that if things go wrong, things will go very, very wrong. Thus, low probability, high-danger risks might be treated as worse than their "actuarial value." A one-in-a-million risk of 10,000 deaths might seem worth more than a one-in-a-thousand risk of ten deaths, or a one-in-a-hundred risk of one death. It seems clear that people are especially hostile to new risks. Old risks tend to be taken for granted. Thus an additional risk of .001 percent may well be treated as more troubling than a removal of a risk of .002 percent. The point is connected with the well-known psychological phenomenon of loss aversion. Losses from the status quo are seen as more bad than (equivalent) gains from the status quo are seen as good."' At least as a general rule, and putting to one side the possibility that new risks may pose especially high costs of adaptation, government should probably refuse to treat new risks as especially troublesome. On reflection it is not at all clear why a new risk of a certain magnitude is worse than an old risk of the same magnitude. Perhaps it could be said that old risks are an inextricable part of a system of benefits and costs that have already been "coded" at the individual level. Thus, the environmental risks associated with coal-fired power plants are something to ' See Sarah Lichtenstein, et al, When Lives Are In Your Hands: Dilemmas of the Social Decision Maker, in Robin M. Hogarth, ed, Insights in Decision Making: A Tribute to Hillel J. Einhorn 91 (Chicago 1990). The discussion thus far has implications for the positive theory of health and safety regulation. It suggests that some apparently odd patterns (see Table 1) may well reflect differences between lay and expert judgments about risk. In this section, I offer several examples. We would expect greater resources to be devoted to risks that are especially dreaded. Thus government might well devote more resources to the AIDS crisis and to cancer prevention, partly because these deaths are so dreaded. With AIDS, there is the additional problem that the disease casts a pall over a wide range of sexual acts; this would increase the public "demand" for AIDS-related research. Judge Posner has attributed the large amount of resources devoted to such research to interest-group power."2 But the qualitative nature of risks-producing particularly grim deaths-undoubtedly plays a role in funding decisions. It is easy to predict that the availability heuristic would help create a kind of crazy-quilt pattern in regulation, with some events calling for stringent regulation and others calling for little or no regulation at all. The regulation would not be closely asso 62 See Thomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, Private Choices and Public The disparities are plausibly attributed at least in part to the availability heuristic. The dramatic difference between expert and public assessments of risk levels has something to do with this heuristic, and the difference maps closely onto actual differences in expenditures per life saved. The public demand for regulation therefore appears to be a product of the availability heuristic, which is itself endogenous to the nature and levels of public and private publicity. Thus, for example, there are enormous expenditures designed to counteract cancers in the workplace, and relatively low expenditures designed to prevent injuries from automobile accidents. The comparative over-regulation of certain environmental risks may well be a product of the fact that those risks, when they come to fruition, are highly publicized. Through this route, too, we might be able to explain the otherwise inexplicably severe controls on nuclear power. We might also be able to explain the extraordinary safety of air travel as compared with other means of transportation." C. Ambiguity Aversion If people are averse to ambiguity, we might expect that political outcomes will avoid ambiguity and present risks in "all or nothing" terms. In fact, this is a pervasive phenomenon in environmental statutes, where administrators are entrusted with ensuring a "safe level" rather than with coping pragmatically amidst ambiguities of both fact and value.' Samuelson and Zeckhauser have shown that the affinity for the status quo appears to affect such diverse forms of behavior as brand allegiance, choice of insurance plans, changing public policies, marketing techniques, and investment decisions." If this is correct, large consequences follow. We can predict that much See Table 1. See Nancy L. Rose, Fear of Flying? Economic Analyses of Airline Safety, 6 J Econ This is in fact what we observe. It is a defining characteristic: of the current system of environmental controls. 7 New risks are regulated far more stringently than old ones, even though this strategy sometimes creates extremely perverse results, by perpetuating the life of the especially severe old risks and thus damaging public health and safety. New stationary sources of air pollution must meet technological requirements not imposed on old sources; new cars are regulated far more heavily than old ones.6 There are many other examples in the area of environmental regulation. Consider, for example, the controversial and probably irrational Prevention of Significant Deterioration ("PSD") program. 9 The PSD program says roughly that states that met national ambient air quality standards in 1977 cannot suffer a deterioration in air quality, even if the air would remain very clean, and even if there are good reasons for allowing new development. The use of the 1977 benchmark seems puzzling and even senseless. There is no clear reason to conclude that the air cannot, become dirtier than it happened to be in 1977, so long as it is consistent with the other national benchmark standards in the Clean Air Act. Of course, there is good reason to ensure that some areas are pristine or have especially clean air. The PSD program is, however, ill-suited to achieving this goal, since the 1977 benchmark is so broad. 72 See Robert W. Crandall, Policy Watch: Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards, What about risks that do not involve mortality? As I have noted, many risks, especially in the environmental area, are serious because of morbidity effects, harms to recreational opportunities and aesthetic values, and mortality and morbidity effects for plants and animals. Here, there seems to be no alternative but to try to specify the relevant adverse effects in both quantitative and qualitative terms-how many weeks of respiratory problems, how much in the way of damage to crops, how much and what kind of animal morbidity. These specifications might be translated into more commensurable units through some variation on the idea of quality-adjusted or disability-adjusted life years.7 5 That is, morbidity effects might be analyzed by seeing the extent to which the effects diminish ideal functional capacity. This idea imposes a large cognitive demand on government, and it may be best to rely on simplifying categories. It is possible that we would want to separate the mechanism used to identify the Thus far I have discussed matters of substance, but some of the most pressing questions are institutional. Current American institutions fail to promote either democratic or technocratic goals. The current system is insufficiently democratic in the sense that the pattern of risk regulation cannot be plausibly attributed to considered judgments of the American people. Thai; pattern is more plausibly a combination of interest-group pressure, selective attention, sensationalistic media "scandals," and the "pollutant of the month" syndrome that plagues federal regulation. The current system is insufficiently technocratic be.. cause there is no general or coherent effort to bring the best scientific judgments to bear on risk-regulation. Of course science plays a large role; but its role is episodic rather than global. Instead, American government has a highly fragmented system, with a proliferation of congressional committees reflecting vari.. 1. Create a new congressional committee entrusted with the job of compiling information about risk levels and producing better priority-setting. A large problem for American government consists of the congressional committee structure, which ensures that comparative risk analysis will be rare, and which promotes a kind of balkanization of federal law. A straightforward remedy would consist of the creation of a new committee whose principal purpose would be to ensure good priority-setting. Such a committee would have authority over substantive statutes and also over the appropriations process. Its basic goal would be to engage in "risk ranking," to publicize misallocations, and to initiate corrective legislation. Such a committee should rely a great deal on current scientific findings. But it should be aware that value judgments play a legitimate role in deciding which risks are most serious. Thus the committee might adopt a presumption in favor of maximizing the number of decently-livable life-years, but allow adjustments when reasonable judgments of value so require. It would be an advantage to initiate the very process of deliberating about how to decide which risks are most serious. Such a process would alert legislators and perhaps the public to the problems in "safe or unsafe" thinking and to the need to engage in risk comparisons. sis in the Federal Bureaucracy (Cambridge 1991). This idea is a way of overcoming the general problem of selective attention; it is appropriately modest but also has considerable power. It entails at a minimum an interpretive principle allowing agencies to exempt de minimis risks, and perhaps requiring them to do so, on analogy to the old common law idea that absurdity in interpretation will be avoided. It also entails a principle that agencies should be permitted to engage in "healthhealth" analysis where they see fit, ensuring that regulations do not create health problems greater than those that they are intended to reduce.8' Finally, it entails a requirement that under the Administrative Procedure Act,8" agencies should, under "arbitrary or capricious" review, make a plausible showing that a regulation will make things better rather than worse. and to focus attention on the most serious risks. Justice Breyer has suggested the creation of an elite corps of risk managers, versed in various disciplines and authorized to divert resources from small problems to large ones.s" Most ambitiously, then, the national government might move in the direction of a variation on the "Breyer group" to engage in the sort of analysis I have proposed here, and grant that group the authority to 1) publicize its findings about which risks are most severe, 2) require agencies to engage in similar priority-setting, 3) recommend changes in statutes or regulations, or appropriations, and perhaps 4) engage in some reallocating on its own. See Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle (cited in note 76). See Richard H. Pildes and Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 I have made four basic claims in this essay. First, environmental regulation suffers above all from a problem of selective attention. No reasonable reading of reflective citizen judgments can account for the pattern we now observe, and an understanding of the systemic effects of regulation would much improve the process of priority-setting. Second, the foundation for regulatory policy should be the number of decently-livable life-years saved. Third, government should use expert judgments on that count as the foundation for analysis, and it should qualify those judgments in a limited way. More specifically, it should do so with reference to whether the risks at issue are especially dreaded, inequitably distributed, and controllable or voluntarily incurred by the individuals involved. The latter two factors point in essence to the costs of risk avoidance (including information costs). Numerical weights might be added to different assessments of these variables. Government should not use lay judgments to the extent that they reflect factual errors, even though those judgments do appear to play a role in any persuasive "positive" account of regulation. Fourth, institutional arrangements should be designed so as to allow government to make the relevant judgments in a rational manner. See id.