 Formerly American Law Register The American Constitution allows the removal of the President for "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors."' Well over 200 years after ratification, the meaning of these terms is debated, even over the most fundamental questions. The continuing debate raises a number of important issues in constitutional theory-involving the role of "politics" in " This Essay represents a witten and updated version of the Owen J. Roberts Memorial Lecture, delivered at the University of Pennsylvania on November 10, 1998. interpretation, the place of text and history, the relevance of changed circumstances, the place of post-ratification practice, and the relevance of contemporary moral and political changes to constitutional meaning. I offer two substantive claims here. The simplest is that, with respect to the President, the principal goal of the Impeachment Clause is to allow impeachment for a narrow category of egregious or large-scale abuses of authority that comes from the exercise of distinctly presidential powers. On this view, a criminal violation is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for impeaching the President. What is generally necessary is an egregious abuse of power that the President has by virtue of being President. Outside of this category of cases, impeachment is generally foreign to our traditions and is prohibited by the Constitution. Outside of this category of cases, the appropriate course of action for any crime is generally3 not impeachment, but a prosecutorial judgment, after the President leaves office, whether indictment is desirable. This is not a claim that the President can never be impeached for decisions and acts that do not involve the abuse of distinctly presidential powers. The Nation has left that issue undecided, and it should continue to do so until it becomes necessary to decide it. The text of the Constitution is the place to begin. It says that a President may be removed for "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors." 10 How much progress can be made by looking at the text alone, 11 at least if we attempt to read it as it would have been read in 1788? The basic answer is that while the text certainly does not answer every 8 116 CONG. REc. 11, 913 (1970) (statement of Rep. Gerald Ford). 9 See ANTONIN SCALIA, A MATTER OF INTERPRETATION: FEDERAL COURTS AND THE LAW 38 (1997) (arguing that the Constitution should be interpreted after consulting the writings of delegates to the Constitutional Convention and other intelligent people of that era and determining "the original meaning of the text"). eluding cultural understandings. 12 The phrase "ejusdem generis" means "of the same kind." 13 See infra Part I.B for a discussion of the founding of the Constitution. 14 By itself, the term "high" creates a problem of "scaling without a modulus," a problem that is bound to create arbitrariness and variability in individual judgments. See Cass R. Sunstein et al., Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law), 107 YALE L.J. 2071, 2106-07 (1998) (explaining that a "modulus" is a particular rating to a standard stimulus used "to assign ratings to other stimuli in relation to that modulus"). Much of the debate is about the search for a modulus. The terms "treason" and "bribery" might supply one; so too with the historical practice, as I emphasize. I am grateful to Akhil Amar for this analogy. The founding of the Constitution of course occurred in two stages. The first involved the Constitution's actual drafting, which was done in secret; the second involved ratification, which was highly public. There is thus room for a debate over the appropriate sources of constitutional interpretation. It is possible to question whether the secret meetings of the drafters should play a large role in constitutional interpretation; but what happened there is extremely interesting. Impeachment was no marginal issue. It was central to the Framers' deliberations. What emerged from those deliberations was an effort to cabin the impeachment power in order to preserve the separation of powers, and also to define the grounds for impeachment in a way that would meet the Framers' stated concern: the large-scale abuse of distinctly presidential powers. Meeting in Philadelphia in the summer of 1787, the Framers sought to produce a form of government that would reject England's monarchical is historical support for IMPEAcHMENT: THE CONSTITUTIONAL PROBLEMS 59-67 (1973) (discussing the origins of the phrase "high crimes and misdemeanors" in English law and concluding that the meaning of the phrase is "confined to impeachments, without roots in the ordinary criminal law"). The initial draft of the Constitution took the form of resolutions presented before the members meeting in Philadelphia on June 13, 1787.24 One of the key resolutions, found in the Convention's official journal, said that the President could be impeached for "mal-practice, or neglect of duty." 25 On July 20, this provision provoked an extended debate. Three positions dominated the day's discussion. One extreme view, represented by Roger Sherman and attracting very little support, was that the legislature should have the power to remove the Executive at its pleasure. Charles Pinckney, Rufus King, and Gouverneur Morris represented the opposing extreme view, that in the new republic, the President "ought not to be impeachable whilst in office. 26  This view did receive considerable support, and it played a large role in the day's debate. It was defended partly by reference to the system of separation of powers, which would be compromised by impeachment, and partly by reference to the fact that the President, unlike a monarch, would be subject to periodic elections, a point that seemed to make impeachment less necessary. The third position, which ultimately carried the day, was that the President should be impeachable, but only for a narrow category of abuses of the public trust-for example, by procuring office by unlawful means, or using distinctly presidential authority for ends that are treasonous. ances with regard to the relative powers of the legislative and executive branches). 70 (1966) (discussing the need for a check on the executive branch to discourage abuse of presidential powers). There is one further wrinkle. The resulting draft was submitted to the Committee on Arrangement and Style, which deleted the words "against the United States." 0 Hence there is an interpretive puzzle. Was the deletion designed to broaden the legitimate grounds for impeachment? This is extremely unlikely. As its name suggests, the Committee on Style and Arrangement lacked substantive authority (which is not to deny that it made some substantive changes), and it is far more likely that the particular change was made on grounds of redundancy. Hence the Impeachment Clause, in its final incarnation, was targeted at "high Crimes and Misdemeanors." The most reasonable reading of these debates is that in designing the provision governing impeachment, the Framers were thinking, exclusively 34 See 2 id. at 185-86 ("[The President] shall be removed from his office on impeachment by the House of Representatives, and conviction in the supreme Court, of treason, bribery, or The same view is supported by discussion at the time of ratification and in the early period. The basic point is that impeachment was explained and defended as a way of removing the President when he used his public authority for treasonous or corrupt purposes. I offer a few brief notations here. One of the most sustained discussions came from the highly respected (and later Supreme Court Justice) James Iredell, speaking in the North Carolina ratifying convention: "I suppose the only instances, in which the President would be liable to impeachment, would be where he had received a bribe, or had acted from some corrupt motive or other.'A3 By way of explanation, Iredell referred to a situation in which "the President had received a bribe. . . from a foreign power, and, under the influence of that bribe, had address enough with the Senate, by artifices and misrepresentations, to seduce their consent to a pernicious treaty.' 4 James Wilson wrote similarly in his great 1791 Lectures on Law: "In the United States and in Pennsylvania, impeachments are confined to politi [t]he legitimate causes of impeachment... can have reference only to public character, and official duty.... In general, those offences, which may be committed equally by a private person, as a public officer, are not the subjects of impeachment. Murder, burglary, robbery, and indeed all offenses not immediately connected with office,... are left to the ordinary course of judicial proceeding.... This was a contested view, and a few people suggested in the early period that murder and the like would be a legitimate basis for impeachment; but there was general agreement that the great office of impeachment was to remove from office those who had abused distinctly public power. In the ratification debates themselves, I have not been able to find a single example of an impeachable offense that did not involve this kind of abuse, and certainly the prominent examples all involved abuses of that sort. Thus far, I have said very little about the particular understanding in America in 1788 of the phrase "high Crimes and Misdemeanors." This term was not debated in the convention; it was treated as a term of art, satisfactory for the purpose. Because the term comes from English law, it is possible to contend that it should be interpreted in accordance with English understandings.47 There is considerable sense in this view-the term certainly does come from English law-but serious questions might be raised about this basic proposition. The most important point is that it is not at all clear that the American understanding was the same as the English one. Recall that in the framing period, participants were aware of two exceedingly important differences between America and England: (1) the election of the President and (2) the separation of powers. As we have seen, these differences led many to suggest no impeachment power, or at least a narrow power of impeachment. It is possible that many of the Framers were aware of the content of English practice, but it is doubtful that most of them were, or they knew of every detail. It is even more doubtful that they meant to transport it In English law, there was some ambiguity in the use of the word "high." Did the term refer to the seriousness of the offense, or to the nature of the office against which the proceeding was aimed? Probably the better view, based on the actual practice, was that the term referred to both.51 In any case a "high Crime and Misdemeanor" could be a serious crime, but it could also be a serious offense that was not a technical violation of the criminal law. Serious misconduct, as in the form of committing the Nation to "'an ignominious treaty,"' was said by some to be a just basis for impeachment in England.52 Whatever one thinks of the particular example, it is clear that there was no consensus in England that a "high Crime and Misdemeanor" had to be a violation of the criminal law. Indeed, the better view-based on what was said at the framing-is that an impeachable offense, to qualify as such, need not be a crime in the United States. ment, for one reason or another, were beyond the reach of ordinary criminal redress."). I do not believe that the meaning of the Impeachment Clause was settled in 1787, any more than that the meaning of the First Amendment was settled in 1789. Two centuries of practice matter a great deal, especially, perhaps, in the context of separation of powers. But the original under gories," all involving the abuse of authority by public officers). substantially narrowed prior practice by limiting impeachment to official misconduct). What have been our historical practices? This question is important for several reasons. Some people argue that America does and should have a 60 My colleague Joseph Isenbergh has argued that the House has the power to impeach the President for acts short of "high Crimes and Misdemeanors," and also that it is legitimate for the Senate to convict but not to remove the President in the face of a House impeachment; in his view, impeachment is mandatory for "high Crimes and Misdemeanors," but permissive for acts that do not meet that standard. See Joseph Isenbergh, Impeachment and Presidential Immunity from Judicial Process (Dec. 31, 1998) (unpublished manuscript, available at <http:/www.law.uchicago.edulPublications/Occasional>). This is a creative and ingenious argument. I cannot discuss it in detail here, but for three reasons, I do not believe that it should be accepted. The first problem is the sheer weight of history. For well over a century at least, the nation has agreed that without a high crime and misdemeanor, there can be no impeachment, and any effort to disrupt that agreement bears a heavy burden of justification. The second problem is practical: recognition of congressional power to impeach the President (or for that matter judges) for reasons that do not involve high crimes and misdemeanors would gravely threaten the separation of powers. The third problem is that despite its ingenious presentation, I do not believe that Isenbergh has shown that this view had the support of the founding era. Most of his evidence is speculative, inferential, and indirect, and the direct evidence supports the conventional view. Consider, for example, the crucial remark by George Mason, arguing, in his initial claim to include "maladministration," that "it is the more necessary to extend: the power of impeachments." 2 FARRAND, supra note 23, at 550 (emphasis added). This remark, and the following colloquy, would be senseless if Congress already had the power to impeach presidents for grounds falling short of high crimes and misdemeanors. Certainly someone, during the founding and ratification debates, would have been expected to make the mandatory/permissive distinction if it had been what was intended and understood. The most important lesson of history is that the exceptional infrequency of serious impeachment proceedings against the President--even in circumstances in which such proceedings might have appeared legitimate-suggests a historical understanding that impeachment is appropriate only in the most extraordinary cases of abuse of distinctly presidential authority. We should notice at the outset that, before the impeachment of President Clinton, there had only been sixteen impeachments; only one President was impeached; and only one other President was subject to serious impeachment inquiry. stitutional interpretation"). The only President to have been impeached (though not convicted) was the unelected President Andrew Johnson, who was subject to an extraordinarily partisan battle. The key counts involved allegations that he discharged his Secretary of State in violation of the Tenure in Office Act, which Johnson believed (rightly, as it turned out) to be unconstitutional.6 6 President Johnson was impeached less because of a violation of lawthough there was a violation of law-than because radical Republicans were critical of Johnson on unambiguously political grounds. 67 History has not been kind to that impeachment effort, which weakened the presidency for a period of decades. 68 But even in the Johnson case, when partisan fervor was at its height, the allegations involved the allegedly large-scale abuse of presidential authority, through the lawless exercise of presidential power. With respect to the office of the President, at least, impeachment has been considered as a weapon of rare and last resort, in a way that vindicates the Framers' emphasis on the safeguards of the electoral process. peachment of the President, 105th Cong. (1998) [hereinafter House Impeachment Hearing, 105th Cong.], available in 1998 WL 846820 (statements of former Congresswoman Elizabeth Holtzman (D-NY), former Congressman Robert Drinan (D-MA), former Congressman Wayne Owens (D-UT)) (noting that because it was personal rather than official misconduct, Nixon's tax evasion was not impeachable). In a decision that has received considerable publicity in the last weeks, the House refused to include, as an impeachment count, legitimate allegations of income tax evasion against President Nixon. A basic ground for the refusal was that income tax evasion-though hardly excusable and indeed a major breach of every citizen's obligation-did not amount to a misuse of distinctly presidential authority. 70 2. Reagan and the Iran-Contra Controversy President Reagan was allegedly involved in unlawful misconduct in connection with the Iran-Contra controversy; at least he presided over an administration allegedly involved in such unlawful misconduct. Indeed, the Independent Counsel's investigation yielded no fewer than seven guilty pleas and four convictions, including convictions of relatively high-level executive branch officials. 69 See ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE, Silver Blaze, in 1 SHERLOCK HOLMEs: THE COMPLETE NOvELs AND SToRIES 455, 475 (1986) ("Before deciding that question I had grasped the sigObnificance of the silence of the dog, for one true inference invariably suggests others .... viously the midnight visitor was someone whom the dog knew well."). 3. Bush and the Iran-Contra Controversy Many people have alleged that Vice-President Bush was involved in aspects of the Iran-Contra controversy, and some people suggested that he had personal knowledge of the unlawful activity. An impeachment investigation would not have been hard to imagine. Here too impeachment never emerged as a serious possibility. In World War II, the Lend-Lease Act allowed the President to build and sell arms and ammunition to other nations, most notably England. Before the passage of the Act, the sale of arms to other nations, including England, was prohibited by law. Nonetheless, it is generally agreed that President Roosevelt was secretly and unlawfully transferring arms-including over 20,000 airplanes, rifles, and ammunition-to England. Indeed, illegal approval of such weapons transfers were quite routine in the two full months before Congress authorized it. Even President Roosevelt's Secretary of War "felt troubled by the illegality and deception." 72 It is often said that Roosevelt both deceived and lied to Congress and the American people in connection with the program. President Eisenhower lied to the country at least twice. After the Russian downing of a U-2 airplane, he publicly denied that the plane was engaged in intelligence-gathering, claiming that it "may have drifted across the Russian border," and that it was a weather plane. The story had to be retracted after the Soviets produced contrary evidence from the plane.7 3 In 71 This point was highlighted during a hearing of the Constitution Subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee, when Professor Arthur Schlesinger commented, "[lit seems to me that the Reagan administration systematically violated the Boland Amendments in the course of aid to the contras in Nicaragua." Representative Henry J. Hyde, Chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, responded, "If I may answer, professor, I was on the Iran-contra committee, and we went all summer turning over every rock we could. Nobody ever filed a bill of impeachment against the president." History and Background of Impeachment and the U.S. Constitution, Federal News Service, Nov. 9, 1998, available in LEXIS, News Library, Transcripts File. 6. Suspicions of Ford's Pardon of Nixon There were widespread claims of a secret "deal" between President Ford and President Nixon, culminating in the pardon granted by President Ford.75 At the time, many Americans suspected that such a "deal" had occurred. So far as I am aware, no evidence supports any such suspicion. But in view of the climate of the time, these claims might well have produced an impeachment inquiry. It was widely believed that President Kennedy was involved in a series of illicit sexual relationships while in office, including an illicit sexual relationship with a woman who was simultaneously involved with a member of the Mafia. 76 This relationship-some people have suggested-could have compromised the efforts of the Department of Justice. Some people have alleged that whether or not it involved technical violations of law, this reckless behavior reflected a serious indifference to law enforcement efforts. Yet no one has suggested, at the time or since, that impeachment was the appropriate course. Consider, as just one further illustration, the fact that President Lincoln suspended the writ of habeas corpus, a serious violation of civil liberties that was ruled unlawful.77 74 See Peter Morgan, Legal Theory: The Undefined Crime of Lying to Congress, 86 N.W. 9. Conclusions These are simply a few random examples, and doubtless reasonable people will suggest that some or all of them involve conduct far less egregious, or less legitimately impeachable, than alleged in other actual or hypothetical cases, or with respect to President Clinton. Other reasonable people will disagree; and if these examples seem weak, it should not be hard to come up with others. My basic point is to establish a lengthy historical practice of great restraint. The fact that only one President has been impeached, when many others might have been, attests to the strength and longevity of our historical understandings. spective of whether the nation is in peace or at war). For the factual details and background of Milligan, the first significant civil liberties decision by the Supreme Court, see William Rehnquist, Civil Liberty and the Civil War: The Indianapolis Treason Trials, 72 IND. L.J. 927 (1997). standing practice, under an apparently general statute, narrows the statute's reach). C. Is the Office of the President Unique for Impeachment Purposes? The Constitution allows impeachment of all civil officers-not only the President, but also the Vice President, cabinet heads, and judges-for high crimes and misdemeanors. 80 Does this mean that the same standard applies to all such officers? Are there differences between the legitimate grounds for impeaching a president and the legitimate grounds for impeaching a federal judge? The question is extremely important for current purposes. If the same standards apply, it would make sense to say that the standards-perhaps the more lenient standards-applied to the impeachment of federal judges apply as well to the impeachment of presidents. My basic conclusion is that our history establishes that, as applied, the constitutional standard for impeaching the President has been distinctive, and properly so. 8 1. Non-Presidential Impeachments By far the largest majority of impeachments in American history have involved federal judges. Even here, the number is extremely low. In all of American history, there have been just thirteen judicial impeachments. 2 This is an exceptionally small number of impeachments, as remarkable in its way as the corresponding number of presidents, especially when we consider the enormously larger number of judges than presidents. Of those cases, by far the largest number, indeed almost all, involved at least some 79 There is a great deal of difference between the argument I am proposing and a reasonable alternative: that the power to impeach is somewhat broader than what I have suggested, but that the House appropriately uses that power only in the most compelling cases. Some people might suggest, for example, that the House had the power to impeach President Clinton, but that it did not, all things considered, exercise its discretion wisely. On this view, the examples I have given show the wise exercise of discretion. I prefer an understanding involving power to an understanding involving the appropriate exercise of discretion because it seems to me to fit somewhat better with history, both in the framing period and throughout history, and because it greatly decreases the likelihood, to which the Founders were alert, that impeachment will be used as a political tool. John Pickering was impeached in 1803 for refusing to hear witnesses in a case, for violating an act of Congress, and also for drunkenness and blasphemy; James H. Peck was impeached in 1826 for holding a lawyer in contempt of court for no legitimate reason; 88 West H. Humphreys was impeached in 1862 for supporting secession and acting as a confederate judge;8 9 Mark Delahay was impeached in 1876 for questionable financial deal ings and drunkenness; 90 Charles Swayne was impeached in 1903 for not residing in his district and unlawfully holding attorneys in contempt of court; 91 George W. English was impeached in 1926 for disbarring lawyers and for threatening members of the press and jurors;92 83 See 93D CONG. IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY, supra note 2, at 29-30. 84 For a general discussion, see REHNQUIST, supra note 67, at 59 (discussing the charges against Chase based on his conduct during the Fries trial in which he "conducted himself in a manner highly arbitrary, oppressive, and unjust"). dence in anticipation of a divorce action by his wife; 93 Halsted Ritter was impeached in 1936 for income tax evasion and cor ruption in a receivership case;94 Harry Claiborne was impeached in 1986 for income tax evasion and for perjury in connection with that unlawful act;95 Alcee Hastings was impeached in 1989 for taking a bribe;96 and Walter L. Nixon, Jr. was impeached in 1989 for perjury before a grand jury, in connection with a claim that he had called a prosecutor to obtain favorable treatment for the son of a friend.97 Of the fifteen non-presidential impeachments, only seven were convicted: Pickering, Humphreys, Archbald, Ritter, Claiborne, Hastings, and Nixon. Delahay, Belknap, and English resigned before the Senate vote. In several impeachments, it would be possible to argue that the grounds invoked by the House of Representatives could not meet the test I have suggested for presidential impeachment. Harry Claiborne, for example, was not shown to have abused distinctly judicial powers, and it is possible to make the same argument about Walter Nixon, Jr. and Harold Louderback. Some of the counts for impeaching Mark Delahay and Charles Swayne also seem to fall short of my suggested standard. Do these practices suggest that the test I have suggested is wrong? If, as the text plainly suggests, the same standard governs both the President and the federal judiciary, the answer is that my test is indeed wrong. On the other hand-and this is the fourth and to me the most important point-judges have particular duties, and it may be that what counts as a "high Crime and Misdemeanor" is understood by reference to those duties. A judge who committed perjury might well be disqualified from the particular office of judge; the same need not be true of the Vice President. On this view, the power of impeachment is understood by the distinct functions of the officer. My basic purpose thus far has been to defend a particular understanding of the impeachment power. But two elements are missing from the picture. The first, of more immediate interest, has to do with the evaluation of the 1998 impeachment of President Clinton. Did President Clinton commit a 99 The cases in which judges have been impeached for perjury might be understood as suggesting that a judge, whose basic job is to preside over trials, cannot be entrusted with that job in the face of a perjury conviction. Presidential perjury is not excusable, but it is a different sort of problem. It should also be noted that Harry Claibome was impeached partly because he was in jail at the time, and that Walter Nixon, Jr.'s perjury involved a call to a prosecutor. A. The Peculiar Case ofPresident Clinton Both the original understanding and-historical practice converge on a simple principle: The principal purpose of the impeachment provision is to allow the House of Representatives to impeach the President of the United States for egregious misconduct that amounts to the abusive misuse of the authority of his office. This principle does not exclude the possibility that a president would be impeachable for an extremely heinous "private" crime, such as murder or rape. But it suggests that outside of such extraordinary (and unprecedented) cases, impeachment is unacceptable. How does all this bear on the current allegations against President Clinton? The first implication is that the charges made by Judge Kenneth Starr and David Schippers did not, even if proven, constitute legitimately impeachable offenses under the Constitution. The second implication is that no impeachable offense was identified in the four Articles of Impeachment voted on by the House of Representatives, including the two Articles that were approved. These charges do not involve egregious misuse of the powers of the office of the President. Perjury and obstruction of justice-the basis of the two Articles that passed the House-are extremely serious charges, and they are legitimately the basis for a criminal indictment. There 100 1 discuss the lessons of the impeachment of President Clinton from other angles in Let us explore several responses to this claim. One possible view, suggested by many observers, is that no matter the crime, it is simply unacceptable for a criminal to stay in the White House. If the President in fact committed a crime, it might be said he is legitimately removed from office. It should be clear that this view is not consistent with the Constitution as it is written. The President is palpably not removable for the commission of any crime. The question is whether he has committed a high crime or misdemeanor.10 1 Criminality is not a sufficient ground for impeachment. 101 It is possible to understand "high" as referring to the office, not the crime, and this is not an implausible view of the English practice. But in America, the concern was so conspicuously to require serious criminality, not any criminality, that this view could not, for us, be seriously urged. In the present context, it would be possible to respond to my basic suggestion-that President Clinton's alleged wrongdoing does not meet the constitutional standard-in two more subtle ways. First, it might be urged that actual or possible counts against President Clinton-the two Articles for which he was impeached, and perhaps also frequent lies to the American public-are very serious indeed, and in a sense uniquely serious. No other president has been charged with lying under oath, and President Clinton is joined only by President Nixon in having been charged with obstruction of justice. It follows that if these very serious charges are deemed a legitimate basis for impeachment, little or nothing will be done to alter the traditional conception of impeachment. Perhaps some of these charges, involving interactions with his advisers designed to promote lies or continued procedural objections to the underlying inquiry, even amount to abuse of power. In any case, the acts of lying within the criminal justice system and enlisting others in the effort to do so are highly distinctive, different in kind from past allegations against any other president (with the exception of President Nixon). It might even be urged (as discussed below) that these acts are very close indeed to bribery. If the President may be impeached for bribing a judge or bribing a witness, may he not be impeached for lying under oath or encouraging others to lie on his behalf? Second, and more ambitiously, it might be said that whatever history and past practice show, we should understand the Constitution's text to allow the President to be impeached, via the democratic channels, whenever a serious charge, of one sort or another, is both made and proven. Let me take up these two responses in sequence. lieve that Clinton v. Jones, 117 S. Ct. 1636 (1997), would not be understood to allow a president to be subject to a criminal trial, which is far more likely to threaten the performance of the President's constitutional duties than a civil proceeding. In any case, it is clear that an effort to put the President in jail could not be consistent with Article II. Of course, people of good faith could say that the President has a special obligation to the truth, especially in a court of law, and that it is therefore reasonable to consider impeachment whenever the President has vioIt is certainly true that as the Nation's chief law lated that obligation. enforcement officer, the President has a special obligation to the truth. Perhaps such people also believe that false statements under oath, perjury, obstruction of justice, and associated misconduct are genuinely unique and that impeachment for such statements and misconduct would therefore fail to do damage to our historical practice of resorting to impeachment only in the most extreme cases. But this position has serious problems of its own. Even if it would be possible, in principle, for reasonable people to confine the current alleged basis for impeachment, it is extremely doubtful that the line could be held in highly partisan practice. Thus, the House's judgment that the current grounds are constitutionally appropriate has set an exceedingly dangerous precedent for the future, a precedent that could threaten to turn impeachment into a political weapon, in a way that would produce considerable instability in the constitutional order. and unique acts, even if presidential power was not involved. On this view, the impeachment of President Clinton does not signal any departure from our practices, nor does it mean that impeachment can be used more readily than it has in the past.10 6 B. Impeachment Now But should the Nation adopt a lower standard for impeachment of the President? Should we, for example, conclude that impeachment is legitimate for criminality not involving misuse of office, or for misuse of office that is perhaps not as "high" as has traditionally been thought? We might consider, for example, the following propositions: 1. The President may be impeached for anyviolation of any law. 2. The President may be impeached for any crime. 3. The President may be impeached for any felony. 4. The President may be impeached for any violation of any law (civil or criminal) involving the performance of his official responsibilities at any time in public life. cial powers. criminal prosecutions and suggesting that the Framers "were steeped in history" in intending for impeachment to be used as a means of preserving the effectiveness of the government rather than as an instrument to punish officials for their conduct). By way of summary and review, let us now explore a set of possible cases for impeaching the President. impeachment. egregious abuse of the President's power. tory. On one view, there is no abuse of distinctly presidential powers, and hence no impeachable offense. On another view, the best conclusion is that the President can be impeached for this level of private misconduct on the theory that this is undoubtedly an exceptionally serious crime, and the President is not likely to be able to govern after committing such a crime. Perhaps the Constitution would make little sense if it did not permit the Nation to remove murderers from the highest office in the land. It would probably be intolerable not to allow the President to be removable in such an extreme case; the key point is that this judgment should not be allowed to produce a different judgement about cases four and five above.' 10 D. A Note on Partisanship From their discussion in Philadelphia, it is clear that the Framers feared that impeachment could be used as a political tool, and sought to ensure a standard that would insulate the President from impeachments that were driven by factions, passions, or parochial interests. And while the Framers did not anticipate the rise of political parties, it is reasonable to ask whether and how the interest in "bipartisanship" should bear on the topic of impeachment. The impeachment of Andrew Johnson seems deplorable in large part because of its partisan character."' And it is fair to say that the founding debates show a general intention of allowing the impeachment devices to be invoked only where there was a kind of national consensus, cutting across partisan disagreements, to the effect that the President had grossly abused his official powers. It makes sense to endorse the general principle, on which history has also generally converged, to the effect that the President (or for that matter judges) should not be subject to serious impeachment inquiry unless there is at least some consensus, across political lines, that the inquiry is justified. It follows that future impeachments should be avoided unless and until people who disagree on political questions can be brought to agree that the President has committed deeds that justify his removal from office. ordinarily required; I am speaking here of an extremely unusual case, an exception to the general proposition.