Faculty Scholarship 

Theories and Tropes: A Reply to Posner and Kelman 
Theories and Tropes: A Reply to Posner and Kelman 

University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1998 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Christine Jolls 

Richard H. Thaler 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, Christine Jolls & Richard H. Thaler, "Theories and Tropes: A Reply to Posner and 
Kelman," 50 Stanford Law Review 1593 (1998). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Theories  and Tropes: A  Reply to Posner
and Kelman

Christine Jolls,* Cass R. Sunstein,**
and Richard Thaler***

We  are  grateful  to  Richard  Posner  and  Mark  Kelman  for  their  detailed
comments  on  our  article.  Their  objections  come  from  opposite  directions.
Judge  Posner complains  that behavioral  economics  is not a "theory"  and  is in-
deed  "antitheoretical"';  he  invokes  "evolutionary  considerations" 2  in  the  in-
terest of providing  a unitary  account of both rational  and  "quasi  rational"  be-
havior,  as  well  as  bounded  self-interest.3  Posner  also  thinks  that  rational
choice  theory  can  handle  many  of the  problems  we  describe.  By  contrast,
Professor  Kelman  wishes  that  we  were  less  theoretical.  Favoring  "open-
textured  interpretivism,"4  he  thinks  that behavioral  economics  is  in a kind  of
"dance ' 5 with  rational  choice  theory,  and  that both  dancers  suffer  from  "hu-
bris."16  He  suggests that both approaches  are  mere  "interpretive  tropes,"  pro-
viding  two  of many  possible  understandings  of the  "inexorably  ambiguous"
data.7

In  these  brief remarks,  we  reply  to  these  different  challenges.  Our  dis-
agreements  with  Posner  are  far  narrower  than  they  might  appear;  he  accepts
our central  claims and  chooses mostly to  argue that the  behavior we describe,
while  real,  deserves  to  be  termed  "rational."  Insofar as Kelman  is  arguing  in
favor of more  in the way  of behavioral  research,  we fully agree  with him.  In-
sofar as  he  is  arguing  that  any  approach  is  hubristic  unless  it acknowledges

*  Assistant  Professor of Law, Harvard Law  School.

**  Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished  Service  Professor of Jurisprudence,  University  of Chicago.
**  Robert  P.  Gwinn  Professor  of  Economics  and  Behavioral  Science,  Graduate  School  of

Business, University of Chicago.

We thank Gil Seinfeld  for excellent research assistance.
1.  Richard A. Posner,  Rational Choice, Behavioral Economics, and the Law, 50 STAN.  L. REV.

1551,  1552,  1560  (1998).
2.  Id. at 1552.
3.  We  will use the term "quasi  rational"  to refer  to behavior characterized  by bounded rational-

ity and bounded willpower.

4.  Mark  Kelman,  Behavioral Economics as Part of a  Rhetorical Duet: A  Response  to Jolls,

Sunstein, and Thaler, 50 STAN.  L. REV.  1577,  1591  (1998).

5.  Id. at 1580.
6.  Id. at  1590.
7.  Id. at  1579.

1593

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1593 1997-1998

1594

STANFORD LAWREVIEW

[Vol.  50:1593

that it is  merely  one  of several  equally  valid  ways  of viewing  the world,  we
disagree;  we believe that behavioral  law and economics  should be regarded  as
more than  an  "interpretive  trope"  and that  it  will  help  to  shed  light on  legal
problems  and produce  improvements  in the legal system.

A small note  at the  outset:  Both Judge Posner  and Professor Kelman  fre-
quently  use  the  word  "irrationality,"  and  they  write  as  if "irrationality"  and
"irrational  behavior"  are  at the  heart of behavioral  economics  and behavioral
law  and  economics.  But  our  article  intentionally  avoided  that  word,  on  the
ground that it is not useful  and is likely  to mislead.  We  do far better to  spec-
ify how human  beings  actually  behave (and  depart  from the  conventional  the-
ory) than  to  argue  whether  they are  "irrational."  Hence  we refer  to  quasi  ra-
tional  agents  and  to  bounded  rationality,  bounded  willpower,  and  bounded
self-interest,  three  ideas  of special relevance  to  Posner's  comment, to  which
we now turn.

I.  POSNER

A reader of Judge Posner's commentary  might be left with the impression
that  there  are  large  disagreements  between  us.  This  impression  would  be
false.  Posner  accepts  the  most important  points  of our  article;  he  acknowl-
edges the  existence  of the three bounds,  and he agrees  that the phenomena  we
discuss  are real and potentially important  to  economics  and law.  Much  of his
discussion consists  of quibbling  about what  is really  a minor matter:  whether
we should  call  a  given behavior  rational  or not.  Posner  is  also  concerned  to
show the  sources  of the three bounds,  an important  subject to  be sure, but one
on which we  are  agnostic.  Our goal  here is  to  reduce  the perceived  distance
between our views  and straighten out the most important  misunderstandings.

A-  Framing the Debate

Seeming  to  have  learned  more  from  the  study  of cognitive  psychology
than he lets  on, Judge  Posner begins with  a  clever  framing  manipulation.  He
says 
that  we  (implicitly)  define  behavioral  economics  negatively  as
"economics  minus the assumption that people  are rational  maximizers  of their
satisfactions."8  He  contrasts  this  negative  approach  to  what  he prefers,  the
positive  "enriching"  approach  he  claims  for  standard  economic  theorizing.9
As readers  of our article realize,  we  offer no  such negative  definition;  in fact
we  often  use precisely  the  same  concept,  "enriching"  the  standard  economic
model, that is  offered by Judge Posner.10

Indeed,  as we will  make clear  below,  our goals  and tools  are  remarkably
similar.  The  primary problem Posner seems  to have with  our approach  is our
reluctance  to  call  all behavior rational.  To Posner,  a model that is  rational is
good,  disciplined,  scientific,  and enriching,  whereas  a model that is  quasi ra-

8. Posner, supra note 1, at  1552.
9.  Id. at 1567.
10.  Id.;  Christine  Jolls,  Cass  Sunstein  & Richard  Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and

Economics, 50 STAN.  L. REV.  1471,  1475 (1998)  [hereinafter  "JST"].

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1594 1997-1998

May  1998]

THEORIES AND  TROPES

1595

tional  is bad,  undisciplined,  unscientific,  and  subtracting.  Posner  seems  to be
using  the  heretofore  undiscovered  "rationality  heuristic"  (if it uses  rational
models,  it is good).  Like  all heuristics,  this one  sometimes  works well, but it
can  lead to systematic  biases.

In this case  the primary  bias  is one  that Colin Camerer  calls,  in  conversa-
tion,  the  "sufficiency  bias."  Throughout  Posner's  commentary,  he  goes
through  the  following  ritual.  He  discusses  one  of the  phenomena we  identify
as problematic  for economic  theory; he  offers a modification  or elaboration  on
the  standard  theory  that could,  in principle,  be  consistent  with this phenome-
non;  and then  he declares victory.  Posner seems  to think that the  fact that it is
possible  to  tell  a rational  choice  story  consistent  with the  data is  sufficient  to
establish  that this  explanation  is  the  correct  one.  This is  obviously  a  fallacy.
In  no  case  does  he  offer evidence  to  suggest that  his  preferred  explanation  is
correct,  nor even  a test that  would,  in  principle,  discriminate between  his  ex-
planation  and  ours.  For those  of us who believe  in  falsifiability,  this is an  un-
fortunate  omission.

B.  Three Bounds

1.  Bounded rationality.

To  his  credit, Posner  offers a definition  of rationality:  "choosing  the best
means  to  the  chooser's  ends.""  But  at  many  places  he  acknowledges  that
people  often  do  not choose  the  best means to  their own  ends.  He agrees that
there is  substantial  evidence  in  favor  of what he  insists,  in  our view mislead-
ingly, on calling  "cognitive  quirks"' 2 (a  subtle suggestion that these are minor
and  unsystematic  departures  from  the  standard  model).  Still,  he  claims  that,
in general,  bounded  rationality  either can be accommodated  within  a more  re-
fined  rational  choice  model,  or does  not upset  the  predictions  of the  standard
model,  or both.  He  claims that  we are simply willing  to  "give  up on rational-
choice  economics  too soon."'13

Whether  this  is true of course depends  on what the  evidence  shows.  Pos-
ner  suggests,  for  example,  that  the  standard  economic  analysis  of transporta-
tion  is unaffected  by  people's  ("irrational"--his  term)  fear of flying,  and that
the  economic  analysis  of  voting  is  unaffected  by  ("irrational"--again  his
term)  voting  behavior. 14  In  some  contexts  a standard  analysis  of transporta-
tion  and  of voting  may  work  (although  for the  same reasons  we  gave  in  our
article,  we  continue  to  question  assertions  such  as  that  standard  analysis  is
helpful  in  predicting  "why  the  old vote  more  than the  young"; 5  if in  fact  the
young  voted more,  could  it  not be  said that voting  for them  was  more  novel
and  thus generated  greater utility?).  A standard analysis  cannot,  however, tell
us  all  of what we  need  to  know.  Behavioral  economists  would predict  that

11.  Id. at 1551.
12.  Id. at 1553.
13.  Id. at 1556.
14.  Id. at 1554-55.
15.  Id. at 1554.

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1595 1997-1998

1596

STANFORD LA WREVIEW

[Vol. 50:1593

both market  behavior  and  government  behavior  in  the  airline  industry  are  af-
fected  by  bounded  rationality,  as,  for example,  when  additional  safety  meas-
ures  are  taken  and  mandated  in  the  aftermath  of a  crash  (a  prediction  of the
availability  heuristic)-even if such measures  are not defensible  on traditional
grounds  and  even  decrease  aggregate  safety  (by  producing  a  shift  toward
other,  more dangerous  modes  of transportation,  such  as driving).  We  would
also  predict that bounded  rationality  (the  availability heuristic,  overoptimism,
and framing  effects)  is  relevant  to  voting  behavior-and  also  that people  are
more  likely to  vote  if they  think that most people  are voting  (not a prediction
of the  conventional  analysis,  in  fact  a conundrum  under  that  analysis,  but  a
reasonable  inference  from models involving cooperative  behaviorl 6).

The  behavioral  economics  of transportation  and  voting  are  in  fact  ex-
tremely  interesting;  the notion that all the  important aspects  of these behaviors
are well-explained  by standard economics  strikes us as, well, overoptimistic.

2.  Bounded willpower.

Posner  agrees  that  self-control  problems  are  real:  "I  do  not  doubt  that
there is  such a thing as weakness  of will.' u 7  Indeed,  he thinks that  analysis of
the  behavior that presents  such problems  "may  require  abandoning  a tacit as-
sumption of most economic  analysis-that the  self is  a unity."' 8  We share the
view  that  people  are  often  in  struggles  with  themselves-struggles  that  the
wiser part of their personality sometimes  loses.  (Posner suggests  at one point
that we  "do  not  discuss  the  'multiple  selves'  approach"; 19 but such  temporal
inconsistency  of  preference  is  precisely  what  hyperbolic  discounting  re-
flects.2 0)

We disagree, though,  with Posner's view that information  provides  an ob-
vious  explanation  for  hyperbolic  discounting.2'  Posner  suggests  that  people
may  discount  sharply  in  the  relatively  near  future  because  they  know  they
have  a particular  need  for cash now,  whereas  for times  in the  distant  future it
is  hard to  envision  "what might make  [one]  pay  in  effect a huge  interest  rate
to  reallocate  consumption. '22  It is  true that people  may  sometimes  have  less
information  about their future needs than about their present  ones, but it is not
clear why lack  of information alone  would cause them to  err systematically on
the  side of underestimating  future needs.  Given  the lack  of information  about
the  future,  it is  quite possible  that the  need  for immediate  cash  will  be much
more intense in the future.

16.  See  John  0.  Ledyard,  Public  Goods:  A  Survey  of Experimental Research,  in  THE
HANDBOOK  OF  EXPERIMENTAL  ECONOMICS  111,  121-22  (John  H.  Kagel  &  Alvin  E.  Roth  eds.,
1995).

17.  Posner, supra note  1, at 1555.
18.  Id.
19.  Id. at 1556.
20.  See  David  Laibson,  Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting, 112  Q.J.  ECON.  443,  445

(1997).

21.  See  Posner, supra note 1, at 1555.
22.  Id.

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1596 1997-1998

May  1998]

THEORIES AND  TROPES

1597

3.  Bounded self-interest.

Posner  agrees  that people  do not  act only  from  financial  self-interest, and
he  appears  to  think  that  this  is  important  to  both  economics  and  law.  His
chief objection  to our discussion of bounded  self-interest  is that we do not link
it with  the  two  other bounds,  making  our approach  to  enriching  the  standard
economic  model appear  disconnected  and,  in his  view, antitheoretical.  We  do
not  see  how  Posner's  proposed  approach  is  more  theorized,  in  the  relevant
sense, than ours,  as we will now explain.

C.  Theory and Antitheory

As  noted, Posner  claims  that behavioral  economics  is  "undertheorized. '2 3
Our  article  should  have  been  entitled,  he  says,  "A  Psychological  Critique  of
Economic  Analysis  of Law"  rather than  "A  Behavioral  Approach  to  Law and
Economics. '24  In  his  view,  behavioral  economics  is  "purely  empirical,"  de-
fined  "by  its  subject  rather  than by  its  method,"  and  unable  to  make  predic-
tions?5

We intended  to create-and  to show to be warranted-precisely  the oppo-
site impression.  There  have  been many  important theoretical  advances  in be-
havioral  economics;  a number of them  are cited in  our article.26  Consider,  for
example,  prospect theory, the  specification  of biases  and heuristics,  and mod-
els  of fairness-related  behavior-all  discussed  in  some  detail  in  our  article.
Though  much  remains  to  be  done,  each  of these  contains  a  set of theoretical
claims.  Behavioral  economists  interested  in  law  would  predict,  for  example,
that  injunctions  will  stick  in  nuisance  cases,  that participants  in  lawsuits will
display self-serving  bias,  that  the  allocation  of a  legal  entitlement  will matter
to  the  ultimate  outcome,  that  laws  will  reflect  widespread  judgments  about
fairness  organized  around  reference  points,  that the  pattern  of environmental
regulation  will  reflect  the  use of familiar  heuristics,  that people  will  be over-
optimistic  about risk-all  topics  developed  in  our article.  Of course  it is true
that there  is much  more  to be learned  and that in many  contexts  good predic-
tions  are  difficult.  To  the  extent that  he  is  saying  more than  this, we  are  left
with  the  impression  that Posner's  claim  of undertheorization  is based  on Pos-

23.  Id. at 1559.
24.  Id. at 1558.
25.  Id. at 1559.
26.  On bounded  rationality,  see  Daniel  Kahneman  & Amos Tversky,  Prospect Theory:  An
Analysis of Decision Under Risk, 47 ECONOMETRICA  263  (1979).  On  bounded willpower, see Laib-
son, supra note 20; Ted O'Donahue  & Matthew  Rabin, Doing It Now or Later (Berkeley Department
of Economics  Working  Paper No.  97-253,  Jan.  1997);  Richard  H. Thaler & H.M.  Shefrin,  An Eco-
nomic Theory of Self-Control, 89 J. POL.  ECON.  392 (1981).  (The  last two are not cited in our origi-
nal article.)  On bounded self-interest, see Matthew  Rabin, Incorporating Fairness into Game  Theory
and Economics, 83 AM.  ECON.  REV.  1281  (1993).  New theoretical work is  even emerging  that uses
psychology  to  explain  the  anomalous  behavior  of stock  prices.  See  Nicholas  Barberis,  Andrei
Shleifer  &  Robert  Vishny,  A  Model of Investor Sentiment,  49  J.  FIN.  ECON.  (forthcoming  Sept.
1998);  Kent Daniel,  David Hirshleifer  & Avanidhar  Subrahmanyam,  Investor Psychology and Secu-
rit'  Market  Under-  and  Over-reactions, J.  FIN.  (forthcoming  1998)  (manuscript  available  at
<http://www.cob.ohio-state.edu/dept/fm/joumallabstract.htm#futurearticles>).

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1597 1997-1998

1598

STANFORD LA WREVIEW

[Vol.  50:1593

ner's (undefended  but more  than implicit) view that an essential  part of a good
theory is that it be a rational choice  theory.

Predictions  can be hard for any  model, standard  or behavioral,  and a basic
problem  in  judging  the  success  of any  model,  rational  or quasi  rational,  is
knowing what constitutes  a true prediction  of the model rather than  a post hoc
explanation.  A case  in  point  is  Posner's  discussion  of AIDS.  In  support  of
the  rational  choice  model,  he cites  the prediction  that the  AIDS  epidemic  will
increase  the  rate  of unwanted  pregnancies  by  "inducing a rational  substitution
of condoms"  for  birth-control  pills.27  But  the  example  raises  two  obvious
questions.  First,  was this  really  an  ex  ante  prediction?  Second,  if so,  is  this
really  a  victory  for  rationality?  Isn't it quite  possible  that  a rational  woman
who  viewed  both  AIDS  and  pregnancy  as  undesirable  would  choose  to  use
both a condom  and a pill (despite  the  cost  of using two  forms  of protection)?
How  would  a  rational  actor  model  decide,  ex  ante,  between  this  prediction
and the  alternative?  How,  then,  does the  rational  choice  approach  provide  a
more "theorized"  analysis than the behavioral  approach?

Of  course,  predictions  are  sometimes  robust  to  departures  from  un-
bounded rationality;  an  example  discussed in  our article  is  downward-sloping
demand.28  If economics  only consisted  of this  sort of prediction,  many of the
bounds we  discuss  would not matter.  But in these  cases  there would  also  be
no need  for  (or benefit  from) rational  choice  models.  Recall  that Posner  de-
fines  rational  as  "choosing  the best"  in  terms  of benefits  and  costs,  implying
an  optimal  tradeoff analysis  (including  decisionmaking  and  information  ac-
quisition  costs). 29  This  optimizing  model  is  much richer than  merely buying
less of a good when the price  goes up; as we pointed  out, even  laboratory rats
do this.30  The richness  adds  precision  to the  theory  and  also renders  it falsifi-
able  (and  in many cases,  false;  Posner's  own  discussion  acknowledges  many
examples).  In defense  of rational choice  theory, and in  urging that we give up
on it too  quickly, Posner  cites  our claim  that the  fact  that random  choice  (by
rats  or  human  beings)  in  a  situation  of scarcity  will  generate  a  downward-
sloping demand  curve  shows that downward-sloping  demand  "is  not evidence
in  support  of  optimizing  models."' 31  He  declares  our  analysis  "wrong":
"Buyers  do not choose randomly.  Rationality  is  the only reasonable  explana-
tion  for  their  reactions  to  changes  in  relative  prices. '32   Wrong.  Gary
Becker's  demonstration  that random  choice yields  downward-sloping  demand
extends  easily  to  almost  any choice  behavior.33  A  mix of budget-constrained
consumers,  some of whom just buy the brand  their mother did, some of whom
buy anything  with  Michael  Jordan's  picture  on it,  some of whom always  buy
the  brand  on the right,  and so  forth,  will  also buy  less  of goods  whose prices

27.  Posner, supra note  1, at  1557.
28.  JST, supra note  10, at 1481-82.
29.  Posner, supra note  1, at 1551.
30.  JST, supra note  10, at 1481-82.
31.  Posner, supra note  1, at 1556.
32.  Id.
33.  Gary  S.  Becker,  Irrational Behavior and Economic  Theory,  70  J.  POL.  ECON.  1,  5,  7

(1962).

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1598 1997-1998

May  1998]

THEORIES AND  TROPES

1599

rise  (because  they  have  limited  budgets).  As  Becker  says,  "[T]he  negative
slope  of market  demand  curves...  is equally  consistent  with  individual  irra-
tionality  [and  individual  rationality]  and  cannot  distinguish  between  them." 34
Consumers  can  be  doing  almost  anything  and  this  result  will  still  hold.
(Would  Posner respond  that whatever  they  do,  people  are  "choosing  the  best
means  to  the  chooser's  ends"?  If so,  does  that  theory  make  any  falsifiable
predictions?)

We stress this relatively  minor point because  much of the  evidence Posner
marshals  in support of rational  choice models  falls  into just this category.  We
are  willing  to  stipulate  that  demand  curves  slope  down.  But  we  agree  with
Becker's  analysis that this  result  depends  not at all on  unbounded rationality.
We  also think that for analyzing behavior  related to  law,  it is necessary  to  say
much  more,  by  way  of theory, than  that  demand  curves  slope  down  and that
people choose  the best means  to their ends.

Posner  offers  a  further  criticism  of the  idea  that  sound  predictions  about
law  must  take  into  account  the  bounds  we  emphasize.  He says  that  random
behavior  may often  be treated  as  rational  actor  behavior  because  "the  distri-
bution  of... random  behaviors"  may have  the  same  mean  as rational  actors'
behavior.35  This  is  a  common  response  to  behavioral  economics,  and  con-
ceivably  it  could  be true;  but there is  absolutely  no  reason  to  think  it is,  and
(as  is usually the  case) none  is offered  by the  source of the criticism.  Each of
the  legal  applications  discussed in  our article  is  an  instance  in  which the  evi-
dence  suggests  that  people  are  likely  to  err  in  a  systematic  direction-and
hence  that they will behave  differently  in  systematic  ways  from unboundedly
rational  agents.

D.  Evolutionary Biology

Following  Karl  Popper,  Posner  is  enthusiastic  about  falsifiability  as  the
essential  feature  of a  successful  scientific  theory.36  For present  purposes  we
intend no  quarrel  with  this  idea.  Posner is  even  more enthusiastic  about  evo-
lutionary  biology,  and  he  thinks  that  it  is  important  to  show  that  behavior
which  departs  from traditional  economic  assumptions  is  a result of evolution-
ary forces. 37  For present purposes we do not intend to  quarrel with  evolution-
ary biology either.  (As we stated  in our article,  the  notion  that the bounds  on
human  behavior  are adaptive is wholly consistent with our approach.38)  But it
is  not easy  to  stand,  as Posner  does,  with  both Popper  and  evolutionary  biol-
ogy.  The problem  is that Popper's views  have been  subject to  criticism  in the

34.  Id. at 13.
35.  Posner, supra note  1, at  1556.
36.  Id. at 1560-61.
37.  Id. at 1561-64.
38.  JST, supra note  10,  at 1477-78.  Thus, we do  not disagree  with the idea that  "while it may
appear that  the  agents  are  acting  irrationally,"  it is possible  that they  are  "processing  incomplete  in-
formation  as  well as  it  can be processed."  Kelman,  supra note 4,  at 1583.  For instance,  the use of
"more  general  rules of thumb  about when  information is  relevant"  may be  the  best approach  under
the circumstances,  "even  if it results  occasionally  in the use of information  that is  not in  fact proba-
tive."  Id.

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1599 1997-1998

1600

STANFORD LA WREVIEW

[Vol. 50:1593

philosophy  of science,  and  evolutionary  biology  is  part  of the  standard  criti-
cism  of Popper.  The  reason  is  that  evolutionary  biology  is  an  unfalsifiable
theory.

We are  agnostic on the  question whether biology can  explain the behavior
we  discuss  in  our article,  but  we  do  not think that  Posner  has  shown  that  it
can.  Consider,  for  example,  his  claim  that  the  endowment  effect  (in  which
opportunity  costs  are  underweighted  relative  to  out-of-pocket  costs)  or  the
sunk cost fallacy  can be  derived  from  evolution. 39  No  doubt  it is possible  to
produce  an  evolutionary  model  in  which  paying  attention  to  sunk  costs,  or
displaying loss  aversion,  is  adaptive.  The  problem  is  that it is  also  possible,
indeed  easier,  to  derive  another  model  in  which  ignoring  sunk  costs,  and
equating  opportunity  costs  to  out-of-pocket  costs,  is  also  adaptive  (based  on
the  standard  reasoning  offered  to  economics  students  who  are  being  taught
why  sunk costs  should be ignored  and  opportunity costs  equated  with out-of-
pocket  costs).  Indeed,  there  is  a  long  tradition  in  economics,  going  back  at
least to  Milton Friedman,  of arguing that  such forces  are precisely why the as-
sumptions  of economics must be true  (that competition  or evolution will  drive
out the people  who don't do what they  are supposed  to).40  It is difficult to see
what conclusions  should be  drawn from  the  fact  that evolution  can be  shown
to produce  a behavior and the absence  of that behavior.

Note  that we  are not saying  that biology  is not capable  of making predic-
tions.  We  are  simply saying  that the  fact that one  can  tell  an evolution-based
story  for  why  a  particular  behavior  might  have  emerged  neither  implies  the
existence  of a falsifiable  theory nor  (more importantly) is particularly  helpful.
To do better economic  analysis we need theories  that can help us predict when
sunk  costs  are  more likely  to be  ignored,  or when opportunity  costs  are  more
likely to be given  full weight.  So far, however,  such insights have come  more
from psychology than from biology.

We  agree  that much  of the  behavior  we  discuss  can  be considered  a ves-
tige of our long held  instincts.  In the  case  of bounded  willpower,  this is obvi-
ously true.  The  instinct to  eat when hungry  is present  in every  species, but it
can  get  one  in  trouble  when  food  becomes  abundant  and  exercise  unneces-
sary.  Ancient man  needed neither Weightwatchers  nor Stairmasters.  Aspects
of  bounded  rationality  can  also  be  explained,  speculatively  but plausibly,  in
evolutionary  terms;  the  heuristics  and  biases  literature  in psychology  is  ex-
plicitly based  on  the  premise  that the  heuristics  which  emerge  are  those  that
are useful  on  average.4 1  Availability  is  highly correlated  with frequency,  and
using  the  availability  heuristic  may  be  a  sensible  strategy  in  most  circum-
stances.  Behavior that has survived  the test of time may or may not have a lot
to  do  with biology, and  while  it would  be interesting  (and  in  some  ways po-
tentially valuable) to know,  a behavioral  approach  to  the economic  analysis  of
law can proceed whether  or not the  evolutionary  account  is right.

39.  Posner, supra note 1, at 1562-63,  1565.
40.  MILTON  FRIEDMAN,  The  Methodology  of Positive Economics,  in  ESSAYS  IN POSITIVE

ECONOMICs  3, 21-22 (1953).

41.  See JST, supra note  10,  at 1477-78.

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1600 1997-1998

May  1998]

THEORIES AND  TROPES

1601

E.  Smaller Points

We  do  not intend  here to  respond  to  all  of Posner's  particular claims.  In
many  places he  has  raised good questions  for further research,  behavioral  and
otherwise.

1.  The ultimatum game and the endowment effect.

Posner claims  that our analysis  of the ultimatum  game  is  merely a "label-
ing of the  result of the game. '42  He prefers  an  analysis  that depends  on what
he calls "negative  altruism"  and  "signaling. '43  We  are not sure that we under-
stand  the  difference  between  his  negative  altruism  explanation  and  our  own;
here  is another  case  where  Posner's  "enriched"  version  of economics  is  sim-
ply  a  form  of behavioral  economics.  Where  we part  company  has to  do  with
signaling.  If the  signaling explanation  has  any content, then  it would seem  to
predict  that Responders  would  accept  small  offers  (such  as the  fifty cents  of-
fered by  the least generous  of the  Proposers  in our  study)  as long  as their ac-
tions were  completely  anonymous  (not known  to  the Proposer  or anyone  else
including  the  experimenter.)  Of course,  these  are  exactly  the  conditions  in
our experiments  (as  well  as  the  other ultimatum  game  experiments  in  the  lit-
erature).  How then  can their actions  be called signaling-unless  they  are  sig-
naling  to themselves?

Posner  also  has  various  explanations  for  why  we  might  observe  the  en-
dowment effect within a rational choice  model. 44  Though he claims  that these
explanations  are  falsifiable,  he offers  neither evidence  in  support  of them  nor
tests  he would  accept  as valid.  For example, he points  out that an endowment
effect  might be  rational  for a  good with no  substitutes,  and  that this  observa-
tion  might explain  the  large  discrepancies  that are  observed  between  willing-
ness  to  pay  and  willingness  to  accept  for  environmental  goods.45  However,
this observation  cannot explain  the difference  in  buying and selling  prices  for
the  coffee mugs in  the  mugs  experiments  (since the  mugs were  for sale in the
campus  book  store).  This  suggests  that  the  absence  of substitutes  cannot  be
the only  explanation  for the  observed behavior.

Posner also  suggests that the  outcome  of the  mugs  experiments  might  be
explained  by  rational  habit  formation. 46  He  does  not  say  exactly  how  this
works;  one  possibility  is  that  we  are used  to  thinking,  correctly,  that we  like
the  things  we  own  because  we  picked  them  out  ourselves  and  have  subse-
quently  become  accustomed  to  them.  In  the mugs  experiment,  this  is  not the
case,  but perhaps  we  act,  out  of habit,  as  if the  mug had  been  in  our posses-
sion  for a  long  time.  This is  an  interesting  speculation,  though no  empirical
support is  offered  on  its behalf.  More  important,  suppose  this  explanation  is
true.  This  in  no way  alters  the  behavioral  analysis.  Recall  that the mugs  ex-

42.  Posner, supra note  1, at 1564.
43.  Id. at 1564-65.
44.  Id. at 1565-67.
45.  Id. at  1566.
46.  Id. at  1566-67.

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1601 1997-1998

1602

STANFORD LA WREVIEW

[Vol.  50:1593

periments  were  designed  to  test  (i.e.,  falsify)  a prediction  of behavioral  eco-
nomics,  namely  that  the  ultimate  allocation  of property  rights  would  depend
on  the  initial  assignment  of those  rights  even  when  transaction  costs  were
zero.  The  experimenters  were  unable  to  reject  this  prediction.  The  "prebe-
havioral  economic  analysis"  (to  use Posner's  phrase 47-one  we  like!)  of this
experiment  was  surely  that  the  mugs  market would be  identical  to  the  token
market;  that  is,  the  Coase  theorem  would  hold.  The  behavioral  economic
analysis  is  that  the  granting  of property  rights  will  affect  the  allocation  of
those  rights.  Posner's  "habit formation"  hypothesis  leads  to  exactly  the same
prediction as the behavioral analysis,  and  hence to  rejection of the  Coase theo-
rem.  We are not sure about the  hypothesis,  but we are pleased to  agree  on the
prediction,  and  we  are  looking  forward  to  a  revised  treatment  of the  Coase
theorem in the next edition  of Economic Analysis of Law.

2.  Crime, Optimism, and Childbirth.

Posner has various  responses  to our interpretation  of Jon Gruber's  empiri-
cal  study of childbirth benefits. 48  Many  of these  responses  are  acknowledged
in  our  original  discussion;  we  expressly  stated  that the  endowment  effect  is
not  the  only  possible  explanation  for  the  empirical  findings.  One  response
that we  did not mention-and that  strikes  us as particularly  odd-is  Posner's
objection  to  our  stressing  the  role  of  one  variable  (the  endowment  effect)
while retaining the rest of the  rational  choice  apparatus.  Why, he asks,  do we
not think that other behavioral  factors  were not also  at play?49  The answer, of
course,  is  simplicity.  We  add  complexity  one  step  at  a time just  as he  does.
When  he  suggests  that  signaling,  asymmetric  information,  risk  aversion,  al-
truism, and other traditional  rational  choice  add-ons provide  an  alternative ex-
planation  for  some  phenomenon,  he  does  not  say  why  another  factor  is  not
also  present.  We  do  not  challenge  this  way  of proceeding.  Users  of both
methods  are  forced  (because  of bounded  rationality)  to  enrich  their  models
one  step  at a  time.  It  is,  of course,  possible  to  combine  two  features  in  one
analysis.  This is exactly what we have done in our sunk cost ultimatum game.
We  used  the  mental  accounting  of  sunk  costs  to  predict  that  Responders
would  demand  even more  (closer to  half the  amount to  be divided) if they had
put up  the  money  themselves.  We  then  attempted  to  falsify  this  prediction,
unsuccessfully.

Still, Posner grants that we are  "on  to  something. '50  He just predicts  that
rational  choice  plus  evolutionary  biology  will  prove  more  useful  in  under-
standing these phenomena.  Time will tell.

47.  Id. at 1552.
48.  Id. at 1568-70.
49.  Id. at 1569-70.
50.  Id. at 1570.

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1602 1997-1998

May  1998]

THEORIES AND  TROPES

1603

3.  Empirical Evidence.

Posner  says  that we  make  "exaggerated  claims  for the  empirical  robust-
ness of behavioral  economics." 5 1  What, he asks,  is the theoretical  or empiri-
cal basis for supposing that the experimental  environment  is similar to the real
world?  This  is  a  perfectly  reasonable  question  that  behavioral  economists
have  been  busy exploring.  For example, the  original research  on both mental
accounting  and  prospect  theory  was  experimental.  Yet  these  concepts  have
proven useful  in explaining  field phenomena  as diverse  as the asset allocation
decisions  of pension  plan participants,  the  behavior of cab drivers,  and the  eq-
uity  premium  puzzle.52  We  await  similar  tests of the  alternatives  Posner  fa-
vors.

One of the best examples  of doing precisely  what Posner  seems to  want is
the  study  of  self-serving  bias  by  Linda  Babcock,  Xianghong  Wang,  and
George  Loewenstein. 53  Posner  misinterprets  the  results  of this  study.  He  is
right,  of course,  that there is  nothing  surprising  in  the  fact that  each  side in  a
lawsuit will publicly adopt self-serving  analogues.  And he grants  that there  is
such a thing as a role bias.  But he  is wrong in  concluding  that this study  adds
nothing, or that the survey respondents  are just posturing to the researchers  (as
well as to  their counterparts).5 4  What the  authors  show  is that the answers  the
two  parties  give  to  the  survey  help  explain  the  incidence  of strikes.  Why,  if
the  two  sides  are just posturing,  would  their  "meaningless"  answers  help  ex-
plain their  actual  behavior?  It seems  that, while posturing to the  other side (or
even  to  the  researchers),  the  bargainers  end  up  posturing  to  themselves  in  a
way that they have  difficulty overcoming.  We also refer readers  once  again  to
the  study's  own discussion  of the  problem  of strategic  behavior  and the  evi-
dence against this explanation  for the  study's findings. 55

Posner  is also incorrect  in  asserting that the empirical  findings on whether
parties  bargain  around  court  orders  "vindicate  rather than  challenge  rational-
ity. '" 56  Posner reasons  that "[i]f a case  that has  become  final through  exhaus-
tion  of appellate remedies  could have been settled,  because the remedy  sought
by the plaintiff would  cost the  defendant  more  than it would benefit the  plain-
tiff, the  case  would  have been settled  earlier-at the  latest after  the judgment
in  the  trial  court  and before the  appeal. '57  We  fail  to  see  this  reasoning.  For
if the defendant thinks  there is  a good chance  a verdict  for the plaintiff will be
overturned  on  appeal, it will  have  no reason  to  settle  the  case  prior to  appeal,

51.  Id.
52.  See Schlomo  Benartzi  & Richard  H.  Thaler,  Risk  Aversion  or  Myopia?  Choices  in  Re-
peated  Gambles  and  Retirement  Investments  (Nov.  8,  1997)  (unpublished  manuscript,  on  file with
the Stanford Law Review);  Colin Camerer,  Linda Babcock,  George  Loewenstein  & Richard  Thaler,
Labor Supply of New  York  City Cabdrivers: One Day at a Time,  112 Q.J. ECON.  407 (1997);  Jeremy
J. Siegel  & Richard H.  Thaler, Anomalies: The Equity Premium Puzzle,  11  J. ECON.  PERSP.,  Winter
1997, at 191.

53.  Linda Babcock,  Xianghong  Wang & George Loewenstein,  Choosing the Wrong Pond: So-

cial Comparisons in Negotiation that Reflect a Self-Serving Bias, 111  Q.J. ECON.  1 (1996).

54.  Posner, supra note 1, at 1573.
55.  Babcock et al., supra note 53, at 17-18.
56.  Posner, supra note  1, at 1572.
57.  Id. at 1571-72.

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1603 1997-1998

1604

STANFORD LA WREVIEW

[Vol.  50:1593

even  if the  plaintiffs  remedy  would  cost  the  defendant  more  than  it  would
benefit the  plaintiff;  the  defendant  is  hoping to  have  to  pay nothing.  In  any
event,  we  offer the  empirical  findings  on settlement  not to  challenge  "ration-
ality,"  but to  suggest  that motivations  other than material  self-interest  help to
account  for  behavior  relevant  to  law-a point  to  which  Posner  offers  no  ob-
jection.

4.  Bureaucrats and debiasing.

Posner's  commentary  on  our normative  analysis  is  misplaced.  We  never
suggested  that  experts  would  be  charged  with  determining  the  populace's
"authentic  preferences. ' 58  We  do  not think  people  have  orderly preferences,
so  charging  anyone  with  determining  them  would  be  a  meaningless  assign-
ment.  Nor  do  we  suggest that  bureaucrats  would  be immune  from  bounded
rationality.  Indeed, we emphasize  precisely the opposite position.5 9

Posner  also  faults  us for not advocating  education  and psychiatry  to  cure
"cognitive  quirks  and  weakness  of will. '60  In  some  circumstances,  debiasing
techniques  may  work for  instances  of bounded  rationality,  and  this  is  an  im-
portant  area  for  further  investigation.  We  mention  several  specific  applica-
tions  in  our  article. 6 1   Perhaps  education  and  psychiatry  can  help  with
bounded  willpower as well,  but the problem has been with us at least since  the
time of Adam and Eve,  and we  are not optimistic  about a cure  any time soon.
In  any  case,  while  educators  and  psychiatrists  are  doing  their best  to  reduce
the  impact  of bounded  rationality  and bounded  willpower,  we  will  continue
our efforts  to  model  these  phenomena  and  learn  more  about  how  they affect
the  economics  of the  law,  and  also  about  how  their harmful  effects  might  be
reduced.  We hope that no one will attempt to  cure bounded self-interest.

5.  Equity premium puzzle.

Posner suggests that we have succumbed  to the  hindsight bias;  he says we
conclude  that people  are  irrationally  risk averse  from  the  fact, known  only  in
hindsight, that stock returns  have  been so  high.62  We should  note that we are
not  responsible  for  declaring  the  high  returns  on  equities  a  "puzzle."  The
puzzle  was  declared  by  rational  choice  theorists  Mehra  and  Prescott,  who
were admirably  attempting  to make the  theory of investment  decision-making
falsifiable  by  asking  how  large  an  historical  equity  premium  would  be  con-
sistent with reasonable  (in their view)  levels  of risk aversion. 63  They  decided
that  the returns  up  to  the  mid  1980s,  when they  wrote  their article,  were  too
high.  Since their article was written,  the  equity premium in the  United  States

58.  Id. at 1575.
59.  JST, supra note 10, at  1475,  1541,  1543-45.
60.  Posner, supra note  1, at 1575.
61.  JST, supra note 10,  at  1504,  1527,  1544.
62.  Posner, supra note  1, at  1572 n.41.
63.  See Siegel  & Thaler, supra note 52,  at 192,  for a discussion.  The original article  is Rajnish

Mehra  & Edward C. Prescott,  The Equity Premium: A  Puzzle, 15 J. MONETARY  ECON.  145 (1985).

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1604 1997-1998

May  1998]

THEORIES AND  TROPES

1605

has  been  even  higher  than  in  the  past,  and  a substantial  equity  premium  has
been  found  in  most countries  around the  world.64  These  facts provide  out-of-
sample tests of the  equity premium puzzle.

II.  KELMAN

Professor  Kelman  has  considerable  sympathy  for behavioral  economics.
His  basic  complaint  is  that  far  from  providing  a  "fuller,  more  accurate"  ac-
count  of human  behavior,  behavioral  economics  should  recognize  that  it is
merely  one  of  "a  variety  of interpretive  traditions"  engaged  in  making  up
"stories"  about  social  practices. 65  Kelman  thinks  that behavioral  economics
and  rational  choice  theory  are "bound  together in  a  form of rhetorical  duet or
ritualized  dance. '66  In his  view, the  two  therefore  stand  together  in  "irrecon-
cilable  mutual  dependence. '67  Kelman  also  contends  that  behavioral  eco-
nomics mostly  offers "anecdot[es]. '' 68  In Kelman's  view,  this is  not so  much
a  criticism as a suggestion  about the need  to  avoid  "hubris. '69  In light of "the
rich,  inexorably  overwhelming  data  with  which  we  have  to  deal, .... open-
textured  interpretivism"  is all that we have.70  His complaint is that behavioral
economists,  and  the behavioral  approach  to  law  and  economics,  claim to  pro-
vide more  than that.

A.  Tropes?

It is not clear  to us  why Professor Kelman  prefers  "interpretive  tropes"  to
what  behavioral  economists  are  trying  to  do.  Kelman  does  not  show  that
analysts  are  unable  to  develop  and  to  test  hypotheses  about  the  relationship
between  incentives,  including  law,  and  human  behavior.  We  hope  to  have
suggested  a  number  of promising  examples  in  our  article.  To  be  sure,  in
many areas we know much  less than we should;  as we emphasized  throughout
the  article,  one  of our most  important  goals  in this project  is to  outline  an ex-
tended  research  agenda.  The  solution  to  this  problem  is  to  do more  investi-
gating  in  order  to  figure  out which  hypotheses  are true.  There  is  nothing hu-
bristic  about that.

Kelman  thinks  that  our hope  that  behavioral  economics  can  supplement
standard  economics  is  wrong  because  they  are  in  "irreconcilable  mutual  de-
pendence. ' 71  We  do not understand this objection.  While it is surely true that
behavioral  economics  relies  greatly  on traditional  economic  tools  (since  it is,
indeed,  merely  an approach  to  doing economics),  behavioral  economics  is  in-

64.  See  Siegel  & Thaler, supra note  52,  at  193-94.  The  equity premium  has risen since  1985

because of the exceptionally  high returns on stocks.  See id.

65.  Kelman, supra note 4, at 1580.
66.  Id.
67.  Id.
68.  Id.
69.  Id. at  1590.
70.  Id. at 1591.
71.  Id. at  1580.

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1605 1997-1998

1606

STANFORD LAWREVIEW

[Vol. 50:1593

tended  as  an  improvement  because  it  contains  more  realistic  assumptions
about human behavior.

Of course  Kelman  is right to  say that some imaginable  debates  amount to
stylized rhetorical patterns,  or "moves,"  involving those who are  not and those
who  are  committed to  traditional  rationality  assumptions.  Psychologists  con-
cerned with bounded rationality may claim to have found hindsight bias;  those
committed to  unbounded rationality may say that what appears to  be hindsight
bias  is really  not that at  all,  but rather  is  a normative judgment  about the ap-
propriate  legal regime.  Behavioral  economists  may point to  the results  of the
ultimatum  game  as suggesting  that people  will sacrifice  some  money  to pun-
ish someone  who they  think has mistreated  them;  traditional  economists  may
reply  (as  Kelman  does  in  their  name)  that people  care  about various  psychic
goods  and  are  willing  to  sacrifice  their material  self-interest  to  obtain  these
goods.72  And so on.

Some debates  may  indeed have  this form.  But taken in  this stylized  way,
the  disagreements  between  the two  camps are  awfully  tedious.  The  real  task
is  to  be  clear  about both  the  hypothesis  being tested  and  the data,  and to  go
back  and  forth between  them to see whether  the hypothesis  in  question can be
falsified.

Consider  a few  examples.  Of course  there  is  nothing to  prevent  econo-
mists  from saying  that because  people  care about  "psychic  goods,"  the  results
of the ultimatum  game  are no  surprise.  But  this response  has a major  defect.
It  either  makes  rational  choice  theory  incapable  of generating  predictions  at
all (because  whatever happens  can be said to have been a result of the  relevant
utility function, constructed  ex post),  or it converts rational  choice theory  into
a primitive form  of behavioral  economics.  It is  plainly better to  do what be-
havioral economists  are  doing, that is, to  be explicit  about the  bounded  nature
of self-interest  and to  see  what hypotheses  fit  the  data  and  might  be used  to
make  predictions,  and  then  test  them.  Indeed,  it  is  worth  remembering  that
the ultimatum game  was invented  precisely to test ideas  about resisting unfair
behavior.73

Or consider  Kelman's  claim  that hindsight  bias  is  not what  it  appears  to
be  and  the  results  may  well  reflect  a  form  of rational  Bayesian  updating  or
normative  judgments  about  liability  schemes. 74  This  is  an  intriguing  claim
that  is  difficult  to  evaluate  without seeing  the  relevant  experiments,  but Kel-
man  does not  say anything  to  undermine  the  central  empirical  work  on hind-
sight  bias.  Consider,  for  example,  Baruch  Fischhoff s  early  study,  where
people  were  asked  to  say  how  likely  certain  events  were  to  happen  during

72.  Id. at 1585  n.24.
73.  See Werner GUth,  Rolf Schmittberger  & Bemd Schwairze,  An Experimental Analysis of Ul-
timatum  Bargaining, 3  J.  ECON.  BEHAV.  &  ORG.  367,  367-68  (1982).  Giith,  Schmittberger,  and
Schwarze,  after defining  the ultimatum  game, proceeded to  test people's  behavior  in the game.  See
id. at 373-77.

74.  Kelman,  supra note 4, at 1583-84.

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1606 1997-1998

May  1998]

THEORIES AND  TROPES

1607

Nixon's  trip to  China,  and  then  asked  to  remember  their  earlier predictions. 75
Their remembered  probabilities  were higher for things that happened.  This is
surely  a  bias.  Or  consider  the  work  by  Colin  Camerer  and  others  on  the
"curse  of knowledge,"  in which subjects  who are told the  actual earnings  for a
company are unable to give good estimates  of what other subjects,  who do not
know  the  outcome,  will  predict.76  Of course  there  may be  some  studies  that
attribute  some behavior  to  hindsight  bias where  some  other  interpretation  is
possible, or even plausible.

With respect  to the  equity  premium  puzzle,  Kelman  thinks  that a surpris-
ingly  high  equity  premium  gives  people  the  profitable  opportunity  to  sell
bonds  to  unwitting  investors  and  use  the  proceeds  to  buy  stocks,  making  a
killing.77  Although  this  critique  is  based  on standard  economic  thinking,  the
analysis  is  flawed.  The  opportunity  Kelman  identifies  is  not a  true  arbitrage
opportunity  (meaning  without risk);  as  we  suggested  in our  article,  there  are
costs  to  arbitrage  in  equity  markets.78  Investment  bankers  could  try  what
Kelman  suggests,  at  their own  risk,  assuming  they  could  convince  investors
that their bonds were  risk-free (despite the  risks the banks  were  taking on).  If
enough  people  could do this,  then the  equity  premium might shrink.  But  this
is  precisely  the  kind  of question  that  behavioral  economists  have  been  suc-
cessfully  addressing,  namely,  how  do  the  forces  of competition  and  arbitra-
geurs  interact with quasi rational agents? 79

Kelman  is right to  emphasize  the  importance  of sorting out possible  alter-
native  explanations  and  of understanding  what kinds  of effects  are  at work in
different  settings.  Our basic  point is  that we  have  important  empirical  issues
here,  and no  reason  to think that we are left only  with  "interpretive  tropes"  or
"dances."  Dancing  has  its  place,  but  in  this  context,  people  should  stop
dancing and  get to work.

B.  Incompleteness

Sounding  a  bit  like  Posner,  Kelman  also  complains  that  behavioral  eco-
nomics  is  an  incomplete  theory.80  He  objects,  for  example,  that  behavioral
economics  cannot  predict  the  domain  in  which  quasi  rationality  will  be  im-
portant;  that we  do  not  know  when  and  how  much  people  will  sacrifice  their
material  interest for the  sake of fairness;  that the  relationship  between  legisla-

75.  Baruch Fischhoff, Hindsight --Foresight: The Effect of Outcome Knowledge on Judgment
Under Uncertainty, I J. EXPERIMENTAL  PSYCHOL.  HUM.  PERCEPTION  & PERFORMANCE  288,  297
(1975).

76.  Colin  Camerer,  George  Loewenstein  & Martin  Weber,  The  Curse of Knowledge  in Eco-

nomic Settings: An EtperimentalAnalysis, 97  J. POL.  ECON.  1232 (1989).

77.  Kelman,  supra note 4, at 1586-87.
78.  JST, supra note  10, at 1485.
79.  See  Jeffrey Pontiff,  Costly Arbitrage: Evidence from Closed-End Funds, 111  Q.J.  ECON.
1135  (1996);  Thomas  Russell  & Richard H.  Thaler,  The Relevance of Quasi Rational Behavior in
Competitive Markets, in RICHARD  H.  THALER,  QUASI  RATIONAL  ECONOMICS  239  (1991);  Andrei
Shleifer & Robert W. Vishny,  The Limits ofArbitrage, 52 J. FIN. 35  (1997).

80.  Kelman,  supra note 4, at 1580,  1586-90.

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1607 1997-1998

1608

STANFORD LA WREVIEW

[Vol. 50:1593

tive behavior  and widely shared  fairness  norms  is ambiguous; 81 that the  use of
the  availability  heuristic  to  explain  environmental  law  leaves  many  gaps  in
understanding  the  demand  for environmental  regulation.  Generally  speaking,
we agree.  There  is a lot of work to  do.  To be sure, we  already have far  more
than  "counterstories."  Matthew  Rabin,  for  example,  has  developed  a  model
of fairness  behavior, 82  and  there  is  a  good  deal  of empirical  work  (cited  and
discussed  in  our article)  in  this domain.  The role  of the  availability  heuristic
in  producing  regulation  has  already  received  considerable  attention  (again,
examples  are  cited  in  our  article).  This  is  not  to  say  that  all  of Kelman's
questions  have been  answered;  as we have repeatedly said, we think  there is a
lot more to do.

Our discussion  of the legal  examples just mentioned,  and the others in our
article,  was intended  both as an effort to  make new progress in behavioral  law
and  economics,  and,  equally  importantly,  an  effort  to  suggest  directions  for
future  research.  One of our central points  is that behavioral  law and econom-
ics  is  "incomplete"  at this  extremely  early  stage.  A great  deal remains  to  be
learned  about  the  actual  (as  opposed  to  hypothesized)  relationship  between
law  and human  behavior.  We  hope  that  Posner  and  Kelman,  both  occasional
past practitioners of behavioral  economics,  will join the  many people  now  en-
gaged in that endeavor.

81.  Kelman  misunderstands  us when he  suggests  that we believe  that legislators  "seek  reelec-
tion above  all."  Kelnan, supra note 4, at 1590.  We have  only assumed  this for purposes  of analysis.

82.  Rabin,  supra note 26.

HeinOnline  -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1608 1997-1998

