 Duke Law Journal, Vol. 47, No. 6, Twenty-Ninth Annual Administrative Law Issue (Apr., Is Tobacco a Drug? Administrative Agencies as Common Law Courts Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein Source: Duke University School of Law Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Professor Cass Sunstein argues that the FDA has the authority to regulate tobacco products. He considers the text of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, which supports the FDA assertion, and the context of its enactment, which argues against the FDA. He resolves the tension between text and context in favor of FDA jurisdiction by turning to the emerging role of administrative agencies. In modern government, he contends, administrative agencies have become America's common law courts, with the power to adapt statutory regimes to new facts and new values when the underlying statute is ambiguous. t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Law, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Elizabeth Garrett, Jack Goldsmith, Dan Kahan, Martha Nussbaum, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, David Strauss, and Peter Strauss for valuable comments. In his Article, Professor Sunstein presents the arguments he first offered on March 6, 1998, at the Duke Law Journal's 1998 Administrative Law Conference. Does the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have the authority to regulate tobacco and tobacco products? For a long time the FDA said that it did not. In 1996, the FDA changed its mind.4 The principal issue raised by this assertion of authority is whether tobacco qualifies as a "drug." The issue is exceptionally important for both policy and law. It is important for policy because FDA authority over tobacco products is significant in itself, and also because a resolution of the case will provide the backdrop for statutory developments and for any continuing settlement negotiations between the tobacco industry and government.5 Obviously new initiatives will be much affected by the existing power of the FDA. The question is important for law because it raises large issues not only about the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FDCA)6 but also about the nature of statutory interpretation in the administrative state. Above all, these questions involve the respective roles of courts and administrative agencies in settling the meaning of federal law. articles intended for use as a component of any article specified in clause (A), (B), or (C) of this paragraph.7 For purposes of the FDA's assertion of jurisdiction over tobacco, the key provision is clause (C), defining a drug as an "article[ ] ... intended to affect the structure or any function of the body." Is tobacco such an article? I will be urging here that the FDA has the legal authority to answer this question either no or yes, and that its yes in 1996 is therefore lawful. 8 B. Several Puzzles, and a Particular Dispute The dispute over the authority of the FDA9 to regulate tobacco raises a number of questions-indeed, a remarkably high percentage supplement ... is not a drug solely because the label or the labeling contains such a claim." Id. (3) intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or other animals, and which does not achieve its primary intended purposes through chemical action within or on the body or man or other animals and which is not dependent upon being metabolized for the achievement of its primary intended purposes. of the set of questions raised in a whole semester of administrative law. Examples of these questions include the following: the power of an administrative agency to change its mind; the role of unenacted legislation; the extent to which subsequent legislative action can divest an agency of authority that it might otherwise have; the authority of an agency to define its own jurisdiction; and the law-interpreting power of agencies. The dispute over the FDA's authority could ultimately be resolved on these or any number of other grounds, and I will take up these and other questions in the course of the discussion. My principal emphasis, however, will be on a conflict between two different styles of statutory interpretation.'0 The first is a form of literalism: it stresses the need to interpret statutory terms in accordance with their ordinary, plain meaning to speakers of English." Because of the breadth of the language of the FDCA, this approach strongly supports the FDA. The second style of interpretation is more contextual: it emphasizes the need to understand statutory terms taken in their original context, in accordance with thencontemporary understandings of their meaning. This argument creates serious problems for the FDA because the context of the statute suggests a narrower reading than the text alone. These two styles produce conflicts in many different areas of statutory law. To take just two examples, the dispute between them accounts for internal disputes on the Supreme Court about the legality of affirmative action under a law forbidding "discrimination"'2 and also about whether someone "uses" a gun when he sells it for cash.'3 There is no simple or easy choice between the two approaches. The literalist approach has many advantages. It enables diverse judges to coordinate about both method and outcomes, prevents guessing games about the nature of past contexts, and may well impose good incentives on the enacting legislature.'4 Its disadvantage is 10. The statement in this paragraph is an oversimplification; a more precise explanation of the two styles may be found below, in Part IV.C. that, by wrenching statutory terms out of their context, it may well lead to understandings of statutory terms that are quite different from those of the enacting Congress and may, in that sense, produce significant mistakes." The chief advantage of the contextual approach is that it builds on a sensible understanding of how the governing words were understood by ordinary people, including members of Congress, at the time of enactment.16 Its disadvantage is that it increases the burdens of judicial judgments and may involve unreliable speculation about the nature of the relevant context. The FDA has a large law-interpreting role and it has made some distinctive findings in the case of tobacco that support its regulations.19 In light of those findings and that role, courts are not in a position to make independent judgments but only to say whether the FDA's interpretation is reasonable.20 In the end, I will argue that reviewing courts should uphold the regulation, principally by reference to the appropriate role of contemporary administrative agencies. A general claim underlies this conclusion: without much fanfare, agencies have become modern America's common law courts, and properly so. The basic task of common law courts is to specify abstract standards (often involving reasonableness) and to adapt legal rules to particular contexts as facts, social understandings of facts, and underlying values change over time. Operating as common law courts, agencies have, as they should, considerable power to adapt statutory language to changing understandings and circumstances. This is a conventional role, for example, of the National Labor Relations Board, the Federal Trade Commission, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Federal Communications Commission, the Department of Health and Human Services, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, and the Internal Revenue Service.21 The FDA's conclusion that tobacco is a "drug" is merely an unusually dramatic and visible illustration of this proposition. 19. The FDA first determined that nicotine in tobacco products is a drug. See FDA Regulations, supra note 1, at 44,403. The FDA then adopted regulations after finding that advertisements for tobacco products were specifically harming young people. See id. at 44,466-95. chooses to do so. One of my principal goals here is to show why this is no contradiction. In the process I shall have occasion to discuss a number of important interpretive questions: the relevance of subsequent legislative events; the uses and limits of literalism;"2 the power of an agency to change its mind after Congress and others have been explicitly informed of the previous interpretation;23 the nature of statutory default rules, operating as "information-eliciting" rules or as "intention-eliciting" rules;24 and the exercise of dynamic statutory interpretation by administrative agencies rather than courts.25 A. Notes on Smoking The problems posed by cigarette smoking might, of course, fill many volumes. I offer here a brief discussion as a way of providing some context. It was estimated in 1995 that about 529,000 deaths in the United States were attributable to smoking, about twenty-four percent of total mortality that year.26 "Second-hand" smoke is said to be responsible for 3,000 deaths from lung cancer and 37,000 deaths from heart disease annually,2 though these numbers are controversial.28 In any case, there is general agreement that smoking is by far the largest of the preventable causes of death,29 and "passive" smok INTERPRETATION (1995) [hereinafter ESKRIDGE, DYNAMIC INTERPRETATION]. Professor Eskridge focuses on dynamic statutory interpretation by courts, where my emphasis is on dynamic interpretation by administrative agencies, a different and, I believe, more legitimate enterprise. ing is sometimes described as the third leading preventable cause of deaths.30 The causes of reductions in smoking are disputed. It appears that education, advertising restrictions, reduction of peer pressure, and taxes may all contribute to changes in smoking levels.38 Social norms may, for example, operate as subsidies or taxes to smoking behavior, encouraging people to smoke when norms are a subsidy and encouraging them to cease smoking when norms are a tax.39 Public percep 30. See Lisa Goldman & Stanton Glantz, Evaluation of Antismoking Advertising Cam tions of greater hazard, in response to government action and other public health warnings, also contribute to drops in smoking rates.40 Advertising bans appear to have had a significant effect in Canada, Finland, New Zealand, and Norway.41 Antismoking advertising campaigns appear to have substantial effects as well. In particular, campaigns intended to delegitimize smoking by emphasizing the dangers of second-hand smoke and the industry's manipulation of smokers seem to have been especially effective.42 Tobacco taxes also have been found to have substantial consequences.43 Currently a complex network of laws controls cigarette smoking. Every state now bans the sale and distribution of tobacco to those under the age of eighteen.44 Congress has also enacted legislation controlling both cigarette labeling and advertising.45 Current taxes range from 20% to 44% of the retail price of cigarettes, a sharp contrast to other industrialized nations, where taxes range from 50% to 86% of the retail price.46 A variety of federal and state laws regulate smoking in public places.47 As of this writing, there are continuing discussions sion between private judgments and public behavior by conferring benefits (subsidies) on appropriate behavior and imposing costs (taxes) on inappropriate behavior); see also Hersch, supra note 31, at 1158 (arguing that social norms-as reflected in state minimum age restrictions-are inversely correlated to teen smoking). state minimum smoking age provisions in force before 1992). about a tobacco "settlement" that would involve a resolution of pending civil cases against the tobacco industry, an increase in tobacco taxes, and the provision of funds for education and prevention of smoking by young people.48 There is a substantial debate about the appropriate role of government in regulating the sale and use of tobacco products. On one view, people are now adequately informed about the risks of smoking, and the basic task of government should be to promote the operation of the market for safer cigarettes.49 Others believe that this argument understates the role of addiction and the motivational and cognitive issues raised by risk-taking by young people.'o Still others focus on the possible existence of unrealistic optimism in risk-taking behavior and also on the problems presented by cumulative risks."5 There is a further question about the government's appropriate role when choices are a function of social norms over which people have little control, and which they wish to change; this phenomenon makes it unclear what it means to say that government should respect people's preferences or choices.52 For a number of decades, the FDA disclaimed the general legal authority to regulate tobacco, and Congress and others operated under the assumption that tobacco would not generally be subject to FDA authority. Until 1963, there was no serious discussion of whether tobacco products might generally qualify as a "drug." In and local governments)). deed, the only real assertion of FDA authority over tobacco products prior to that time occurred in 1959, when the since-renamed Federal Drug Administration claimed authority only because certain cigarette companies had advertised that their cigarettes would reduce body weight."5 Between 1963 and 1988, FDA officials said explicitly that tobacco products did not otherwise qualify as drugs, devices, foods, or cosmetics.54 Thus, the FDA Commissioner testified in 1972 that cigarettes would be counted as drugs if, and only if, claims about beneficial physical effects were made on their behalf;"5 that is to say that cigarettes would qualify as drugs only if tobacco companies marketed them by reference to their beneficial effects on the human body. This view was consistently maintained through 1988.56 In an important decision in the late 1970s, the FDA rejected petitions by an anti-smoking group-Action on Smoking and Healthto regulate cigarettes as drugs.57 The FDA concluded that there was insufficient evidence that cigarettes were "intended" to affect the structure or function of the body.58 By this, the FDA meant that those who sold cigarettes did not "intend," by express representation or otherwise, to affect people's bodies. Such an intention could, of course, be found when cigarettes were marketed and sold as a means of reducing weight, but not in the ordinary course of sale.59 The FDA's decision was upheld on appeal.60 The court said that the FDCA authorized the FDA to regulate tobacco only if tobacco companies were marketing cigarettes by reference to various physiological benefits of smoking, and if most smokers used a particular brand of cigarettes partly because of those supposed benefits.61 In 1988, the American Heart Association and other public health organizations petitioned the FDA to regulate low-tar cigarettes as drugs. The FDA responded by announcing its intention to reconsider whether it had jurisdiction over cigarettes and smokeless tobacco. In 1996, the FDA concluded that it did indeed have jurisdiction in a dense report of some seven hundred pages.62 The scientific and political background leading to this decision is undoubtedly worth an article, or perhaps a book, of its own.63 For present purposes, two points seem both clear and highly relevant to the legal issue. First, this was an extremely visible political issue, one in which the President himself was heavily involved and one that played a serious part in the presidential election of 1996." Second, the FDA's decision would not have been possible without a great deal of relatively new evidence about the effects of nicotine and the intentions of the tobacco industry. The evidence suggested that smoking is responsible for more than 400,000 premature deaths per year.65 It also suggested that tobacco companies were well aware of the adverse 59. See supra note 53 (citing cases). 60. See Action on Smoking and Health, 655 F.2d at 239. 61. See id. 62. See FDA Regulations, supra note 4, at 44,399-413. In 1995, the FDA had published a report finding probable jurisdiction over "nicotine in cigarettes and smokeless tobacco," but withheld a final assertion of jurisdiction at that time, "recogniz[ing] the unique importance of the jurisdictional issue as well as the factual justification for any proposed rule in this area." See FDA Jurisdictional Analysis, supra note 8, at 41,453. physical effects of smoking.66 The FDA stressed its conviction by stating that smoking was a far more important public health problem than those to which it ordinarily devoted its attention. Thus, in its own statement, the FDA said that smoking causes more deaths annually in the United States than AIDS, car accidents, murders, suicides, fires, alcohol, and illegal drugs combined.67 Nonetheless, about fifty million Americans continue to smoke cigarettes, and 3,000 minors begin to smoke every day." With respect to the jurisdictional issue, the FDA supported its view with two central conclusions. First, it said that tobacco affects the structure or function of the body because (a) it causes and sustains addiction, (b) it has mood-altering affects, such as stimulation and tranquilization, and (c) it controls weight.69 Second, and most important for purposes of its change in view, the FDA stressed that tobacco products are intended to have these effects.70 This conclusion resulted from new evidence of the foreseeability of these various physical effects, new evidence of consumer use, and new evidence of manufacturer intent, stemming from three decades of industry statements and research.71 The FDA emphasized that the situation had changed dramatically from 1980,72 when no major health organization had determined that nicotine was addictive, to 1995, by which time most major public health organizations-including the American Psychiatric Association, the U.S. Surgeon General, and the American Psychological Association-had concluded that tobacco was addictive.73 There was also a great deal of emerging evidence, since 1980, to support this conclusion-and the conclusion that smoking had various stimulating and sedating effects, effects intended by tobacco companies.74 66. See, e.g., id. at 44,870-71 (discussing internal memoranda circulating within the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. which made reference to the "undesirable" physical effects of smoking). 67. See id. at 44,398. Note, however, that smoking may also control behavior that would otherwise lead to premature deaths, such as obesity; the figure of 400,000 lives lost does not take account of losses that would be produced in any case, as a result of substitute or offsetting behavior. The FDA did not, however, ban nicotine.75 It concluded that a ban would be ineffective, because it would produce black markets and smuggling, and that it would be undesirable, because it would create adverse health consequences for the millions now dependent on nicotine.76 It decided that the best response would be to prevent children and adolescents from beginning to use cigarettes at all.77 To this end, the FDA invoked its "restricted device" authority78 and adopted a regulatory strategy with two principal components.79 First, the FDA attempted to limit the access of young people to cigarettes in the following ways: by prohibiting the sale of cigarettes to people under eighteen years of age; by requiring retailers to check photographic identification; by banning free samples; by requiring retailers to remove self-service displays; and by prohibiting the use of vending machines for selling cigarettes."8 Second, the FDA attempted to limit the desire of young people to smoke by restricting cigarette advertising and promotion. The restrictions included a requirement that advertising use a black and white, text-only format;81 a ban on outdoor advertising near schools and playgrounds;82 a prohibition on the sale or distribution of non-tobacco products, such as hats or T-shirts, with a tobacco product brand name or logo;83 and a prohibition on tobacco brand name sponsorship of athletic, cultural, or similar events.84 Now let us turn to the legal issues. The critical language of the FDCA defines "drugs" as "articles... intended to affect the structure or any function of the body.""' Is tobacco an article that is in habit-forming, with the power to sedate or tranquilize its users. See id. at 41,591. tended to affect the structure or any function of the body? Let us begin by generating an argument on behalf of the FDA, emphasizing the apparently literal meaning of the statutory text and attempting to account for the change in the FDA's position over time. At first glance, the text of the definition of "drug" plainly includes tobacco, or so a reasonable FDA, acting on the basis of plausible factual assumptions, could find. Thus, the natural reading of the text appears to be strongly supportive of the FDA. It suggests not ambiguity but a relatively clear understanding like that of the current FDA. An ordinary English reader would probably find that tobacco is a drug in light of the two statutory requirements. The text of the statute may not be decisive if the traditional tools of statutory construction lead to a contrary result. In Part II, I will discuss this point in connection with the strongest argument against the FDA. But it makes sense to begin with a simpler, more straightforward, and, in a way, more obvious set of questions: What of the original understanding about whether tobacco fell within the term "drug?" Does Congress's original understanding of the place of to bacco argue against a literal interpretation of the text? What is the importance of the (exceedingly likely) fact that the enacting Congress did not intend to give the FDA power over tobacco? When the definition of "drug" was originally enacted in 1938, it seems clear at first glance that the term was not understood to include tobacco products.87 There was no discussion of the FDA's authority over tobacco products in Congress that year, and the silence is highly relevant: in view of the importance and high visibility of the tobacco industry, it defies belief to suggest that Congress was conferring that authority without debate or by inadvertence. It is entirely reasonable to think that the battle over the 1938 bill would have been far more intense if the bill was meant to give the FDA this kind of regulatory control; it is even reasonable to think that a statute giving the FDA such authority could not possibly have been enacted. Moreover, the FDA's predecessor agency said in 1914 that it could not regulate tobacco products under the 1906 Act,m and Congress did not enact an explicit proposal in 1929 that would have amended the 1906 Act to cover tobacco products.89 Thus, it could be argued that the statutory term should be understood by reference to its original meaning, which did not include tobacco. By itself, however, this argument is quite weak. The basic reason is simple: Congress enacted general words, not its beliefs about particular applications of those general words, and Congress's unenacted beliefs about those applications need not control. When Congress enacts such general words, it is usually their present meaning that governs,90 at least if the question is whether the agency charged 87. The qualification "at first glance" is necessary because it is unclear whether at that time Congress would have been taken to have referred to existing understandings of what counted as drugs and devices, or to have set out a general concept whose particular content would and should vary over time, with new understandings of facts and values. If the second view, which envisions an evolving definition of what constitutes a "drug" under the Act, is correct, then Coyne Beahm, Inc. v. FDA is rightly decided even under Justice Scalia's view of interpretation, rooted, as it is, in textualism. 966 F. Supp. 1374 (M.D.N.C. 1997). The court in Beahm adopted an expansive view of the term "drug" as used within the FDCA and concluded that Congress's failure to address tobacco within the Act when enacted did not withhold FDA authority to regulate tobacco products today. See id. at 1380-81. In reality, it is unlikely that there was a general understanding on Congress's part about whether the statutory definition was static or meant to change over time. with their interpretation may so conclude.9' History may help in sorting out ambiguities, but when they are unambiguous, general words are frequently applied in ways that enacting legislatures could not have anticipated and would not, on their particular, time-bound understanding of facts and even values, have approved.92 The validity of such applications is especially clear where, as here, factual understandings have changed dramatically since the statute was written. Consider that it is generally agreed that the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA)96 authorizes the EPA to regulate DDT as a product raising "a substantial question" of human safety," but that this authority does not rest on a judgment that the 91. See Bob Jones Univ. v. United States, 461 U.S. 574, 605 (1983) (upholding the IRS's decision not to grant tax exempt status to a university which did not permit partners in interracial marriages to enroll because the university's practice was "contrary to public policy"); Environmental Defense Fund, Inc. v. Ruckelshaus, 439 F.2d 584, 593 (D.C. Cir. 1971) (holding that the Secretary of Agriculture's interpretation of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act governs except in cases of abuse of discretion). But see Boutilier v. INS, 387 U.S. 118, 118 (1967) (holding that an "alien who was a homosexual over a continuous and uninterrupted period prior to and at time of entry was 'afflicted' with psychopathic personality within terms of [the INS's interpretation of the]statute excluding such persons from admission into United States") 92. See, e.g., Bob Jones, 461 U.S. at 592-93, 598-99 (holding that prohibition of interracial marriages within educational institutions is contrary to public policy despite the fact that such discrimination was thought consistent with public policy in the first half of this century); Environmental Defense Fund, 439 F.2d at 593-95 (noting that despite an administrative recognition of "a substantial question concerning the safety of DDT" that was not present at the time of the enaction of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, the pesticide's registration was not suspended); Oncale, 118 S. Ct. at 1001-02 (holding that although Title VII was not enacted with such a claim in mind, "nothing in Title VII necessarily bars a claim of discrimination 'because ... of sex' merely because the plaintiff and the defendant... are of the same sex"). pretation of factors determined to be relevant in implementing statutory purpose). Congress that enacted FIFRA believed that the EPA could regulate DDT. On the contrary, when introduced, DDT was thought to be unproblematic and entirely safe,98 and hence the enacting Congress did not contemplate that FIFRA would authorize EPA regulation of DDT. The EPA nevertheless possesses just such authority. Statutes regulating health and safety quite routinely contain broad language authorizing agencies to regulate articles or substances if the statutory criteria are met. Whether Congress believed that the statutory criteria were met when it enacted the relevant legislation is beside the point unless Congress embodied that belief in law. Consider, as well, the prominent example of Bob Jones University v. United States,9 in which the Court held that a public policy exception to the category of charitable deductions disallowed deductions for gifts to schools prohibiting interracial marriages-notwithstanding the fact that when the charitable deduction was first enacted in 1918, segregated schools were thought entirely consistent with public policy.'00 As the Court wrote in 1998, "statutory prohibitions often go beyond the principal evil to cover reasonably comparable evils, and it is ultimately the provisions of our laws rather than the principal concerns of our legislators by which we are governed."'0' Then the Court held that the 1964 Civil Rights Act bans same-sex harassment, even though the 1964 Congress did not in the least have that problem in mind, or intend to cover it.102 We can make the point more plain by supposing that in floor debates in 1938, members of Congress expressly stated the view that the Act did not authorize the FDA to regulate tobacco, on the ground (for example) that tobacco did not create a serious health threat or did not "affect the structure or function of the body."'03 A scenario of this sort would be at least as strong and perhaps even stronger for those attacking the FDA regulation than the actual case, for, in the hypothesized situation, there would be explicit legislative history against the FDA's view. Even if, however, there were an express statement to this effect in the legislative history, it would not be con "sex discrimination consisting of same-sex sexual harassment is actionable under Title VII"). trolling. What matters is the language of the enactment, not the particular, unenacted understanding of how that language applies to a particular case.1" Congress's judgment that tobacco was not a "drug" would, in the hypothesized case, have been a product of certain factual judgments, judgments that have proved inaccurate. It does no violence to the statute to read it to authorize a different decision about tobacco once the facts have been revealed to be otherwise. 104. This view should hold even for those who believe that legislative history is entitled to weight in resolving ambiguities; I am supposing here that the text is unambiguous. terpret unclear statutory language"). ened, rather than weakened, with a more pragmatic understanding of why it might make sense for Congress to have given the FDA authority in certain kinds of cases. Very plausibly, the purpose of the FDCA'08 is to allow the FDA to act in circumstances in which consumers are unlikely to be well informed about products with physiological effects; foods, drugs, and cosmetics are substances for which the risk of poor information and poor information processing are especially high. On this view, the FDA's proper business goes well beyond the prevention of fraud and deception, a task that it shares with other administrative agencies such as the FTC. The FDA's jurisdiction is properly invoked by products with medicinal or therapeutic effects, or products otherwise intended to affect bodily structure or function, because it is in these cases that full information may be hard for consumers to obtain or to process, and the risk of harm is especially great. sources to which judges may look in deciding legal questions). ized, consistently with the relevant legal materials. population has heard that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health"). ternalistic, and there is at least an intelligible account, stemming from an absence of consumer information, for such a grant of authority. What is the best response to this argument? As noted, the FDCA defines "drug" in relevant part to include articles "intended to affect the structure or any function of the body,""112 but these words were written in a particular setting, and they may not mean all of what they appear to mean. Would it follow from a literal interpretation that the FDA could, or perhaps must, define as "drugs" exercise machines, chewing tobacco, certain bracelets said to counteract arthritis, bras, word processors, even radio and television? If at least some of these "articles" are not within FDA authority, what, in a world of literalism, can prevent the FDA from so concluding? A. From Text to Context: The Contextual Understanding of "Drug" The answer might involve starting not only with text, but also with context, placing particular emphasis on the ordinary understanding of the controlling statutory term: "drug." Of course, Congress, like Lewis Carroll's famous Humpty Dumpty in Through the Looking Glass,113 can define terms however it wishes; it might define "drugs" to include horses, bulletin boards, works by Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., or law reviews if it wishes. But ordinary usage surely matters, and we should not lightly assume that Congress has defined the term "drug" in a way that departs radically from the ordinary understanding of the term. The argument made in Part II-with its extremely expansive conception of what can be counted as a drugmight be seen to make this error. Congress's definition does, of course, govern; but in case of doubt, there is reason to favor an understanding of that definition that conforms to and does not violate the ordinary understanding. volving a "drug" refer to articles used to help cure or alleviate some illness, disease, or medical condition.114 These are the basic exemplars from which interpretation should proceed."(cid:127) Indeed, the statute defines "drugs" to include articles of exactly this kind.116 The specific subsection with which we have been dealing is a separate one, applying not to articles that help with a disease or illness but to "articles (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of the body.""'7 In the particular context of a statutory definition of "drug," what is the basic purpose or function of this subsection? Without looking at history, but instead looking at the context (this is after all an attempted definition of "drug"), it seems reasonable to think that the provision covers products that would not cure or alleviate an illness or disease, but that are nonetheless marketed (or "intended") to alter body structure or function by, for example, fighting colds,"8 smoothing skin,"119 helping to produce weight loss,'12 reducing odors,21 or (more exotically) tying off severed blood vessels during medical procedures.122 All of these cases involve "drugs" in the ordinary English 114. It might be possible to respond that the term "drug" can be understood to refer to cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and so forth, and thus that the FDA definition of tobacco as a drug is not so counterintuitive after all. In ordinary language, "drug" has come to refer to narcotics. I am speaking of the ordinary meaning of drug in the context of the FDCA, where the term drug is not rooted in illegal substances, but quasi-medical ones. mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in man or other animals"). for tying off several blood vessels during surgery were "drugs"). language sense because the relevant articles are marketed in order to alter bodily structure or function in a certain desirable way and, thus, belong in the same basic family as the ordinary exemplars of drugs in the specific context of a regulatory agency charged with regulating "food" and "drugs." On this count, cigarettes are altogether different. Manufacturers may know about the addictive properties of cigarettes and may even be delighted with those effects. Cigarettes are not, however, sold and purchased because of a promotional campaign emphasizing their drug-like effects, that is, their effects on the structure and function of the human body. If and when they are so treated, they might fit within the category "drug"-otherwise not. This is the start of a less literal and more contextual understanding of the definition of "drug;" it is strongly supported by the history of the FDCA. In fact, an investigation of the history provides some support for the general view, associated with Justice Breyer, that investigations of this kind can help illuminate the meaning of statutory provisions that might otherwise be misunderstood.123 In 1906, the term "drug" had been defined to mean "all medicines and preparations recognized in the United States Pharmacopoeia or National Formulary for internal or external use, and any substance or mixture of substances intended to be used for the cure, mitigation, or prevention of disease in man or other animals."124 This relatively narrow definition led to a concern about the need for a broader definition to enable the FDA to control remedies for obesity and cosmetics.'25 The expanded definition, enacted in 1938, with its to establish the "specialized meanings" of certain terms as they are used in specific statutes). precursor to the FDA responsible for enforcing the 1906 Act: While the accomplishments of the Food and Drugs Act have been considerable, it must be admitted that it has its serious limitations. Especially conspicuous ones are... the limitations placed upon the term "drug" by definition which render it difficult to control injurious cosmetics, fraudulent mechanical devices used for therapeutic purposes, as well as fraudulent remedies for obesity and leanness. addition of "articles (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of the body,"'126 was designed partly to enable the FDA to control "slenderizing" remedies and related practices.127 Thus, the Chief of the FDA, W.G. Campbell, explained in a key statement: Let me tell you the purpose of that [expanded definition]. There are products on the market now that escape control under [existing law], such as slenderizing products, reducing products. Obesity is not itself a disease in all instances and products advocated and sold for the treatment of obesity, as a matter of fact, are not always subject to the terms of this act. Campbell indicated that when questions arose about whether a hard case involved a statutory drug, the FDA would focus on the nature of representations made by the manufacturer.129 Hence, a chiropractor's table would not qualify as a drug unless the manufacturer decided "to ship that table into interstate commerce, and say that that table would cure various ills."'130 The FDA's jurisdiction "would depend al together on the character of the representation."'31 Campbell said, in response to a question about the extent of jurisdiction: [There] is no interference at all with the manufacture, with the marketing, with the use of such product. This is only when someone goes to the extreme of converting that thing into a drug, according to this definition, and making preposterous and ridiculous representations about it that there would be any jurisdiction under this law.132 The product referred to in the quoted passage was an ordinary lamp. Campbell suggested that such an ordinary product would qualify for regulation if and only if it were marketed under "a preposterous representation," for example as a cure for blindness.'33 Even a belt, used to help fix an injured back, was "admittedly a drug in some circumstances."'134 These are highly suggestive comments. They suggest that the statutory phrase "intended to affect the structure or function of the body" was not designed to authorize the FDA to affect every item or "article," other than food, that affected bodies. Instead, it was intended to allow the FDA to go beyond articles that are responsive to a preexisting medical condition by regulating those that are alleged to have beneficial or therapeutic effects on the body. Past FDA practice is consistent with this view. In every judicial decision upholding FDA authority, the product held to fall within the "intended to affect" provision had been marketed pursuant to manufacturer representations about its intended use.'35 In such cases, the FDA asserted authority over products said, implicitly or explicitly, to have beneficial effects on the human body. This practice is entirely compatible with the legislative history and the contextual understanding of "drug" because a product is so characterized if it is used with the suggestion that it will have some kind of desirable effect on the body. This general idea also fits extremely well with the FDA's governing regulations.'36 More particularly, the FDA's practice with respect to tobacco products has been entirely consistent with this understanding. The FDA did regulate cigarettes in the past. When it did so, though, it invoked a specific ground, pointing to various manufacturers' claims about the beneficial effects of smoking, including its usefulness in helping people to lose weight.137 In such cases, cigarettes were intended to affect the structure or function of the body in the same sense as a "slenderizer" or the hypothesized "preposterous" chiropractic table.'38 With both the slenderizer and the table, the product was regulable to the extent that it was sold on the ground that it would have the stated desirable physical effects. The key past federal court of appeals case involving tobacco products endorsed this basic understanding: "In cases such as the one at hand, consumers must use the product predominantly, and in fact nearly exclusively with the appropriate intent before the requisite statutory intent can be inferred.,"139 How does this bear on the FDA's current assertion of jurisdiction over tobacco? Note that in its jurisdictional statements, the FDA emphasized that tobacco has various addictive and toxic properties, and these factual claims are not in serious dispute.'40 In order, how 136. FDA regulations use the same language to explain the meaning of "intended uses" for both drugs and devices. See 21 C.F.R. ? 201.128 (1997) (drugs); id. ? 801.4 (devices). While both regulations state that this term "refer[s] to the objective intent of the persons legally responsible for the labeling of [the drugs or devices, respectively]," this intent may be shown either explicitly "by such persons' expressions" or may be inferred "by the circumstances surrounding the use of the article." Id. ?? 201.128, 801.4 (1997). Specifically, "[i]t may be shown by the circumstances that the article is, with the knowledge of such persons or their representatives, offered and used for a purpose for which it is neither labeled nor advertised." Id. Thus, a product not explicitly sold as a fat reducer may be implicitly understood in this way, and the manufacturers' intention that it be so understood and used would be sufficient. Tobacco is very different because tobacco is not used on the understanding that it would produce addiction. ever, to fit tobacco products within the statutory definition of "drug," this is insufficient (on the interpretation I am now offering). Manufacturers must sell tobacco with some reference to those addictive and toxic properties; they must, in other words, sell tobacco by, in some sense, invoking or stressing those properties. It is this kind of sale that would make tobacco into a "drug." This, of course, they have not done (and needless to say this would be a self-defeating strategy). The contextual understanding of the FDCA offers a distinctive interpretation of the Act's purpose, one that competes with the broader argument, based on information failure, that was offered above. On this view, Congress was concerned, first and foremost, with ensuring that the FDA had authority over products billed as medicines or as otherwise therapeutic,141 where the likelihood of fraud, deception, confusion, and harm is especially high, as are the stakes. But Congress was also concerned with the kind of fraud and deception that comes when products are marketed as affecting the body in a beneficial way,'42 because this kind of misrepresentation, whether or not based on explicit language, is in the same family of harmfulness as the core or defining case. It thus emerges that there are two competing understandings of the relevant provision of the FDCA, with different assessments of the language and of the underlying purpose of the Act. In a familiar formulation, a court might resolve the dispute by asking which is a better constructive interpretation, that is, by asking which interpretation best fits the relevant statutory materials and which interpretation makes best sense of those materials.'43 In a conflict of this kind, there are several natural places to look for assistance. I discuss several possible strategies for resolving the case: analogies, diverse tie breakers, and a narrow argument by the FDA that attempts to draw on the contextual interpretation described above. I ultimately conclude that (1994) ("(A) articles recognized in the official United States Pharmacopoeia, official Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the United States, or official National Formulary, or any supplement to any of them; and (B) articles intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in man or other animals"). any function of the body of man or other animals"). the narrow argument, combined with an understanding of the common law role of modern agencies, is sufficient to support the FDA's assertion of jurisdiction. In one form or another, the conflict under discussion comes up in many areas. Consider, for example, McDoyle v. United States,1" an important case in the law of statutory construction. The issue in McDoyle involved the meaning of the statutory term "motor vehicle," defined as including "an automobile, automobile truck, automobile wagon, motorcycle, or any other self-propelled vehicle not designed for running on rails."145 The relevant statute made it a federal crime to transport a motor vehicle, thus defined, known by the transporter to be stolen.'46 The question in the case was simple: did an airplane qualify as a "motor vehicle"? In one sense, the answer would seem to be yes, since an airplane is a self-propelled vehicle emphatically not designed for running on rails. In an opinion by Justice Holmes, the Court acknowledged that it was possible to understand an airplane to be a vehicle, but concluded that in its context the term had a narrower scope: When a rule of conduct is laid down in words that evoke in the common mind only the picture of vehicles moving on land, the statute should not be extended to aircraft, simply because it may seem to us that a similar policy applies, or upon the speculation that, if the legislature had thought of it, very likely broader words would have been used.147 Thus, Justice Holmes suggested that a statutory term would be understood by reference to exemplar cases and, in particular, to the "picture" that is "evoked in the common mind."148 Perhaps this idea supports the attack on the FDA regulation, suggesting that despite the literal language of the FDCA, tobacco is simply too far afield from the "picture" called up by the contextual understanding of the term "drug." Consider two more recent cases: the famous affirmative action decision United Steelworkers of America v. Weber'49 and the less famous but very similar interpretive problem in Smith v. United States.150 In Weber, the Court held that a statutory ban on "discrimination" did not forbid a voluntary, race-conscious affirmative action program.'51 The Court understood "discrimination" in a highly contextual manner. It concluded that despite its literal breadth, the term should not be wrenched out of context to forbid conduct that Congress had not chosen to forbid.152 The Court rejected what it saw as an excessively literal and insufficiently purposive reading of the statute. Justice Rehnquist wrote a vigorous dissenting the word opinion, contending, among other "discrimination" should be interpreted in its ordinary English sense.153 Whether or not Weber was correctly decided, the basic approach was far from exotic, and it provided a possible foundation on which to build an outcome unfavorable to the FDA in the tobacco litigation. In Smith, the Court was asked to decide whether a statutory ban on the "use" of a firearm in connection with a drug offense applied to the "use" of a firearm as an object of barter.'54 Invoking the literal meaning of the word "use" and the dictionary, the Court held that the statutory ban did indeed apply.'55 Justice Scalia wrote a vigorous dissenting opinion, arguing that while trading a firearm could be understood as a use, the statutory context suggested that the term was best understood to mean "used as a firearm," not as a commodity.156 Weber suggests the important point stressed by Justice Holmes: that language is often understood by reference to the paradigm or exemplar cases that it was written in order to cover. In Weber, the Court might be taken to have said that the 1964 Civil Rights Act was designed to forbid discrimination against blacks-that this was the paradigm or exemplar case-and that the literal meaning of the word "discrimination" would not be taken out of its context in order to re solve a question to which Congress had given little or no attention. In Smith, Justice Scalia's approach was similar. The paradigm case involved the use of a gun as a firearm, and the word "use" should be understood in the setting in which it was written, which included, not incidentally, a substantial mandatory minimum sentence.15 While it would take a lengthy argument to establish this claim, I believe that Weber was correctly decided and that Smith was wrong. The basic reason is that when there is ambiguity, a statute generally should not be taken to extend to a case that Congress did not consider, at least if there is an arguable difference between that case and the exemplar cases covered by the rule. Congress should not be taken to have made certain acts unlawful if it has had no occasion to focus on those particular acts.18 A judgment of this kind might well suggest that the FDA has no authority to regulate tobacco, on the theory that the contextual understanding of "drug" suggests a narrower definition, and that Congress should not be taken to have authorized the FDA to undertake such regulation by a kind of inadvertence. There are, however, two crucial differences between the FDA case on the one hand and Weber and Smith on the other. First, the definition of "drug" offers far stronger support for the FDA than did the terms "discrimination"159 and "use" for Weber and Smith. In this respect, the best precedent for the FDA may be Oncale, holding, on the basis of text, that the ban on sex discrimination applies to same-sex harassment, even though that problem was far from the specific intention of the passing Congress.160 Second, an administrative agency entrusted with rulemaking authority is involved in the FDA case, whereas it was not in the latter two. The strongest argument on behalf of the FDA emphasizes this point, as we will shortly see. An interesting analogy in this regard is Brogan v. United States.'61 There the Court was asked to construe a federal perjury statute providing that "[w]hoever, in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the United States knowingly and willfully... makes any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations ... shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than five years, or both."162 Lower courts had, since 1962, found an exception to this prohibition when the defendant issued a simple denial of guilt: the "exculpatory no."163 The lower courts reasoned that an "exculpatory no" was far afield from Congress's purposes in enacting the statute.164 The statute had originally been enacted as part of the prohibition on filing fraudulent claims with the government, and the ban on false statements was limited to statements that related to these filings.165 In 1918 the statute was broadened to apply to other false statements designed to swindle or defraud the government, and in 1934 it was broadened to its present form, apparently with the goal of protecting the government "'from the affirmative, aggressive, and voluntary actions of persons who take the initiative."''66 In this way, the statute was designed to prevent the perversion of governmental functions through affirmative lies, not to allow the government to convert protected acts into crimes by obtaining "no" answers to incriminating questions. ambiguity, and the case for a contextual limitation on its reach is therefore stronger. Oncale is closer to the tobacco case on this count. I conclude that the analogous cases do not favor one result or the other. In some cases, literal language has been understood literally; in others, courts have proceeded more purposively and contextually. Of course, literalism is rejected when it would produce absurd results.169 Of course, purpose and context is considered when the language is ambiguous. But when the language seems to support an agency's view, and when the context raises doubt, there is no clear line of authority. Perhaps the tiebreaker lies in subsequent developments. Indeed, the tiebreaker may be more than that. the FDA's claim that it cannot exercise authority over tobacco as a drug. Examples are the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act of 1965,173 the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act of 1986,174 and the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Reorganization Act of 1992.'75 The basic functions of this legislation are to control tobacco advertising and to ensure disclosure of health information, functions that overlap with some of the FDA's recent requirements. Even if the case were otherwise in equipoise, one might argue, the background of a consistent FDA interpretation, at least when combined with actual congressional enactments that might well coexist uneasily with FDA action, is sufficient to resolve the case against the FDA. (1994)) (requiring a health-related warning label on all cigarette packaging and advertising). effects of some kind.'77 The FDA's current assertion of authority over tobacco is based largely on a claim that tobacco companies made, and intended to make, that kind of representation.178 No doubt this was a change in the FDA's position, but there was some ambiguity in the former disclaimer of authority, and there is something less than complete discontinuity between the FDA's past and current positions. interpretation was made public, and Congress could easily have been made aware of it.182 Here the FDA's change was self-consciously motivated by new understandings of the effects of tobacco and of tobacco companies' intentions with respect to those effects. (discussing this theory and listing cases in which this argument was made). dangerous ground on which to rest an interpretation of a prior statute."). been new understandings of statutorily relevant facts; the FDA did not disclaim all authority over tobacco for all time, and hence it is not even clear that a reenactment would have frozen the preexisting FDA view. claim that the FDA has been divested of authority by subsequent legislation looks very similar to a claim for implied repeal. Capacity A natural way to resolve the dispute between a more literal and more contextual understanding is to ask some questions about institutional capacity. First, which approach would lead to more mistakes and more serious mistakes? This is a question about "error costs." Second, which approach would lead to more costly and more difficult decisions? This is a question about "decision costs." To approach these questions, it is necessary to refine the distinction between the two approaches; they represent a continuum rather than a sharp dichotomy. Some literal interpretations would be ruled out by context, regardless of one's general approach. This is true not only for scrivener's errors,'9' but also for terms whose meaning becomes plain only by context.192 Context is always present and always helps inform the understanding of meaning. In some cases the literal meaning would make no sense; even the most enthusiastic textualists accept this point.193 By the same token, contextual interpretation becomes quite contentious if it is understood to entail a rejection of the plain meaning of the text on the basis of the legislative history. The form of contextualism that argues against the FDA is more modest: it is merely a suggestion that an apparently broad text should be understood by reference to its purpose and background and that the context, including the history, supports a narrower understanding than the language alone suggests. The debate here is not between rigid lit 193. Justice Scalia, for example, a self-described textualist, acknowledges that context is a critical tool to be used in interpreting the meaning of a word. See Smith v. United States, 508 U.S. 223, 241-47 (1993) (Scalia, J., dissenting) (arguing that the majority's literal definition of the word "use" is inaccurate given its ordinary contextual meaning); see also SCALIA, INTERPRETATION, supra note 102, at 23-24 (criticizing the majority's strict construction in Smith and stating that a text should be interpreted "reasonably, to contain all that it fairly means," a goal which neither strict nor lenient construction achieves). eralists and text-rejecting contextualists-two pretty absurd campsbut between two emphatically reasonable opponents: those who would stress the ordinary meaning of the statutory terms and those who would stress contextual factors suggesting a narrower view than the words alone support. in the law of contracts). But this view is far too simple.'9 Suppose, for example, that the more contextual interpretation depends on resort to the legislative history, and that the statute's text alone, as enacted in 1938, cannot support that interpretation. It is entirely reasonable to think that the text should prevail. A refusal to give the words their ordinary meaning may create bad incentives for Congress; perhaps a more literal reading would encourage Congress to speak more clearly. A literal reading may also greatly simplify the process of judicial judgment. Freed from reliance on the ordinary meaning of the text, contextualist courts might produce mistakes, partly through simple error, partly through willfulness, even if some contextualist courts might also make some better decisions than literalist ones. In other words, literalists cannot be perfect; but perhaps they will be better, on balance, than their adversaries. Here as elsewhere, the perfect can be the enemy of the good. On this view, (reasonable, rather than science fictional) literalism can be justified as analogous to an informationeliciting rule in the law of contract, designed to force the parties (or in this case, the Congress) to speak with greater clarity.198 It can be so justified with the additional claim that if intention-eliciting is important, literalism is no worse than the alternative, and perhaps better, at least as a general rule.199 It is hard to resolve this dispute in the abstract. An obvious question is whether Congress will in fact respond to literal interpretations by legislating with greater care and clarity; there is little evidence that it will. Another question is whether Congress will respond to judicial mistakes, and here there is no systematic evidence. These points suggest that the contextual approach is more reasonable, at least where the court is confident that the resulting interpretation is really a fairly accurate conception of Congress's instructions and where the notion of contextual interpretation is not a guise for unreliable inferences based on legislative history. rules which "promote information revelation"). kind of representation about their beneficial medical or therapeutic effects, making them analogous to slenderizers.200 But courts are not deciding this issue in the first instance-an important fact of life in the administrative state,201 as we shall soon see. Is it possible to accept the contextual interpretation offered in Part III while, at the same time, upholding the FDA's treatment of cigarettes as drugs? Might the FDA endorse a narrower understanding of the statute and still prevail? This would be the most promising route; it would make the basic conflict about styles of interpretation irrelevant, or nearly so. prevent weight gain. A reasonable person could find that manufacturers intend these effects and that many consumers smoke with these effects in mind. Indeed, common advertisements for cigarettes can be seen to be emphasizing, explicitly or implicitly, the tranquilizing and stimulating effects of smoking,203 and there is evidence that tobacco companies have been entirely aware of these effects.204 Thus, for example, the FDA reported survey evidence that over seventy percent of young people who are daily smokers said that they smoked for relaxation.205 The narrowest decision upholding FDA authority would emphasize these points, which provide a much stronger foundation for the FDA's assertion of jurisdiction than does addiction.26 A. A Reading of Chevron Thus far the discussion has proceeded as if this were a case of statutory interpretation, but it is also one of administrative law, and the FDA's position is much fortified if we expand the lens in this way. In the modern era, most of the key work of statutory interpretation is, of course, not done by courts, but rather by federal agencies. Most of these interpretive acts never face judicial review, and those who challenge such acts face a high burden.207 Realistically speaking, general and ambiguous terms are given their meaning by agency officials who adapt those terms to changing facts and values. Thus, the business of a wide range of agencies-the NLRB, the FCC, the FTC, the SEC, the IRS, the EPA, the CPSC, and many more-involves the specification of general statutory terms, the resolution of ambiguities, 203. See, e.g., KLUGER, supra note 63, at 295, 443-45 (noting especially that the Marlboro Man is capable of both 'action' and 'repose,' suggesting both stimulation and tranquillity); Irene Scharf, Breathe Deeply: The Tort of Smokers' Battery, 32 HOUS. L. REV. 615, 631-60 (1995) (discussing advertising thoroughly, and noting specific campaigns based on the weight control properties of cigarettes). and the adaptation of legal texts (their enabling statutes) to new circumstances and new social understandings.208 The point is, of course, recognized in Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., which, it is becoming increasingly clear, stands as the most important case about legal interpretation in the last thirty years.2" Chevron holds that where statutes are ambiguous, courts should accept any reasonable interpretation by the agency charged with their implementation.210 Agencies are to prevail whenever statutes are subject to diverse, plausible readings. This idea is of course strongly supportive of the FDA's position that tobacco can be treated as a drug. 208. See infra notes 229-233 and accompanying text. 209. There is, of course, much debate about the precise meaning and consequences of the decision. See, e.g., Thomas W. Merrill, Textualism and the Future of the Chevron Doctrine, 72 WASH. U. L.Q. 351 (1994) (discussing implications for textualism); Thomas W. Merrill, Judicial Deference to Executive Precedent, 101 YALE L.J. 969 (1992) (arguing that the Supreme Court has not rigorously followed Chevron); Peter H. Schuck & E. Donald Elliott, To the Chevron Station: An Empirical Study of Federal Administrative Law, 1990 DUKE L.J. 984 (presenting empirical evidence about the impact of Chevron on administrative law). While agencies are not directly accountable to the people, the Chief Executive is, and it is entirely appropriate for this political branch of the Government to make such policy choices-resolving the competing interests which Congress itself either inadvertently did not resolve, or intentionally left to be resolved by the agency charged with the administration of the statute in light of everyday realities. agencies are, of course, influenced by shifting public judgments, and their approaches are likely to reflect the President's basic commitments.213 This was, no doubt, true in Chevron itself, where the costsaving innovation there at issue responded to President Reagan's concern with expensive regulations. In the context of the tobacco controversy, the point is highly relevant, for there can be little doubt that the FDA's position is highly responsive to the views of President Clinton, who has made regulation of tobacco a central issue, not least in the context of the presidential campaign of 1996.214 Chevron appears in this way to accept the suggestion that deciding how to read ambiguities in a law involves no brooding omnipresence in the sky but an emphatically human judgment about policy or principle.215 This suggestion was of course central to the legal realist movement, but it is now supported by a wide range of people216 and it obviously bears on the question of whether and how the FDA can interpret the word "drug." Chevron also has a technocratic (as opposed to democratic) justification: judgments about the best meaning of statutory terms may well turn on an understanding of underlying facts. A decision about which articles affect the structure or function of the body will inevitably turn on judgments about facts, not only about the particular consequences of using the relevant articles, but also on the consequences, for regulatory policy, of a judgment one way or the other. This point is closely connected to the question of whether the FDA has authority over tobacco, since the FDA's decision turned partly on judgments about the facts.217 In this and other disputes, the importance of the Chevron decision cannot be overstated: in its relatively short period on the scene, Chevron, a kind of counter-Marbury21 for the administrative state, has been cited more frequently than Marbury v. Madison, Brown v. Board of Education,2(cid:127) or Roe v. Wade,220 and, if present trends continue, it may ultimately be cited more frequently than all those cases put together.221 Of course, there are limits to what citation rates show, but, at the very least, Chevron has become the framework through which agency interpretations of law are reviewed. We are thus left with the question of whether the FDA is bound by what may appear to be the most reasonable interpretation of the statutory terms, taken in their context and understood by reference to the traditional tools of statutory construction, or whether the FDA may adopt an interpretation that, whether or not the very best, seems consistent with the language of the statute and that does not violate any unambiguously expressed will of Congress. So phrased, Chevron seems to supply the answer: the FDA should prevail. the fact that many consumers are aware of them and smoke because of them is sufficient if the manufacturer intends those effects. To uphold the FDA regulation, this narrow understanding is sufficient. would allow a person's murderer to receive an inheritance from that person). that Congress did not intend the statute to be interpreted literally). have urged that it is entirely illegitimate for judges to continue their common law role,226 while others have argued for a form of "dynamic" statutory interpretation,227 and still others have gone so far as to urge a judicial power to nullify statutes on the ground that they are out of accord with the existing legal landscape.228 In the modern period, however, dynamic interpretation issimply as a matter of actual practice-an administrative task, not a judicial one. This is least controversially the case when agencies are deciding how to apply general terms to new problems or old problems that appear in new lights. In the late twentieth century, administrative agencies have undertaken most of the functions of common law courts, adapting general principles to various contexts, often in ways that produce substantial reversals. This is an omnipresent feature of the modern legal landscape. Consider just a few examples. The public interest standard for regulation of the broadcasting indus sludges, scrap metal, and the like would be treated as solid waste if they were not directly reused but were instead held as part of an industry's ongoing production process. See id. at 1180. The EPA reasoned that materials that were stored, transported, and held for recycling were associated with the same kinds of environmental harms as materials that were abandoned or disposed of in some final way. The court of appeals struck down the EPA regulation on the ground that the governing statute defined solid waste as "garbage, refuse, sludge ... and other discarded material," id. at 1179. For the court, material held for recycling was not "discarded." Id. at 1193. Citing the dictionary, the court thought that the "ordinary, plain-English meaning" was decisive. Id. at 1184. If the question was an internal dispute on a court of appeals about the best interpretation of a statutory term, perhaps the majority would be right. But the question involved the validity of an EPA regulation, produced after a complex process involving a number of political interests, an extended process of intergovernmental deliberation, and an elaborate inquiry into the underlying issues of substance. Even if a court would be reluctant to adapt the meaning of a term like "discarded" to fit with context, is it not hubristic for judges, not elected and knowing little about the enormously complex subject at hand, to invoke dictionaries (compiled, after all, by human beings) to invalidate executive branch decisions that cannot reasonably be said to run afoul of any judgment made by Congress? The EPA's decision followed a sustained period of public comment, and undoubtedly the government would be held accountable for any decision about the reach of the enabling statute. If the EPA's definitions runs afoul of dictionary decisions but of no actual decision by Congress, should it really be struck down? See also, e.g., Industrial Union Dep't, AFL-CIO v. American Petroleum Inst., 448 U.S. 607, 659-62 (1980) (rejecting a literal interpretation of the OSH Act). try has been subject to a common-law-like process of specification on the part of the FCC, embodying recognition of new values and facts. Thus, the FCC originally created and then eliminated the fairness doctrine, and new public interest obligations have grown up in the wake of the elimination.229 The EPA's regulations for protecting the public health through national ambient air quality standards are hardly static; even if the governing statutory term is taken to be clear and firm, the agency's practice has been otherwise.230 The NLRB operates, in practice, as a common law court, adapting statutory terms to new facts and values.231 The principal judgments about what qualifies as a "drug" have come from the FDA, not from courts, which have played a supplemental role. The FDA's assertion of jurisdiction over tobacco is merely an unusually visible and dramatic instance of this phenomenon. 229. See Glen O. Robinson, The Electronic First Amendment: An Essay for the New Age, 47 potential vice. The common law role of agencies is a function of specifications of statutory terms that result either from new factual knowledge or from changes in values, or from some combination of the two. The reversal in Chevron itself-from a smokestack definition of "source" to a plant-wide definition of "source"-was partly a product of technocratic values suggesting that this strategy would work best;233 it was also undoubtedly a product of political values and interests calling for less costly means of achieving environmental protection. To the suggestion that this position means that some statutes (more accurately, their terms in some applications) might be lost or misdirected as a result of new agency rulings, a response might be given in Justice Scalia's words: "[L]ots of once-heralded programs ought to get lost or misdirected, in vast hallways or elsewhere. Yesterday's herald is today's bore-although we judges, in the seclusion of our chambers, may not be au courant enough to realize it."234 The FDCA was of course written many years ago, and it defies belief to suggest that there is, in the background of that Act, any clear or simple legislative intent235 about whether tobacco might be counted as a drug in light of modern understandings of the effects of tobacco and of the understandings and desires of cigarette companies about those effects. The FDA is in an unusually good position to obtain information about those effects, understandings, and desires. Its assertion of regulatory power has already received and will inevitably continue to receive an enormously high degree of political attention, from Congress as well as from the President, not to mention the relevant groups that appear before the FDA itself. The ordinary understanding of the statutory text supports the FDA's position, and nothing in subsequent developments in Congress has divested the FDA of the authority that it would otherwise have. In applying the FDCA to tobacco, the FDA performed a lawful common law function, one that also has a high degree of democratic legitimacy. Where Congress has not spoken clearly, the role of the reviewing court is to obtain assurance of the reasonableness of the agency's decision in terms of facts, policy, and law, and there can be no doubt that the FDA's judgment was reasonable here. There are several possible responses to the argument rooted in Chevron. "jurisdictional." Second, Chevron is in part a recognition of the comparative advantages of agencies over courts, stemming from the agencies' greater factfinding power and electoral legitimacy, and those comparative advantages seem to apply to jurisdictional determinations as well. An extension of jurisdiction is likely to reflect political judgments, assessments of underlying facts, or both; the assertion of jurisdiction over tobacco products is certainly a case in point. In any event, the cases appear to have settled, at least implicitly, on the view that jurisdictional determinations are not entitled to less deference. It probably makes sense to say that a steady course of administrative interpretation is entitled to an unusually high level of deference. If the agency's course has been steady, then reliance interests may have built up around it; there may be special reason to think the old interpretation makes sense; and Congress and relevant interests have not, by hypothesis, showed dissatisfaction with it, even though they have had some time in which to do so. It does not, however, make sense to say that a new interpretation is entitled to no deference at all. Chevron itself was a case in which the agency changed its mind, partly because of political judgments, partly because of technical ones; consider, as well, Rust v. Sullivan, upholding the so-called "abortion gag rule," a new administrative interpretation driven largely by political judgments. The case for deference is of course heightened when the area involves a high degree of political visibility or technical complexity, and the FDA rule involves both. I conclude that the fact that the FDA changed its mind is relevant and justifies less deference than an unbroken pattern of interpretation, but it provides insufficient reason to disallow the FDA from adopting a reasonable understanding of the statutory terms. If there were an applicable canon of construction that would trump the FDA's interpretation, then the FDA should not prevail. It is difficult, however, to find any such canon in this case. To be sure, the FDA's assertion of authority over tobacco places some federal 241. See Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Bldg. & Constr. Trades Council, authority in an area that has also been regulated by the states. It would be implausible, however, to say that the FDA's decision triggers a relevant canon of construction, as in the idea that ambiguous statutes should not lightly be taken to preempt state law. No countervailing canon of construction defeats the application of Chevron. The analysis here suggests that that court was probably wrong under Chevron: the statute has considerable ambiguity here, and the term "conditions" on "sale, distribution, or use" can reasonably be understood to include restrictions on advertising and promotion. The court's decision would, however, be strengthened if it were thought that some or all of these restrictions raised serious questions under the First Amendment. A claim to this effect raises many issues by itself, and I do not believe that the First Amendment obstacles are in fact serious.247 This is, however, a controversial view of the First Amendment,248 and the best argument against the FDA's position on this count would invoke the constitutional background. There have been many strands in the foregoing argument, and by way of summary, it may be useful to outline the most plausible opinions and surrounding rationales against and for the FDA (in ascending order of persuasiveness). grounds: 1. It might be held that in the view of the enacting Congress, tobacco did not count as a "drug" and that this original understanding is decisive. This is the weakest argument against the FDA because the general terms are what matter, and because the original understanding about the applications of those terms were not enacted into law. reasoning in Posadas). in the first instance, this argument would have considerable weight, especially when combined with argument (3) above. In light, however, of the FDA's factual findings and the appropriate judicial posture in reviewing an agency interpretation of general statutory terms after Chevron, that argument is not persuasive. As a matter of simple practice, administrative agencies have become America's common law courts. The task of adapting the law to new circumstances, of both value and of fact, is largely an administrative responsibility. Agencies specify general statutory terms and are engaged in continuing processes of both "updating" and particularization. come our common law courts in a distinctive sense. On the one hand, it is legitimate for them to undertake relatively rapid changes over time, accountable as they are to the current administration-more legitimate than it is for common law courts to do the same thing.249 On the other hand, the updating and particularizing functions of administrative agencies must be disciplined by statutory boundaries, by "clear statement" principles, and by requirements of reasoned decisionmaking, requirements with both substantive and procedural components.