University of Chicago Law School ersity
Cass R. Sunstein
In 1982, Guido Calabresi published a provocative book, A Common Law for the Age of Statutes,' based on his Holmes Lectures at Harvard Law School. Judge Calabresi's basic argument was that the common law has certain virtues-above all, flexibility across time and space-that are at serious risk in a statutory era.2 Judge Calabresi's central concern was to find a way to import the values of common law judgment into a legal fabric governed by statutory law. His most dramatic proposal was that courts should be given the authority to declare statutes that were out of step with the prevailing legal landscape void for "obsolescence."3 Judge Calabresi's particular proposal has been very controversial, but it is of a piece with more standard views about statutory construction having common law origins: judge-made exceptions to plain language for absurd results judicially developed "clear statement" principles judicial invocation of statutory purpose in a way reminiscent of a precedent's "rationale" judicial treatment of many statutes as the foundation for judge-made common law and "dynamic" statutory interpretation.' And
Cass R. Sunstein
The Yale Law Journal
Judge Calabresi's views are reflected in the common law characteristics of much constitutional law, characteristics which have given rise to a general claim, usually meant as both description and praise, that constitutional law is merely a species of Anglo-American common law.
The central essay in Justice Antonin Scalia's new book,6 based on his Tanner Lectures at Princeton, offers an argument that is in many ways the converse of Judge Calabresi's. Where Judge Calabresi sought to celebrate the common law and to authorize courts to introduce far more of common law thinking into a statutory era, Justice Scalia seeks to demote, even to exorcise, the common law, to complain of its ascendancy in an age committed to the principles of democratic government and the rule of law. Hence the essay's title: Common-Law Courts in a Civil-Law System.7 In Justice Scalia's view, the use of common law methods is simultaneously anachronistic and hubristic. It is anachronistic because it is out of touch with the values and operations of modern government.8 The charge of hubris is the more serious one. Justice Scalia thinks that common law methods compromise democratic values, by allowing judges an excessive role in policymaking.9 He also thinks that common law methods introduce a high degree of unpredictability, increasing judicial discretion and at the same time depriving others, citizens as well as legislators, of a clear background against which to work.'"
Justice Scalia intends, then, to defend a species of democratic formalism. We might even say that Justice Scalia is the clearest and most self-conscious expositor of democratic formalism in the long history of American law. Justice Scalia is a democrat in the sense that much of his jurisprudence is designed to ensure that judgments are made by those with a superior democratic pedigree. Above all, he seeks to develop rules of interpretation that will limit the policymaking authority and decisional discretion of the judiciary, the least accountable branch of government. Justice Scalia is a formalist in the particular sense that he favors clear rules, seeks to treat statutory and constitutional texts as rules, and distrusts the view that legal texts should be understood by reference either to intentions or to canons of construction that live outside of
[Vol. 107: 529
authoritative texts." Democratic formalism finds its interpretive foundation in textualism. Thus Justice Scalia writes: "Of all the criticisms leveled against textualism, the most mindless is that it is 'formalistic.' The answer to that is,
formalism. It is what makes a government a government of laws and not of
As a judicial creed, democratic formalism is intelligible and coherent in part because it argues in favor of interpretive principles and statutory default rules that will create a clear background for Congress. in the process imposing the right incentives on lawmakers. Justice Scalia's preferred default rules are intended to make the law readily predictable and to ensure that Congress will legislate in the constitutionally preferred fashion.
Where does all this leave the common law? For the democrat and for the formalist, the common law raises many doubts. The common law, of course, owes its content not to electoral processes but to decisions by people who are mostly unelected. And common law judges are free to eschew rules and to act on a case-by-case basis. Indeed, the glory of the common law is often said to consist in its particularism-its careful attention to the facts of the particular case, its provision of an individualized hearing for each litigant.' Justice Scalia's attack on the common law legacy is thus rooted in distrust of particularism-especially judicial particulaism-and in enthusiasm for rulebound interpretation that relies, in both statutory and constitutional
This is an elegant book, and it is a great pleasure to read. My central objection is that Justice Scalia's argument on behalf of democratic formalism does not come to terms with three important problems for democratic formalism: the internal morality of the democratic ideal the existence of reasonable, alternative, nonformalist approaches to interpretation, designed to limit judicial discretion, promote stability, and enhance democratic self-
The Yale Law Journal
government and (most surprising) the place of administrative agencies in the structure of modem public law. It is not clear that democratic formalism actually promotes democracy, rightly understood. Moreover, there are other ways of limiting judicial power and judicial discretion, ways that are familiar to, even constitutive of, the common law tradition as it has come to be understood in the United States. The principal virtue of democratic formalism is that it may be the best way of promoting predictability, but even here there are reasonable alternatives, and it is far from clear that predictability trumps all other values.
In a short, vivid essay of this kind, originally presented as a public lecture, Justice Scalia cannot be expected to have laid all doubts to rest, or to have answered all questions in legal theory. But his defense of his own position works too often by hyperbolic slippery slope arguments, by opposing democratic formalism to positions that no one really holds, and most of all by invoking the specter of untrammeled judicial control over political outcomes. It is as if those who reject Justice Scalia's particular approach hope to give, and inevitably will give, unelected judges the power to do whatever they wish. But the choice between democratic formalism and the real alternatives calls for more fine-grained and, in part, empirical judgments about the capacities of real-world institutions. If, for example, judges interpret statutes in accordance with the original meaning of their text, will legislative drafting be improved, and will legislatures correct obvious mistakes? If judges do not use legislative history, might ambiguous texts be interpreted by reference to the judges' own views about policy and principle? If judges abandon the original understanding of the constitutional text, are there alternative positions that would limit judicial discretion and allow appropriate space for electoral politics? And just what is the role of administrative agencies, which might, in a post-Chevron7 era, perform, and be authorized to perform, the role formerly carried out by common law courts? Justice Scalia's silence on the last question is especially disappointing: At this stage in American history, no treatment of legal interpretation is complete if it neglects the enormous de facto and de jure interpretive function of administrative agencies.
If a goal of a system of interpretation is to constrain judicial discretion, and particularly if we attend to the role of regulatory agencies, it is far from clear that Justice Scalia's approach is superior to the alternatives actually favored by the American tradition of public law. And if (as Justice Scalia rightly insists) a goal of a system of legal interpretation is to promote democratic self-government, it is not at all clear that Justice Scalia's approach
[Vol. 107: 529
is better than that favored by our tradition, which uses interpretive principles to promote democratic goals, not only in the area of statutory construction but also in administrative and constitutional law. A great defect of democratic formalism is that it identifies democracy with whatever happens to emerge from majoritarian politics. If we insist (with the Constitution's Framers)'" that there is a difference between a well-functioning system of deliberative democracy and simple majoritarian politics, we may well favor principles of interpretation that promote that very system, perhaps by allowing administrative agencies some license to adjust text to circumstance, certainly through "clear statement" principles, and not least by invalidating outcomes that are inconsistent with what we might consider the internal morality of democracy.
In any case, this will be my basic argument here. Part I summarizes Justice Scalia's essay. Part II deals with the topic of statutory interpretation-Justice Scalia's particular passion and the highlight of his essay here. This part outlines the stakes, explores the great case of Church of the Holy Trinity v. United States, and examines the role of administrative agencies in legal interpretation. Its principal theme is that Justice Scalia's discussion neglects the possibility that administrative agencies can discharge some of the functions of common law courts without compromising democratic values. Part III explores the Constitution. It argues that the interests in ensuring stability, constraining judicial discretion, and promoting democratic self-government do argue for some version of the principles of stare decisis and judicial restraint, but not the particular form of originalism favored by Justice Scalia.
The principal essay in A Matter of Interpretation comes in three parts. The first part is an attack on the common law. The second part is a discussion of statutory interpretation. The third part deals with constitutional law.
Justice Scalia's discussion of the common law is sharp, clever, and at times hilarious. In some ways it amounts to an indictment of legal education. Justice Scalia thinks that the first year of law school has "an enormous impact upon the mind,"' and much of that impact comes from the student's immersion in judge-made common law. There is a difference, for Justice Scalia, between law that is common in the sense of "customary" and law that
A. Broken-Field Runners
The Yale Law Journal
is "common" in the sense that it is the creation of judges. That latter form of law is not created through practice but is the stuff of law schools, hypotheticals, and analogical thinking:
What intellectual fun all of this is! It explains why first-year law
school is so exhilarating: because it consists of playing common-law
judge, which in turn consists of playing king-devising, out of the
brilliance of one's own mind, those laws that ought to govern
mankind. How exciting! 2' The student comes to have a distinctive picture of the great judge, with a large influence on American legal culture, as-the person
who has the intelligence to discern the best rule of law for the case
at hand and then the skill to perform the broken-field running through
earlier cases that leaves him free to impose that rule: distinguishing
one prior case on the left, straight-arming another one on the right,
high-stepping away from another precedent about to tackle him from
the rear, until (bravo!) he reaches the goal-good law.
What is wrong with this picture? Justice Scalia thinks that the problem is simple: "a trend in government that has developed in recent centuries, called democracy. Legal realism has taught us what is now obvious, that common law judges make and do not find law. This does not mean the common law should be eliminated from its own domain, but it does mean the attitude of common law judges is inappropriate for most of the work of federal judges and much of the work of state judges. "We live in an age of legislation, and most new law is statutory law."5 And the common law method has two basic problems. First, it is insufficiently democratic, since it threatens rule by judges.2 Second, the common law method is insufficiently formal, because it is too highly particularistic, too unpredictable, too rule-free.
Justice Scalia brings these points to bear on the topic of statutory interpretation, a real highlight of the book and clearly one of his passions.28
"What a Waste"
[Vol. 107: 529
His basic complaint is that American judges and academics 'are unconcerned with the fact that we have no intelligible theory" of statutory construction. "' His central claim is that what matters is the objective meaning of the text, not the subjective intentions of Congress. "It is the law that governs, not the intent of the lawgiver."" Interpretation actually turns on "a sort of 'objectified' intent-the intent that a reasonable person would gather from the text of the
intent is so murky, Justice Scalia thinks that its use risks substitution of judicial policy preferences for those of the legislature.
His case in chief in this regard is States.2 There the Court held, contrary to the apparently plain language of the governing statute banning the importation of foreign labor, that a church could pay for the transportation of a rector to the United States." Justice Scalia reads Holy Trinity (not at all unreasonably) as a case about the substitution of legislative intent for text. In his view, what the church did violated "the letter of the statute, and was therefore within the statute: end of case." Thus Justice Scalia adopts textualism. But he offers two important clarifications. First, he disfavors "strict construction": "I am not a strict constructionist, and no one ought to be .... ." Textualists give to the text its ordinary meaning, construing it neither broadly nor narrowly. Nor does Justice Scalia favor literalism.36 He emphasizes that meaning is a function of context. What he urges is that courts should refuse to go beyond the range of meaning offered by a reasonable understanding of statutory terms, taken in their context.
Justice Scalia is aware that some cases involve a fairly wide range of textual meanings, and that the text can leave ambiguities. What aids are permissible? It is entirely acceptable to interpret statutory terms with structural aids, resolving ambiguities so as to make statutes both internally consistent and consistent with previously enacted laws. His textualism is thus supplemented with the structure of the relevant statute and indeed the structure of the law as whole.3
The Yale Law Journal
Justice Scalia also defends canons of construction as legitimate and helpful to the extent that they are common sense ways of understanding the meaning of text. This is true of the ancient canons with Latin names, such as the old favorite, expressio unius est exclusio alterius (expression of the one is exclusion of the other). In urging the use of such canons, Justice Scalia takes a stand against Karl Llewellyn's famous attempt to demolish the canons by showing that for every canon there is an equal canon pointing in the opposite direction.3 " Justice Scalia says, very reasonably, that there are not really opposites on almost every point, and he thinks that the most that Llewellyn has shown is that the canons are not absolute,39 which is not exactly news.
Justice Scalia is much less enthusiastic about substantive canons and presumptions, as in the idea that courts should construe statutes favorably to Native Americans, leniently on behalf of criminal defendants, narrowly if they are in derogation of the common law, narrowly if they waive sovereign immunity, and so forth. For textualists, substantive canons are "a lot of trouble." They lack clear legitimacy (because it is not clear where courts get the authority to use them), and they have indeterminate weight, thus increasing the unpredictability and possible arbitrariness of judicial decision. On the other hand, some substantive presumptions may be reasonable if they attempt to get at meaning or if they have the warrant of antiquity. Thus, extraordinary acts, like the congressional elimination of state sovereign immunity or perhaps the waiver of sovereign immunity, require a clear statement, because that is what one would expect were extraordinary acts intended. And the rule of lenity may be justified by its age. But others, like the rule that statutes in derogation of the common law will be narrowly construed, look like "a sheer judicial powergrab.
For a long time, Justice Scalia has been critical of judicial use of legislative history.42 Here he makes two central points. First, legislative intent is not the proper basis of interpretation, and hence legislative history focuses judicial attention on the wrong question,43 away from meaning and toward subjective understandings of meaning. Second, use of history involves a lot of time and expense, and it is "more likely to produce a false or contrived legislative intent than a genuine one."" This is because there is in 99.99% of cases no such thing, and the archives are unreliable in any case. "In the only case I recall in which, had I followed legislative history, I would have come
[Vol. 107: 529
out the other way, the rest of my colleagues (who did use legislative history)
C. "A Rock-Solid, Unchanging Constitution"
Constitutional interpretation, for Justice Scalia, is a place not for special principles but for the usual ones just described. His basic argument is that the Constitution's meaning is set not by the original intention but by the original meaning of its text. Alexander Hamilton and James Madison receive attention not because they were Framers whose subjective intentions matter, but because they (no more than John Jay and Thomas Jefferson, who were not Framers) can help us identify the original meaning. For Justice Scalia, originalism opposes those who think, in common law fashion, that the Constitution is "living" and should be understood by reference to "current" meaning.' The notion of a "living constitution" is an invitation to the broken-field running characteristic of common law thinking, or decision by reference to cases instead of authoritative text. Justice Scalia particularly deplores the fact that constitutional law is made after consulting recent cases rather than original intention. For Justice Scalia, the result is "a common-law way of making law, and not the way of construing a democratically adopted text."' The consequence is that the Constitution means whatever the judges think it should mean.
Against the view that the "living constitution" is necessary to promote flexibility over time, Justice Scalia argues that the "living constitution" approach actually reduces the capacity for democratic experimentation, by allowing judges to prevent elected officials from engaging in new experiments.48 Against the view that the "living constitution" is necessary to protect an ample category of rights, Justice Scalia argues that it need not increase the category of rights at all. In many cases-property rights, Second Amendment rights,49 Confrontation Clause rights--originalism offers a more expansive rather than less expansive understanding of rights." That understanding may be ill-suited to current social desires. But it is emphatically not a truncated understanding of rights.
Justice Scalia's fundamental objections to a common law understanding of the Constitution are that it lacks legitimacy and that it is too discretionary. Freed from the original meaning, judges consult their own judgments of policy
The Yale Law Journal
and principle and are effectively untethered. "[T]here is no agreement, and no chance of agreement, upon what is to be the guiding principle of the evolution., To be sure, originalists disagree among themselves history can be ambiguous and, importantly, as Justice Scalia notes, there are questions about applying the original meaning to "new and unforeseen phenomena," such as sound trucks and television.53 But these are minor problems compared to those raised when people who, believing in a "living constitution," take the Constitution to mean what it should and hence authorize judges to understand the Constitution to be whatever "the majority wants."54 "This, of course, is the end of the Bill of Rights, whose meaning will be committed to the very body it was meant to protect against: the majority. By trying to make the
A. Interpretive Goals: Decisional Burdens, Stability, Democracy, and
Restraint
What are the goals of Justice Scalia's approach to interpretation? One goal is to reduce the sheer costs of decision, so that the burden on courts and litigants is relatively low. A closely related goal is to make law relatively certain and predictable, so that people know where they stand and do not have to puzzle much over the content of law. Yet another goal is to control the discretion of those institutions whom we trust least or fear most. A system of interpretation might well be designed to reduce the role of courts in establishing social policies or governing principles, certainly if it seems that courts ought not to be entrusted with that kind of business. Justice Scalia thinks that his version of textualism will effectively control judicial power, while at the same time increasing the policymaking primacy of the legislature, in part by giving it appropriate incentives. If, for example, legislative history will not be used, legislators will be under considerable pressure to increase
nothing at all."
[Vol. 107: 529
statutory clarity. These points are about reducing the burdens of decision and the costs of uncertainty.
But Justice Scalia seeks most fundamentally to promote democratic self-
of the Constitution. The reduction of judicial discretion via textualism serves both of these fundamental goals. In so doing, democratic formalism ensures "purposes" attributable to the (unenacted) political morality of any particular era. A ban on "dynamic" interpretation, and a requirement of fidelity to enacted law, ensures that courts will not bow to political will or bend statutes to prevailing political winds except to the extent that they have produced actual legislation.5
It is worth speculating about why and how Justice Scalia, educated at
position. Henry Hart and Albert Sacks, of course, saw continuity between the
collaborative role of courts, not least in the process of statutory interpretation, which they thought was best rooted in identification of statutory "purpose,"
Scalia has suggested that years ago he was sympathetic to this position, or at
self-professed shift in view may have emerged from the nation's experience with both particularism and purposive interpretation in the period between, say, 1965 and the present. In this period, particularism occasionally has produced a high degree of confusion, as case-by-case decisions allow judges to have
The Yale Law Journal
continuing room to maneuver and make predictability hard to maintain. Perhaps even worse, resort to statutory and, above all, constitutional purpose has led Justices in directions that, by Justice Scalia's lights, must seem highly ideological-much less a matter of finding something than a matter of making things up.6 And what is made up might well seem to reflect the views of a "new class" of intellectuals having political commitments very different from those of Justice Scalia himself and perhaps the nation as a whole.
In brief: When particularism and purposivism invite courts to take stands on the great issues of the day, or on "Kulturkampf," formalism reemerges as an appealing alternative.66 A shift from particularism and purposivism to formalism represents a natural odyssey for students of Hart and Sacks, disappointed by personal experience with an apparently ideological, particularistic, and purposive judiciary, and seeking to impose sharp constraints on judicial discretion.67 Some help in this regard emerges from work in cognitive psychology suggesting that people often overstate the value of caseby-case, intuitionistic judgments, and understate the value of (admittedly somewhat crude) rules.68
What I will be arguing here is that, despite appearances, Justice Scalia's argument cannot really rely on abstract or a priori claims about Article I of the Constitution or on arguments about democratic rule.69 Those claims do not support Justice Scalia's distinctive approach. Instead, that approach must be defended by a set of pragmatic and empirical claims about various governmental institutions and how those institutions are likely to respond to
[Vol. 107: 529
different interpretive strategies. Justice Scalia does not defend those pragmatic and empirical claims. Thus, he has not shown that his approach is preferable to reasonable alternatives, including those that stress the role of administrative agencies in the modem state. will make much sense. 7' And while judgments about the future are inevitably speculative, America's own experience, with its distinctive history, suggests that democratic formalism is likely to be inferior to the alternatives actually favored by the American legal tradition. 7' We might take this to be a neoBurkean point, intended as a challenge to Justice Scalia's neo-Benthamite attack on the common law.72
It is highly revealing in this connection that there is a substantial overlap between the interpretive practices of common law and civil law courts, each of which uses similar presumptions and canons, not only linguistic but also substantive.73 Thus, Justice Scalia's attack on common law practices cannot easily survive an encounter with civil law systems, whose courts are only intermittently textualist, and which are permeated by interpretive practices of the kind he disfavors.74
The Yale Law Journal
Holy Trinity, Excessive Generality, and Presumptions
Let us approach these points by focusing on Church of the Holy Trinity v. United States,5 Justice Scalia's bete noire. The Holy Trinity case raises a large number of the issues dealt with in Justice Scalia's discussion of statutory interpretation by discussing Holy Trinity, we can discuss many of the issues raised in the book. In 1885, largely in response to an influx of immigrant labor, Congress made it unlawful
for any person, company, partnership, or corporation, in any manner
whatsoever, to prepay the transportation, or in any way assist or
encourage the importation or migration of any alien or aliens, any
agreement, parol or special, express or implied, made previous to the
importation or migration of such alien or aliens, foreigner or
foreigners, to perform labor or service of any kind in the United
The problem arose because the Church of the Holy Trinity made a contract with E. Walpole Warren, an alien residing in England, to pay for his transportation to the United States, where he was to work as a rector and pastor. The United States claimed that the church had acted unlawfully.77 The Supreme Court disagreed. It said that the text of the statute was not controlling.78
The Court's opinion was very complex, with multiple strands. It can be read in three different ways, each with support in the opinion itself.
(1) General language will not be taken to produce an outcome that would, in context, be absurd, at least if there is no affirmative evidence that this result was intended by the enacting legislature.
[F]requently words of general meaning are used in a statute, words
broad enough to include an act in question, and yet a consideration of
the whole legislation, or of the circumstances surrounding its
enactment, or of the absurd results which follow from giving such
broad meaning to the words, makes it unreasonable to believe that the
legislator intended to include the particular act.79
On this view, Holy Trinity is a rerun of the famous case of Riggs v. Palmer," in which the New York Court of Appeals held that a statute governing
[Vol. 107: 529
The Yale Law Journal
Justice Scalia appears to think that each of these three principles is wrong, certainly as applied to Holy Trinity.84 Let us take up these principles in turn.
Understood according to principle (I), Holy Trinity presents a familiar, even mundane problem, that is, the problem introduced by linguistic generality. In a famous passage, Wittgenstein describes the problem in this way: "Someone says to me: 'Shew [sic] the children a game.' I teach them gaming with dice, and the other says, 'I didn't mean that sort of game.' Must the exclusion of the game with dice have come before his mind when he gave me the order?"8
Wittgenstein's clear implication is that it need not. In daily communication, and without thinking about it, we carve out exceptions from general language we do not consult the dictionary meaning of the words and act in accordance with what we find there. It is tempting to respond that there is a difference between daily communication and a legislative command perhaps the latter should be presumed not to be sloppy. But this response misses the point, which has nothing to do with sloppiness and everything to do with the cognitive limits of human beings. Because of the inevitable limitations of human foresight, even the most carefully chosen words can become unclear because and not in spite of their generality.87 Textualists who fail to see this point can be found only in science fiction novels populated by androids and aliens,88 whose misunderstandings and befuddlement are a direct consequence of their textualism. Now, Justice Scalia is not a literalist he is at
[Vol. 107: 529
The Yale Law Journal
But are the assumptions correct? This is far from obvious. Perhaps a judicial role of the sort suggested in Holy Trinity will not introduce much uncertainty perhaps cases in which textual generality produces absurdity are few in number and easily recognized as such. If so, principle (1) may not much increase decision costs, and it may greatly reduce error (understood as such if the outcome would be by general agreement absurd). And perhaps it is very hard for legislatures to anticipate cases of this kind in advance-and also costly and complex for legislatures, with so much business to transact, to spend all the resources necessary to fix the errors of excessive generality. Formalism may decrease costs at the judicial level while also increasing costs, perhaps dramatically, at the legislative level. If all this is true, Holy Trinity is right as an example of principle (1).
If we are talking about the modem state, it makes sense to say that administrative agencies should be permitted to act as the Court did in Holy Trinity (a point to which I will return94). And a reasonable assessment of the practical issues would suggest that courts should feel free to make exceptions for applications that seem unquestionably absurd. Then the question would be whether the application in Holy Trinity falls in that category. To know that, we have to know some cjetails, but certainly it cannot be said that the outcome is implausible or an abuse.
Justice Scalia is correct in objecting to principle (2) if he understands that principle to suggest that clearly expressed legislative history (in, for example, committee reports) should trump clearly expressed text. He is also right to say that the text, and not the history, is the law no one should doubt that point. And it is sensible for Justice Scalia to insist on a distinction between subjective intent (something actually in the minds of legislators) and "objectified intent," understood as "the intent that a reasonable person would gather from the text of the law, placed alongside the remainder of the corpus juris. But suppose that we do not trouble ourselves with the complexities of psychological inquiry into the subjective intentions of collective decisionmaking bodies, and suppose that we use legislative history only in cases of interpretive doubt, not because it is "the law" but because it helps identify the meaning of the law. Suppose too that interpretive doubt can be created either by ambiguous terms or by what appears to be excessive generality. Here legislative history would matter for the same reason that Madison and Hamilton matter. Words are hard to understand without some conception of their purpose, and the distinction between purpose and intention (suitably "objectified") is thin.
Indeed, textualism itself cannot do without some crucial subjective elements. Recall that meaning is, for Justice Scalia, to be determined by
[Vol. 107: 529
The Yale Law Journal
culture in which legislative history helps to discipline judges, by giving them a sense of context and purpose, without creating serious problems at the legislative stage. There is no way to know whether, in the abstract, the use of legislative history is good or bad. So long as courts proceed sensibly, first principles involving political legitimacy cannot resolve that question. Whether it makes sense to use legislative history depends on such issues as the simple costs of using the history, the likelihood that it will increase rather than decrease errors, the availability of other more reliable sources of meaning, and the consequences for the legislature itself of using legislative history or not using it.
Justice Scalia is convincing in urging that legislative text and structure deserve priority. He is right to say that courts have often misused legislative history and that the use of history can increase costs of decision while also creating more rather than fewer mistakes. Certainly a movement in the direction of a firm judicial principle of textual primacy would make a good deal of sense."' But he has not demonstrated that where other sources of meaning leave doubt, courts should not consult legislative history. Perhaps a legal system starting from scratch would do best to forbid courts from consulting history. Perhaps American public law would be better if a ban on the use of history were enacted this is far from implausible. But in light of our longstanding traditions, a dramatic shift of the sort proposed by Justice Scalia bears a heavy burden of justification, and he has not met that burden here.
What about principle (3)? Justice Scalia does not discuss it in any detail. But it is not hard to imagine how clear statement rules might be defended. Justice Scalia willingly acknowledges that extraordinary acts are not expected and that courts should not find such acts unless there is clear indication that they were intended " this idea is part of a defense of principle (3). Justice Scalia also insists that courts should try to fit ambiguous texts with the rest of existing law, and Holy Trinity was written very much in this spirit. And there is a third possible defense of principle (3) it has to do with the nondelegation doctrine, whose purpose is to ensure that legislatures, rather than bureaucracies or courts, actually make the most important decisions of policy.' Perhaps courts should require Congress-not the executive branch-to decide, with particularity, if it wants to force judges to resolve a serious constitutional problem. On this view, vague or general language should not be taken to require judicial resolution of a hard constitutional judgment there is too great a likelihood that, if it is so taken, Congress itself will not have thought about the constitutional issue at all. Certainly it is most unlikely
[Vol. 107: 529
that the Congress that enacted the statute at issue in Holy Trinity actually decided to apply the ban on importation of labor to churches."'
Of course, the nondelegation doctrine is effectively dead, in part because courts cannot easily enforce it." But many clear statement principles or substantive canons-prominently including the principle requiring Congress to speak clearly if it wants to raise a serious constitutional problem-can be seen as narrower, more modest, more targeted nondelegation doctrines. The basic defense of principle (3) is that it has a democracy-forcing character. It requires the national legislature to make a highly focused decision, reflecting its own choices about constitutionally sensitive issues. Many substantive canons of construction have this purpose. They are designed to ensure that the legislature focuses with particularity on some issue, largely for reasons with roots in the Constitution, American history, or both. Thus, ambiguous statutes will be read so as not to preempt state law, or favorably to Native Americans, or so as not to apply extraterritorially, or favorably to criminal defendants, or so as not to intrude on the traditional authority of the President.'
We can agree that the statutory text deserves priority over legislative history and that courts should ordinarily rely on a reasonable understanding of the text at the time of enactment. But Justice Scalia provides no convincing argument against principles (1), (2), or (3). A general conclusion follows. Any approach to statutory interpretation depends on judgments, partly pragmatic and empirical in nature, about the capacities of both courts and legislatures, and about the likely effects on both institutions of different interpretive approaches.' Those who endorse principles (1), (2), and (3), or imaginable cousins and variations, have to defend those principles against the objection that they increase uncertainty (thus jeopardizing rule of law values) and also the number and magnitude of mistakes. Justice Scalia's approach must be defended not only on the ground that it increases certainty (a reasonable proposition, though a questionable one if textual ambiguity is pervasive) but also on the ground that it will not lead to errors that are large in number and
serious in magnitude. A good deal turns on the likely performance of courts and legislatures and on legislators' responsiveness to judicial interpretation.
Justice Scalia has offered only the beginning of a defense in the necessary terms. He does not show that the actual practices of American courts reveal systematic abuses of principles (1), (2), and (3). Certainly a more extended empirical study would be helpful here.
C. A Dog That Did Not Bark: Have Administrative Agencies Become Our
Common Law Courts?
There is a notable and surprising gap in Justice Scalia's argument: the administrative state. Justice Scalia is, of course, a specialist on administrative law, whose rise has, in practice, greatly transformed the practice of interpretation in public law. Most of the key work of statutory interpretation is done not by courts at all, but by federal agencies. Justice Scalia has also
Natural Resources Defense Council,"' which is unquestionably the most important case about legal interpretation in the last thirty years. Note in this regard that in its relatively short period on the scene, Chevron, a kind of counter-Marbury"l for the administrative state, has been cited more frequently (3977 times)"l than Marbury v. Madison (948 times), Brown v. Board of Education"3 (1520 times), or Roe v. Wade (1556 times), and if present trends continue it will soon have been cited more frequently than all those cases put together. Indeed, Chevron may qualify as the most cited case in federal courts.
Chevron holds that where statutes are ambiguous, courts should accept any reasonable interpretation by the agency charged with their implementation." Chevron also appears to accept the legal realist suggestion, central to Justice Scalia's essay here, that the decision of how to read ambiguities in law involves no "brooding omnipresence in the sky"" but an emphatically human judgment about policy or principle. And Chevron concludes, in a way
[Vol. 107: 529
The Yale Law Journal
Justice Scalia has argued elsewhere that plain text always counts against an agency interpretation in his view-consistent with his argument in this book-Chevron deference is never due to an agency that counteracts text (defined by reference to ordinary understandings). But perhaps this view is itself anachronistic. Indeed, we ultimately might conclude that we can obtain the right mix of democratic and common law virtues if and only if we decide that the adaptation of statutory text to particular applications (including the exemption of absurd outcomes), and the use of applicable canons of construction, is an entirely appropriate administrative task.'15
On this view, Holy Trinity might be seen very differently in the context of the twenty-first century, whose public law would pose as a central question: What are the views of any agency charged with implementation of this law?"2 To the suggestion that this position means that some statutes (more accurately their terms in some applications) might be lost or misdirected as a result of new agency rulings, a response might be given in Justice Scalia's own words: "[L]ots of once-heralded programs ought to get lost or misdirected, in vast hallways or elsewhere. Yesterday's herald is today's bore-although we judges, in the seclusion of our chambers, may not be at courant enough to realize it.' As against Judge Calabresi's plea for judicial updating, we might claim that the argument itself needs to be updated: For the most part, appropriate solutions to the problem of statutory obsolescence should come from administrative agencies, immersed in the problems at hand and having both technocratic and democratic virtues as compared to courts. And as against Justice Scalia, we might urge that administrative agencies should be authorized to reject the "text" in a way that would go well beyond the common law role envisaged by Holy Trinity, at least when there is no evidence of a considered
[Vol. 107: 529
legislative judgment against the agency's interpretation.'2 ' In modern Holy Trinity cases, courts would not do the work on their own, but would permit agencies to engage in a degree of statutory adaptation, not at all on the theory that agencies can violate the text, but on a finding that agencies reasonably concluded that despite the generality of the text, there was no considered legislative judgment that the text should be applied in a way contrary to the
Consider, for example, a fairly conventional case, Congress v. EPA. 3' Congress had not clearly dealt with the problem of how to handle materials held for recycling, and the relevant EPA regulation defined certain materials involved in recycling as "solid waste." In particular, the regulation said that spent materials, sludges, scrap metal, and the like would be treated as solid waste if they were not directly reused but were instead held as part of an industry's ongoing production process."' The EPA reasoned that materials that were stored, transported, and held for recycling were associated with the same kinds of environmental harms as materials that were abandoned or disposed of in some final way. The court of appeals struck down the EPA regulation on the ground that the governing statute defined solid waste as "'garbage, refuse, sludge and other discarded for the court, material held for recycling was not 'discarded."" Citing the dictionary, the court thought that the "'ordinary plain-English meaning" was decisive.1 If the question was an internal dispute in a court of appeals about the best interpretation of a statutory term, perhaps the majority would be right. But the question involved the validity of an EPA regulation, produced after a complex process involving a number of political interests, an extended process of intergovernmental deliberation, and an elaborate inquiry into the underlying issues of substancc. Even if a court would be reluctant to adapt the meaning of a term like "discarded" to fit with context-even if this is a weaker case than Holy Trinity for contextual adaptation-is it not hubristic for judges, unelected and relatively unknowledgeable about the enormously complex subject at hand, to invoke dictionaries (compiled after all by human beings) to invalidate executive branch decisions that cannot reasonably be said to run
afoul of any judgment from Congress? The EPA's decision followed a sustained period of public comment, and undoubtedly the government would be held accountable for any decision about the reach of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976.136 If the EPA's decision runs afoul of dictionary decisions but of no actual decision by Congress, should it really be struck down?
Or consider an especially important recent case, upholding the power of the FDA to regulate tobacco products as "drugs" or "devices. The FDA contended that the current meaning of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, " as enacted in 1938, allows it to regulate tobacco products.' At first glance, it seems clear that in 1938, the terms "drug" and "device" were not understood to include tobacco products. But might not an executive agency, subject as it is to political checks and immersed as it is in the technical details, be entitled to interpret those terms to include tobacco products in 1997? The statute defines "drug" to include articles "intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or other animals,"'' and it defines "device" to include any "article" that is similarly intended and that "does not achieve its primary intended purposes" through chemical action or through being metabolized.' The court held that the FDA could rely on foreseeability, consumer use, and internal manufacturer memoranda to establish intended use "to affect the structure or any function of the body.' And the court added that the FDA could conclude that tobacco products contain "device components" designed to ensure an (admittedly indirect) effect on the structure or function of the body.'" What is striking about the court's conclusions is that they were based not on the ordinary understanding of the statutory terms at the time of enactment, but on the agency's authority to interpret those terms in a way consistent with (what accountable and informed officials could conclude is) their current meaning.
Without attempting to resolve the underlying issues here, I think that the court's decision is reasonable and probably correct. To be sure, the original meaning of "drug" and "device" may not, to the relevant community, have
[Vol. 107: 529
included tobacco products.4 But Congress enacted general terms, not particular understandings of what those terms meant. And in view of new judgments about relevant facts and belief-influenced changes in values, it seems appropriate to allow a specialized agency, accountable as it is to political forces, to interpret these (general and ambiguous) terms as did in 1997. There can be little doubt that the FDA's decision was a product of a set of legitimate political influences and that it emerged after a sustained period of highly visible deliberation on the issues at hand, with involvement from the President himself. And, of course, Congress can override the interpretation if it chooses.
A broader conclusion follows. It is one thing to say that courts should be permitted to reject original meaning in favor of current meaning' it is quite another thing to say that agencies, with their comparative advantages, should be permitted to do precisely that. These are separate debates, and it is possible to resolve the first question against the courts while at the same time resolving the second question in favor of the agencies."' What is disappointing is that Justice Scalia does not discuss these issues, which link his interests in statutory interpretation and administrative law, and which cast a new light on the courtlegislature interactions that concern him here.
Allowing appropriate adjustments for administrative law, we can better understand statutory interpretation if we borrow from the law of contract. It is now familiar to see contract law as consisting largely of default rules, specifying how to understand gaps or silences from the parties and also how to understand provisions that seem vague or ambiguous. The law of contract contains three kinds of default rules. First, some default rules are designed to find out the instructions of the parties. What would they have done, if they had made provision on the point? Such default rules are marketmimicking." Second, some default rules are designed not to implement the parties' will, but to impose on the party who can do so most cheaply the incentive to make a clear provision on the point.' Default rules of this kind
D. An Analogy
The Yale Law Journal
are information-eliciting, intended not to mimic the parties' wishes but to make sure that those wishes are made clear by the parties themselves. It also seems clear how to choose between market-mimicking and information-eliciting default rules. If the court is clear on what the market-mimicking rule is, it should choose that rule. But if the court is unsure on that question-if the costs of decision and costs of error for the judge seeking to discern the market mimicking rule are very high-the court might do better to impose an information-eliciting default, designed to penalize the party in the best position to make explicit provision for the matter at hand.
Courts also have a third kind of default rule. Some such rules are based on considerations of public policy that have little or nothing to do with implementing or eliciting the parties' instructions.' Such considerations might involve, for example, the protection of third parties, or they might be intended to shift the parties' preferences and values in a certain direction.
Much of legal interpretation is, or is about, default rules.'5 Now, it may be tempting to suppose that federal courts, lacking common law authority, ought not to use such rules, and that statutory construction should proceed without them. But a moment's reflection should show that statutory default rules, in some form, are not so much desirable as inevitable. As the law of contract helps reveal, words cannot have meaning without background understandings of various sorts. Usually those understandings are so taken for granted, so highly internalized, that they seem invisible, and part of the necessary meaning of words. But they are nonetheless in place they make communication possible. And often legal interpretation is possible only because of background principles or rules, some of them so taken for granted that they are invisible, some of them contested enough to be visible but not highly controversial, some of them at the heart of spirited debates in public law. If, for example, a federal statute does not say whether state law is preempted, what happens? If a statute is silent on the existence of private rights of action, do such rights exist? A default rule, principle, or presumption is necessary one way or the other. The legal system cannot proceed without them. The question is not whether to have statutory default rules but which statutory default rules to have.
Some default rules15 may be designed to find out the legislature's actual
The Yale Law Journal
Justice Scalia's attack on a version of common law constitutionalism, in favor of a species of originalism, raises a number of questions, and I will attend to only a few of them here.
Are we all originalists now? In the commentaries in this book, Ronald Dworkin ' and Laurence Tribe write as originalists, and with suitable qualifications, most of their work can fly comfortably under the originalist banner. For most participants in the continuing debates, the question is emphatically not whether the original understanding is controlling it is how the original understanding is best understood. Some people think that the original understanding is best taken as setting out abstract moral principles.'6 Others think that the original understanding points to abstract principles' -in the context of the ban on cruel and unusual punishment, for example, it "'forbid[s] whatever punishments are in fact cruel and unusual."" Still others think that however the original understanding is described, its provisions must be "translated" in order to be applied to new
Justice Scalia claims that he does take the Constitution to embody "abstract principles." What it sets forth "is not a moral principle of 'cruelty' that philosophers can play with in the future, but rather the existing society's assessment of what is cruel."' Thus, the Eighth Amendment is to be understood not by "'what we consider cruel today"' but instead by "the moral perceptions of the time." Of course, this formulation raises many
[Vol. 107: 529
questions. How do we characterize the moral perception of the time9 At what level of abstraction? Apparently Justice Scalia believes that it must be characterized at a relatively low level of abstraction his claim that the death penalty cannot possibly violate the Eighth Amendment's *'abstract moral principle"' appears to be rooted in the fact that the moral prnciple held by the founding generation did not appear, to the Founding generation, to forbid the death penalty. But this raises many further questions. Does it follow that the Equal Protection Clause permits school segregation*? That the national government, not bound by the Equal Protection Clause, can discriminate however it wishes? That the First Amendment does not disturb the common law of libel?
Justice Scalia does not answer these questions. I emphasize this point not to say that the originalist will necessarily arrive at unacceptable results," but to suggest that there is not one kind of (canonical) originalism but a wide range of (plausible) originalisms. Justice Scalia has not adequately defended the particular kind that he favors.
There is a pervasive problem for originalists: how to handle precedents that depart from originalism. In many areas of constitutional law, onginalism as Justice Scalia understands it has been repudiated for a fairly long time, and key provisions now mean something other than what, on Justice Scalia's version of originalism, they were originally understood to mean. The question goes to the heart of the relationship between the Constitution and the common law method. Common law lawyers rely heavily on the doctrine of stare decisis it is a foundation of their method. How should those skeptical of common law constitutionalism deal with the resulting doctnne?
Commenting in this volume, Professor Tribe argues that Justice Scalia is not really an originalist at all. Tribe objects that in several First Amendment cases (involving flag burning. cross burning,": and animal sacrifice173 Justice Scalia has voted to strike down statutes not inconsistent with the original understanding, narrowly understood.'" But Justice Scalia acknowledges the problem. He answers that his votes are attributable not to a belief that the First Amendment sets out aspirations whose content changes over time, but to the unblinkable fact that for the First Amendment "the Court has developed long-standing and well-accepted principles (not out of accord
The Yale Law Journal
with the general practices of our people, whether or not they were constitutionally required as an original matter) that are effectively irreversible.' The point of originalism is thus not to "roll[] back... accepted old principles of constitutional law" but to reject "usurpatious new ones."'7 Justice Scalia explains in this fashion his recent votes against "novel constitutional rights"-the right against excessive damage awards,'7 the right against being excluded from government contracts because of party affiliation,'78 and the novel constitutional ban on some single-sex
Now, this is a large problem, faced in some form by every Justice, and Justice Scalia cannot be faulted for failing to resolve it in a brief essay and an even briefer reply to critics. But the difficulty with his claim here is that it is very hard to know when an originalist judge, concerned to respect precedent, is applying "accepted old principles" or instead creating "new constitutional rights." Would it not be equally plausible to say that in the nonoriginalist judgments that Justice Scalia joined the Court created new rights, for example the right to bum the flag and the cross, and the right to sacrifice animals? Would it not be plausible to say that in the judgments from which Justice Scalia dissented, the Court largely applied principles developed in older cases forbidding government from using outmoded sex stereotypes as a basis for segregating schools"' or from conditioning employment on party affiliation?'
To answer these questions, everything depends on the level of generality at which old principles or new rights are described. The precedents in such areas as sex equality are well-entrenched, and Justice Scalia offers no basis on which to distinguish between a refusal to create "new rights" and a willingness to follow "old principles." There is also a risk that the originalist judge, refusing to extend the principles reflected in old cases, will ensure incoherence in the law, and thus a form of unfairness, since similarly situated people will not be treated similarly. This might be referred to as the Bowers v. Hardwick' problem: "Thus far and no more!" does not produce much
[Vol. 107: 529
coherence in the law.' Perhaps this sacrifice is inevitable and worthwhile-if it is the only way to restore judicial legitimacy without renovating existing law-but it creates problems of its own. To decide whether the resulting incoherence, and dissimilar treatment of the similarly situated, are worthwhile, it is necessary to balance the extent of the unfairness against the value of preventing further mistakes. This is a large problem, faced by anyone with confidence in a particular method of interpretation, and I cannot resolve it here.
As Justice Scalia knows and acknowledges, the original understanding cannot be decisive simply because it was the original understanding. A defense of using the original understanding must itself be independent of the original understanding and thus must be made out in terms of political theory and good empirical assessments of institutional competence.t Lawyers cannot defend use of the original understanding, let alone any particular species of originalism, by reference to history. (Nor can they defend an approach other than Justice Scalia's by reference to originalism.) The question of whether the original understanding of an old text should bind current generations is not at all simple-why on earth should current Americans be bound by some understandings of some votes by some segment of the citizenry over two centuries ago?' -- and a reference to "democracy," though a good start, cannot provide the necessary legitimation.
Justice Scalia suggests that his version of originalism will limit the policymaking authority of federal judges, and this is very plausibly true. But he also 5uggests-and this is mostly how he makes his argument-that judges have only two real alternatives: Follow the original understanding as he understands it or basically do whatever they want. This is implausible. Both originalist and nonoriginalist judges come in many different stripes, and the
The Yale Law Journal
distinctions among them require a good deal of attention. Since Justice Scalia describes the alternative to his brand of originalism as free floating constitutional creativity, the discussion is unduly loaded from the beginning. The debate over methods of constitutional interpretation cannot sensibly be resolved by suggesting that anyone who disagrees is inviting judges to rule as they wish.
Let us imagine some more reasonable alternative positions. We can imagine judges who care a great deal about history, but who explore history to identify not particular understandings of particular problems, but overall goals and purposes. We can imagine judges who think, for example, that the First Amendment, understood in light of its historical roots, is centered above all on the preconditions for democratic self-government,'87 and that this idea calls for some particular results contrary to the originalist understanding-for example limits on use of the law of libel by public officials. We can imagine judges who think that interpretation calls for something like an act of translation to accommodate new circumstances, including unforeseen developments not only of fact but also of value. Attentive to issues of democratic theory and the rule of law, such judges may well try to devise strategies to reduce their own discretion and policymaking authority. They might, for example, care a great deal about precedent, using previous holdings and rationales to discipline their own discretion. They might also think that courts should be reluctant to invalidate outcomes of electoral processes unless it is very clear that something has gone wrong.
Such judges might emphasize-and this is particularly important-that the case for judicial intrusion is strongest, under an ambiguous constitutional provision, when there is some defect in the process of democratic deliberation that gave rise to the relevant law.'89 Despite Justice Scalia's presentation here, democracy should not be identified with the outcomes of majoritarian politics it is no mere statistical affair. Whatever emerges from a particular political process should not be identified with the ideal itself. ' Democracy comes equipped with its own internal morality,'9' which constrains what a
[Vol. 107: 529
majority may do, consistent with the commitment to democracy. A majority may not, for example, disenfranchise people, impose a regime of political inequality, or act solely on the basis of contempt for fellow citizens.'
Judges of this kind come in many shapes and sizes they might well think of themselves as originalists. What matters is that such judges are much influenced by the common law tradition, and it is by no means clear that judges of that kind have less legitimacy or are worse than oiginalist judges of the kind that Justice Scalia favors. A federal judiciary that proceeds in common law fashion and that treats constitutional rights as aspirations (given content by concrete cases and invoked sparingly to invalidate the outcomes of ordinary politics) might well, because of its very insulation, produce a better system of constitutional democracy. It might do so because it has certain advantages in deliberating on questions of basic justice,' or-in my view far more likely-it might do so because and to the extent that it focuses on ensuring the preconditions for a well-functioning democratic regime. Justice Scalia thinks that, even if this is true, a judicial role of this kind is fundamentally illegitimate and without authority, because it is not authorized by the Constitution. But the Constitution does not set out the principles governing its own interpretation certainly the Constitution itself does not contain an interpretive principle of originalism. Any judgment about the appropriate content of governing interpretive principles must invoke not the Constitution but political theory of some kind. The claim that the text must be interpreted in light of the original understanding as Justice Scalia conceives it is not an implausible argument. But it depends both on contested ideals and on highly contingent and largely empirical claims about what system of interpretation is likely to be or to do best, all things considered.
For America, what system of interpretation would in fact be or do best? The past offers no clear answer, but it is a good place to start. It is highly relevant that an originalist approach of the sort favored by Justice Scalia would have very dramatic consequences (not acknowledged or discussed in his essay). Such an approach may well, for example, mean that Brown v. Board of Education,'95 the cornerstone of modem equal protection doctrine, is wrong that New York Timres Co. v. Sullivan,'" the cornerstone of modern free speech doctrine, is also wrong that the Establishment Clause does not
The Yale Law Journal
apply to the states that affirmative action raises no serious issue that the federal government can discriminate on the basis of race and sex however it wishes that nearly all sex discrimination by the states is unobjectionable that compulsory school prayer is constitutionally acceptable that, in short, most of modern constitutional law, now taken as constitutive of the American constitutional tradition by Americans and non-Americans alike, now taken as symbolic of our nation's commitment to liberty under law, and, for the last decade in particular an inspiration for constitution-making and constitutionbuilding all over the globe, is illegitimate and fatally undemocratic. An approach that leads to conclusions of this kind may not be disqualified for that reason, but these possibilities show that slippery slope arguments can work in both directions.
Justice Scalia may believe that consequences are irrelevant. It is tempting to think that the choice among interpretive approaches should not depend on outcomes an important guarantee of neutrality might even be found in indifference to outcomes. But I think that this is a confusion. There is this much to be said for indifference to outcomes: Once an interpretive approach has been properly selected, it should not be abandoned simply because it produces a bad outcome. But any approach to interpretation must be defended partly by reference to its consequences, broadly conceived, and the set of relevant consequences includes emphatically its effects on human liberty and equality. No approach to interpretation can be defended without reference to the human interests that it affects. If consequences, broadly conceived,1 do not matter, what does?
My central point is that other approaches to interpretation, whether or in whatever sense originalist, can accommodate our constitutional tradition as it has come to be understood without, at the same time, authorizing judges to do whatever they want. Justice Scalia is correct to say that common law thinking lies at the heart of American constitutional law.' But this way of thinking should be seen as part of judicial modesty, not judicial hubris. Certainly it allows for a degree of flexibility. But it also comes with its own constraints on judicial power, brought about through the doctrine of stare decisis, close
(Vol. 107: 529
The Yale Law Journal
The distinctive virtues of the common law stem from the relative independence of common law judges, their caution about high theory, and their intense focus on particulars. These virtues allow a high degree of flexibility over diverse circumstances, prominently including those produced by new facts and values. These virtues are inseparable from the distinctive vices of the common law: its imperfectly democratic character, its lack of theoretical ambition, and its particularity, which may impede planning and lead to unfairness because the similarly situated are not treated similarly and because the judges' own judgments of value or fact play an excessive role. An effort to evaluate the place of common law thinking would do well to come to terms with the realities of the modem state, prominently including the large role of regulatory agencies, which engage in statutory interpretation far more frequently, and with far larger consequences, than do federal courts. Administrative agencies are law-interpreters, both in fact and in law, and it is striking that modern theories of statutory interpretation rarely come to terms with that phenomenon."
Justice Scalia's approach to interpretation-democratic formalism-has two foundations: a strong commitment to rule-bound justice and a desire to ensure that discretion is exercised by democratically elected officials rather than by judges. Hence his overriding goal is to exorcise the common law from public law. He is correct to emphasize the common law heritage of the American legal tradition and much of modern public law: judicial treatment of many statutes as standards rather than rules doctrines of interpretation that operate as standards or factors and, perhaps above all, a system of case-based constitutional law that owes a great deal to the common law heritage. Many observers, above all Judge Calabresi, have celebrated common law methods and sought to reintroduce the virtues of common law judgment into a regulatory state founded mostly on statutory enactments. Justice Scalia's goal is the opposite: to reduce particularity in the hope that it will increase predictability, constrain the abusive exercise of discretion by judges, and increase democratic self-government by imposing good incentives on Congress.
Others might urge courts to make regulatory agencies a central ingredient in their theory of interpretation, on the theory that the traditional common law role of courts would be best carried out by administrative agencies authorized to make sense of statutory text2" when new applications arise, or when facts
[Vol. 107: 529
