A Behavioral Approach to Law and 
Economics 
Economic analysis of law usually proceeds under the assumptions of neoclassical economics. But empirical evidence gives much reason to doubt these assumptions; people exhibit bounded rationality, bounded self-interest, and bounded willpower. This article offers a broad vision of how law and economics analysis may be improved by increased attention to insights about actual human behavior. It considers specific topics in the economic analysis of law and proposes new models and approaches for addressing these topics. The analysis of the article is organized into three categories: positive, prescriptive, and normative. Positive analysis of law concerns how agents behave in response to legal rules and how legal rules are shaped. Prescriptive analysis concerns what rules should be adopted to advance specified ends. Normative analysis attempts to assess more broadly the ends of the legal system: Should the system always respect people’s choices? By drawing attention to cognitive and motivational problems of both citizens and government, behavioral law and economics offers answers distinct from those offered by the standard analysis. * Assistant Professor of Law, Harvard Law School. ** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. *** Robert P. Gwinn Professor of Economics and Behavioral Science, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago. 
We acknowledge the helpful comments of Ian Ayres, Lucian Bebchuk, Colin Camerer, David Charny, Richard Craswell, Jon Elster, Nuno Garoupa, J.B. Heaton, Samuel Issacharoff, Dan Kahan, Louis Kaplow, Lewis Kornhauser, Lawrence Lessig, Steven Levitt, A. Mitchell Polinsky, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Richard Revesz, Steven Shavell, Jonathan Zittrain, Ari Zweiman, and participants at the American Law and Economics Association Annual Meeting, the Boston University Law School Faculty Workshop, the Columbia University Law and Economics Workshop, workshops at Harvard Law School on law and economics and on rationality, the NBER Behavioral Law and Economics Conference, the NYU Rational Choice Colloquium, and the University of Chicago Law and Economics Workshop. Todd Murtha and Gil Seinfeld provided outstanding research assistance. Nicole Armenta provided helpful material on criminal abstinence programs. This work was finished while Thaler was a Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences; he is grateful for the Center’s support. 1476 1476 1477 1479 1479 1480 1481 1485 1487 1489 1489 1489 1493 1497 1497 1497 1499 1501 1501 1502 1504 1505 1505 1506 1508 1510 1510 1515 1516 1518 1518 1520 1522 

C. Behavior of Criminals ............................................................. V. NORMATIVE ANALYSIS: ANTI-ANTIPATERNALISM....................... 
A. Citizen Error ........................................................................... 
B. Behavioral Bureaucrats .......................................................... CONCLUSION ........................................................................................ APPENDIX: FRAMEWORK AND SUMMARY OF APPLICATIONS .............. 1527 1532 1533 1533 1534 1536 1538 1538 1539 1541 1541 1543 1545 1548 
Objections to the rational actor model in law and economics are almost as old as the field itself. Early skeptics about the economic analysis of law were quick to marshal arguments from psychology and other social sciences to undermine its claims.1 But in law, challenges to the rational actor assumption by those who sympathize with the basic objectives of economic analysis have been much less common. The absence of sustained and comprehensive economic analysis of legal rules from a perspective informed by insights about actual human behavior makes for a significant contrast with many other fields of economics, where such “behavioral” analysis has become relatively common.2 This is especially odd since law is a domain where behavioral analysis would appear to be particularly promising in light of the fact that nonmarket behavior is frequently involved. 
Our goal in this article is to advance an approach to the economic analysis of law that is informed by a more accurate conception of choice, one that reflects a better understanding of human behavior and its wellsprings. We build on and attempt to generalize earlier work in law outlining behavioral findings by taking the two logical next steps: proposing a systematic framework for a behavioral approach to economic analysis of law, and using behavioral insights to develop specific models and approaches addressing topics of abiding interest in law and economics.3 The analysis of these specific topics is preliminary and often in the nature of a proposal for a research agenda; we touch on a wide range of issues in an effort to show the potential uses of behavioral insights. The unifying idea in our analysis is that behavioral economics allows us to model and predict behavior relevant to law with the tools of traditional economic analysis, but with more accurate assumptions about human behavior, and more accurate predictions and prescriptions about law. Certainly a great deal of work would be necessary to justify a final evaluation of most of the topics pursued here; there is fertile ground for future research, both theoretical and empirical, and one of our principal goals is to suggest the directions in which that research might go. 
We suggest that an approach based on behavioral economics will help with the three functions of any proposed approach to law: positive, prescriptive, and normative.4 The positive task, perhaps most central to economic analysis of law and our principal emphasis here, is to explain both the effects and content of law. How will law affect human behavior? What will individuals’ likely response to changes in the rules be? Why does law take the form that it does? A superior understanding of human behavior will improve answers to such questions. 
The prescriptive task is to see how law might be used to achieve specified ends, such as deterring socially undesirable behavior. Much of conventional economic analysis is concerned with this sort of question. Explicit consideration of behavioral factors can improve the prescriptions offered by the analyst. For instance, instead of focusing only on the actual probability of detecting criminal behavior in considering whether offenders will be deterred, the analyst might also want to consider the perceived probability of detection and how it might differ in systematic and predictable ways from the actual probability. 
The normative task is to assess more broadly the ends of the legal system. In conventional economic analysis, normative analysis is no different from prescriptive analysis, since the goal of the legal system is to maximize findings and suggest legal issues to which these findings might be relevant. See Ward Edwards & Detlof von Winterfeldt, Cognitive Illusions and Their Implications for the Law, 59 S. CAL. L. REV. 225 (1986); Melvin Aron Eisenberg, The Limits of Cognition and the Limits of Contract, 47 STAN. L. REV. 211 (1995); Robert C. Ellickson, Bringing Culture and Human Frailty to Rational Actors: A Critique of Classical Law and Economics, 65 CHI.-KENT L. REV. 23 (1989); Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law, 64 U. CHI. L. REV. 1175 (1997). The existing literature also includes a number of articles that use behavioral insights to analyze specific topics in the economic analysis of law—primarily the Coase theorem and behavior during bargaining. These articles are relevant to a few of the issues we discuss below, and we will draw on them in analyzing those issues. 
E. Bell, Howard Raiffa & Amos Tversky, Descriptive, Normative, and Prescriptive Interactions in Decision Making, in DECISION MAKING 9 (David E. Bell, Howard Raiffa & Amos Tversky eds., 1988); Sunstein, supra note 3. “social welfare,” usually measured by people’s revealed preferences, and prescriptive (in our sense of the term) analysis also focuses, for the conventional economist, on how to maximize social welfare. But from the perspective of behavioral economics, the ends of the legal system are more complex. This is so because people’s revealed preferences are a less certain ground on which to build; obviously issues of paternalism become central here. 
Each of these three strands of our project is deeply constructive. Behavioral economics is a form of economics, and our goal is to strengthen the predictive and analytic power of law and economics, not to undermine it. Behavioral economics does not suggest that behavior is random or impossible to predict; rather it suggests, with economics, that behavior is systematic and can be modeled. We attempt to sketch several such models here. 
Part I below offers a general framework and provides an overview of the arguments for enriching the traditional economic framework. We see this enrichment as similar in spirit to the increased emphasis on asymmetric information in mainstream economic analysis in recent decades. Just as people often have imperfect information, which has predictable consequences for behavior, the departures from the standard conception of the economic agent also alter behavior in predictable ways. 
Parts II and III of the article involve positive analysis. Part II examines how a behaviorally-informed law and economics analysis can help to explain the behavior of human agents insofar as that behavior is relevant to law. Our topics here include bargaining behavior and the effects of mandatory contract terms. Part III shifts to an explanation of existing legal rules and institutions. We suggest that many features of the legal landscape that are puzzling from a traditional law and economics perspective follow naturally from behavioral phenomena. 
Part IV of the article examines prescriptive issues, offering a series of proposals that might seem surprising or controversial from a neoclassical economic perspective but that follow naturally from taking into account features of actual choice behavior. Our principal emphasis is on how people respond to information and how this point bears on the role of law. 
Part V is more speculative and normative. We briefly outline the main problems—some familiar and others less so—with the idea that the legal system ought always to respect informed choice, and also with the idea that government decisionmakers—who after all are behavioral actors too—can be relied upon to make better choices than citizens. Because of the complexity of these issues, we emphasize three broad points: the framework that behavioral economics suggests for thinking about issues of paternalism; the possibility that some institutions—such as populist government—may be particularly bad at attempted correction of citizen error, while others may be better; and the prospect that some methods of correction (such as those that focus on debiasing rather than outright coercion) may be acceptable even if one thinks that citizen error is relatively unlikely. 
I. FOUNDATIONS: WHAT IS “BEHAVIORAL LAW AND ECONOMICS”? In order to identify, in a general way, the defining features of behavioral law and economics, it is useful first to understand the defining features of law and economics. As we understand it, this approach to the law posits that legal rules are best analyzed and understood in light of standard economic principles. Gary Becker offers a typical account of those principles: “[A]ll human behavior can be viewed as involving participants who [1] maximize their utility [2] from a stable set of preferences and [3] accumulate an optimal amount of information and other inputs in a variety of markets.”5 The task of law and economics is to determine the implications of such rational maximizing behavior in and out of markets, and its legal implications for markets and other institutions. Although some of Becker’s particular applications of the economic approach might be thought of as contentious, that general approach underlies a wide range of work in the economic analysis of law.6 
What then is the task of behavioral law and economics? How does it differ from standard law and economics? These are the questions we address below. 
The task of behavioral law and economics, simply stated, is to explore the implications of actual (not hypothesized) human behavior for the law. How do “real people” differ from homo economicus? We will describe the differences by stressing three important “bounds” on human behavior, bounds that draw into question the central ideas of utility maximization, stable preferences, rational expectations, and optimal processing of information.7 People can be said to display bounded rationality, bounded willpower, and bounded self-interest. 
All three bounds are well documented in the literature of other social sciences, but they are relatively unexplored in economics (although, as we noted at the outset, this has begun to change). Each of these bounds represents a significant way in which most people depart from the standard eco5. GARY S. BECKER, THE ECONOMIC APPROACH TO HUMAN BEHAVIOR 14 (1976). ed. 1989); RICHARD A. POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF LAW 3-4 (5th ed. 1998). 
Homo Economicus, in FOUNDATIONS OF RESEARCH IN ECONOMICS: HOW DO ECONOMISTS DO ECONOMICS? 227, 230-35 (Steven G. Medema & Warren J. Samuels eds., 1996). nomic model. While there are instances in which more than one bound comes into play, at this stage we think it is best to conceive of them as separate modeling problems. Nonetheless, each of the three bounds points to systematic (rather than random or arbitrary) departures from conventional economic models, and thus each of the three bears on generating sound predictions and prescriptions for law. They also provide the foundations for new and sometimes quite formal models of behavior. 
Bounded rationality, an idea first introduced by Herbert Simon, refers to the obvious fact that human cognitive abilities are not infinite.8 We have limited computational skills and seriously flawed memories. People can respond sensibly to these failings; thus it might be said that people sometimes respond rationally to their own cognitive limitations, minimizing the sum of decision costs and error costs. To deal with limited memories we make lists. To deal with limited brain power and time we use mental shortcuts and rules of thumb. But even with these remedies, and in some cases because of these remedies, human behavior differs in systematic ways from that predicted by the standard economic model of unbounded rationality. Even when the use of mental shortcuts is rational, it can produce predictable mistakes. The departures from the standard model can be divided into two categories: judgment and decisionmaking. Actual judgments show systematic departures from models of unbiased forecasts, and actual decisions often violate the axioms of expected utility theory. 
A major source of differences between actual judgments and unbiased forecasts is the use of rules of thumb. As stressed in the pathbreaking work of Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, rules of thumb such as the availability heuristic—in which the frequency of some event is estimated by judging how easy it is to recall other instances of this type (how “available” such instances are)—lead us to erroneous conclusions. People tend to conclude, for example, that the probability of an event (such as a car accident) is greater if they have recently witnessed an occurrence of that event than if they have not.9 What is especially important in the work of Kahneman and Tversky is that it shows that shortcuts and rules of thumb are predictable. While the heuristics are useful on average (which explains how they become adopted), they lead to errors in particular circumstances. This means that someone using such a rule of thumb may be behaving rationally in the sense of economizing on thinking time, but such a person will nonetheless make forecasts that are different from those that emerge from the standard rationalchoice model.10 
Just as unbiased forecasting is not a good description of actual human behavior, expected utility theory is not a good description of actual decisionmaking. While the axioms of expected utility theory characterize rational choice, actual choices diverge in important ways from this model, as has been known since the early experiments by Allais and Ellsberg.11 There has been an explosion of research in recent years trying to develop better formal models of actual decisionmaking. The model offered by Kahneman and Tversky, called prospect theory, seems to do a good job of explaining many features of observed behavior, and so we draw on that model (whose main features we summarize in Part IV.B below) here.12 
We emphasize that bounded rationality is entirely consistent with modeling behavior and generating predictions based on a model, in line with the methodology of conventional economics. As Kenneth Arrow has explained, “[T]here is no general principle that prevents the creation of an economic theory based on other hypotheses than that of rationality. . . . [A]ny coherent theory of reactions to the stimuli appropriate in an economic context . . . could in principle lead to a theory of the economy.”13 Arrow’s example here is habit formation; that behavior, he says, can be incorporated into a theory by supposing that people choose goods with an eye towards minimizing changes in their consumption. 
Though there is an optimization in this theory, it is different from utility maximization; for example, if prices and income return to their initial levels after several alterations, the final bundle [of goods] purchased will not be the same as the initial [bundle]. This theory would strike many lay observers as plausible, yet it is not rational as economists have used that term.14 
In addition to bounded rationality, people often display bounded willpower. This term refers to the fact that human beings often take actions that they know to be in conflict with their own long-term interests. Most smokers say they would prefer not to smoke, and many pay money to join a program or obtain a drug that will help them quit. As with bounded rationality, many people recognize that they have bounded willpower and take steps to mitigate its effects. They join a pension plan or “Christmas Club” (a special savings arrangement under which funds can be withdrawn only around the holidays) to prevent undersaving, and they don’t keep tempting desserts around the house when trying to diet. In some cases they may vote for or support governmental policies, such as social security, to eliminate any temptation to succumb to the desire for immediate rewards.15 Thus, the demand for and supply of law may reflect people’s understanding of their own (or others’) bounded willpower; consider “cooling off” periods for certain sales and programs that facilitate or even require saving. 
Finally, we use the term bounded self-interest to refer to an important fact about the utility function of most people: They care, or act as if they care, about others, even strangers, in some circumstances. (Thus, we are not questioning here the idea of utility maximization, but rather the common assumptions about what that entails.) Our notion is distinct from simple altruism, which conventional economics has emphasized in areas such as bequest decisions.16 Self-interest is bounded in a much broader range of settings than conventional economics assumes, and the bound operates in ways different from what the conventional understanding suggests. In many market and bargaining settings (as opposed to nonmarket settings such as bequest decisions), people care about being treated fairly and want to treat others fairly if those others are themselves behaving fairly. As a result of these concerns, the agents in a behavioral economic model are both nicer and (when they are not treated fairly) more spiteful than the agents postulated by neoclassical theory. Formal models have been used to show how people deal with both fairness and unfairness; we will draw on those models here. 
The goal of this article is to show how the incorporation of these understandings of human behavior bears on the actual operation and possible improvement of the legal system. The appendix summarizes some key features of each of the three bounds on human behavior just described. It also indicates the law and economics issues we analyze under each category. 
When is each bound likely to come into play? Any general statement will necessarily be incomplete, but some broad generalizations can be offered. First, bounded rationality as it relates to judgment behavior will come into play whenever actors in the legal system are called upon to assess the probability of an uncertain event. We discuss many examples below, including environmental legislation (Part III.C), negligence determinations (Part IV.A), and risk assessments (Parts IV.B and V.A.). Second, bounded rationality as it relates to decisionmaking behavior will come into play whenever actors are valuing outcomes; a prominent example here is loss aversion and its corollary, the endowment effect, which we discuss in connection with bargaining behavior (Part II.B), mandatory contract terms (Part II.D), prior restraints on speech (Part III.B), and risk assessments (Part IV.B). Bounded willpower is most relevant when decisions have consequences over time; our example is criminal behavior (Part IV.C), where the benefits are generally immediate and the costs deferred. Finally, bounded self-interest (as we use the term) is relevant primarily in situations in which one party has deviated substantially from the usual or ordinary conduct under the circumstances; in such circumstances the other party will often be willing to incur financial costs to punish the “unfair” behavior. Our applications here include bargaining behavior (Part II.B) and laws banning market transactions (Part III.A). 
The three bounds we describe do not (at least as we characterize them here) constitute a full description of human behavior in all its complexity. Although we will have more to say about parsimony below, we will say for now that our goal is to sketch out an approach spare enough to generate predictions across a range of contexts, but not so spare that its predictions about behavior are often incorrect (as we will suggest is the case with conventional law and economics in some contexts). Many interesting features of behavior discussed by psychologists but not emphasized by our framework may also play a role in explaining specific forms of behavior relevant to law.17 And it can be illuminating to attend in some detail to the role of social norms in Settlement: An Experimental Approach, 93 MICH. L. REV. 107 (1994) (finding effects of “equity seeking” and “reactive devaluation” on settlement behavior); Mark Kelman, Yuval Rottenstreich & Amos Tversky, Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making, 25 J. LEGAL STUD. 287 (1996) (describing effects of “compromise” and “contrast” behavior on jury decisionmaking). various contexts18 and to the place of shame, pride, and status,19 especially insofar as an understanding of these variables helps give content to people’s utility functions in ways that bear on the uses of law. Our principal purpose here, however, is to provide predictions, rather than to give full descriptions of individual motivations and self-understandings, and we will refer to these variables only occasionally and in passing. For similar reasons, we do not emphasize behavioral patterns that depart from standard economic assumptions but fail to point in systematic directions; such patterns would not generate distinct predictions (although they would of course matter to a full account of individual behavior). Our focus here is robust, empirically documented phenomena that have reasonably precise implications for legal issues. 
Behavioral and conventional law and economics do not differ solely in their assumptions about human behavior. They also differ, in testable ways, in their predictions about how law (as well as other forces) affects behavior. To make these differences more concrete, consider the three “fundamental principles of economics” set forth by Richard Posner in his Economic Analysis of Law,20 in a discussion that is, on these points, quite conventional. (Posner’s discussion represents an application of the basic economic methodology set forth by Becker above.21) To what extent would an account based on behavioral law and economics offer different “fundamental principles”? 
The first fundamental principle for the conventional approach is downward-sloping demand: Total demand for a good falls when its price rises.22 This prediction is, of course, valid. There are few if any documented cases of Giffen goods (goods that are consumed more heavily at high prices, due to the fact that the price increase makes people unable to afford goods that are even pricier than the good in question). However, confirmation of the prediction of downward-sloping demand does not suggest that people are optimizing. As Becker has shown, even people choosing at random (rather than in a way designed to serve their preferences) will tend to consume less of a good when its price goes up as long as they have limited resources.23 This behavior has also been demonstrated with laboratory rats.24 Thus, evidence of downward-sloping demand is not evidence in support of optimizing models. 
The second fundamental principle of conventional law and economics concerns the nature of costs: “Cost to the economist is ‘opportunity cost,’” and “‘[s]unk’ (incurred) costs do not affect decisions on prices and quantity.”25 Thus, according to traditional analysis, decisionmakers will equate opportunity costs (which are costs incurred by foregoing opportunities—say, the opportunity to sell one’s possessions) to out-of-pocket costs (such as costs incurred in buying possessions); and they will ignore sunk costs (costs that cannot be recovered, such as the cost of nonrefundable tickets). But each of these propositions is a frequent source of predictive failures. The equality of opportunity costs and out-of-pocket costs implies that, in the absence of important wealth effects, buying prices will be roughly equal to selling prices. This is frequently violated, as is well known. Many people holding tickets to a popular sporting event such as the Super Bowl would be unwilling to buy tickets at the market price (say $1000), yet would also be unwilling to sell at this price. Indeed, estimates of the ratio of selling prices to buying prices are often at least two to one, yet the size of the transaction makes it implausible in these studies to conclude that wealth effects explain the difference.26 As described below, these results are just what behavioral analysis suggests. 
The traditional assumption about sunk costs also generates invalid predictions. Here is one: A theater patron who ignores sunk costs would not take into account the cost of a prepaid season pass in deciding whether to “rou[se] [him]self . . . to go out” on the evening of a particular performance;27 the decision would be made purely on the basis of the benefits and costs from that moment forward. However, in a study of theater patrons, some of whom were randomly assigned to receive discounted prices on prepaid passes, the patrons who received discounts were found to attend significantly fewer performances than those who did not receive discounts, despite the fact that (due to random assignment) the benefit-cost ratio that should have mattered—benefits and costs going forward—was the same on average THEORY: AN EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ANIMAL BEHAVIOR 8, 17-19, 24-25 (1995). 
Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem, 98 J. POL. ECON. 1325, 1327 tbl.1 (1990) (summarizing studies). 
in the two groups.28 In short, sunk costs mattered; again, the standard prediction proved invalid. 
The third fundamental principle of conventional law and economics is that “resources tend to gravitate toward their most valuable uses” as markets drive out any unexploited profit opportunities.29 When combined with the notion that opportunity and out-of-pocket costs are equated (see fundamental principle two), this yields the Coase theorem—the idea that initial assignments of entitlements will not affect the ultimate allocation of resources so long as transaction costs are zero.30 Many economists and economically oriented lawyers think of the Coase theorem as a tautology; if there were really no transaction costs (and no wealth effects), and if an alternative allocation of resources would make some agents better off and none worse off, then of course the agents would move to that allocation. Careful empirical study, however, shows that the Coase theorem is not a tautology; indeed, it can lead to inaccurate predictions.31 That is, even when transaction costs and wealth effects are known to be zero, initial entitlements alter the final allocation of resources. These results are predicted by behavioral economics, which emphasizes the difference between opportunity and out-of-pocket costs. 
Consider the following set of experiments conducted to test the Coase theorem;32 let us offer an interpretation geared to the particular context of economic analysis of law. The subjects were forty-four students taking an advanced undergraduate course in law and economics at Cornell University. Half the students were endowed with tokens. Each student (whether or not endowed with a token) was assigned a personal token value, the price at which a token could be redeemed for cash at the end of the experiment; these assigned values induce supply and demand curves for the tokens. Markets were conducted for tokens. Those without tokens could buy one, while those with tokens could sell. Those with tokens should (and do) sell their tokens if offered more than their assigned value; those without tokens should (and do) buy tokens if they can get one at a price below their assigned value. These token markets are a complete victory of economic theory. The equilibrium price was always exactly what the theory would predict, and the tokens did in fact flow to those who valued them most. 
However, life is generally not about tokens redeemable for cash. Thus another experiment was conducted, identical to the first except that now half the students were given Cornell coffee mugs instead of tokens. Here behavioral analysis generates a prediction distinct from standard economic analy28. Hal R. Arkes & Catherine Blumer, The Psychology of Sunk Cost, 35 ORG. BEHAV. & HUM. DECISION PROCESSES 124, 127-28 (1985). 

sis: Because people do not equate opportunity and out-of-pocket costs for goods whose values are not solely exogenously defined (as they were in the case of the tokens), those endowed with mugs should be reluctant to part with them even at prices they would not have considered paying to acquire a mug had they not received one. 
Was this prediction correct? Yes. Markets were conducted and mugs bought and sold. Unlike the case of the tokens, the assignment of property rights had a pronounced effect on the final allocation of mugs. The students who were assigned mugs had a strong tendency to keep them. Whereas the Coase theorem would have predicted that about half the mugs would trade (since transaction costs had been shown to be essentially zero in the token experiments, and mugs were randomly distributed), instead only fifteen percent of the mugs traded. And those who were endowed with mugs asked more than twice as much to give up a mug as those who didn’t get a mug were willing to pay. This result did not change if the markets were repeated. This effect is generally referred to as the “endowment effect”; it is a manifestation of the broader phenomenon of “loss aversion”—the idea that losses are weighted more heavily than gains—which in turn is a central building block of Kahneman and Tversky’s prospect theory. 
What are we to make of these findings? There are at least three important lessons. First, markets are indeed robust institutions. Even naive subjects participating at low stakes produce outcomes indistinguishable from those predicted by the theory when trading for tokens. Second, when agents must determine their own values (as with the mugs), outcomes can diverge substantially from those predicted by economic theory. Third, these departures will not be obvious outside an experiment, even when they exist and have considerable importance. That is, even in the mugs markets, there was trading; there was just not as much trading as the theory would predict. These lessons can be applied to other markets; we offer some examples below. 
The foregoing discussion illustrates the point with which we began this section: The difference between conventional and behavioral law and economics is not just a difference in the validity of the assumptions about human behavior. While the assumptions of unbounded rationality, willpower, and self-interest are unrealistic, the force of behavioral economics comes from the difference in its predictions (for example, fewer trades for mugs than for tokens). In this sense, our analysis is consistent with the precept originally proposed by Milton Friedman: Economics should not be judged on whether the assumptions are realistic or valid, but rather on the quality of its predictions.33 We share this view (or at least will accept it for purposes of this arti33. See MILTON FRIEDMAN, The Methodology of Positive Economics, in ESSAYS IN POSITIVE ECONOMICS 3, 14-16 (1953). cle); as we have emphasized, our principal interest is predictive in character. A behavioral analysis would be of much less interest if conventional economic models did a satisfactory job of predicting the behavior of agents insofar as relevant to law. Unfortunately, they often do not. 
they show that predictions about law based on the conventional assumptions tend to work? Consider some examples of the successes: ( correlation between price ceilings and queues; ( between rent control and the stock of housing; (3) the positive correlation in financial markets between risk and expected return; (4) the relation between futures prices and spot-market prices.34 The problem with the first three examples is that, as with tests of downward-sloping demand curves, they are quite undemanding; they ask simply whether the theory gets the direction of the effect right—and it does. But this is not a complete vindication of the theory, for the theory may misstate the magnitude of the effect. Consider (3), the positive relation between risk and return in financial markets. As predicted by this theory, stocks (equities) earn higher returns (on average) than do riskless assets such as treasury bills. But what can we say about the magnitude? Is this difference in return roughly what the theory would predict? This is precisely the question posed by Rajnish Mehra and Edward Prescott in their well-known paper on the “equity premium puzzle.”35 The equity premium is the difference in returns between equities and riskless assets. In the United States, the equity premium has been roughly six percent per year over the past seventy years.36 This implies that a dollar invested in stocks in 1926 would, at the end of 1997, be worth over $1800, while a dollar invested in treasury bills would have accumulated to less than $15. This difference is remarkably large. Mehra and Prescott therefore ask whether it can possibly be explained by investor risk aversion. They conclude that it cannot. That is, no plausible value of risk aversion could explain such a big difference.37 Although the theory gets the sign right in this case, the magnitude of the effect suggests that the theory is wrong. (And note that arbitrage, which we discuss just below, would not be expected to eliminate the equity premium; there are often significant costs of arbitrage in equity markets.38) 
Example (4) above, the relation between spot and futures prices, does better on magnitudes. Spot and futures prices are very closely related. However, this case is special in several respects. First, arbitrage is possible. If spot and futures prices get out of line, then investors can make sure profits by buying the contract that is too cheap and selling the one that is too expensive. Second, this context is one in which most of the activity is undertaken by professionals who will quickly lose their money and their jobs if they make frequent errors. Third, the markets in which these professionals operate offer frequent opportunities for learning. Under these circumstances, markets tend to work very well,39 though not perfectly.40 Essentially, these conditions render agents who do not conform to the standard economic assumptions irrelevant (because they will be bankrupt). 
So, in some (fairly unusual) circumstances, such as futures trading, market forces are strong enough to make the three “bounds” irrelevant for predictive purposes. The point is important; it suggests that while human beings often display bounded rationality, willpower, and self-interest, markets can sometimes lead to behavior consistent with conventional economic assumptions. Then the question becomes when, exactly, do market forces make it reasonable to assume that people behave in accordance with those assumptions? What circumstances apply to most of the domains in which law and economics is used? 
In this regard it is instructive to compare the market for futures contracts with the market for criminal activity. Consider the proposition that a potential criminal will commit some crime if the expected gains from the crime exceed its expected costs.41 Suppose a criminal mistakenly thinks that the expected gains outweigh the expected costs, when in fact the opposite is true. First notice that no arbitrage will be possible in this situation. If someone is unfortunate enough to commit a crime with a negative expected value, then there is no way for anyone else to profit directly from his behavior. Outside of financial markets (and not always there), those who engage in low-payoff activities lose utility but do not create profit opportunities for others. Nor do they typically disappear from the market. (Even poorly run firms can survive for many years; consider GM.) Being a bad criminal is rarely fatal, and except possibly for organized crime, there is little opportunity for “hostile takeovers.” Finally, the decision to enter a life of crime is not one that is made repeatedly with many opportunities to learn. Once a teenager has dropped out of high school to become a drug dealer, it is difficult to switch to dentistry. 
Because law and economics is frequently applied to criminal behavior, the above argument is obviously germane. We think that the same analysis applies to many of the domains in which law and economics has been used. In fact, economic analysis of law seems to be a branch of economics in which the limits of arbitrage are particularly powerful, so special care should be taken not to push the standard economic model too far. 
This is by no means to say that conventional law and economics has had no victories. One cannot look at the current state of antitrust law, or the use of market-based regulation in environmental law (to name just two of many examples), without acknowledging the important advances produced through the conventional approach. Often this approach points in the right direction and identifies flaws in noneconomic reasoning. Many advances in the positive and prescriptive understanding of law have come from the conventional assumptions. Attention to incentive effects can often reveal a great deal. (Thus, those who would argue that rent control helps tenants must contend with the obvious long-run supply effects of such laws.) 
The project of behavioral law and economics, as we see it, is to take the core insights and successes of economics and build upon them by making more realistic assumptions about human behavior. We wish to retain the power of the economist’s approach to social science while offering a better description of the behavior of the agents in society and the economy. Behavioral law and economics, in short, offers the potential to be law and economics with a higher “R2”—that is, greater power to explain the observed data. We will try to highlight some of that potential (and suggest cases where it has been realized) in this article. 
A possible objection to our approach is that conventional economics has the advantage of simplicity and parsimony. At least—the objection goes—it provides a theory. By contrast, a behavioral perspective offers a more complicated and unruly picture of human behavior, and perhaps that picture will make prediction more difficult, precisely because behavior is more complicated and unruly. Everything can be explained in an ex post fashion—some tool will be found that is up to the task—but the elegance, generalizability, and predictive power of the economic method will be lost. Shouldn’t analysts proceed with simple tools? We offer two responses: First, simplicity and parsimony are indeed beneficial; it would be highly desirable to come up with a model of behavior that is both simple and right. But conventional economics is not in this position, for its predictions are often wrong. We will encounter many examples in addition to those already discussed. 
often does so at the expense of any real predictive power. Its goal is to provide a unitary theory of behavior, a goal which may be impossible to achieve. By itself the notion of “rationality” (the centerpiece of traditional analysis) is not a theory; to generate predictions it must be more fully specified, often through the use of auxiliary assumptions.42 Indeed, the term “rationality” is highly ambiguous and can be used to mean many things. A person might be deemed rational if her behavior ( expected utility theory; ( changes her behavior when the costs and benefits are altered; (3) is internally consistent; (4) promotes her own welfare; or (5) is effective in achieving her goals, whatever the relationship between those goals and her actual welfare. We observe departures from most of these definitions; thus, with respect to ( nearly fifty years, and prospect theory seems to predict behavior better.43 With respect to (4) and (5), people’s decisions sometimes do not promote their welfare or help them to achieve their own goals; and with respect to (3), behavioral research shows that people sometimes behave in an inconsistent manner by, for example, indicating a preference for X over Y if asked to make a direct choice, but Y over X if asked to give their willingness to pay for each option.44 Many of our examples will thus show that people are frequently not rational if the term is understood to mean ( for ( idea of responsiveness to incentives is empty. If rationality is used to mean simply that people “choose” what they “prefer” in light of the prevailing incentives,45 then the notion of rationality offers few restrictions on behavior. The person who drinks castor oil as often as possible is rational because she happens to love castor oil. Other self-destructive behavior (drug addiction, suicide, etc.) can be explained on similar grounds. It is not even clear on this view whether rationality is intended as a definition of “preference” or as a prediction.46 
If such a notion of rationality allowed for good predictions, then perhaps there would be no reason for complaint; the problem, however, is that so high a degree of flexibility leaves the theory with few a priori restrictions. A theory with infinite degrees of freedom is no theory at all. For example, consider whether it is a paradox (as many economists think) that so many people vote (despite the virtual certainty that no one person’s vote will alter the outcome). If it is a paradox, so much the worse for the rationality assumption; if it is not a paradox, what does the assumption predict? Does it merely predict that people will respond to changes in conditions—for example, fewer people will vote when it is snowing? If so, the prediction is not bad, but surely it would be possible to say, after an unusually large vote amidst the storm, that more people voted simply because voting seemed especially valiant in those circumstances (so much for predictions based on this form of rationality). Conventional economics sometimes turns to stronger forms of rationality in response, and those forms provide stronger predictions in some cases; but those predictions are often inaccurate, as described above and as illustrated by the examples considered below. 
We believe that a behavioral approach imposes discipline on economic theorizing because assumptions cannot be imported at will. In a behavioral approach, assumptions about behavior should accord with empirically validated descriptions of actual behavior. For example, in the case of “fairness,” specifically defined and empirically verified patterns of behavior are used to generate predictions in new contexts. (“Fairness” is not, on this view, simply a catch-all to explain any observed behavior.) This is the approach we advocate for economic analysis of law. This approach, we believe, produces a better understanding of law and a better set of predictions about its effects. 
We now turn to positive, prescriptive, and normative issues. Our purpose is not to settle all of them, but to show the promise of behavioral economics in casting light on a wide range of questions. A great deal of work would be necessary to justify authoritative judgments on most of these questions. What follows should be taken partly as a proposal, perhaps in the spirit of the early economic analysis of law, for a research agenda to be carried out with a new set of tools. 
We begin with bounded self-interest, the third bound described above. A useful first example of this bound is agents’ behavior in a very simple bargaining game called the ultimatum game. In this game, one player, the Prowe think this is a sensible prescription in such settings, we note that it will not eliminate the effects of hindsight bias, since (as proponents of bifurcated trials recognize) “the jury will undoubtedly know that they are not being asked simply to engage in an academic exercise,”166 and that (because a trial is being held) “a bad outcome must have occurred.”167 In contrast, in cases in which jurors need not know (because they cannot infer from the fact of a lawsuit) what choice the defendant made, it may be possible to eliminate the hindsight bias completely. And there are many such situations: cases in which either of two options facing a physician could have caused harm or death to a patient; cases in which either the use or the failure to use a new technology could have led to harm; cases in which either revealing or failing to reveal suicide threats by a psychiatric patient could have resulted in suicide. 
A further feature of our prescription here is that even if we are wrong about the effects of hindsight bias, the prescription seems unlikely to do significant harm (from the perspective of the specified goal of achieving correct application of the ex ante cost-benefit standard). If hindsight bias is unimportant, then whether jurors are told what outcome occurred should not matter; either way, they should be able to make a correct ex ante determination. Thus, the prescription should either have no effect on decisionmaking (if hindsight bias is not a problem) or represent an improvement over the current system (if hindsight bias is a problem). 
Second prescription: Alter the evidentiary standard. The result of hindsight bias, as described above, is that jurors will overestimate the probability that harm will occur (since harm did, in fact, occur). The determination of the probability of harm would conventionally be made under a “preponderance of the evidence” standard: If jurors think it more likely than not, based on the evidence, that the probability of harm was above the threshold level required for liability, they are to find the defendant liable. One might imagine counteracting the effects of hindsight bias by raising the evidentiary standard (as an alternative, not in addition, to the previous proposal; the two together would produce overcorrection and, thus, underdeterrence). Thus, for example, if the jurors were to find the defendant liable only if the evidence suggested at least a seventy-five percent likelihood—rather than merely a fifty-one percent likelihood—that the critical harm probability threshold was met, then they might well reach the correct conclusion about liability: They would overestimate the likelihood attached to the critical threshold, but the overestimate might well be below the new required level. in Mental Health Malpractice Litigation: Some Preliminary Observations, 7 BEHAV. SCI. & L. 485, 496 (1989). 


The highest evidentiary threshold known to our legal system—the “beyond a reasonable doubt” standard—is used only in criminal cases. However, in civil cases an intermediate standard (higher than the preponderance standard, but less demanding than the “beyond a reasonable doubt” standard) is the “clear and convincing evidence” standard. This standard has been adopted by many states for punitive-damage determinations,168 and a broadening of its use to all negligence determinations—or at least those in which hindsight bias seems most likely to present a significant problem—might provide a desirable counterweight to the tendency of jurors to overestimate the probability that harm will occur. (Of course, further study would be required before reaching a final conclusion here.) This, of course, would be likely to be a second-best solution; in some situations defendants might be found not liable when, under a perfectly functioning system with no hindsight bias and no heightened evidentiary standard, they would be found liable.169 This need not be the case, however, and even if it is, we might well tolerate a crude measure that produced some errors so long as it represented an improvement over the current system. Most importantly, there is much room for research focused on determining whether altering the evidentiary threshold would represent a desirable response on balance—either across the board or in particular categories of cases. Our goal is to suggest the value of research on this issue, rather than to urge an immediate change in policy based on what we now know. 
To fix ideas for purposes of exploring these points, imagine first that hindsight bias produces a similar increase across cases in a juror’s perceived likelihood that the negligence threshold is met. (So, for example, suppose that jurors generally overestimate by fifty percent the likelihood that the negligence threshold is met, based on the evidence presented.) In this circumstance, the overestimation of the likelihood that the negligence threshold is met could in theory be precisely offset by a change in the evidentiary threshold. To see this point, imagine that the likelihood that the negligence threshold has been met is graphed as a function of the strength of the evidence. In the absence of hindsight bias, the function will cross the fiftypercent (preponderance) cut-off at a given level of evidentiary strength, and all cases in which the evidence is stronger than that should produce findings of liability. But with hindsight bias, jurors will overestimate the likelihood that the negligence threshold has been met, and this will produce an upward shift in the function we are imagining; as a result, too many cases will cross the preponderance line. But if that line itself is shifted up by an appropriate amount, the hindsight-influenced function will cross it at precisely the same level of evidentiary strength as the one at which the original function crossed the preponderance standard. For instance, if the likelihood that the negligence threshold has been met is a linear function of the strength of the evidence, half of all cases in the system meet the threshold under the preponderance standard, and jurors overestimate by fifty percent the likelihood that the threshold is met, then a move to a seventy-five-percent likelihood requirement would result in the jurors’ finding negligence in precisely the half of cases in which it should be found. 
If hindsight bias produces different degrees of distortion in jurors’ probability estimates across different types of cases, then a shift to a higher evidentiary standard might result in underdeterrence of some defendants (specifically those whose actions will not be judged in a particularly hindsightbiased way). But as long as the increase in the evidentiary standard is modest relative to what hindsight bias in the average case warrants, the change would produce fewer “underdeterrence errors” (findings of no liability for defendants who should be found liable) than corrections of “overdeterrence errors” (findings of liability for defendants who should not be found liable). And the change from a move to the “clear and convincing evidence” standard would be a relatively modest one; a survey of federal district court judges found that in the judges’ view that standard requires a likelihood of sixty to seventy percent, compared to the fifty-one percent threshold under the preponderance standard.170 (Of course, more interesting would be data on how jurors view the two standards.) 
One response to this analysis is that the reason jurors tend to find defendants liable even when liability is not legally warranted is not that jurors overestimate the probability of harm, but simply that they want to compensate tort victims. Our first prescription addresses the latter issue as well as the former, for if jurors do not know what harm occurred, it is difficult for them to engage in compensation-based decisionmaking. (In the case of the food-processing company discussed above, the jurors, to ensure compensation for the harm that occurred, would have to say that the company was negligent whether it used the chemical or refrained from using it—probably not a likely scenario.) But as far as the second prescription is concerned, the problem of compensation-based decisionmaking remains. So if this is what is going on, jurors may continue to find defendants liable, regardless of a higher evidentiary threshold. But there is no reason to think the existence of a higher threshold will make things worse in this situation, and so as long as there are some cases in which jurors try faithfully to apply the negligence standard, moving to the higher evidentiary threshold may improve decisionmaking. The same response may be offered to the objection that jurors’ behavior is not sensitive to the evidentiary threshold—a point on which there is conflicting evidence;171 as long as an increase in the threshold will matter in some cases, the change may be desirable, since there is no reason to think it will cause harm in cases in which it does not change jurors’ behavior. 
A final objection might be that altering the evidentiary standard would not (it is claimed) survive the Kantian-Rawlsian publicity condition, which means, roughly, that principles of justice must be defensible publicly, and that their basis and content must not be secret.172 The question is whether it is coherent to tell jurors that: Although this case should be decided by the preponderance of the evidence, we know that you are likely to think irrationally, so therefore we raise the threshold to clear and convincing evidence. We do not believe that there is anything incoherent, or violative of the publicity condition, in an idea of this sort. In both private and public life, people, acting individually or in groups, take steps to ensure against their own tendencies to make mistakes. (We discussed in Part I.A the steps that people frequently take to deal with problems of bounded willpower.) Raising the standard of proof to prevent errors is consistent with much of the law of evidence, which is also designed to respond to cognitive errors. As just one example, consider the restrictions on admission of evidence of prior crimes.173 A public defense of such steps is perfectly intelligible. 
The discussion to this point has focused on tort cases decided under the negligence standard, but similar issues may arise in other areas of law in which juries (or judges) must determine whether an ex ante standard was met while armed with the knowledge that a negative event in fact materialized. One example is securities fraud litigation, whose perceived excesses prompted Congress to enact the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.174 In a typical securities fraud case, decisionmakers are confronted with a company whose stock price experienced a dramatic fall, and they are required to assess whether a particular issue or problem facing the company, whose disclosure prompted the fall, should have been disclosed at an earlier stage (typically before it had become an issue or problem). Decisionmakers in such a case are required to make an after-the-fact determination of whether a reasonable ex ante decisionmaker would have thought the prospective issue or problem “material” to the average shareholder based on the information available at the time.175 The problem is that this determination must be made against the backdrop of knowledge that the issue or problem in fact materialized, and produced a large drop in the company’s stock price. In this situation, a decisionmaker will likely find it difficult to see how a reasonable ex ante decisionmaker might have thought the prospective issue or problem other than material. Consistent with this analysis, the main predictor of whether a securities fraud action is brought seems to be whether there has been a large change in the company’s stock market value, not whether the company’s behavior was reasonable from an ex ante perspective.176 
Another example here involves damage suits for violations of the Fourth Amendment. A risk in such suits is that if the allegedly illegal search did in fact produce damaging evidence (say, drugs or other contraband), then decisionmakers are likely to conclude that the law enforcement agency’s behavior was reasonable. This will be true even if, from an ex ante perspective (without knowing the eventual outcome), this behavior would not have been found reasonable. 
Suppose it is agreed that individuals lack adequate information on a given subject—for example, workplace safety, appliance energy efficiency, or the effects of drug use. In some such instances the government may seek to foster comparison shopping and informed decisionmaking (as in the federal truth-in-lending law, which requires lenders to announce interest rates, measured the same way177); in other instances the government may have a specific policy goal (reducing drug use, encouraging the use of energyefficient refrigerators). Conventional economics acknowledges the possible desirability of each of these goals (the second in the case of phenomena such as externalities), and it often advocates, as a means of achieving them, providing additional information to citizens, either through a mandate to the relevant private actors (for instance, employers), or through provision of information by the government itself.178 
The prescription to “provide more information” is striking in its spareness. Behavioral analysis suggests that this prescription is far too spare. “Provide more information” says nothing about the way in which the information will be provided, and yet we know from much of what has been said already, as well as from empirical work by scholars such as W. Kip Viscusi, that this will matter a great deal.179 Thus, for example, we know that people’s perceptions of the probability of uncertain events is influenced by the salience of the presentation of these events. 
That presentation matters has several implications. One is “antiprescriptive”: Prescriptions directed toward fostering comparison shopping—the first government goal mentioned above—will often be incomplete and may even be paralyzing, since there is often no “neutral” way to present information. The second implication is that effective prescriptive strategies for achieving the second goal mentioned above—discouraging particular types of behavior—must take behavioral factors into account. It is not enough simply to “provide information.” We discuss several examples of this below. 
Consider the following example of a government attempt to foster informed decisionmaking: In the case of defined contribution plans such as 401(k)s, the Labor Department, the relevant government authority, has ruled that employers must give employees investment alternatives, and must provide information about those alternatives (such as risk and returns); but firms are not allowed to offer “advice” as to how to invest.180 We think that such spare guidelines place employers in a very difficult position. The reason is that the way firms decide to describe and display information on investment alternatives will have a powerful impact on the choices employees make. 
Consider in this connection a recent study of the division of retirement savings by university staff employees between two different funds, a safe one (bonds) and a risky one (stocks).181 All the employees were shown actual historical data on the returns of the two funds, but this information was displayed in two different ways; one group was given the distribution of oneyear rates of return, while the other was given a simulated distribution of thirty-year rates of return. Those shown the thirty-year returns elected to invest nearly all their savings in stocks, while those shown the one-year returns invested a majority of their funds in bonds. Our point is not that one of these outcomes is better. Our point is simply that in the real world, she who provides information ends up giving advice. 
This is an example in which the prescription to “provide more information” may be paralyzing; in other instances it may simply be incomplete. Thus, suppose that the prescription is that certain private actors be required to provide “information”; what does this mean? If it means that those who expose people to a dangerous substance or product in the workplace (say benzene) must provide them with accurate information about the danger, this leaves open a tremendous range of possibilities. The actors subject to the mandate will often have an interest in providing the least scary, most pallid version of the information possible (for example, “benzene has been associated with a statistical increase in risk”), while regulators might want the most scary, salient message available (say, “exposure to benzene will increase your risk of getting CANCER and other FATAL diseases”). Of course, the best message in this case, if the goal is accurate knowledge, may well be somewhere in between. An important goal of the analyst’s task in making prescriptions in this area is to say how the information should be provided— not just that it should be provided. 
In still other contexts, such as ones in which the presentation of information will affect people’s preferences rather than just their perceptions of risk, it is not even clear in theory what is meant by ensuring “informed decisionmaking.” It is not even clear that there are steady or stable background preferences that might be “informed.” The preferences can themselves be an artifact of the method of informing. For instance, one of the central features of Kahneman and Tversky’s prospect theory is that people evaluate outcomes based on the change they represent from an initial reference point, rather than based on the nature of the outcome itself; also, losses from the initial reference point are weighted much more heavily than gains.182 This aspect of prospect theory (like its other features) is based on evidence about actual choice behavior.183 The evaluation of outcomes in terms of gains and 
form of gains or losses from a perceived status quo); id. at 279 (citing Eugene Galanter & Patricia Pliner, Cross-Modality Matching of Money Against Other Continua, in SENSATION AND MEASUREMENT 65 (Howard R. Moskowitz, Bertram Scharf & Joseph C. Stevens eds., 1974)) (losses are weighted more heavily than gains). Another feature of how outcomes are viewed, both empirically and under prospect theory, is that a given change produces less reaction the further a decisionmaker is from her reference point. Thus, for example, the value difference between $10 and $20 is greater than the value difference between $1000 and $1010, both for gains and for losses, assuming a reference point of $0. See id. at 278. In terms of the shape of the “value function” for decisionmakers (a function giving the value of each outcome–this is prospect theory’s counterpart to the utility function), this suggests a function that is concave for gains and convex for losses; only with that shape are both gains and losses viewed as less significant the further the decisionmaker is from her reference point. See id. This shape of the value function is further supported by evidence of attitudes toward risk: People appear generally (though there are exceptions) to exhibit risklosses from an initial reference point, coupled with the special aversion to losses, means that it matters a great deal whether something is presented as a gain or a loss relative to the status quo; a perceived threat of a loss relative to the status quo weighs more heavily than a perceived threat of foregoing a gain. In such cases it is difficult to say which individual is “informed”—the one who is told of the perceived threat of a loss or the one who is told of the perceived threat of foregoing a gain. In this and other contexts, preferences are not preexisting but rather “constructive, context-dependent,” analogous to the balls or strikes that do not predate the situation of choice and that “ain’t nothing till” the umpire calls them.184 
Suppose now that the agreed-upon goal is not to foster “informed decisionmaking,” but to discourage particular types of behavior. Conventional economics would view this as a desirable goal at least to the extent that fullyinformed consumers would not engage in the behavior in question, and to an even greater extent if the behavior in question produces externality effects. And to achieve this goal, conventional economics would again prescribe, as one possible means, “more information.” (Other, probably more usual, means include taxation and regulation designed to discourage the unwanted behavior.) Quite obviously, though, some ways of providing information are more effective than others. There is nothing surprising about this statement. Presumably, when firms pay millions of dollars to advertising agencies to create splashy new ad campaigns, they think they are getting something for their money. Likewise, there is of course an enormous marketing literature about how best to shape people’s behavior in desired directions. These points apply equally to the government. Below we develop briefly some specific prescriptions for achieving goals that involve changing people’s behavior. 
First prescription: Exploit loss aversion. As just noted, individuals tend to weight losses far more heavily than gains. As a result, framing consequences in terms of losses rather than gains is likely to be far more effective in changing behavior.185 A well-known illustration of this sort of framing averse attitudes towards gains but risk-seeking attitudes toward losses, and these attitudes imply concavity of the value function for gains and convexity for losses. See id. This pattern of concavity and convexity has received considerable empirical support. See id. at 268, 278; Peter C. Fishburn & Gary A. Kochenberger, Two-Piece Von Neumann-Morgenstern Utility Functions, 10 DECISION SCI. 503, 509-10 (1979). 
79, 91. 
Cognitive Perspectives on Pain and Suffering Awards, 81 VA. L. REV. 1341 (1995) (finding effect of gain versus loss framing on magnitude of damage awards). effect is a study involving breast self-examination; pamphlets describing the positive effects of breast self-examination (for example, women who undertake such examinations have a greater chance of finding a tumor at a treatable stage) are ineffective, but there are significant changes in behavior from pamphlets that stress the negative consequences of a refusal to undertake self-examinations (women who fail to perform such examinations have a decreased chance of finding a tumor at a treatable stage).186 Note that this example illustrates how the provision of information may be a more natural tool than taxation or regulation for discouraging some forms of behavior (such as the failure to perform a self-examination). 
Second prescription: Exploit salience. Effective prescriptive strategies need to take account of the fact that vivid and personal information will often be more effective than statistical evidence. This sort of information has a high degree of salience, and, as a result of the availability heuristic, people will tend to respond to it by attaching a higher probability to the event in question. Thus an antidrug advertisement, showing a frying egg with the announcer’s voice claiming, “this is your brain on drugs,” appeared to have a significant effect on behavior.187 Availability suggests that the ad produced a higher perceived probability of negative effects than a flatter ad would have. 
previous section, a common feature of human behavior is overoptimism.188 This behavior is not specific to the young, although it may be diminished as people move beyond middle to old age, as Richard Posner has suggested.189 What does this feature of behavior imply about government provision of information? Consider the choice between a safe-driving campaign focused on drivers’ own driving and the ingenuous campaign actually adopted by the government: “Drive defensively: Watch out for the other guy.”190 The government’s campaign, perhaps self-consciously, responded to the fact that most people tend to believe that they are unusually safe drivers. This is a model of the sort of prescriptive approach advocated by behavioral analysis. 
Our discussion of prescriptive analysis has thus far focused on bounded rationality. But bounded willpower may also play a role. Consider the question of deterring criminal behavior. Economic analysis of this question typically starts from the premise that potential offenders will be deterred from criminal acts if the expected costs of those acts exceed their expected benefits.191 Potential offenders are imagined to make at least a rough calculation of these costs and benefits in the process of making their decisions. Bounded rationality suggests that people may make systematic (as opposed to random) errors in computing these costs and benefits; for example, as described above, individuals tend to judge the likelihood of uncertain events (such as getting caught for a crime) by how available such instances are to the human mind, and this may depend on factors unrelated to the actual probability of the event. This analysis suggests the desirability, from a prescriptive standpoint, of making law enforcement highly visible, holding constant the actual probability that offenders will be caught; it suggests, for example, the good sense of the familiar method of parking-ticket enforcement—sticking large, brightly-colored tickets that read “VIOLATION” in large letters on the drivers’ side window, where they are particularly noticeable to drivers passing by—as opposed to a less costly approach (putting small, plain tickets under the windshield wiper on the curb side of the street, convenient for the parking officer to reach). Another example here is “community policing,” now widely practiced across the country; by making more visible and memorable the presence of police (as, for example, by having them walk their beats rather than ride in patrol cars), authorities can, it is suggested, increase the deterrence of potential criminals without altering the actual probability of apprehension. 
But even if one assumes that potential offenders can accurately compute the costs and benefits of crime, bounded willpower suggests that they will often behave in ways at odds with conventional economic analysis, due to problems of self-control. A central feature of much criminal behavior is that the benefits are immediate, while the costs (if they are incurred at all) are spread out over time—often a very long time. Economic analysis assumes that such future costs are discounted to present value, and A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell have recently suggested that potential criminal offenders may have unusually high discount rates, so that years in prison far in the future will be discounted very heavily.192 Behavioral economic analysis carries this idea further by incorporating self-control issues often emphasized by criminologists.193 
As just noted, the existing economic analysis assumes a constant discount rate (although perhaps a high one); this means that the difference between the attractiveness or aversiveness of a reward or punishment today versus tomorrow is the same as the difference between a year from now and a year and one day from now. In contrast to this theory, there is considerable evidence that people display sharply declining discount rates.194 This means that impatience is very strong for near rewards (and aversion very strong for near punishments) but that each of these declines over time—a pattern referred to as “hyperbolic discounting.”195 Such attitudes reflect “dynamic inconsistency”; one’s present desires for the future are at odds with one’s future desires for the future.196 In an illuminating overstatement, Jon Elster has referred to this as the “absolute priority of the present”—akin to the “absolute priority [of the self] over other persons: I am I—while they are all ‘out there.’”197 Richard Posner has recently applied these ideas to issues of aging and old age,198 and their application to criminal offenders is supported by the idea that such offenders often behave “impulsive[ly]” and then have to “exaggerat[e] the benefits of crime” in order to justify their behavior to themselves later.199 Such a need for justification would not occur with the ordinary discounting assumed by most conventional economic analysis; decisions would not be regretted later because with that form of discounting there is no dynamic inconsistency of preference.200 
What does hyperbolic discounting imply for effective deterrence of criminal behavior? With this sort of bounded willpower on the part of potential offenders, the difference between not getting caught and being imprisoned for, say, a year differs dramatically from the difference between being imprisoned for ten years and being imprisoned for eleven years (even apart from any fixed costs that may accompany the fact of conviction). While the standard theory says that these two things differ only insofar as the costs of imprisonment in year eleven must be discounted to present value in order to be compared with the loss of wages and personal freedom in year one, behavioral economic analysis (and basic common sense) tells us that this is not so. Short punishments will thus have much more effect than long punishments as a result of the “priority of the present”; adding years onto a sentence will produce little additional deterrence.201 This idea is reflected in policy recommendations such as Mark Kleiman’s “coerced abstinence” proposal, under which drug offenders on probation or parole would be swiftly and automatically punished, but with modest sanctions, for any positive drug result.202 Short punishments are also desirable under Polinsky and Shavell’s approach, but for a different reason. 
Our analysis is consistent with empirical evidence suggesting that criminal behavior is correlated with high levels of self-control problems. It appears, for example, that drunk-driving behavior is significantly correlated with not wearing a seat belt—itself a behavior that seems to suggest a very high weight on the present, and thus a lack of self-control in the sense used here.203 Another interesting piece of empirical evidence concerns offenders’ views of sentences of different lengths. One study found that they view a five-year term of imprisonment as, on average, only twice as bad as a oneyear term; the five-year term had a perceived severity of 200, compared to 100 for the one-year term.204 This alone is also consistent with a high discount rate—a rate of roughly 0.5. But with that discount rate, the difference between a five- and ten-year term should be quite small (approximately 6 on the severity measure); in fact, the difference was 300.205 This difference is also somewhat higher than hyperbolic discounting would suggest; if the difference between 100 and 200 represents a .25 weight on all years after the first year (so that the five-year term’s severity is 100 + 25 + 25 + 25 + 25 = 200), then the ten-year term’s severity would be 325—much closer than the 206 predicted by the nonhyperbolic approach, although still less than the actual severity rating of 500. These data are of course only suggestive; we have not shown that the bounded willpower approach leads to improved predictions of actual criminal behavior. Empirical work on actual behavior of this sort is notoriously difficult, but scholars such as Steven Levitt have begun to demonstrate the possibilities in this area.206 A full analysis of criminal behavior would also need to incorporate other factors not considered here (such as the role of community); our goal is only to sketch some of the many ways in which conventional economic analysis of criminal law can be usefully extended using the tools of behavioral economics. 
In its normative orientation, conventional law and economics is often strongly antipaternalistic. The idea of “consumer sovereignty” plays a large role; citizens, assuming they have reasonable access to relevant information, are thought to be the best judges of what will promote their own welfare. Yet many of the instances of bounded rationality discussed above call this idea into question—and also, as we will emphasize below, call into question the idea that intervention by government actors, who themselves may face the same cognitive or motivational problems as everyone else, can improve matters. In this way bounded rationality pushes toward a sort of antiantipaternalism—a skepticism about antipaternalism, but not an affirmative defense of paternalism.207 We also note (although we do not explore this point here) that while bounded rationality may increase the need for law (if government’s failings are less serious than citizens’), bounded self-interest may reduce it, by creating norms that solve collective action problems even without government intervention.208 
Many of the forms of bounded rationality discussed above call into question the idea of consumer sovereignty. For example, overoptimism leads most people to believe that their own risk of a negative outcome is far lower than the average person’s. Similarly, the effect of salience may lead to substantial underestimation of certain risks encountered in everyday life (for example, the risks from poor diet), since these harms may not be very salient. 
on Crime, 87 AM. ECON. REV. 270 (1997); Steven D. Levitt, The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence from Prison Overcrowding Litigation, 111 Q.J. ECON. 319 (1996). 
selfinterested people will create collective irrationality; if people are boundedly self-interested, however, this problem may tend to disappear. When overoptimism is combined with salience, people may underestimate risks substantially. We emphasize that these problems are not ones of insufficient information per se; they are ones of insufficient ability to process accurately the information one possesses insofar as that information bears on one’s own risks. Thus, for example, people may have reasonably adequate information about the risks of smoking,209 but this does not at all imply that they have adequate perceptions of the risks of smoking that they themselves face.210 Even if people can obtain accurate statistical knowledge, statistical knowledge may not be enough to inform actual choices.211 It does not follow from this that information is useless; it is just that having information per se does not automatically imply optimal behavior. 
Further questions about the idea of consumer sovereignty arise from the gap between “decision” and “experience” utility. The utility of actual experience may diverge from the anticipated utility as revealed by people’s decisions.212 The identity of decision and experience utility in conventional economics is often treated as an axiom, or at least as a proposition that could not be falsified. But behavioral research shows that people’s judgments about their future experience at the time of decision can be mistaken, in the sense that people are sometimes unable (even apart from the sorts of informational issues recognized by conventional economics) to assess what the experience will actually be like. Thus, for example, people appear not to predict accurately the consequences of becoming seriously ill or disabled.213 They tend to underestimate their ability to adapt to negative changes, a point that may bear on law and policy in such areas as global climate change.214 
But this suggestion about adaptation raises a complex normative question: Is a person’s measure of welfare after (for example) becoming ill the appropriate measure of value? Perhaps people, through coping mechanisms, are able to adapt to disease better than they anticipate in advance, but does this mean that disease is a less severe problem than prior attitudes would have suggested? On conventional utilitarian grounds, the answer is probably affirmative; the subjective experience is what counts. But a well-established challenge to utilitarian analysis suggests the possibility of a negative answer, on the ground that subjective experience may not be all that counts.215 What we mean to suggest here is a simple point: People sometimes do mispredict their utility at the time of decision, and on conventional grounds, this phenomenon raises serious problems for the idea of consumer sovereignty. 
Any suggestion that the government should intervene in response to people’s mistakes raises the question whether the government will be able to avoid such errors. The prospects for productive and useful intervention may be smallest in the case of populist government; the actions of such a government, based heavily on pressures coming from citizens, may tend to be subject to the very same biases and errors that afflict citizens. (Thus behavioral analysis complements existing accounts of the problems with populism.) An example of the effects of populism is the Superfund statute, discussed in Part III.C; irregular perceptions of risk by ordinary people may tend to produce irregularities in regulation, as the cognitive errors that ordinary people make are replicated in statutory and administrative law.216 The effects of social interaction may even make government action worse, and more dangerous, than individual errors. Our earlier discussion suggests a possible mechanism: Availability entrepreneurs in the private sector can heighten the demand for regulation, and public sector availability entrepreneurs can take advantage of, and heighten, this effect, by advocating anecdote-driven policy. Thus public choice accounts of legislation can work productively with behavioral accounts; there is a good deal of synergy between behavioral mechanisms and interest group leaders, many of whom are amateur (or professional?) behavioral economists. The pollutant-of-the-month syndrome in environmental law is paralleled by many measures responding to the crisisof-the-month. These difficulties with populist government also point to problems with the referendum process. 
But populist government is not the only worry. Government will often be subject to cognitive and motivational problems even if it is not populist. (Bureaucrats may also lack appropriate incentives to make decisions in the public interest.217) Thus, for example, there is no necessary reason to think AMARTYA SEN, COMMODITIES AND CAPABILITIES (1985). 
RISK 149 (1992); VISCUSI, supra note 137, at 85-88, 94-97; Noll & Krier, supra note 137, at 
89 COLUM. L. REV. 1703, 1719-20 (1989). that government officials are, by virtue of their offices, able to avoid overoptimism or predict experience utility. On the other hand, a degree of insulation from populist pressures, combined with knowledge of behavioral economics, might produce some improvement. New institutions may play a role; consider Justice Breyer’s plea for an insulated body of specialized civil servants, entrusted with the job of comparing risks and ensuring that resources are devoted to the most serious problems;218 Howard Margolis’ behaviorally-informed suggestion that government should be required to ensure that all initiatives “do no harm”;219 even proposals for cost-benefit analysis, understood in a behavioral light as an attempt to overcome biases and confusions in both perception and motivation.220 We also emphasize that government intervention need not come in highly coercive forms; perhaps distortions in people’s decisionmaking can be overcome by information campaigns falling well short of coercion. For instance, in the contexts of risks such as smoking, might debiasing techniques work to link the statistical evidence with the personal reality? 
All of the foregoing ideas raise many complexities; and we have not even touched upon the complicated philosophical literature on the legitimacy of paternalism. Application of these ideas to any specific topic in law would require a much fuller development of many issues than the space in this article permits. But we need not leave the ideas in purely abstract form; consider the following simple illustration of their application. Imagine that sunlamps are being sold in an unregulated market and that it is learned that many consumers fall asleep under the lamps, burning themselves badly. Consumers make this mistake in spite of warnings included on the package and in the instructions, perhaps because they fail to anticipate that lying in a warm place with one’s eyes closed is likely to induce sleep. Let’s call this an “unintended risk,” meaning a risk that consumers fail to appreciate. The existence of this unintended risk leaves open the possibility of welfareenhancing regulation. Suppose, for example, that an automatic timer can be added to the sunlamp at a cost of twenty-five cents, and that manufacturers have not included this feature because consumers do not anticipate that they will need it. We do not discuss here the issues raised by the possibility that a government mandate of the timer interferes with freedom, rightly conceived. Nor do we address possible distributive issues (all will pay more for sunlamps, although perhaps only some failed to appreciate the risks of falling asleep). All we suggest is that an important part of the analysis involves asking whether the cost of requiring this safety-promoting feature (twentyfive cents per customer) is less than the cost of the unanticipated burns. 
solutions stated in the text may also be attractive to conventional economists on a variety of grounds. 
A central point of this example is that from the perspective of behavioral law and economics, issues of paternalism are to a significant degree empirical questions, not questions to be answered on an a priori basis. No axiom demonstrates that people make choices that serve their best interests; this is a question to be answered based on evidence. Of course the case for intervention is weakened to the extent that public institutions are likely to make things worse rather than better. What we are suggesting is that facts, and assessment of costs and benefits, should replace assumptions that beg the underlying questions. 
Traditional law and economics is largely based on the standard assumptions of neoclassical economics. These assumptions are sometimes useful but often false. People display bounded rationality: They suffer from certain biases, such as overoptimism and self-serving conceptions of fairness; they follow heuristics, such as availability, that lead to mistakes; and they behave in accordance with prospect theory rather than expected utility theory. People also have bounded willpower; they can be tempted and are sometimes myopic. They take steps to overcome these limitations. Finally, people are (fortunately!) boundedly self-interested. They are concerned about the wellbeing of others, even strangers in some circumstances, and this concern and their self-conception can lead them in the direction of cooperation at the expense of their material self-interest (and sometimes spite, also at the expense of their material self-interest). Most of these bounds can be and have been made part of formal models. 
In this article we have sketched some of the implications of enriching the traditional analysis by incorporating a more realistic conception of human behavior. We have insisted on the value and importance of using the three bounds in the economic analysis of law; more tentatively, we have explored a series of legal problems in which the bounds may be significant. Obviously there is a great deal of research to be done, and one of our principal goals has been to outline areas that could benefit from further work, both analytic and empirical. 
We do not doubt that replacing the simple maximizing model of economics with a more complicated psychological treatment comes at some cost. Solving optimization problems is usually easier than describing actual behavior. It has been said (we believe by Herbert Simon) that economics makes things hard on agents, but easy on economists; behavioral economics, we suggest, does the opposite. We recapitulate here some of the reasons we think the enriched model is worth the trouble for those interested in the economic analysis of law. example, people can be both more spiteful and more cooperative than traditional analysis predicts, and this matters a great deal to law. It is also important to know that even in a world without transaction costs and wealth effects, the assignment of property rights alters the ultimate allocation of those rights, and that this may be particularly true for certain forms of property-rights assignment (such as court orders). These features of the world matter greatly for making predictions and formulating policy. of no effect). Prominent in this category are the effects of presentation; since economic theory assumes that choices are invariant to the manner in which a problem is framed, it falsely predicts that the language of a media account or advertisement has no effect on behavior, holding the information content constant. In contrast, it is well established that people react differently to potential outcomes depending on whether they are perceived as foregone gains or out-of-pocket costs (losses), and that they are likely to think, mistakenly, that salient events are more common than equally prevalent but more subtle ones. These points bear on the supply of and the demand for law, and on the behavior of agents in their interactions with the legal system. limited range of potential explanations, namely optimal (or second-best) rules set by judges and rent-seeking legislation determined by selfinterested log-rolling. Behavioral economics offers other sources of potential explanation—most prominently, perceptions of fairness. We have tried to show that many laws which are seemingly inefficient and do not benefit powerful interest groups may be explained on grounds of judgments about right and wrong. 
A behavioral approach to law and economics offers a host of novel prescriptions regarding how to make the legal system work better. Some stem from the improved predictions mentioned in point 2 above. Cognitive difficulties and motivational distortions undermine or alter conventional economic prescriptions about the jury's role, most notably in the context of assessing negligence and making other determinations of fact or law. We have taken some preliminary steps in suggesting ways to reduce the costs of some of these problems. 
A behavioral approach to law and economics produces new questions about possible mistakes by private and public actors. On the one hand, it raises serious doubts about the reflexive antipaternalism of some economic analysis of law. On the other hand, it raises equivalent questions about whether even well-motivated public officials will be able to offer appropriate responses to private mistakes and confusion. 
We hope that this article will encourage others to continue the inquiry and research, both theoretical and empirical, that will be needed to flesh out the behavioral approach for which we have argued here. This approach will use traditional economic tools, enhanced by a better understanding of human behavior. Thirty years from now, we hope that there will be no such thing as behavioral economics. Instead we hope that economists and economically oriented lawyers will simply incorporate the useful findings of other social sciences, and in so doing, transform economics into behavioral economics, and economic analysis of law into one of its most important branches. 
This appendix summarizes our framework for behavioral law and economics. It also lists the law and economics issues we analyze within each category of the framework. The specific behavioral mechanisms we draw upon, which are summarized here, do not constitute an exhaustive list of the mechanisms that might be relevant to law and economics; they simply reflect the mechanisms we have used here. For each mechanism, we provide a reference to the literature, as an overview of or entry to the existing research; we refer the interested reader to the text of our article for additional references on each topic. 
reference: Linda Babcock & George Loewenstein, Explaining 
ECON. PERSP., Winter 1997, at 109. our applications: bargaining around court orders; failed negotiations. 
reference: Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, in JUDGMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY 3 (Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic & Amos Tversky eds., 1982). our applications: environmental legislation, government advertising, anti-antipaternalism. 
EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOL. HUM. PERCEPTION & PERFORMANCE 288 (1975). 
our applications: negligence determinations; other determinations of fact or law. our applications: negligence determinations; other determinations of fact or law. reference: Neil D. Weinstein, Unrealistic Optimism About Future Life Events, 39 J. PERSONALITY & SOC. PSCYHOL. 806 (1980). 
our applications: government advertising, anti-antipaternalism. 
Assumption, in THE RATIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF ECONOMIC BEHAVIOUR 203 (Kenneth J. Arrow, Enrico Colombatto, Mark Perlman & Christian Schmidt eds., 1996). 
our applications: anti-antipaternalism. 
Decisionmaking behavior 
reference: Daniel Kahneman & Amos Tversky, Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk, 47 ECONOMETRICA 263 (1979). 
our applications: government advertising. 
reference: Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. Knetsch & Richard H. 
Coase Theorem, 98 J. POL. ECON. 1325, 1327 (1990). our applications: bargaining around court orders, mandatory contract terms, prior restraints on speech. 
reference: David Laibson, Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting, 112 Q.J. ECON. 443 (1997). reference: Colin Camerer & Richard H. Thaler, Anomalies: Ultimatums, Dictators, and Manners, 9 J. ECON. PERSP., Spring 1995, at 209. 
