 A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics Christine Jolls,* Cass R. Sunstein,** and Richard Thaler*** Economic analysis of law usually proceeds under the assumptions of neoclassical economics. But empirical evidence gives much reason to doubt these assumptions; people exhibit bounded rationality, bounded self-interest, and bounded willpower. This article offers a broad vision of how law and economics analysis may be improved by increased attention to insights about actual human behavior.  It considers specific topics in the economic analysis of law and proposes new models and approaches for addressing these topics.  The analysis of the article is organized into three categories: positive, prescriptive, and normative.  Positive analysis of law concerns how agents behave in response to legal rules and how legal rules are shaped.  Prescriptive analysis concerns what rules should be adopted to advance specified ends.  Normative analysis attempts to assess more broadly the ends of the legal system: Should the system always respect people’s choices? By drawing attention to cognitive and motivational problems of both citizens and government, behavioral law and economics offers answers distinct from those offered by the standard analysis. Business, University of Chicago. Objections to the rational actor model in law and economics are almost as old as the field itself. Early skeptics about the economic analysis of law were quick to marshal arguments from psychology and other social sciences to undermine its claims.1  But in law, challenges to the rational actor assumption by those who sympathize with the basic objectives of economic analysis have been much less common. The absence of sustained and comprehensive economic analysis of legal rules from a perspective informed by insights about actual human behavior makes for a significant contrast with many other fields of economics, where such “behavioral” analysis has become relatively common.2  This is especially odd since law is a domain where behavioral analysis would appear to be particularly promising in light of the fact that nonmarket behavior is frequently involved. articles related to behavioral economics. ics of abiding interest in law and economics.3 The analysis of these specific topics is preliminary and often in the nature of a proposal for a research agenda; we touch on a wide range of issues in an effort to show the potential uses of behavioral insights. The unifying idea in our analysis is that behavioral economics allows us to model and predict behavior relevant to law with the tools of traditional economic analysis, but with more accurate assumptions about human behavior, and more accurate predictions and prescriptions about law.  Certainly a great deal of work would be necessary to justify a final evaluation of most of the topics pursued here; there is fertile ground for future research, both theoretical and empirical, and one of our principal goals is to suggest the directions in which that research might go. 3. The existing legal literature includes several articles that generally catalogue behavioral findings and suggest legal issues to which these findings might be relevant. See Ward Edwards & Detlof von Winterfeldt, Cognitive Illusions and Their Implications for the Law, 59 S. CAL. L. REV. 225 (1986); Melvin Aron Eisenberg, The Limits of Cognition and the Limits of Contract, 47 STAN. L. REV. 211 (1995); Robert C. Ellickson, Bringing Culture and Human Frailty to Rational Actors: A Critique of Classical Law and Economics, 65 CHI.-KENT L. REV. 23 (1989); Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law, 64 U. CHI. L. REV. 1175 (1997). The existing literature also includes a number of articles that use behavioral insights to analyze specific topics in the economic analysis of law—primarily the Coase theorem and behavior during bargaining. These articles are relevant to a few of the issues we discuss below, and we will draw on them in analyzing those issues. “social welfare,” usually measured by people’s revealed preferences, and prescriptive (in our sense of the term) analysis also focuses, for the conventional economist, on how to maximize social welfare. But from the perspective of behavioral economics, the ends of the legal system are more complex. This is so because people’s revealed preferences are a less certain ground on which to build; obviously issues of paternalism become central here. focus on debiasing rather than outright coercion) may be acceptable even if one thinks that citizen error is relatively unlikely. In order to identify, in a general way, the defining features of behavioral law and economics, it is useful first to understand the defining features of law and economics. As we understand it, this approach to the law posits that legal rules are best analyzed and understood in light of standard economic principles. Gary Becker offers a typical account of those principles: “[A]ll human behavior can be viewed as involving participants who [1] maximize their utility [2] from a stable set of preferences and [3] accumulate an optimal amount of information and other inputs in a variety of markets.”5  The task of law and economics is to determine the implications of such rational maximizing behavior in and out of markets, and its legal implications for markets and other institutions. Although some of Becker’s particular applications of the economic approach might be thought of as contentious, that general approach underlies a wide range of work in the economic analysis of law.6 What then is the task of behavioral law and economics? How does it differ from standard law and economics?  These are the questions we address below. The task of behavioral law and economics, simply stated, is to explore the implications of actual (not hypothesized) human behavior for the law. How do “real people” differ from homo economicus? We will describe the differences by stressing three important “bounds” on human behavior, bounds that draw into question the central ideas of utility maximization, stable preferences, rational expectations, and optimal processing of information.7 People can be said to display bounded rationality, bounded willpower, and bounded self-interest. nomic model.  While there are instances in which more than one bound comes into play, at this stage we think it is best to conceive of them as separate modeling problems.  Nonetheless, each of the three bounds points to systematic (rather than random or arbitrary) departures from conventional economic models, and thus each of the three bears on generating sound predictions and prescriptions for law.  They also provide the foundations for new and sometimes quite formal models of behavior. forecasts that are different from those that emerge from the standard rationalchoice model.10 Just as unbiased forecasting is not a good description of actual human behavior, expected utility theory is not a good description of actual decisionmaking.  While the axioms of expected utility theory characterize rational choice, actual choices diverge in important ways from this model, as has been known since the early experiments by Allais and Ellsberg.11 There has been an explosion of research in recent years trying to develop better formal models of actual decisionmaking. The model offered by Kahneman and Tversky, called prospect theory, seems to do a good job of explaining many features of observed behavior, and so we draw on that model (whose main features we summarize in Part IV.B below) here.12 We emphasize that bounded rationality is entirely consistent with modeling behavior and generating predictions based on a model, in line with the methodology of conventional economics. As Kenneth Arrow has explained, “[T]here is no general principle that prevents the creation of an economic theory based on other hypotheses than that of rationality. . . . [A]ny coherent theory of in an economic context . . . could in principle lead to a theory of the economy.”13 Arrow’s example here is habit formation; that behavior, he says, can be incorporated into a theory by supposing that people choose goods with an eye towards minimizing changes in their consumption. reactions the to Though there is an optimization in this theory, it is different from utility maximization; for example, if prices and income return to their initial levels after several alterations, the final bundle [of goods] purchased will not be the same as the initial [bundle]. This theory would strike many lay observers as plausible, yet it is not rational as economists have used that term.14 10. For further discussion, see the recent survey of results in John Conlisk, Why Bounded Ra 2. Bounded willpower. 4. Applications. 17. See, e.g., Russell Korobkin & Chris Guthrie, Psychological Barriers to Litigation Settlement: An Experimental Approach, 93 MICH. L. REV. 107 (1994) (finding effects of “equity seeking” and “reactive devaluation” on settlement behavior); Mark Kelman, Yuval Rottenstreich & Amos Tversky, Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making, 25 J. LEGAL STUD. 287 (1996) (describing effects of “compromise” and “contrast” behavior on jury decisionmaking). various contexts18 and to the place of shame, pride, and status,19 especially insofar as an understanding of these variables helps give content to people’s utility functions in ways that bear on the uses of law. Our principal purpose here, however, is to provide predictions, rather than to give full descriptions of individual motivations and self-understandings, and we will refer to these variables only occasionally and in passing.  For similar reasons, we do not emphasize behavioral patterns that depart from standard economic assumptions but fail to point in systematic directions; such patterns would not generate distinct predictions (although they would of course matter to a full account of individual behavior).  Our focus here is robust, empirically documented phenomena that have reasonably precise implications for legal issues. Behavioral and conventional law and economics do not differ solely in their assumptions about human behavior. They also differ, in testable ways, in their predictions about how law (as well as other forces) affects behavior. To make these differences more concrete, consider the three “fundamental principles of economics” set forth by Richard Posner in his Economic Analysis of Law,20 in a discussion that is, on these points, quite conventional. (Posner’s discussion represents an application of the basic economic methodology set forth by Becker above.21)  To what extent would an account based on behavioral law and economics offer different “fundamental principles”? The first fundamental principle for the conventional approach is downward-sloping demand: Total demand for a good falls when its price rises.22 This prediction is, of course, valid. There are few if any documented cases of Giffen goods (goods that are consumed more heavily at high prices, due to the fact that the price increase makes people unable to afford goods that are even pricier than the good in question).  However, confirmation of the prediction of downward-sloping demand does not suggest that people are optimizing. As Becker has shown, even people choosing at random (rather than in a way designed to serve their preferences) will tend to consume less of a good when its price goes up as long as they have limited resources.23  This behavior has also been demonstrated with laboratory rats.24 Thus, evidence of downward-sloping demand is not evidence in support of optimizing models. in the two groups.28  In short, sunk costs mattered; again, the standard prediction proved invalid. sis:  Because people do not equate opportunity and out-of-pocket costs for goods whose values are not solely exogenously defined (as they were in the case of the tokens), those endowed with mugs should be reluctant to part with them even at prices they would not have considered paying to acquire a mug had they not received one. cle); as we have emphasized, our principal interest is predictive in character. A behavioral analysis would be of much less interest if conventional economic models did a satisfactory job of predicting the behavior of agents insofar as relevant to law. Unfortunately, they often do not. What of all the well-known successes of conventional economics?  Do they show that predictions about law based on the conventional assumptions tend to work?  Consider some examples of the successes:  (1) the inverse correlation between price ceilings and queues; (2) the inverse correlation between rent control and the stock of housing; (3) the positive correlation in financial markets between risk and expected return; (4) the relation between futures prices and spot-market prices.34 The problem with the first three examples is that, as with tests of downward-sloping demand curves, they are quite undemanding; they ask simply whether the theory gets the direction of the effect right—and it does.  But this is not a complete vindication of the theory, for the theory may misstate the magnitude of the effect.  Consider (3), the positive relation between risk and return in financial markets.  As predicted by this theory, stocks (equities) earn higher returns (on average) than do riskless assets such as treasury bills. But what can we say about the magnitude?  Is this difference in return roughly what the theory would predict?  This is precisely the question posed by Rajnish Mehra and Edward Prescott in their well-known paper on the “equity premium puzzle.”35  The equity premium is the difference in returns between equities and riskless assets. In the United States, the equity premium has been roughly six percent per year over the past seventy years.36 This implies that a dollar invested in stocks in 1926 would, at the end of 1997, be worth over $1800, while a dollar invested in treasury bills would have accumulated to less than $15. This difference is remarkably large. Mehra and Prescott therefore ask whether it can possibly be explained by investor risk aversion.  They conclude that it cannot. That is, no plausible value of risk aversion could explain such a big difference.37 Although the theory gets the sign right in this case, the magnitude of the effect suggests that the theory is wrong. (And note that arbitrage, which we discuss just below, would not be expected to eliminate the equity premium; there are often significant costs of arbitrage in equity markets.38) Example (4) above, the relation between spot and futures prices, does better on magnitudes. Spot and futures prices are very closely related. However, this case is special in several respects.  First, arbitrage is possible.  If spot and futures prices get out of line, then investors can make sure profits by buying the contract that is too cheap and selling the one that is too expensive. Second, this context is one in which most of the activity is undertaken by professionals who will quickly lose their money and their jobs if they make frequent errors. Third, the markets in which these professionals operate offer frequent opportunities for learning. Under these circumstances, markets tend to work very well,39 though not perfectly.40  Essentially, these conditions render agents who do not conform to the standard economic assumptions irrelevant (because they will be bankrupt). In this regard it is instructive to compare the market for futures contracts with the market for criminal activity. Consider the proposition that a potential criminal will commit some crime if the expected gains from the crime exceed its expected costs.41  Suppose a criminal mistakenly thinks that the expected gains outweigh the expected costs, when in fact the opposite is true. First notice that no arbitrage will be possible in this situation. If someone is unfortunate enough to commit a crime with a negative expected value, then there is no way for anyone else to profit directly from his behavior. Outside of financial markets (and not always there), those who engage in low-payoff activities lose utility but do not create profit opportunities for others. Nor do they typically disappear from the market. (Even poorly run firms can survive for many years; consider GM.) Being a bad criminal is rarely fatal, and except possibly for organized crime, there is little opportunity for “hostile takeovers.” Finally, the decision to enter a life of crime is not one that is made 39. See Thomas Russell & Richard H. Thaler, The Relevance of Quasi Rationality in Com repeatedly with many opportunities to learn.  Once a teenager has dropped out of high school to become a drug dealer, it is difficult to switch to dentistry. The project of behavioral law and economics, as we see it, is to take the core insights and successes of economics and build upon them by making more realistic assumptions about human behavior.  We wish to retain the power of the economist’s approach to social science while offering a better description of the behavior of the agents in society and the economy.  Behavioral law and economics, in short, offers the potential to be law and economics with a higher “R2”—that is, greater power to explain the observed data.  We will try to highlight some of that potential (and suggest cases where it has been realized) in this article. A possible objection to our approach is that conventional economics has the advantage of simplicity and parsimony. At least—the objection goes—it provides a theory. By contrast, a behavioral perspective offers a more complicated and unruly picture of human behavior, and perhaps that picture will make prediction more difficult, precisely because behavior is more complicated and unruly. Everything can be explained in an ex post fashion—some tool will be found that is up to the task—but the elegance, generalizability, and predictive power of the economic method will be lost.  Shouldn’t analysts proceed with simple tools?  We offer two responses:  First, simplicity and parsimony are indeed beneficial; it would be highly desirable to come up with a model of behavior that is both simple and right.  But conventional economics is not in this position, for its predictions are often wrong. We will encounter many examples in addition to those already discussed. If such a notion of rationality allowed for good predictions, then perhaps there would be no reason for complaint; the problem, however, is that so high a degree of flexibility leaves the theory with few a priori restrictions. A theory with infinite degrees of freedom is no theory at all. For example, consider whether it is a paradox (as many economists think) that so many people vote (despite the virtual certainty that no one person’s vote will alter the outcome). If it is a paradox, so much the worse for the rationality assumption; if it is not a paradox, what does the assumption predict? Does it merely predict that people will respond to changes in conditions—for example, fewer people will vote when it is snowing? If so, the prediction is not bad, but surely it would be possible to say, after an unusually large vote amidst the storm, that more people voted simply because voting seemed especially valiant in those circumstances (so much for predictions based on this form of rationality). Conventional economics sometimes turns to stronger forms of rationality in response, and those forms provide stronger predictions in some cases; but those predictions are often inaccurate, as described above and as illustrated by the examples considered below. A. The Ultimatum Game 1. The game and its sunk-cost variation. poser, is asked to propose an allocation of a sum of money between herself and the other player, the Responder. The Responder then has a choice. He can either accept the amount offered to him by the Proposer, leaving the rest to the Proposer, or he can reject the offer, in which case both players get nothing. Neither player knows the identity of his or her counterpart, and the players will play against each other only once, so reputations and future retaliation are eliminated as factors. Economists often worry that the results of this type of experiment are sensitive to the way in which the experiment was conducted.  What would happen if the stakes were raised substantially, or the game was repeated several times to allow learning?  In this case, we know the answer.  To a first approximation, neither of these factors changes the results in any important way. Raising the stakes from $10 per pair to $100, or even to more than a week’s income (in a poor country) has little effect; the same is true of repeating the game ten times with different partners.49  (Of course, at some point raising the stakes would matter; probably few people would turn down an offer of five percent of $1,000,000.) We do not see behavior moving toward the prediction of standard economic theory. article, a factor that economic theory predicts will not have an effect, namely the introduction of a sunk cost, does have an effect.  As noted above, economics predicts that decisionmakers will ignore sunk costs in making their choices (see fundamental principle two above); but in fact decisionmakers often do not behave in this way. Do sunk costs alter behavior in the ultimatum game? To find out, we asked classroom volunteers to bring $5—what would become a sunk cost for them—to class. Students were given a form asking them how they would play both roles in an ultimatum game in which the $10 to be divided was contributed half by the Proposer and half by the Responder. They were told that their role would be determined by chance, so they had to decide first what offer to make if they were chosen to be a Proposer and then what minimum offer they would be willing to accept if they were a Responder.50  We also ran a version of the standard ultimatum game (without sunk costs by the students) as a control. Note that our emphasis here, as well as in the ordinary ultimatum game, is on the fairness behavior of Responders, not on affirmative concerns for fairness on the part of Proposers.  (As noted above, their behavior appears fully consistent with financially maximizing responses to Responders’ fairness behavior; other experimental results support this conclusion.51) We do know, however, that in other contexts people appear to display affirmative concerns for fairness.52 The fairness results obtained in various experimental settings, such as the ultimatum game, cannot be explained on grounds of reputation. The parties are interacting anonymously and in a one-shot fashion.  Of course, many real-world situations may reflect a combination of reputational and fairness factors.  Thus, for example, firms that violate the norms of an industry are ostracized, presumably at some cost to the remaining firms, partly because of a rational fear that the offending party might be untrustworthy, and partly because of a spiteful tendency to punish unmannerly behavior, even when the punishment is costly to administer (as when Responders turn down small offers). Many of Robert Ellickson’s examples in his pathbreaking book, Order Without Law, have precisely this flavor.53 Often it is impossible to disentangle the two effects. The value of the experimental method is precisely that situations can be created in which the reputational factor is absent (because the transactions are anonymous and one-shot), allowing one to test directly for fairness. The ultimatum game results show that we find it: People will often behave in accordance with fairness considerations even when it is against their financial self-interest and no one will know. Thus, for instance, 51. See Elizabeth Hoffman, Kevin McCabe & Vernon L. Smith, Social Distance and OtherRegarding Behavior in Dictator Games, 86 AM. ECON. REV. 653, 653-54 & fig.1 (1996) (finding that Proposers typically offered no more than 10% of the sum to be divided—and over 60% offered nothing—when (1) the Responder had no choice but to accept the Proposer’s offer and (2) anonymity was guaranteed). most people leave tips in out-of-town restaurants that they never plan to visit again. In the rural areas around Ithaca it is common for farmers to put some fresh produce on a table by the road. There is a cash box on the table, and customers are expected to put money in the box in return for the vegetables they take. The box has just a small slit, so money can only be put in, not taken out. Also, the box is attached to the table, so no one can (easily) make off with the money. We think that the farmers who use this system have just about the right model of human nature.  They feel that enough people will volunteer to pay for the fresh corn to make it worthwhile to put it out there. The farmers also know that if it were easy to take the money, someone would do so.54 We emphasize that this is not a story of simple altruism.  As noted above, such altruism is sometimes recognized in conventional economics; our account, in contrast, is a more complicated story of reciprocal fairness. A concern for fairness is part of most agents’ utility function. The results of the ultimatum game, like the behavior of the Ithaca shoppers, cannot readily be explained on grounds of simple altruism.  First of all, the games are played between anonymous strangers.  What reason is there to believe that these people care about one another? (Most of us give little of our wealth to anonymous strangers whom we have no reason to believe are any worse off than we are. Similarly, most people driving by a farm do not pull over and stuff two dollars through the mail slot, even in Ithaca. Fairness behavior is probably reciprocal.)  Second, we observe not only apparently “nice” behavior (generous offers) but also “spiteful” behavior (Responders turning down small offers at substantial cost to the Proposers).  In the ultimatum game, people appear simultaneously nicer and more spiteful than conventional assumptions predict. utility function, in such a way as to deprive the conventional model of the ability to make any predictions. The goal of the behavioral approach is to go back and forth between data and theory to generate predictions that will generalize. (A) People are willing to sacrifice their own material well-being to help those who are being kind. (B)  People are willing to sacrifice their own material well-being to punish those who are being unkind. (C) Both motivations (A) and (B) have a greater effect on behavior as the material cost of sacrificing becomes smaller.56 Rabin shows how these assumptions about behavior can explain the behavior observed in the ultimatum game as well as other games of cooperation such as the Prisoner’s Dilemma.  Related work, bearing on the appropriate role of law, has shown the role of such behavior in helping to produce norms that solve collective action problems.57 Rabin’s theory can be viewed as a theory of manners and principles. Generalizing from Rabin’s treatment, we might say that people can be understood as having preferences for (a) their own material payoffs and (b) those of some others they know well, and in addition they have preferences about (c) the well-being of some strangers whose interests are at stake, (d) their own reputation, and (e) what kind of person they wish to be.  A person’s willingness to cooperate or to help others can be seen as a function of these variables.  The last factor is important and especially easy to overlook; the desire to think of yourself as an honest, principled person helps explain why most of us (though not all) do leave tips in strange restaurants and would leave money in the box at the road-side stand.  As Rabin says, people are willing to sacrifice their own material well-being to help those who are being or have been kind. Of course, these desires compete with others in a world of scarce resources.  We don’t recommend that Mercedes dealers adopt the road-side stand selling technique. Thus behavioral economic agents have manners and scruples that can lead them to be “nice” in some settings. But, as we observe in the ultimatum game, people can also be provoked to be spiteful.  Sometimes the fact that another person will lose, in a material or other sense, is a benefit to the agent; these are the conditions for spite.  An agent may calculate that the costs of benefiting another person argue strongly against a deal, even if the agent would benefit materially.  Thus Responders who receive (relatively) small offers are willing to decline them in order to punish the rude Proposers who tried to grab too much for themselves, even when the small offer is a substantial amount of money. Notice that this spiteful behavior is also “principled”:  People are willing to pay to punish someone who has been unfair. This is the same behavior that drives boycotts, where consumers refrain from buying something they normally enjoy in order to punish an offending party. Conventional economics has sometimes recognized such behavior, but it has received little attention in law and economics, where, unfortunately, it may often be quite relevant.58 Spiteful behavior is common under conditions of acrimony, such as during a fight or argument.  Under these circumstances, even married couples will say and do things to hurt the other party; under bad conditions, the hurting, material or otherwise, is part of the agent’s gain. A loss to another is a gain to oneself; even the idea of thinking of oneself as a certain kind of person (not a doormat or a dupe) can lead in the direction of inflicting losses. (Concern with not establishing a reputation as a doormat or a dupe may also play a role.) This is of course the converse of circumstances of cooperative behavior.  Unfortunately, acrimony is particularly prevalent in many legal settings, before, during, and after litigation.  Much protracted litigation— cases that fail to settle early and amicably—may arise precisely because the two sides were unable to deal with matters in a more friendly manner. (Divorces that end up in court are, almost by definition, acrimonious.)  We suspect that spiteful behavior is frequently observed in conditions of acrimony even when reputational concerns are unimportant; for example, we think that the average contestant in a divorce case that ends up in court would be likely, in the role of Responder in the ultimatum game playing against his soon-to-be-ex-spouse, to reject low offers, not wanting the Proposer to benefit greatly.59 What is “fair”? Absent acrimony, spiteful behavior—such as rejection of small offers in the ultimatum game—is typically observed in situations 58. The concepts of revenge and retribution, which are related to spite, have been discussed by Posner. See Richard A. Posner, Retribution and Related Concepts of Punishment, 9 J. LEGAL STUD. 71 (1980). where one party has violated a perceived “norm of fairness.” This raises an obvious question:  What is “fair”?  In the ultimatum game, most people regard an offer of, say, a penny to the Responder as “unfair.” This perception is an illustration of a more general pattern:  People judge outcomes to be “unfair” if they depart substantially from the terms of a “reference transaction”—a transaction that defines the benchmark for the parties’ interactions.60  When the interactions are between bargainers dividing a sum of money to which neither is more entitled than the other (and this is common knowledge), the “reference transaction” is something like an equal split; substantial departures are viewed as unfair and, accordingly, punished by Responders. If parties are bargaining over the division of money and both have reason to view one side as more entitled than the other, then the “reference transaction” is a split that favors the more-entitled party.61 And if the parties are a consumer and a firm in the market, the “reference transaction” is a transaction on the usual terms for the item in question.62 We will have much more to say about this last context in Part III below.  For now our goal is simply to offer our general definition of what is “fair” and to make clear that we do not view the term as a vague and ill-defined catch-all.  Rather, we view it as having a reasonably well-specified meaning that can generate useful predictions across a range of contexts.63 Norms.  Thus far the discussion has emphasized fairness, and we will stress this factor throughout.  But fairness-related norms are a subset of a large category of norms that govern behavior and that can operate as “taxes” or “subsidies.”  An analysis like that above could be undertaken for many decisions in which people care not only about material self-interest but also about their reputations and their self-conception—for example, through purchasing books, suits, vacation spots, or through smoking, recycling, discriminating on the basis of race and sex, or through choosing friends, restaurants, and automobiles. A better understanding of the ingredients of individual utility could help a great deal with both the positive and prescriptive analysis of law. For example, it might help us understand more about (and be better able to predict in related contexts in the future) the massive changes 60. See Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. Knetsch & Richard Thaler, Fairness as a Constraint on in behavior that have followed largely unenforced bans on smoking in public places—the phenomenon of “compliance without enforcement.”64 B. Bargaining Around Court Orders 1. Coasian prediction. Although the endowment effect suggests generally that the assignment of a legal entitlement may affect the outcome of bargaining, such an effect is especially likely when the entitlement is in the form of a court order obtained after legal proceedings between opposing parties (our focus here). This is so for several reasons. 67. See George Loewenstein & Samuel Issacharoff, Source Dependence in the Valuation of analysis. With conventional law and economics, behavioral analysis is concerned with the fact (and the consequences of the fact) that some cases proceed to trial.68 Although our focus in this section is on positive analysis, there is also a tricky normative issue:  When people fail to reach bargains that would be reached in the absence of endowment effects and spiteful behavior, is there any problem from the standpoint of efficiency?69 On one view, the answer is no; if the parties do not contract around a court-ordered outcome for these reasons, then the outcome must be efficient (even if another, different outcome—favoring the other side—would also have been efficient). An underlying question, however, is whether spite ought to count in the efficiency calculus. Some of the most prominent utilitarian philosophers believe that it should not.70 68. Conventional law and economics attributes failures to settle primarily to informational differences among parties. There is a large body of literature on this topic, which is summarized in Bruce L. Hay & Kathryn E. Spier, Litigation and Settlement, in THE NEW PALGRAVE DICTIONARY OF ECONOMICS AND THE LAW (forthcoming 1998). in UTILITARIANISM AND BEYOND 39, 55-56 (Amartya Sen & Bernard Williams eds., 1982).  A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell have acknowledged this view in their analysis of punitive damages as a response to the socially illicit gains obtained by certain defendants. See A. Mitchell Polinsky & Steven Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic Analysis, 111 HARV. L. REV. 869, 908-10 (1998). nomic model would predict.71  Farnsworth interviewed attorneys from approximately twenty nuisance cases in which injunctive relief was sought and either granted or denied after full litigation before a judge.  In not a single case of those Farnsworth studied did parties even attempt to contract around the court order, even when transaction costs were low, and even when an objective third party might think that there was considerable room for mutually advantageous deals.  Conventional analysis might attribute failures to reach an ultimate agreement to asymmetric information;72 but under such analysis it is difficult to explain the complete failure even to negotiate. It is also interesting to note that the lawyers interviewed said that the parties would not have reached a contractual solution if the opposite result had been reached. (This last point also means that the no-bargaining result cannot be explained by supposing that the court orders entered were uniquely efficient.) The lawyers’ explanations for these results are behavioral in character. Once people have received a court judgment, they are unwilling to negotiate with the opposing party, partly because of an unwillingness by victorious plaintiffs to confer advantages upon their opponents.  Having invested a great deal of resources in pursuing the case all the way to court and through a trial, victors perceive themselves as having a special right to the legally endorsed status quo, and they are unlikely to give that right up, especially to their opponent, for all, or most, of the tea in China. Their investment in the entitlement gives it a distinctive character. Bargains are unlikely in the extreme; the plaintiff and the defendant tend not even to think about them. These tendencies are reinforced (according to the lawyers in Farnsworth’s study) by the presence of acrimony between the parties; thus acrimony combines with the endowment effect to produce an absence of negotiation. 71. Ward Farnsworth, Do Parties to Nuisance Lawsuits Bargain After Judgment? A Glimpse Inside the Cathedral (1998) (unpublished manuscript, on file with the Stanford Law Review). approaches is careful empirical work that provides reasonably definitive conclusions about predictive failures and successes. 1. Self-serving conceptions of fairness. By itself, this difference is highly suggestive; if the two sides have different views about comparable districts, bargaining impasses may well occur. But do these self-serving views (reported to the authors of the study in response to a survey question) correlate with actual behavior?  Yes.  The authors regressed the percentage of previous negotiations that ended in a strike against the difference between the two sides’ lists of comparable districts. The regression showed that this difference had substantial explanatory power. In those school districts where the average salary of the union’s list is $1000 greater than the board’s list, a strike is forty-nine percent more likely than where the average salaries of the two lists are the same.78 Thus self-serving biases can explain real-world bargaining impasses. As already noted, strategic behavior does not seem to provide a strong explanation for the empirical evidence on school-district negotiations. There was no incentive in the study (as there would often be in negotiations with the opposing party) for parties to choose comparable districts in a strategic manner.79 The behavioral account seems to exhibit a higher “R2”—a better ability to predict the observed data—than the standard account. 79. For a fuller discussion than space here permits of the possibility of strategic behavior, and experimental evidence from other studies that points against such an explanation for the results, see id. at 17-18. to the discrepancy in predictions about the judge’s likely award.82 Note that the hypothetical, role-playing nature of this study in some ways strengthens the interpretation of the result.  In the short time that it took to read all the materials, subjects adopted the point of view of their roles and the bias that comes with it. Of course, the fact that roles were only hypothetical, and the financial stakes small, means that we cannot be sure from these studies alone that parties would display self-serving bias in real-world settings; but the school district study suggests the importance of the bias in such settings. 82. Id. 83. See Russell Korobkin & Chris Guthrie, Psychology, Economics, and Settlement: A New D. Mandatory Contract Terms 1. Wage and price effects. discussed below in connection with the existing empirical evidence (female employees), this assumption is clearly reasonable.90 The conventional account thus offers sharp predictions about the effects of imposing mandatory contract terms.  Do the data bear out these predictions? The leading study in this area is by Jonathan Gruber; Gruber examines the effects of imposing mandatory coverage of childbirth expenses in employer-provided insurance policies.91 Imposition of the mandatory healthinsurance term—which represented a substantial departure from the usual contractual arrangements prior to the mandate—caused the wages of affected workers (most prominently, married women of childbearing age) to fall by at least the cost of the mandated coverage according to most of the author’s estimates.92  The study also found that the hours of employment of these workers were either unchanged or slightly higher with the mandate and that their probability of being employed was either unchanged or slightly lower.93 In sum, “[t]he findings consistently suggest shifting of the costs of the mandates on the order of 100 percent, with little effect on net labor input.”94 These findings are not easy to reconcile with the conventional account, which predicts a fall in wages less than the cost of the benefit. (If the wage were going to adjust by the full cost of the benefit, then some substantial fraction of employers should have offered the benefit even prior to the mandate.) 2. Behavioral analysis. 92. Id. at 623, 630-31, 633, 636. Gruber performs a number of different regressions; one set did not yield statistically significant results, id. at 638, while the others yielded statistically significant results along the lines described in the text. The confidence intervals for the majority of these results also include values indicating less than full shifting of the cost—but also, of course, values indicating much more than full shifting of the cost. imply that he would want to sell the entitlement (if he could) once it has been granted. The corollary of this observation is that imposing a mandatory term may have different effects than the standard analysis predicts.  In supplyand-demand terms, imagine a labor supply curve prior to the imposition of the mandate, reflecting willingness to work at different wage levels given provision of the benefit; the consequence of the endowment effect may be that this curve is shifted to the right once the mandate is imposed, and this move may more than compensate for the backward shift in the employer’s labor demand curve as a result of the mandate. If this occurs, then the wages of the affected worker will fall by as much as or more than the cost of the benefit. This is precisely what the Gruber study of mandated childbirth coverage finds.95 Three caveats are important here.  First, while the endowment effect is consistent with complete or more than complete adjustment of the wage or price, it is also possible to have less than complete adjustment of the wage or price in the presence of the endowment effect. Perhaps workers are not any more willing to supply labor in exchange for a given wage plus the benefit in question once they have an entitlement to the benefit; it may be just that they would be even less willing to supply labor in the absence of the benefit. It is also possible that conventional economic analysis, by incorporating a market failure such as adverse selection (a possibility generally ignored by the above-mentioned critics of mandatory contract terms), can explain the empirical findings discussed above.96 Our point is just the modest one that the behavioral account can predict an instance of observed behavior that is inconsistent with the standard law and economics account of mandatory terms. Future empirical work could attempt to address the adverse selection possibility by examining the effects of mandatory contract terms in a setting in which (in contrast to the health insurance context) adverse selection is unlikely to be a significant force. 95. As noted above, Richard Craswell offers an analogous analysis in the context of mandatory product warranties for consumers. See Craswell, supra note 88, at 388-90.  As Craswell describes, given the endowment effect, the mandatory term may cause the price paid by consumers to adjust by more than the cost of the term, and the quantity of the good demanded may rise. In addition to Craswell’s discussion of mandatory terms, the endowment effect has been extensively discussed in the legal literature in connection with waivable contract terms and the Coase theorem. See, e.g., David Charny, Hypothetical Bargains: The Normative Structure of Contract Interpretation, 89 MICH. L. REV. 1815, 1867-68 (1991) (discussing waivable terms); Kelman, supra note 1, at 678-95 (concerning the Coase theorem). be evaluated in terms of an initial reference point and that “losses loom larger than gains”). This qualification applies only to situations in which there is a financial loss relative to some preexisting expectation; thus it would not apply to, for example, a consumer’s purchase of a durable good at a higher price due to the inclusion of a warranty.  The final qualification here is that our analysis in this section is purely positive, concerned with the effects of imposing a mandatory contract term. The endowment effect does not necessarily imply that, from a normative perspective, mandatory terms are desirable; they may be efficient, in the sense that they would not be undone (if they could be) once imposed, but the situation without such terms is also efficient, for the same reasons given by the standard account, and there is no obvious means by which the two situations can be compared.  Unlike several of the scenarios discussed in Part V below, in which we think there is often a relatively strong argument for choosing one normative benchmark over another (say because people are likely to underestimate certain objective probabilities based on some form of judgment error), here there does not seem to be a clear basis for such a decision. One of the goals of law and economics is to explain the content of law— what the law allows and what it prohibits. The traditional approach provides two tools for this analysis.  First, laws may be efficient solutions to the problems of organizing society.98 Such laws can be thought of as solutions to optimal contracting problems with all of the affected parties at the table. Second, laws may come about because of the rent-seeking activities of politically powerful actors; many laws that benefit farmers and concentrated industries, for example, have been explained along these lines.99  The positive theory of law reflected in the conventional account predicts that the legal rules we observe will be rules that either maximize social wealth (if they are judge-made rules) or redistribute wealth to interest groups able to influence the legislative process. Law and economics scholars who reject this account of the content of law have not offered any alternative account to explain and predict the rules we observe. we suspect that most members of society—which is to say most of the people who are entitled to elect legislators—hold the view, undoubtedly naively, that the purpose of the law is to codify “right” and “wrong.” Certainly many criminal statutes would be explained without reference to either of the above factors. In this section we argue that law and economics explanations of the content of law need to be modified by incorporating the ideas of bounded self-interest (in the form of fairness norms) and bounded rationality developed above. As we will try to show, many laws on the books appear to be difficult to justify on efficiency grounds (for example, those that prohibit mutually beneficial exchanges without obvious externalities) and seem to benefit groups that do not have much lobbying power (such as the poor or middle class).  We argue that the explanation for the “anomalous” laws is typically a quite simple one:  Most people think the result is fair.  We also suggest that some laws we observe reflect neither efficiency nor conventional rent seeking but, instead, aspects of bounded rationality. Our point is not the general (and rather obvious) one that fairness concerns and bounded rationality may shape the content of law; we seek to show specifically how behavioral analysis has real predictive and explanatory power.  We also do not claim that fairness concerns and bounded rationality explain every aspect of the content of law—just that they provide a useful supplement to existing explanations.100 The mechanisms underlying our behavioral economic account of the content of law are simple and conventional.  With the existing analysis, we assume (for present purposes, and insofar as statutory rather than judge-made law is concerned) that legislators are maximizers interested in their own reelection.  Legislators interested in their own reelection will be responsive to the preferences and judgments of their constituents and those of powerful interest groups.  If constituents believe that a certain practice is unfair or dangerous, and should be banned or regulated, self-interested legislators will respond, even if they do not share these views.  Likewise, if a mobilized group holds such views, legislators’ response will be affected, in much the same way as if the group sought legislation to serve a narrowly defined financial self-interest, as posited by the standard account. 100. Our analysis in this part is similar in spirit to that offered by earlier work such as David Cohen & Jack Knetsch, Judicial Choice and Disparities Between Measures of Economic Values, 30 OSGOODE HALL L.J. 737 (1992) (seeking to explain various legal doctrines based on the endowment effect), and Sara Sun Beale, What’s Law Got To Do With It?, 1 BUFF. CRIM. L. REV. 23 (1997) (seeking to explain criminal law based on the availability heuristic and other aspects of bounded rationality). it more “available” to the general public, and thus to increase the public’s demand for regulation. We suspect that a full account of the content of law would have to incorporate legislators’ independent judgments about fairness or risk, which play an occasional role; but we do not discuss that point here because for the examples we consider, public and interest-group perceptions seem to provide a good (and the most parsimonious) account of the laws we observe. This section discusses the demand for the law insofar as that demand is affected by people’s bounded self-interest and in particular by their taste for fairness as they understand it. We do not mean to defend the laws that we describe; we suggest more modestly that people’s commitment to fairness is part of the causal mechanism that establishes those laws.  Fairness norms interact with other forces to produce some of the seemingly anomalous laws we observe.  “Fairness entrepreneurs” may play a role, mobilizing public judgments to serve their (selfish or nonselfish) interests. producing transactions for ordinary commodities such as television sets and theater tickets? Not surprisingly, economists and economically oriented lawyers often view these laws as inefficient and anomalous.104 The laws also do not generally seem well explained in terms of conventional rent seeking by a politically powerful faction. One might argue that ticket-scalping laws are an exception to this last point, on the ground that ticket sellers (who may be politically powerful) might lobby in favor of the laws because moderate prices are necessary to create demand, which in turn certifies quality and makes the product more desirable.105 (Thus, for example, the argument would be that restaurant owners do not raise prices when waits develop for tables, and if a secondary market in restaurant reservations were to develop with very high prices for tables, restaurateurs might wish to outlaw it.) The difficulty with this form of argument as applied here is that it cannot explain the application of ticket-scalping laws to perennially popular events whose quality is known from TV and whose attractiveness to the public would not decrease significantly even with some diminution in demand—a category that includes many professional sporting events. Our point here is actually a more general one: Although it may be possible to offer efficiency or conventional rent-seeking explanations for certain sorts of laws banning economic transactions,106 there does not seem to be a general theory or set of theories that can explain all or even most of these laws on traditional grounds. those of the reference transaction, there will be strong pressure for a law banning such trades. Note that the prediction is not that all high prices (ones that make it difficult or impossible for some people to afford things they might want) will be banned; what we predict will be banned are transactions at terms far from the terms on which those transactions generally occur in the marketplace. characterized by the sort of severe departure from the reference transaction that people view as intolerable.  As a letter-writer to the New York Times colorfully put it in responding to coverage of ticket-scalping laws:  “With legalized scalping, lower- and middle-income consumers would be relegated to watching events at home or buying overpriced seats in the nosebleed section”; such a system of “entertainment Darwinism” would be a “raw deal” for the average consumer.111 We emphasize that we need not (and do not) find these views of fairness necessarily rational or compelling.  Many of those who think “usurious” lenders are “unfair” might not have thought through the implications of their views (for example, that paying an outrageous price for a loan may be better than paying an infinite price, or that a loan to a riskier borrower is a product different in kind from a loan to a safer borrower).  Still, if such views are widespread, they may underlie certain patterns in the content of law, such as the legal restrictions on usury, price gouging and ticket scalping. Our claim here is a positive one about the content of the law we observe, not a prescriptive or normative one about the shape practices or rules should take. As a positive matter, behavioral analysis predicts that if trades are commonly occurring with terms far from those of the reference transaction, then legal rules will often ban trades on such terms. 111. Russ Haven & Amy Chester, Letter to the Editor, Ticket-Scalping Laws Protect the Av does not qualify for a loan at all.112 This is true even when a modest increase in the interest rate would not violate usury laws.113 (Adverse selection considerations may also explain this behavior,114 but they cannot easily explain the existence of laws against such behavior.)  Price gouging and ticket scalping are similar in terms of private actors’ behavior. Thus, when Hurricane Andrew hit Florida and the demand for lumber and other building supplies skyrocketed, Home Depot, a major national chain, continued to sell these goods at its usual prices, despite the fact that the stock could have been sold at an enormous (short-term) profit, and despite the fact that no law banned price increases.115 More generally, economists have often remarked on the failure of firms to increase prices in response to temporary increases in demand.116 Likewise, an interesting feature of ticket-scalping laws is that they will keep prices down only to the extent that firms choose to sell tickets at reasonable prices in the first place; but in fact firms routinely do this.117 For example, during the 1997 NBA playoffs, the Chicago Bulls sold some tickets to the general public at prices that were somewhat higher than regular season games but a fraction of the price the tickets commanded on the (legal in Illinois) ticket broker open market. As the head of a major theater company explained, “there’s a strong public relations argument” against raising prices for tickets for very popular shows (and presumably sporting events as well)—despite excess demand for seats at the going prices—because the public already believes “that Broadway ticket prices are too high.”118 “Even though we could sell tickets at $100,” another theater owner said, “we’d be cutting our own throats because it would be a P.R. disaster for Broadway.”119 Why would it be a “P.R. disaster” if the market would allow them to sell Theaters). their tickets at $100? We think this would be so because a $100 ticket price for a very popular show would have been viewed as unfair by many members of the public given that the usual price for a ticket was below this. Why then are the laws necessary? Some of the relevant actors will not be constrained by fairness norms in the absence of a law.  Noninstitutional lenders may be willing to lend at exorbitant rates; suppliers selling lumber out of the back of pick-up trucks will often charge whatever the market will bear (as occurred after Hurricane Andrew);122 ticket scalpers, who are typically anonymous actors engaged in one-time transactions, have no reason to keep prices down. It is these actors who are regulated by the law. The more powerful mainstream firms will tend to support, or at least not oppose, rules banning unfair transactions. (Note, though, that their support would not be predicted by the standard account.) selling is banned in all states.126  People may not contract around bans on race and sex discrimination, as for example through written agreements.127 Blocked trades can be found in every American jurisdiction. Another instance in which fairness-related norms, and in addition bounded rationality, may affect law involves one of the enduring puzzles in First Amendment law:  the special judicial hostility to “prior restraints” on speech, most notably injunctions.128 A court may well refuse to issue an injunction against speech even if it would allow subsequent punishment of that same speech.  The puzzle is that a prior restraint involves subsequent punishment too; what an injunction means is that a violator will be subject to (subsequent) sanctions. Why is a criminal statute any less problematic than an injunction whose violation produces criminal penalties? Conventional economic analysis provides no satisfying answer to this question.  True, the injunction might be thought to create the prospect of a greater total punishment for the speech, but no one has suggested that the First Amendment imposes limits on the severity of punishment for speech that the government is entitled to criminalize.  In any case, many criminal statutes impose greater punishments than many injunctions, and the latter are nonetheless more troublesome than the former. C. Anecdote-Driven Environmental Legislation (With Particular Reference to Superfund) 1. Estimating the likelihood of uncertain events. 130. Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman, Extensional Versus Intuitive Reasoning: The Con ward heavy regulation of school bus safety in the wake of media coverage of school bus accidents in which children were killed.134 What determines how available a particular environmental hazard is? Two factors are particularly important: the observed frequency of the hazard and its salience. Thus, if a particular hazard has materialized recently, people are likely to attach a higher probability to its occurring in the future. And this is particularly true if the hazard has a high degree of salience—as, for instance, with the discovery of asbestos in schools, where many children are present. Apart from the nature of the event, salience is heavily influenced by the way the event is packaged by the media, organized interest groups, and politicians. Conventional approaches point to the important role of interest groups in shaping environmental law; these groups can use the law to redistribute resources in their preferred directions.  Some of these groups are sincerely concerned with environmental protection; others have economic interests for which environmental issues operate as a smokescreen. Explanations of this kind have had some success, but they fail to account for Superfund. EPA, concerned about an apparent gap in federal law and eager to consolidate their authority over issues of public health, began to draft new legislation in order to respond to the existence of abandoned hazardous waste sites. But it is doubtful that the EPA could have succeeded if not for the fact that in August of 1978, national news began to focus on what was soon seen as a “ticking time bomb” at Love Canal, New York, consisting of apparent leaks from the disposal of 21,000 tons of chemical waste into the Canal between 1943 and 1952.  In the middle and late 1970s, studies of groundwater and cancer incidence appeared to show that the leaks had created serious health risks, to the point where the New York Health Commissioner declared a public emergency on August 2, 1978.  Within two weeks, President Carter declared an emergency in the area.  A kind of cascade effect occurred, and hence in the period between August and October, 1978, the national news was saturated with stories of the risks to citizens near Love Canal. 140. Cf. W. Kip Viscusi, Alarmist Decisions with Divergent Risk Information, 107 ECON. J. 1657 (1997) (finding that in the presence of divergent information about risks, people place inordinate weight on high risk assessments). tion, they did influence its content and structure.  But the enactment and continued popularity of Superfund are not predicted by the conventional account alone.  The behavioral account, in contrast, suggests that the occurrence of an event such as Love Canal, particularly when played up and dramatized by the media and other actors, will produce a legislative response.  Superfund is one example; regulatory responses to Agent Orange and asbestos in schools are others. Available instances of risk or threat seem to shape the content of law. In this part we shift our focus from the positive to the prescriptive.  Instead of seeking to explain what the effects of law will be and why we have the laws we do, we now explore how the law can best be structured to achieve specified ends—deterring socially undesirable behavior through the tort system, encouraging measures that enhance human health, and so on. Our claim in each context we consider is that attention to behavioral insights can improve the law’s ability to move society toward desired outcomes. Our primary emphasis is on problems in processing information, problems that create difficulties both for juries during trials and for those responding to information required by government or coming from government itself. Thus bounded rationality, in the form of both judgment errors and behavior in accordance with prospect theory rather than expected utility theory, are the central emphases in this part.  Section A deals with juries, while section B deals with government information campaigns and mandatory disclosure. Section C emphasizes our second bound on human behavior, bounded willpower, and discusses its relevance to prescriptions directed toward deterring crime. appear to come to the task of awarding punitive damages with strong retributive instincts.142  The goal of optimal deterrence may be best achieved through administrative agencies rather than juries.143 Another example of the application of behavioral economics to prescriptive analysis is Thomas Jackson’s discussion of discharge policy in bankruptcy law. Although standard economic ideas of risk allocation would often support nondischargeability of debts, Jackson draws on aspects of what we have termed bounded rationality and bounded willpower to support the “fresh start” policy of discharge and to sketch the specific contours it should take.144 Our goal in this part is to point to some additional topics in the economic analysis of law in which a more accurate understanding of decisionmaking can improve upon conventional law and economics prescriptions. 1. Background. Hindsight bias has been observed in a large number of studies, including studies of “expert” actors such as physicians, who, when asked to assess the probabilities of alternative diagnoses, given a set of symptoms, offer significantly different estimates depending on what they are told the actual diagnosis turned out to be.146  Hindsight bias also appears to occur in the specific 142. Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman & David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages context of negligence determinations.147  In the negligence studies, subjects in the role of jurors—armed with knowledge that harm had in fact occurred—were found to attach significantly higher probabilities to harm than subjects in the role of ex ante decisionmakers—those not informed of the occurrence of harm.148 This is a straightforward prediction of the many prior studies on hindsight bias.149 Although the negligence studies asked for individual rather than group probabilities (raising the question whether group interaction on an actual jury could dispel hindsight bias), other studies have found hindsight bias in group as well as individual settings.150 Hindsight bias will lead juries making negligence determinations to find defendants liable more frequently than if cost-benefit analysis were done correctly—that is, on an ex ante basis. Thus, plaintiffs will win cases they deserve to lose.  This prediction is consistent with the frequently expressed (though difficult to verify) view that the tort system imposes too much liability.151 A threshold issue raised by the hindsight-bias account of negligence determinations is whether hindsight bias is simply a countervailing weight to a tendency on the part of defendants to underestimate the likelihood of being sanctioned. A common feature of human behavior is overoptimism: People tend to think that bad events are far less likely to happen to them than to others.  Thus, most people think that their probability of a bad outcome is far less than others’ probability, although of course this cannot be true for more than half the population.152  If defendants exhibit such overoptimism, then they will be underdeterred by a correct application of the negligence stan dard; overestimation of the probability of harm based on hindsight bias might then be a desirable countervailing factor. We think that defendant overoptimism is likely to be a much smaller factor for firms than for individual defendants, since firms that make systematic errors in judgment will be at a competitive disadvantage. And for individuals, the role of overoptimism is likely to vary significantly with context. In a case in which the threat of being found liable is highly salient, individuals may tend to overestimate the likelihood of being sanctioned, for reasons discussed in connection with our account of Superfund above.  Hindsight bias, in contrast, seems to be an across-the-board phenomenon; it has been observed in a wide range of contexts across many studies and is likely to be present whenever a jury makes a negligence determination. The findings on hindsight bias provide new empirical support for the old idea that such bias may distort negligence determinations. Despite the vast law and economics literature in the area of torts, no attention seems to have been paid to the potentially significant implications of hindsight bias for achieving optimal deterrence—the goal posited by that literature, and the goal on which we focus here. (Thus, we accept this goal for purposes of our prescriptive analysis; we do not necessarily endorse this goal from a normative perspective.) Law and economics scholars generally approve of the use of the negligence standard for achieving the goal of optimal deterrence; the negligence standard, if applied in an error-free fashion, leads to an efficient level of precaution (although other standards will as well; note that these other standards may be worse or better along other dimensions, such as encouraging victim precautions and inducing optimal activity levels).156 These 153. Guido Calabresi & Alvin K. Klevorik, Four Tests for Liability in Torts, 14 J. LEGAL (1987) (analyzing rules of negligence and strict liability). scholars have also analyzed reasons that legal rules, including the negligence standard, may be imperfectly applied, but they do not offer any clear prescriptions for addressing this problem, since as they see it, the problem does not have a clear direction; either underdeterrence or overdeterrence relative to correct application of the cost-benefit standard is possible.157 In contrast, we can offer clear prescriptions because the hindsight bias points in only one direction: overdeterrence (again relative to what correct cost-benefit analysis would produce). 157. See, e.g., Jason S. Johnston, Bayesian Fact-Finding and Efficiency: Toward an Eco court ultimately accepted the “imaginative” argument of the defendant and ruled in his favor, its evident surprise at the nature of the argument suggests the pervasiveness of hindsight-based thinking in the tort system. Imagine, however, that jurors are not told that the company decided to use the chemical; rather they are told only about the ex ante decision facing the company (whether to use the chemical).  They learn about the benefits and costs of that strategy and must determine whether either pursuing it or failing to pursue it would have been negligent.  In this scenario the jurors would be transformed into ex ante decisionmakers:  They wouldn’t know whether the “accident” that occurred (prompting the lawsuit) was harm from bacterial contamination or harm from the chemical. Because they would not know what harm ended up materializing, they would not be led by hindsight bias to overestimate the probability of that harm. Their probability estimates for each type of harm—and their resulting assessment of whether either decision by the company would have been negligent—would be untouched by hindsight bias.  In this way it might be possible to eliminate the effect of hindsight bias on negligence determinations. (If the decision that the defendant actually made was one that the jury determined to be negligent, outcome information could be introduced for purposes of computing damages.) It is important to note the structure of this example: The defendant faced a choice of options, each of which could have caused harm.  In this sort of case, jurors assessing the defendant’s conduct would not know (if they were not told) whether the harm that prompted the suit was caused by choice of the first option or choice of the second. It is also important to note that various procedural steps would have to be taken to protect the secrecy of the defendant’s choice if outcome information were to be kept from the jury; lawyers’ affiliations, for example, could not be revealed, and witnesses could not be identified as defense-side or plaintiff-side.  (One might worry that the food-processing company’s employees would testify in a way that revealed what choice the company made. But it would not be in the company’s interests to have its employees testify in such a one-sided fashion, since then jurors would suspect which choice was made and would tend to engage in hindsight-biased decisionmaking to the defendant’s detriment.) In some cases, it might not be possible to keep the defendant’s choice from the jury; the fact of the suit will make clear what that choice was. For example, in the well-known case of Petition of Kinsman Transit Co.,164 in which a bridge operator failed to lift the bridge in time to prevent an accident, apparently because he was at a tavern, the fact of a suit may provide strong indication that the bridge was not lifted. In this sort of setting, a possible prescription (offered previously in the literature) involves bifurcation of trials, so that jurors deciding on liability do not learn any of the details of what happened until an initial determination of liability is made.165 Although we think this is a sensible prescription in such settings, we note that it will not eliminate the effects of hindsight bias, since (as proponents of bifurcated trials recognize) “the jury will undoubtedly know that they are not being asked simply to engage in an academic exercise,”166 and that (because a trial is being held) “a bad outcome must have occurred.”167 In contrast, in cases in which jurors need not know (because they cannot infer from the fact of a lawsuit) what choice the defendant made, it may be possible to eliminate the hindsight bias completely.  And there are many such situations:  cases in which either of two options facing a physician could have caused harm or death to a patient; cases in which either the use or the failure to use a new technology could have led to harm; cases in which either revealing or failing to reveal suicide threats by a psychiatric patient could have resulted in suicide. The highest evidentiary threshold known to our legal system—the “beyond a reasonable doubt” standard—is used only in criminal cases.  However, in civil cases an intermediate standard (higher than the preponderance standard, but less demanding than the “beyond a reasonable doubt” standard) is the “clear and convincing evidence” standard.  This standard has been adopted by many states for punitive-damage determinations,168 and a broadening of its use to all negligence determinations—or at least those in which hindsight bias seems most likely to present a significant problem—might provide a desirable counterweight to the tendency of jurors to overestimate the probability that harm will occur. (Of course, further study would be required before reaching a final conclusion here.)  This, of course, would be likely to be a second-best solution; in some situations defendants might be found not liable when, under a perfectly functioning system with no hindsight bias and no heightened evidentiary standard, they would be found liable.169 This need not be the case, however, and even if it is, we might well tolerate a crude measure that produced some errors so long as it represented an improvement over the current system.  Most importantly, there is much room for research focused on determining whether altering the evidentiary threshold would represent a desirable response on balance—either across the board or in particular categories of cases. Our goal is to suggest the value of research on this issue, rather than to urge an immediate change in policy based on what we now know. the preponderance standard.  For instance, if the likelihood that the negligence threshold has been met is a linear function of the strength of the evidence, half of all cases in the system meet the threshold under the preponderance standard, and jurors overestimate by fifty percent the likelihood that the threshold is met, then a move to a seventy-five-percent likelihood requirement would result in the jurors’ finding negligence in precisely the half of cases in which it should be found. One response to this analysis is that the reason jurors tend to find defendants liable even when liability is not legally warranted is not that jurors overestimate the probability of harm, but simply that they want to compensate tort victims. Our first prescription addresses the latter issue as well as the former, for if jurors do not know what harm occurred, it is difficult for them to engage in compensation-based decisionmaking. (In the case of the food-processing company discussed above, the jurors, to ensure compensation for the harm that occurred, would have to say that the company was negligent whether it used the chemical or refrained from using it—probably not a likely scenario.) But as far as the second prescription is concerned, the problem of compensation-based decisionmaking remains. So if this is what is going on, jurors may continue to find defendants liable, regardless of a higher evidentiary threshold. But there is no reason to think the existence of a higher threshold will make things worse in this situation, and so as long as there are some cases in which jurors try faithfully to apply the negligence standard, moving to the higher evidentiary threshold may improve decisionmaking. The same response may be offered to the objection that jurors’ behavior is not sensitive to the evidentiary threshold—a point on which there is conflicting evidence;171 as long as an increase in the threshold will matter in some cases, the change may be desirable, since there is no reason to think it will cause harm in cases in which it does not change jurors’ behavior. comments on an earlier draft of this article. information available at the time.175 The problem is that this determination must be made against the backdrop of knowledge that the issue or problem in fact materialized, and produced a large drop in the company’s stock price. In this situation, a decisionmaker will likely find it difficult to see how a reasonable ex ante decisionmaker might have thought the prospective issue or problem other than material. Consistent with this analysis, the main predictor of whether a securities fraud action is brought seems to be whether there has been a large change in the company’s stock market value, not whether the company’s behavior was reasonable from an ex ante perspective.176 Another example here involves damage suits for violations of the Fourth Amendment. A risk in such suits is that if the allegedly illegal search did in fact produce damaging evidence (say, drugs or other contraband), then decisionmakers are likely to conclude that the law enforcement agency’s behavior was reasonable.  This will be true even if, from an ex ante perspective (without knowing the eventual outcome), this behavior would not have been found reasonable. 1. Background. The prescription to “provide more information” is striking in its spareness.  Behavioral analysis suggests that this prescription is far too spare. “Provide more information” says nothing about the way in which the information will be provided, and yet we know from much of what has been said already, as well as from empirical work by scholars such as W. Kip Viscusi, that this will matter a great deal.179  Thus, for example, we know that people’s perceptions of the probability of uncertain events is influenced by the salience of the presentation of these events. these outcomes is better. Our point is simply that in the real world, she who provides information ends up giving advice. 182. See Kahneman & Tversky, supra note 12, at 277-79. 183. See id. at 273 (outcomes are viewed differently depending on whether they come in the form of gains or losses from a perceived status quo); id. at 279 (citing Eugene Galanter & Patricia Pliner, Cross-Modality Matching of Money Against Other Continua, in SENSATION AND MEASUREMENT 65 (Howard R. Moskowitz, Bertram Scharf & Joseph C. Stevens eds., 1974)) (losses are weighted more heavily than gains). Another feature of how outcomes are viewed, both empirically and under prospect theory, is that a given change produces less reaction the further a decisionmaker is from her reference point.  Thus, for example, the value difference between $10 and $20 is greater than the value difference between $1000 and $1010, both for gains and for losses, assuming a reference point of $0. See id. at 278. In terms of the shape of the “value function” for decisionmakers (a function giving the value of each outcome–this is prospect theory’s counterpart to the utility function), this suggests a function that is concave for gains and convex for losses; only with that shape are both gains and losses viewed as less significant the further the decisionmaker is from her reference point. See id. This shape of the value function is further supported by evidence of attitudes toward risk:  People appear generally (though there are exceptions) to exhibit risk losses from an initial reference point, coupled with the special aversion to losses, means that it matters a great deal whether something is presented as a gain or a loss relative to the status quo; a perceived threat of a loss relative to the status quo weighs more heavily than a perceived threat of foregoing a gain. In such cases it is difficult to say which individual is “informed”—the one who is told of the perceived threat of a loss or the one who is told of the perceived threat of foregoing a gain. In this and other contexts, preferences are not preexisting but rather “constructive, context-dependent,” analogous to the balls or strikes that do not predate the situation of choice and that “ain’t nothing till” the umpire calls them.184 3. Prescriptions. averse attitudes towards gains but risk-seeking attitudes toward losses, and these attitudes imply concavity of the value function for gains and convexity for losses. See id. This pattern of concavity and convexity has received considerable empirical support. See id. at 268, 278; Peter C. Fishburn & Gary A. Kochenberger, Two-Piece Von Neumann-Morgenstern Utility Functions, 10 DECISION SCI. 503, 509-10 (1979). effect is a study involving breast self-examination; pamphlets describing the positive effects of breast self-examination (for example, women who undertake such examinations have a greater chance of finding a tumor at a treatable stage) are ineffective, but there are significant changes in behavior from pamphlets that stress the negative consequences of a refusal to undertake self-examinations (women who fail to perform such examinations have a decreased chance of finding a tumor at a treatable stage).186  Note that this example illustrates how the provision of information may be a more natural tool than taxation or regulation for discouraging some forms of behavior (such as the failure to perform a self-examination). C. Behavior of Criminals 1. Background. the future will be discounted very heavily.192 Behavioral economic analysis carries this idea further by incorporating self-control issues often emphasized by criminologists.193 2. Prescriptions. What does hyperbolic discounting imply for effective deterrence of criminal behavior?  With this sort of bounded willpower on the part of po tential offenders, the difference between not getting caught and being imprisoned for, say, a year differs dramatically from the difference between being imprisoned for ten years and being imprisoned for eleven years (even apart from any fixed costs that may accompany the fact of conviction). While the standard theory says that these two things differ only insofar as the costs of imprisonment in year eleven must be discounted to present value in order to be compared with the loss of wages and personal freedom in year one, behavioral economic analysis (and basic common sense) tells us that this is not so. Short punishments will thus have much more effect than long punishments as a result of the “priority of the present”; adding years onto a sentence will produce little additional deterrence.201 This idea is reflected in policy recommendations such as Mark Kleiman’s “coerced abstinence” proposal, under which drug offenders on probation or parole would be swiftly and automatically punished, but with modest sanctions, for any positive drug result.202 Short punishments are also desirable under Polinsky and Shavell’s approach, but for a different reason. 201. Cf. Robert D. Cooter, Lapses, Conflict, and Akrasia in Torts and Crimes: Towards an Economic Theory of the Will, 11 INT’L REV. L. & ECON. 149, 154 (1991) (concluding that short but highly probable sentences are optimal in a model in which potential offenders experience “lapses” in self-control). 206 predicted by the nonhyperbolic approach, although still less than the actual severity rating of 500.  These data are of course only suggestive; we have not shown that the bounded willpower approach leads to improved predictions of actual criminal behavior.  Empirical work on actual behavior of this sort is notoriously difficult, but scholars such as Steven Levitt have begun to demonstrate the possibilities in this area.206 A full analysis of criminal behavior would also need to incorporate other factors not considered here (such as the role of community); our goal is only to sketch some of the many ways in which conventional economic analysis of criminal law can be usefully extended using the tools of behavioral economics. In its normative orientation, conventional law and economics is often strongly antipaternalistic. The idea of “consumer sovereignty” plays a large role; citizens, assuming they have reasonable access to relevant information, are thought to be the best judges of what will promote their own welfare. Yet many of the instances of bounded rationality discussed above call this idea into question—and also, as we will emphasize below, call into question the idea that intervention by government actors, who themselves may face the same cognitive or motivational problems as everyone else, can improve matters.  In this way bounded rationality pushes toward a sort of antiantipaternalism—a skepticism about antipaternalism, but not an affirmative defense of paternalism.207  We also note (although we do not explore this point here) that while bounded rationality may increase the need for law (if government’s failings are less serious than citizens’), bounded self-interest may reduce it, by creating norms that solve collective action problems even without government intervention.208 A. Citizen Error Many of the forms of bounded rationality discussed above call into question the idea of consumer sovereignty.  For example, overoptimism leads most people to believe that their own risk of a negative outcome is far lower than the average person’s. Similarly, the effect of salience may lead to substantial underestimation of certain risks encountered in everyday life (for example, the risks from poor diet), since these harms may not be very salient. When overoptimism is combined with salience, people may underestimate risks substantially. We emphasize that these problems are not ones of insufficient information per se; they are ones of insufficient ability to process accurately the information one possesses insofar as that information bears on one’s own risks.  Thus, for example, people may have reasonably adequate information about the risks of smoking,209 but this does not at all imply that they have adequate perceptions of the risks of smoking that they themselves face.210 Even if people can obtain accurate statistical knowledge, statistical knowledge may not be enough to inform actual choices.211 It does not follow from this that information is useless; it is just that having information per se does not automatically imply optimal behavior. But this suggestion about adaptation raises a complex normative question:  Is a person’s measure of welfare after (for example) becoming ill the appropriate measure of value? Perhaps people, through coping mechanisms, are able to adapt to disease better than they anticipate in advance, but does this mean that disease is a less severe problem than prior attitudes would have suggested? On conventional utilitarian grounds, the answer is probably affirmative; the subjective experience is what counts. But a well-established challenge to utilitarian analysis suggests the possibility of a negative answer, on the ground that subjective experience may not be all that counts.215 What we mean to suggest here is a simple point: People sometimes do mispredict their utility at the time of decision, and on conventional grounds, this phenomenon raises serious problems for the idea of consumer sovereignty. Any suggestion that the government should intervene in response to people’s mistakes raises the question whether the government will be able to avoid such errors. The prospects for productive and useful intervention may be smallest in the case of populist government; the actions of such a government, based heavily on pressures coming from citizens, may tend to be subject to the very same biases and errors that afflict citizens. (Thus behavioral analysis complements existing accounts of the problems with populism.) An example of the effects of populism is the Superfund statute, discussed in Part III.C; irregular perceptions of risk by ordinary people may tend to produce irregularities in regulation, as the cognitive errors that ordinary people make are replicated in statutory and administrative law.216  The effects of social interaction may even make government action worse, and more dangerous, than individual errors.  Our earlier discussion suggests a possible mechanism:  Availability entrepreneurs in the private sector can heighten the demand for regulation, and public sector availability entrepreneurs can take advantage of, and heighten, this effect, by advocating anecdote-driven policy. Thus public choice accounts of legislation can work productively with behavioral accounts; there is a good deal of synergy between behavioral mechanisms and interest group leaders, many of whom are amateur (or professional?) behavioral economists. The pollutant-of-the-month syndrome in environmental law is paralleled by many measures responding to the crisisof-the-month.  These difficulties with populist government also point to problems with the referendum process. that government officials are, by virtue of their offices, able to avoid overoptimism or predict experience utility. On the other hand, a degree of insulation from populist pressures, combined with knowledge of behavioral economics, might produce some improvement.  New institutions may play a role; consider Justice Breyer’s plea for an insulated body of specialized civil servants, entrusted with the job of comparing risks and ensuring that resources are devoted to the most serious problems;218 Howard Margolis’ behaviorally-informed suggestion that government should be required to ensure that all initiatives “do no harm”;219 even proposals for cost-benefit analysis, understood in a behavioral light as an attempt to overcome biases and confusions in both perception and motivation.220 We also emphasize that government intervention need not come in highly coercive forms; perhaps distortions in people’s decisionmaking can be overcome by information campaigns falling well short of coercion. For instance, in the contexts of risks such as smoking, might debiasing techniques work to link the statistical evidence with the personal reality? All of the foregoing ideas raise many complexities; and we have not even touched upon the complicated philosophical literature on the legitimacy of paternalism. Application of these ideas to any specific topic in law would require a much fuller development of many issues than the space in this article permits.  But we need not leave the ideas in purely abstract form; consider the following simple illustration of their application.  Imagine that sunlamps are being sold in an unregulated market and that it is learned that many consumers fall asleep under the lamps, burning themselves badly. Consumers make this mistake in spite of warnings included on the package and in the instructions, perhaps because they fail to anticipate that lying in a warm place with one’s eyes closed is likely to induce sleep. Let’s call this an “unintended risk,” meaning a risk that consumers fail to appreciate. The existence of this unintended risk leaves open the possibility of welfareenhancing regulation. Suppose, for example, that an automatic timer can be added to the sunlamp at a cost of twenty-five cents, and that manufacturers have not included this feature because consumers do not anticipate that they will need it. We do not discuss here the issues raised by the possibility that a government mandate of the timer interferes with freedom, rightly conceived. Nor do we address possible distributive issues (all will pay more for sunlamps, although perhaps only some failed to appreciate the risks of falling asleep).  All we suggest is that an important part of the analysis involves asking whether the cost of requiring this safety-promoting feature (twentyfive cents per customer) is less than the cost of the unanticipated burns. lutions stated in the text may also be attractive to conventional economists on a variety of grounds. A central point of this example is that from the perspective of behavioral law and economics, issues of paternalism are to a significant degree empirical questions, not questions to be answered on an a priori basis. No axiom demonstrates that people make choices that serve their best interests; this is a question to be answered based on evidence. Of course the case for intervention is weakened to the extent that public institutions are likely to make things worse rather than better.  What we are suggesting is that facts, and assessment of costs and benefits, should replace assumptions that beg the underlying questions. Traditional law and economics is largely based on the standard assumptions of neoclassical economics.  These assumptions are sometimes useful but often false. People display bounded rationality: They suffer from certain biases, such as overoptimism and self-serving conceptions of fairness; they follow heuristics, such as availability, that lead to mistakes; and they behave in accordance with prospect theory rather than expected utility theory. People also have bounded willpower; they can be tempted and are sometimes myopic. They take steps to overcome these limitations. Finally, people are (fortunately!) boundedly self-interested. They are concerned about the wellbeing of others, even strangers in some circumstances, and this concern and their self-conception can lead them in the direction of cooperation at the expense of their material self-interest (and sometimes spite, also at the expense of their material self-interest). Most of these bounds can be and have been made part of formal models. about whether even well-motivated public officials will be able to offer appropriate responses to private mistakes and confusion. We hope that this article will encourage others to continue the inquiry and research, both theoretical and empirical, that will be needed to flesh out the behavioral approach for which we have argued here. This approach will use traditional economic tools, enhanced by a better understanding of human behavior. Thirty years from now, we hope that there will be no such thing as behavioral economics.  Instead we hope that economists and economically oriented lawyers will simply incorporate the useful findings of other social sciences, and in so doing, transform economics into behavioral economics, and economic analysis of law into one of its most important branches. This appendix summarizes our framework for behavioral law and economics.  It also lists the law and economics issues we analyze within each category of the framework.  The specific behavioral mechanisms we draw upon, which are summarized here, do not constitute an exhaustive list of the mechanisms that might be relevant to law and economics; they simply reflect the mechanisms we have used here. For each mechanism, we provide a reference to the literature, as an overview of or entry to the existing research; we refer the interested reader to the text of our article for additional references on each topic. Judgment errors 1. self-serving bias reference:  Linda Babcock & George Loewenstein, Explaining Bargaining Impasse: The Role of Self-Serving Biases, 11 J. ECON. PERSP., Winter 1997, at 109. our applications:  negligence determinations; other determinations of fact or law. reference:  Daniel Kahneman & Amos Tversky, Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk, 47 ECONOMETRICA 263 (1979). 2. endowment effect (a corollary of loss aversion) 1. “hyperbolic” discounting