University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1998 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Democratic Formalism, A Matter of Interpretation 
Democratic Formalism, A Matter of Interpretation 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Democratic Formalism, A Matter of Interpretation," 107 Yale Law Journal 529 (1998). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Book  Review

Justice  Scalia's  Democratic  Formalism

A  Matter of Interpretation: Federal Courts and the  Law  By  Antonin  Scalia*
et  al.  Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1997.  Pp.  xiii,  159.  $19.95.

Cass  R. Sunstein t

INTRODUCTION:  RULE-BOUND  JUSTICE  AND  THE  STATUTORY  STATE

In  1982,  Guido  Calabresi  published  a  provocative  book,  A  Common  Law
for  the  Age  of Statutes,'  based  on  his  Holmes  Lectures  at  Harvard  Law
School. Judge  Calabresi's basic  argument was  that  the common  law  has certain
virtues-above  all,  flexibility  across  time  and  space-that  are  at  serious  risk
in  a  statutory  era.2  Judge  Calabresi's  central  concern  was  to  find  a  way  to
import  the  values  of  common  law  judgment  into  a  legal  fabric  governed  by
statutory  law.  His  most dramatic  proposal  was  that  courts  should  be  given  the
authority  to  declare  statutes  that  were  out  of  step  with  the  prevailing  legal
landscape  void  for  "obsolescence."3  Judge  Calabresi's  particular  proposal  has
been  very  controversial,  but  it  is  of a  piece  with  more  standard  views  about
statutory  construction  having  common  law  origins:  judge-made  exceptions  to
plain  language  for  absurd  results;  judicially  developed  "clear  statement"
principles; judicial  invocation  of  statutory  purpose  in  a  way  reminiscent  of a
precedent's  "rationale";  judicial  treatment  of many  statutes  as  the  foundation
for  judge-made  common  law;  and  "dynamic"  statutory  interpretation.'  And

*  Associate Justice,  United  States  Supreme  Court.
t  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor.  Law  School  and  Department  of  Political
Science,  University  of  Chicago.  I am  grateful  to  Scott  Brewer.  Elizabeth  Garrett. Jack  Goldsmith.  Don
Herzog,  Lawrence  Lessig,  Martha  Nussbaum,  Richard  Pildes,  and  Richard  Posner  for  valuable  comments
on an  earlier draft.

1.  GuIDo  CALABRESI,  A  COMMON  LAw  FOR  THE  AGE  OF  STATUTES  (1982)
2.  See  id. at  3-7.
3.  Id. at  2.
4. See WILLIAM  N.  ESKRIDGE,  JR.,  DYNAMIC  STATUTORY  INIRPRETATION  (1994)

529

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

Judge  Calabresi's  views  are  reflected  in  the  common  law  characteristics  of
much  constitutional  law,  characteristics  which  have  given  rise  to  a  general
claim,  usually  meant  as  both  description  and  praise,  that  constitutional  law  is
merely  a  species  of Anglo-American  common  law.

The  central  essay  in  Justice  Antonin  Scalia's  new  book,6  based  on  his
Tanner  Lectures  at  Princeton,  offers  an  argument  that  is  in  many  ways  the
converse  of Judge  Calabresi's.  Where  Judge  Calabresi  sought  to celebrate  the
common  law  and  to  authorize  courts  to  introduce  far  more  of common  law
thinking  into  a  statutory  era, Justice  Scalia  seeks  to  demote,  even  to  exorcise,
the  common  law,  to  complain  of its  ascendancy  in  an  age  committed  to  the
principles  of democratic  government  and  the  rule  of law.  Hence  the  essay's
title:  Common-Law  Courts in  a  Civil-Law System.7  In  Justice  Scalia's  view,
the use  of common law methods  is  simultaneously  anachronistic  and hubristic.
It is  anachronistic  because  it is  out of touch  with  the  values  and  operations  of
modern  government.8  The  charge  of hubris  is  the  more  serious  one.  Justice
Scalia  thinks  that  common  law  methods  compromise  democratic  values,  by
allowing  judges  an  excessive  role  in  policymaking.9  He  also  thinks  that
common  law  methods  introduce  a high  degree  of unpredictability,  increasing
judicial  discretion  and  at  the  same  time  depriving  others,  citizens  as  well  as
legislators,  of a  clear  background  against  which  to  work.'"

Justice  Scalia intends,  then,  to  defend  a  species  of democratic formalism.
We  might even  say  that Justice  Scalia  is  the  clearest  and  most  self-conscious
expositor of democratic  formalism  in the long  history of American  law. Justice
Scalia  is  a democrat  in  the sense  that  much of his jurisprudence  is  designed  to
ensure  that judgments  are  made  by  those with  a  superior democratic  pedigree.
Above  all,  he  seeks  to  develop  rules  of  interpretation  that  will  limit  the
policymaking  authority  and  decisional  discretion  of  the  judiciary,  the  least
accountable  branch  of government. Justice  Scalia is  a formalist  in the particular
sense that  he  favors  clear  rules, seeks  to  treat statutory  and  constitutional  texts
as  rules,  and  distrusts  the  view  that  legal  texts  should  be  understood  by
reference  either  to  intentions  or to  canons  of construction  that  live  outside  of

5.  See  HARRY  H.  WELLINGTON,  INTERPRETING  THE  CONSTITUTION  127  (1990);  Harry  H.  Wellington,
Common  Law Rules  and Constitutional Double Standards, 83  YALE  L.J.  221,  265-311  (1973);  see  also
David  A.  Strauss,  Common Law  Constitutional Interpretation, 63  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  877,  877-79  (1996).

6.  A  MATTER  OF  INTERPRETATION:  FEDERAL  COURTS  AND  THE  LAW  (Amy  Gutmann  cd.,  1997)
[hereinafter  A  MATrER  OF  INTERPRETATION].  The  book  consists  of  Justice  Scalia's  central  essay;
commentaries  of  Gordon  S.  Wood,  Laurence  H.  Tribe,  Mary  Ann  Glendon,  and  Ronald  Dworkin;  and  a
reply  from  Justice  Scalia.  I focus  on  the  central  essay  with  occasional  reference  to  the  reply,  though  the
commentaries  contain  a  good  deal  of interesting  material.

7.  See  Antonin Scalia, Comnon-Law  Courts in a Civil-Law System:  The Role of United States Federal

Courts in  Interpreting the  Constitution and Laws, in  A  MATTER  OF  INTERPRETATION,  supra note  6,  at  3.

8.  See  id. at  9.
9.  See  id. at  47.
10.  See  id. at 9-12.

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

authoritative  texts."1  Democratic  formalism  finds  its  interpretive  foundation
in textualism.  Thus  Justice  Scalia  writes:  "Of all  the  criticisms  leveled  against
textualism,  the  most  mindless  is  that  it is  'formalistic.'  The  answer  to that  is,
of  course  it's formalistic! The  rule  of  law  is  about  form 
Long  live
formalism.  It  is  what  makes  a  government  a  government  of  laws  and  not  of
men."'

... 

12

As  a judicial  creed,  democratic  formalism  is intelligible  and  coherent  in
part  because  it  argues  in  favor  of interpretive  principles  and  statutory  default
rules that  will  create  a  clear background  for Congress.  in  the  process  imposing
the  right  incentives  on  lawmakers.  Justice  Scalia's  preferred  default  rules  are
intended  to  make  the  law  readily  predictable  and  to ensure  that  Congress  will
legislate  in  the  constitutionally  preferred  fashion.

Where  does  all  this  leave  the  common  law?  For  the  democrat  and  for the
formalist,  the  common  law  raises  many  doubts.  The  common  law,  of  course,
owes  its  content  not to  electoral  processes  but  to decisions  by  people  who  are
mostly  unelected. 3  And  common  law  judges  are  free  to  eschew  rules  and  to
act  on a  case-by-case  basis.  Indeed,  the  glory  of the  common  law  is  often  said
to consist in its  particularism-its  careful  attention  to  the  facts of the particular
case,  its  provision  of  an  individualized  hearing  for  each  litigant.' "  Justice
Scalia's  attack  on  the  common 
in  distrust  of
particularism-especially  judicial  particulaism-and  in  enthusiasm  for  rule-
bound 
in  both  statutory  and  constitutional
interpretation,  on a  single  foundation:  the meaning of the  relevant legal text  as
it was  understood at the  time of enactnent."

is  thus  rooted 

interpretation 

law  legacy 

relies, 

that 

This  is  an  elegant  book,  and  it  is  a  great  pleasure  to  read.  My  central
objection  is  that  Justice  Scalia's  argument  on  behalf of  democratic  formalism
for  democratic
does  not  come  to  terms  with 
formalism:  the  internal  morality  of  the  democratic  ideal;  the  existence  of
reasonable,  alternative,  nonformalist  approaches  to interpretation,  designed  to
limit  judicial  discretion,  promote  stability,  and  enhance  democratic  self-

three  important  problems 

1i. The best  discussion of formalism  is FREDERICK  SCHAUER.  PLAYING  BY  Tiff  RULEs  ( 1991)  Schauer
sees  that  whether  formalism  makes  sense  depends  on  a pragmatic  inquiry.  promincntl) 
involving  the
capacities  of  various  institutions.  See  id. at  196-206  A  dillerent  kind  of  formalsm-the  kind  that  makes
the  term "formalism"  appropriately  an  epithct-refers  to  the  masking  of  a value judgment  by  relerencc  to
a judgment of law  that  actually encodes  the  value judgment  An  especially  good  discussion  of  this  type  of
formalism  is  JOSEPH  RAZ,  ETHics  IN THE  PUBLIC  DOMAIN  314-19  (1996)

12.  Scalia,  supra note  7, at  25
13.  Justice  Scalia  is  self-consciously  a  legal  realist  as  well  as  a legal  lormalist  See  id at 10  A
competing  view  would say  that  the  common  law  has  a democraic  pedigree  because  and to  the extent  that
it  simply  tracks  custom.  There  is  an  interesting  current  revival  of  attention  to  the  role  of norms  and
genuinely  customary  law.  See,  e.g.,  ROBERT  C  ELLICKSON,  ORDER  WIDO7T LAW  (1991)
14.  See,  e.g.,  EDWARD  H, LEVI,  AN  INTRODUcTION  TO  LEGAL  RI-.ASONING  4-6  (1949)
15.  This view  is  traceable  to  Justice  Holmes:  "'WIe ask.  not  what  Ithe  authorl  meant,  but  what  those
words  would  mean  in  the  mouth  of a  normal  speaker  of  English.  using them  in  the  circumstances  in  which
they  were  used  .... Oliver  Wendell  Holmes.  The  Theorn of Legal hlterpreration. 12  HARv  L  REV  417.
417-18  (1899).  The  view  is criticized,  by  an admirer  of Holmes.  in RICHARD  A  POSNER.  THE  PROBLEMS
OF JURISPRUDENCE  262-69  (1990).

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

government;  and  (most surprising)  the place  of administrative  agencies  in  the
structure  of  modem  public  law.  It  is  not  clear  that  democratic  formalism
actually  promotes  democracy,  rightly  understood.  Moreover,  there  are  other
ways  of limiting judicial  power  and judicial  discretion,  ways  that  are  familiar
to,  even  constitutive  of,  the  common  law  tradition  as  it  has  come  to  be
understood  in  the United  States.  The  principal  virtue  of democratic  formalism
is  that  it  may  be  the  best  way  of promoting  predictability, 6  but  even  here
there  are  reasonable  alternatives,  and  it  is  far  from  clear  that  predictability
trumps  all  other  values.

In a short, vivid essay of this kind,  originally presented as a public  lecture,
Justice  Scalia  cannot  be  expected  to  have  laid  all  doubts  to  rest,  or  to  have
answered  all  questions  in  legal  theory.  But  his  defense  of his  own  position
works 
too  often  by  hyperbolic  slippery  slope  arguments,  by  opposing
democratic  formalism  to positions that  no  one really  holds,  and  most  of all by
invoking  the  specter of untrammeled judicial  control  over political  outcomes.
It  is  as  if those  who  reject  Justice  Scalia's  particular  approach  hope  to  give,
and  inevitably  will give, unelected judges  the power to  do whatever they wish.
But the choice between  democratic  formalism  and the real alternatives  calls for
more  fine-grained  and,  in  part,  empirical  judgments  about  the  capacities  of
real-world  institutions. If, for  example, judges  interpret  statutes  in accordance
with  the original  meaning  of their text,  will  legislative  drafting  be improved,
and will  legislatures  correct  obvious mistakes?  If judges  do  not  use  legislative
history, might ambiguous  texts  be interpreted  by  reference  to  the judges'  own
views  about policy and principle?  If judges  abandon the original  understanding
of  the  constitutional  text,  are  there  alternative  positions  that  would  limit
judicial  discretion  and  allow appropriate  space  for electoral  politics?  And just
what is  the  role  of administrative  agencies,  which  might,  in a  post-Chevron7
era,  perform,  and  be  authorized  to  perform,  the role  formerly  carried  out  by
common  law  courts?  Justice  Scalia's  silence  on  the last question  is  especially
disappointing:  At  this  stage  in  American  history,  no  treatment  of  legal
interpretation  is  complete  if it  neglects  the  enormous  de  facto  and  de  jure
interpretive  function  of administrative  agencies.

If a  goal  of a  system  of interpretation  is  to  constrain  judicial  discretion,
and  particularly  if we  attend  to  the role  of regulatory  agencies,  it  is  far  from
clear  that  Justice  Scalia's  approach  is  superior  to  the  alternatives  actually
favored  by  the  American  tradition  of public  law.  And  if  (as  Justice  Scalia
rightly  insists)  a  goal  of  a  system  of  legal  interpretation 
is  to  promote
democratic  self-government,  it is not  at all  clear  that  Justice  Scalia's  approach

16.  Even  thi§  is  not  clear  because  the  original  meaning  may  have  involved  a  concept  that  would
change over time, and because  there  may be  hard questions  in  deciding  how to understand  original  meaning
infra  text  accompanying  notes  137-144  (discussing  FDA
when  facts  and  values  have  changed.  See 
regulation  of tobacco  products).

17.  Chevron  U.S.A.,  Inc.  v.  Natural  Resources  Defense  Council,  467  U.S.  837  (1984).

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

is  better  than  that  favored  by  our  tradition,  which  uses  interpretive  principles
to  promote democratic  goals,  not  only  in  the  area of statutory  construction  but
also  in  administrative  and  constitutional  law.  A  great  defect  of  democratic
formalism  is  that  it  identifies  democracy  with  whatever  happens  to  emerge
from  majoritarian  politics.  If we  insist  (with  the  Constitution's  Framers)'"  that
there  is  a  difference  between  a  well-functioning  system  of  deliberative
democracy  and  simple  majoritarian  politics,  we  may  well  favor  principles  of
interpretation 
system,  perhaps  by  allowing
administrative  agencies  some  license  to adjust  text  to circumstance,  certainly
through  "clear  statement"  principles,  and  not  least  by  invalidating  outcomes
that  are  inconsistent  with  what  we  might  consider  the  internal  morality  of
democracy.

that  promote 

that  very 

In  any case,  this will  be my  basic argument here.  Part  I summarizes  Justice
Scalia's  essay.  Part  II deals  with  the  topic  of statutory  interpretation-Justice
Scalia's  particular  passion  and  the  highlight  of  his  essay  here.  This  part
outlines  the  stakes,  explores  the  great  case  of Church  of the  Holy  Trinity  v.
United States, 9  and  examines  the  role  of  administrative  agencies  in  legal
interpretation.  Its  principal  theme is that Justice  Scalia's discussion  neglects the
possibility that administrative  agencies  can  discharge  some  of the  functions  of
common law courts  without compromising democratic  values.  Part  III  explores
the  Constitution.  It argues  that  the  interests  in  ensuring  stability,  constraining
judicial  discretion,  and  promoting  democratic  self-government  do  argue  for
some version  of the principles  of stare  decisis  and judicial  restraint,  but  not the
particular  form  of  originalism  favored  by  Justice  Scalia.

I.  AGAINST  THE  COMMON  LAW

The principal  essay  in A Matter of Interpretation comes  in  three  parts.  The
first  part  is  an  attack  on  the  common  law.  The  second  part  is a  discussion  of
statutory  interpretation.  The  third  part  deals  with  constitutional  law.

A.  Broken-Field Runners

Justice  Scalia's  discussion  of  the  common  law  is  sharp,  clever,  and  at
times  hilarious.  In some  ways  it  amounts  to  an  indictment  of  legal  education.
Justice  Scalia thinks  that  the  first  year of law  school  has  "an  enormous  impact
upon  the  mind,"' 
and  much  of  that  impact  comes  from  the  student's
immersion  in  judge-made  common  law.  There  is  a  difference,  for  Justice
Scalia, between  law  that  is  common  in  the  sense  of "customary"  and  law  that

18.  See  WiLU~Am BESsETrE,  THE MILD  VoicE  oF RFASON  6-46  (1994)  (dtscussmng the premium  placd

by  the  Framers  on  democratic  deliberation  and  rellection)

19.  143  U.S.  457  (1892).
20.  Scalia,  supra  note  7,  at  3.

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

is  "common"  in  the  sense  that  it is  the  creation  of judges.  That  latter  form  of
the  stuff  of  law  schools,
law 
hypotheticals,  and  analogical  thinking:

is  not  created  through  practice  but 

is 

What  intellectual  fun  all  of this  is!  It  explains  why  first-year  law
school  is  so  exhilarating:  because  it  consists  of playing  common-law
judge,  which  in  turn  consists  of playing  king-devising,  out  of the
brilliance  of  one's  own  mind,  those  laws  that  ought  to  govern
mankind.  How  exciting! 2'

The  student comes  to have a distinctive picture  of the great judge, with  a  large
influence  on  American  legal  culture,  as-the  person

who  has  the  intelligence  to  discern  the  best  rule  of law  for  the  case
at hand  and then the skill to perform  the broken-field  running  through
earlier  cases  that  leaves  him  free  to  impose  that  rule:  distinguishing
one  prior  case  on  the  left,  straight-arming  another  one  on  the  right,
high-stepping  away  from  another precedent about  to  tackle him  from
the  rear,  until  (bravo!)  he reaches  the goal-good  law.22

What is  wrong with  this picture?  Justice  Scalia  thinks  that  the  problem  is
simple:  "a  trend  in government  that  has  developed  in  recent  centuries,  called
democracy. ' 23 Legal  realism has  taught  us what  is  now  obvious,  that  common
law judges  make  and  do  not  find  law.  This  does  not  mean  the  common  law
should  be  eliminated  from  its  own  domain,  but  it  does  mean  the  attitude of
common  law judges  is  inappropriate  for  most  of the  work  of  federal  judges
and much  of the work  of state judges. 24  "We  live  in  an  age  of legislation,  and
most  new  law  is  statutory law."5  And  the common  law  method  has  two  basic
problems.  First,  it  is  insufficiently  democratic,  since  it  threatens  rule  by
judges.26  Second,  the  common  law  method  is  insufficiently  formal,  because
it is  too  highly particularistic,  too  unpredictable,  too  rule-free. 27

B.  "What  a  Waste"

Justice  Scalia  brings  these  points  to  bear  on  the  topic  of  statutory
interpretation,  a  real  highlight  of the  book  and  clearly  one  of his  passions.28

21.  Id. at 7.
22.  Id. at  9.
23.  Id.
24.  Many  state  court judges are,  of course,  elected.  Justice  Scalia does  not say  how  this  might  bear

on  his  argument.

25.  Scalia,  supra note  7,  at  13.
26.  See  id. at  9,  47.
27.  See  id. at 6-12.
28.  Justice Scalia deplores  what he sees as  an absence  of academic  attention to statutory  interpretation,
an  odd  view  in  light  of  the  recent  outpouring  of work  on  that  subject,  inspired  above  all  by  William

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

His  basic  complaint  is  that  American  judges  and  academics  'are  unconcerned
with  the  fact  that  we  have  no  intelligible  theory"  of  statutory  construction. "'
His  central  claim  is  that  what  matters  is  the  objective  meaning  of the  text,  not
the subjective  intentions  of Congress.  "It is  the law that  governs,  not  the  intent
of  the  lawgiver.""  Interpretation  actually  turns  on  "a  sort  of  'objectified'
intent-the  intent  that  a  reasonable  person  would  gather  from  the  text  of  the
law, placed  alongside the  remainder  of the corpus juris.""  Because  subjective
intent  is  so  murky,  Justice  Scalia  thinks  that  its  use  risks  substitution  of
judicial  policy  preferences  for  those  of the  legislature.

His  case  in  chief  in  this  regard  is  Church  of the  Holy  Trinity v. United
States.32  There  the  Court  held,  contrary  to  the  apparently  plain  language  of
the  governing  statute  banning  the  importation  of  foreign  labor, that  a  church
could  pay  for  the  transportation  of  a  rector  to  the  United  States."  Justice
Scalia  reads  Holy  Trinity  (not  at  all  unreasonably)  as  a  case  about  the
substitution  of  legislative  intent  for  text.  In  his  view,  what  the  church  did
violated  "the  letter  of the  statute,  and  was  therefore  within  the  statute:  end  of
case."  Thus  Justice  Scalia  adopts  textualism.  But  he  offers  two  important
clarifications.  First,  he  disfavors  "strict  construction":  "I am  not  a  strict
constructionist,  and  no  one  ought  to  be  .... ." Textualists  give  to  the  text
its  ordinary  meaning,  construing  it  neither  broadly  nor  narrowly.  Nor  does
Justice  Scalia  favor  literalism.36  He  emphasizes  that  meaning  is  a  function  of
context.  What  he  urges  is  that  courts  should  refuse  to  go  beyond  the  range  of
meaning  offered  by  a  reasonable  understanding  of  statutory  terms,  taken  in
their  context.

Justice  Scalia  is  aware  that  some  cases  involve  a  fairly  wide  range  of
textual  meanings,  and  that  the  text  can  leave  ambiguities.  What  aids  are
permissible?  It is entirely  acceptable  to  interpret  statutory  terms  with structural
aids,  resolving ambiguities  so as  to make  statutes  both internally  consistent  and
consistent  with  previously  enacted  laws.  His  textualism  is  thus  supplemented
with  the structure  of the relevant  statute  and  indeed  the structure  of the  law  as
a  whole.

3 7

Eskridge  and  Philip  Fnckey.  See ESKRIDGE.  3tpra  note  4.  WILLA,i  N  ESKRIiDGI-.  JR  &  PHILIP  P
FRICKEY,  CASES  AND  MATERIALS  ON  LEGISLATION  STATL-IS  AND  Tlu-  CRi-ATioN  0F PLBLIC  PoLIC" (2d
ed.  1995).

29.  Scalia,  supra note  7, at  14
30.  Id. at  17.
31.  Id.
32.  143  U.S.  457  (1892).
33.  See id. at  472:  see also infra text  accompanying  notes  75-78
34.  Scalia,  3upra note  7. at  20
35.  Id. at 23.
36.  See id. at 24
37.  See id. at  16-17:.see albo Antonin  Scalia.  Repoin3e.  in  A MATI-R  oi-  rITI-RPRETATION. 3upra note
6,  at  134.  Page  134  offers  a  gloss  on  pages  16-17. in  response  to Tribe's  commentarN  See  Laurence iH
Tribe,  Comment, in A  NATTER  OF INTERPRETATION.  aupra note  6.  at  81

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

Justice  Scalia also defends  canons of construction  as legitimate and helpful
to  the  extent that  they  are common  sense  ways  of understanding  the meaning
of text.  This  is  true  of the  ancient  canons  with  Latin  names,  such  as  the  old
favorite,  expressio  unius  est  exclusio  alterius (expression  of  the  one  is
exclusion  of the other).  In  urging  the use  of such  canons,  Justice  Scalia  takes
a  stand  against  Karl  Llewellyn's  famous  attempt  to  demolish  the  canons  by
showing that  for  every  canon there  is  an  equal  canon  pointing  in the  opposite
direction.3"  Justice  Scalia  says,  very  reasonably,  that  there  are  not  really
opposites  on almost every point,  and he thinks  that the most  that Llewellyn  has
shown  is  that  the  canons  are  not  absolute,39  which is  not  exactly  news.

Justice  Scalia  is  much  less  enthusiastic  about  substantive  canons  and
presumptions,  as  in  the  idea  that  courts  should  construe  statutes  favorably  to
Native Americans,  leniently  on behalf of criminal  defendants,  narrowly  if they
are  in  derogation  of  the  common  law,  narrowly  if  they  waive  sovereign
immunity,  and  so  forth.  For  textualists,  substantive  canons  are  "a  lot  of
trouble."  They  lack  clear  legitimacy  (because  it is  not  clear where  courts  get
the authority  to use them),  and they have indeterminate  weight, thus  increasing
the unpredictability  and possible arbitrariness  of judicial  decision.  On the other
hand, some  substantive  presumptions  may be reasonable  if they attempt  to get
at meaning  or if they  have  the warrant  of antiquity.  Thus,  extraordinary  acts,
like the  congressional  elimination  of state  sovereign  immunity  or perhaps  the
waiver  of sovereign  immunity,  require  a clear  statement,  because  that  is  what
one would expect  were  extraordinary  acts intended.  And the rule of lenity  may
be justified  by  its  age.  But  others,  like  the  rule  that  statutes  in  derogation  of
the common  law will be  narrowly  construed,  look  like "a sheer judicial  power-
grab.

' 41

For  a  long  time,  Justice  Scalia  has  been  critical  of judicial  use  of
legislative  history.42 Here  he  makes  two  central  points.  First,  legislative  intent
is  not the  proper basis  of interpretation,  and  hence  legislative  history  focuses
judicial  attention  on  the  wrong  question,43  away  from  meaning  and  toward
subjective  understandings  of meaning. Second,  use  of history  involves  a  lot of
time  and  expense,  and  it  is  "more  likely  to  produce  a  false  or  contrived
legislative  intent  than  a genuine  one.""  This  is  because  there  is  in  99.99%  of
cases  no  such  thing,  and  the  archives  are  unreliable  in  any  case.  "In  the  only
case  I recall  in  which,  had  I followed  legislative  history,  I  would  have  come

38.  See  Karl  N.  Llewellyn,  Remarks  on  the  Theory  of Appellate Decision and the Rules of Canons

About How Statutes Are  To Be  Construed, 3  VAND.  L.  REv.  395,  401-06  (1950).

39.  See  Scalia,  supra note 7,  at  27.
40.  Id. at 28.
41.  Id. at 29.
42.  See,  e.g.,  Hirschey  v.  Federal  Energy  Regulatory  Comm'n,  777  F.2d  1, 7-8  (D.C.  Cir.  1985)

(Scalia,  J., concurring).

43.  See  Scalia,  supra note 7,  at  31.
44.  Id.  at 32.

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

out  the  other way,  the rest  of  my colleagues  (who  did use  legislative  history)
did  not  come  out  the  other  way  either....  What  a  waste."5

C.  "A  Rock-Solid,  Unchanging Constitution"

Constitutional  interpretation,  for Justice  Scalia,  is  a  place  not  for special
principles  but  for the  usual  ones just  described.  His  basic  argument  is  that  the
Constitution's  meaning  is  set  not  by  the  original  intention  but  by  the  original
meaning  of its  text. Alexander  Hamilton and  James  Madison  receive  attention
not because they were Framers  whose subjective  intentions  matter, but because
they  (no  more  than  John  Jay  and  Thomas  Jefferson,  who  were  not  Framers)
can  help  us  identify  the  original  meaning.  For  Justice  Scalia,  originalism
opposes  those  who  think,  in  common  law  fashion,  that  the  Constitution  is
"living"  and  should  be  understood  by  reference  to  "current"  meaning.'  The
notion  of a  "living  constitution"  is  an  invitation  to  the  broken-field  running
characteristic  of  common  law  thinking,  or  decision  by  reference  to  cases
instead  of authoritative  text.  Justice  Scalia  particularly  deplores  the  fact  that
constitutional  law  is  made  after  consulting  recent  cases  rather  than  original
intention.  For Justice  Scalia, the  result  is  "a  common-law  way  of making  law,
text."'47  The
and  not  the  way  of  construing  a  democratically  adopted 
consequence  is that  the Constitution  means  whatever the judges think  it should
mean.

judges 

to  prevent  elected  officials 

Against  the  view  that  the  "living  constitution"  is  necessary  to  promote
flexibility  over  time,  Justice  Scalia  argues  that  the  "living  constitution"
approach  actually  reduces  the  capacity  for  democratic  experimentation,  by
allowing 
in  new
experiments.48  Against  the  view  that  the  "living  constitution"  is  necessary  to
protect  an  ample  category  of  rights,  Justice  Scalia  argues  that  it  need  not
increase  the category  of rights  at  all.  In  many  cases-property  rights,  Second
Amendment  rights,49  Confrontation  Clause  rights--originalism  offers  a
more  expansive  rather  than  less  expansive  understanding  of  rights."  That
understanding  may  be  ill-suited  to current social  desires.  But  it is emphatically
not  a  truncated  understanding  of rights.

from  engaging 

Justice  Scalia's  fundamental  objections  to a  common  law  understanding  of
the  Constitution  are  that  it  lacks  legitimacy  and  that  it  is  too  discretionary.
Freed from  the original  meaning, judges consult  their own judgments  of policy

45.  Id. at  36-37.
46.  See  id. at  38.
47.  Id. at 40.
48.  See  id. at  42.
49.  See U.S.  CONST.  amend.  II. It  is especially noteworthy--even news--hat Justice  Scalia  que.tiuns

the constitutional  validity  of gun  control  laws  at  the  national  lcvcl  See  Scalia. .iupra  note  7.  ,at 43

50.  See  U.S.  CONST.  amend.  VI,  cl.  2.
51.  See  Scalia, supra note  7,  at  43-44.

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

and  principle  and  are  effectively  untethered.  "[T]here  is  no  agreement,  and  no
chance  of  agreement,  upon  what  is 
to  be  the  guiding  principle  of  the
evolution., 52 To  be  sure,  originalists  disagree  among  themselves;  history  can
be  ambiguous  and,  importantly,  as  Justice  Scalia  notes,  there  are  questions
about applying the original  meaning to "new and unforeseen  phenomena,"  such
as  sound  trucks  and  television.53  But  these  are  minor  problems  compared  to
those  raised  when  people  who,  believing  in  a  "living  constitution,"  take  the
Constitution  to mean  what  it should  and  hence authorize judges  to  understand
the  Constitution  to  be  whatever  "the  majority  wants."54  "This,  of course,  is
the  end  of the  Bill  of Rights,  whose  meaning  will  be  committed  to  the  very
body  it  was  meant  to  protect  against:  the  majority.  By  trying  to  make  the
Constitution  do  everything  that  needs  doing  ...  we  shall  have  caused  it  to do
nothing  at  all." 55

II.  STATUTES,  CONTEXTS,  AND  CLEAR  STATEMENTS

A.  Interpretive  Goals:  Decisional  Burdens,  Stability,  Democracy,  and

Restraint

What  are  the  goals  of Justice  Scalia's  approach  to  interpretation? 56  One
goal  is  to reduce  the sheer  costs  of decision,  so  that the  burden  on  courts  and
litigants  is  relatively  low.  A  closely  related  goal  is  to  make  law  relatively
certain  and predictable,  so that people  know where  they stand  and  do  not have
to  puzzle  much  over  the  content  of law.  Yet  another  goal  is  to  control  the
discretion  of those  institutions  whom  we  trust  least  or fear  most.  A  system  of
interpretation  might  well  be  designed 
in
establishing  social  policies  or governing  principles,  certainly  if  it  seems  that
courts  ought  not  to  be  entrusted  with  that  kind  of business. 7  Justice  Scalia
thinks  that  his  version  of textualism  will  effectively  control  judicial  power,
while at  the same  time  increasing  the policymaking  primacy  of the  legislature,
in  part  by  giving  it  appropriate  incentives.  If,  for example,  legislative  history
will  not  be  used,  legislators  will  be  under  considerable  pressure  to  increase

to  reduce  the  role  of  courts 

52.  Id. at 45.
53.  Id. at  45; see also  Lawrence  Lessig,  Understanding  Changed  Readings:  Fidelty and Theory,  47
STAN.  L.  REv.  395  (1995)  (arguing  that  maintaining  interpretive  fidelity  with  past  understandings  of the
Constitution  may  require  adapting  old  readings to new  social reality).  I do not  discuss that  kind  of objection
here,  though  some of  what I say  below bears  on  it.  See  infra  text  accompanying  notes  137-146.

54.  Scalia,  supra  note  7,  at  47.
55.  Id.
56.  1 do  not  discuss  here  the  suggestion  that  a theory  of  interpretation  is  appropriately  rooted  in a
theory  of authority  or the  accompanying  claim  that  reference  to  lawmaker  intention  is therefore  a  part  of
the appropriate  theory  of interpretation.  See ANDREI  MARMOR, INTERPRETATION  AND  LEGAL THEORY  113-
23  (1992).  Scalia's  general  approach might  be  aided  by  assessing  claims  of this  sort.

57.  Some people,  of course, think  that  courts have  comparative  advantages  at  least on  the question  of
principles.  See,  e.g.,  ALEXANDER  M.  BICKEL,  THE  LEAST  DANGEROUS  BRANCH  23-33  (1962);  RONALD
DWORKIN,  LAW'S  EMPIRE  375  (1986).

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

statutory  clarity.  These  points  are  about  reducing  the  burdens  of decision  and
the  costs  of uncertainty.

But  Justice  Scalia  seeks  most  fundamentally  to  promote  democratic  self-
government  and the  primacy  of  the  system  of lawmaking  set  out in  Article  I
of the  Constitution.  The  reduction  of judicial  discretion  via  textualism  serves
both  of these  fundamental  goals. 58  In  so  doing,  democratic  formalism  ensures
that  statutory  and  constitutional  provisions  will  not  be  given  "spirits"  and
"purposes"  attributable  to  the  (unenacted)  political  morality  of any  particular
era.  A  ban  on  "dynamic"  interpretation,  and  a  requirement  of  fidelity  to
enacted  law, ensures  that  courts  will  not bow  to political  will  or bend  statutes
to prevailing political  winds except  to the  extent that they  have  produced  actual
legislation.5 9

It  is  worth  speculating  about  why  and  how  Justice  Scalia,  educated  at
Harvard  Law  School  in  the  era  of  Hart  and  Sacks,'  actually  came  to  this
position.  Henry  Hart  and  Albert  Sacks,  of course,  saw  continuity  between  the
common law  and statutory  interpretation;  they  placed  a  large  emphasis  on  the
collaborative  role  of courts,  not  least  in  the  process  of statutory  interpretation,
which  they  thought  was  best  rooted  in  identification  of statutory  "purpose,"
supplemented  by  an  array  of judge-made  clear  statement  principles."'  Justice
Scalia has  suggested  that  years  ago  he  was  sympathetic  to  this  position,  or at
least  to  judicial  particularism. 6 2  We  may  speculate" t  that  Justice  Scalia's
self-professed  shift  in  view  may  have  emerged  from  the  nation's  experience
with both particularism  and  purposive interpretation  in the  period between,  say,
1965  and the  present.  In  this  period,  particularism  occasionally  has  produced
a  high  degree  of  confusion,  as  case-by-case  decisions  allow  judges  to  have

58.  Note  in  this  regard  that  after  World  War  II, Bnitain  and  America  responded  to Natism  In pan b)
ensuring  that  such  laws  as  had  been  enacted  in  the  Hitler  penod  and  had  not  been  soidcd  s,,re to  be
interpreted  "in accordance  'with the  plain meaning  of the text  and  without  regard to  oblectiies or  meanings
ascribed  in preambles  or other pronouncements."'  INGOO MILU--R, Hi-tR's  JusTc-  at  ,i( 1991) (omitting
citation).  Note  also  Muller's  demonstration  that  the  principal  technique  used  b% Hitler's  judges  Va5
emphatically  antiformalist,  a  form  of purposive.  dynamic  statutory  construction  intended  to  link  statutorS
meaning  with prevailing  ideals.  See  id. at  92, 104-05.  117

59.  Miller's  book  is  a good  warning  in  this  regard  See  it
60.  See  geterally HENRY  M.  HART.  JR  &  ALBF.RT  NI  SACKS.  THE LFGAL  PROCI-Ss  William  N

Eskridge,  Jr. & Philip  P.  Frickey  eds.,  Foundation  Press  1994)  (1958)

61.  See id. at  1111-380.  For an  outstanding  statement  of the central  organi.ing  themes.  see  u  at  1374-

80. To  get  a  sense of its  flavor,  consider  the  following

In interpreting  a  statute  a  court should:
1. Decide  what purpose  ought  to  be  attnbuted  to  the  statute  and  to  an% suboidinate  pro~tston

of it  which  may  be  involved;  and  then

2.  Interpret  the  words  of the  statute  immediately  in question  so  as  to  .air)  out  the  purptsc  as

best  it can,  making  sure,  however,  that  it  does  not  give  the  words  either-

(a)  a meaning  they  will  not  bear,  or
(b)  a  meaning  which  would  violate  any  established  polic% o clear statement

Id. at  1374.

62.  See  Antonin  Scalia.  The  Rule of La% as  o  Lau of Rule3. 56  U  CHI  L  Ri-v  1175,  1177  ( 1989)
63.  Speculation  of this  kind  risks  recklessness  It what  is said  in  this  paragraph  does  not  reflect  Justice
Scalia's  own  experience,  at  least  it  might  be  said  to  reflect  the  possible  expenente  of  some  people
disaffected  with  the  use  of statutory  purpose  or  with  common  law decisionmaking  in public  lass

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

continuing  room  to  maneuver  and  make  predictability  hard  to  maintain.
Perhaps  even  worse, resort  to  statutory  and,  above  all,  constitutional  purpose
has  led  Justices  in  directions  that,  by  Justice  Scalia's  lights,  must seem highly
ideological-much  less  a matter of finding something than  a matter  of making
things  up.64 And  what  is  made  up  might  well  seem  to  reflect  the  views  of a
"new  class"  of intellectuals  having political  commitments  very  different  from
those  of Justice  Scalia  himself and  perhaps  the  nation  as  a  whole.

In  brief:  When  particularism  and purposivism  invite  courts  to  take  stands
on  the  great  issues  of the  day,  or  on  "Kulturkampf,"65  formalism  reemerges
as  an  appealing  alternative.66  A  shift  from  particularism  and  purposivism  to
formalism  represents  a  natural  odyssey  for  students  of  Hart  and  Sacks,
disappointed  by  personal  experience  with  an  apparently 
ideological,
particularistic, and purposive judiciary, and seeking to impose  sharp constraints
on  judicial  discretion.67  Some  help  in  this  regard  emerges  from  work  in
cognitive  psychology  suggesting  that people often  overstate  the  value  of case-
by-case,  intuitionistic  judgments,  and  understate  the  value  of  (admittedly
somewhat  crude)  rules.68

What  I will  be  arguing  here  is that,  despite  appearances,  Justice  Scalia's
argument  cannot really rely  on abstract or a priori  claims  about Article  I of the
Constitution  or  on  arguments  about  democratic  rule.69  Those  claims  do  not
support  Justice  Scalia's  distinctive  approach.  Instead,  that  approach  must  be
defended  by  a  set  of  pragmatic  and  empirical  claims  about  various
governmental  institutions  and  how  those  institutions  are  likely  to  respond  to

64.  See,  e.g.,  O'Hare Truck  Serv.,  Inc.  v. City  of Northlake,  116  S. Ct.  2353,  2361-62  (1996)  (Scalia,
J.,  dissenting);  Romer  v.  Evans,  116  S. Ct.  1620,  1629  (1996)  (Scalia,  J.,  dissenting);  J.E.B.  v.  Alabama
ex rel T.B.,  511 U.S.  127,  156 (1994)  (Scalia, J.,  dissenting). These  are  recent  cases,  but the  same  general
point  holds, for  many  observers,  as  the general symbol  of the  Warren Court.

65.  Romer,  116  S. Ct.  at  1629  (Scalia,  J.,  dissenting);  see  also  MOLLER,  supra  note  58,  at  4-5

(discussing  Hitler's judges).

66.  Indeed,  a  characteristic  response  to  a  perceived  failure  of purposive  interpretation  is  formalism,
whereas  another  response  involves  general  claims  of  indeterminacy  or  of  the  illusory  character  of  the
distinction  between  law  and  politics.  It  will  emerge  from  the  discussion  that  I  believe  both  of  these
responses  are  inadequate.

67.  See  MOLLER,  supra  note  58,  at  39-119,  for  a  valuable  discussion  of  the  role  of  purposive
interpretation  in  extending  the agenda  of the  Nazi  party.  The  German judges  read  longstanding  statutes
consistently  with the prevailing  political order, both  purposively  and dynamically,  in a  way  that  very  much
promoted  Hitler's  goals.  MUlIler's  book  is  a  valuable  warning  about  the  ideological  uses  of  purposive
interpretation  and  the  possible  advantages,  from  the  standpoint  of  liberty,  of formalism;  it  casts  Scalia's
argument  in a  vividly  appealing light.  If formalism  is  less appealing  for America  than  it was  for Germany
during  or immediately  after  the Nazi  era,  it  is because  of America's common  law  tradition,  which embeds
an enduring  political  morality  that can hardly  be treated  as  a transient  pathology,  and which contains  values
that are compatible  with both democracy and  the rule of law. Consider, for example, background  principles
requiring  criminal statutes to be  construed leniently, see,  e.g., United States  v. R.L.C.,  503  U.S.  291,  305-06
(1992),  or so  as  not  to raise  serious  constitutional  doubts,  see,  e.g.,  Kent  v. Dulles,  357  U.S.  116,  128-30
(1958).  I am  grateful  to Richard  Pildes  for referring  me  to Maller's  book  and  for helpful  discussion  of the
issues  in  this  paragraph.

68.  See,  e.g.,  Daniel  Kahneman  &  Dan  Lovallo,  7Tnid Choices  and  Bold  Forecasts:  A  Cognitive

Perspective on  Risk  Taking, 39  MGMT.  SCI.  17,  19-20  (1993).

69.  Cf  Scalia,  supra note  7,  at 9,  14-17.

1997] 

Democratic  Formalism 

541

different  interpretive strategies.  Justice  Scalia does  not  defend  those  pragmatic
and  empirical  claims.  Thus,  he  has  not  shown  that  his  approach  is  preferable
to reasonable  alternatives,  including  those  that  stress the  role  of administrative
agencies  in the  modem  state.

The  most  basic  point  is  that  no  context-free  view  of  legal  interpretation
will  make  much  sense. 7'  And  while judgments  about  the  future  are  inevitably
speculative,  America's  own  experience,  with  its  distinctive  history,  suggests
that  democratic  formalism  is  likely  to  be  inferior  to  the  alternatives  actually
favored  by  the  American  legal  tradition. 7'  We  might  take  this  to  be  a  neo-
Burkean  point,  intended  as  a  challenge  to  Justice  Scalia's  neo-Benthamite
attack  on  the  common  law.72

It  is  highly  revealing  in  this  connection  that  there  is  a  substantial  overlap
between  the  interpretive  practices  of  common  law  and  civil  law  courts,  each
of which  uses  similar  presumptions  and  canons,  not  only  linguistic  but  also
substantive.73  Thus,  Justice  Scalia's  attack  on  common  law  practices  cannot
easily  survive  an  encounter  with  civil  law  systems,  whose  courts  are  only
intermittently  textualist,  and  which  are  permeated  by  interpretive  practices  of
the kind  he  disfavors.74

70.  This  is  a  lesson  of  P.S.  ATIYAH  &  ROBERT  S.  SuMMi.Rs.  FOR.M  AND  SUBSTANCE  IN ANGLO-
AMERICAN  LAW  298-335  (1987).  which  connects  different  styles  of  interpretation  to  differences  in
legislatures  in  America  and  England.

71.  See  Stephen  Breyer,  On  the  Uses  of Legislative  History in  lnterpretung  Statutes.  65  S  CAL  L
REv.  845,  868-74  (1992),  for a  similar  conclusion  on  a point  stressed  by  Justice  Scalia  One  qualification
is  necessary:  Our  own  legal  tradition has  yet  to come  to terms  with  the  sca-change  inaugurated  by  the  rise
of administrative agencies,  and that development  calls  for some new  analysts.  See 
infra text accompanying
notes  123-125.  It  is here,  for example,  that Judge  Calabresi's  proposal  might  be  faulted  on  the  ground that
the principal  updating  role  should come  from  regulatory  agencies  Bur see CALABRESi.  supra note  I. at  56
("To  allow  the truly  dependent  agency  to  act  to  update  our  laws  would,  in fact,  be  to  cut  through  our
checks  and  balances  by  allowing  a  majoritarian  but  unrestrained  executive  to  enforce  its  vievs  of  the
popular  will  .... ").

72.  See Strauss,  supra note  5,  at  925-34.  For  Justice  Scalia's  approving  discussion  of the  codification
movement,  see  Scalia,  supra  note  7,  at  11-12.  Bentham's  own  view  on  the  role  of  common  law
particularism  was quite  complex.  See  GERALD  POSTEMIA.  BEN'HAM  AND  THE  COMiMON  LAw  TRADmITON
440-64  (1986).

73.  See  Massimo  La  Torre  et  al.,  Statutory Interpretation  in  Italy. in  INTERPREINo  STATUTES  213.
222  (D.  Neil  MacCormick  & Robert  S.  Summers eds..  1991):  D.  Neil MacCormick  & Robert  S  Summers.
Interpretation and Justification, in INTERPRETING  STATUrS.  supra. at 511.  514-15. 518-21.  535-39.  Robert
S.  Summers  &  Michele  Taruffo.  Interpretation and  Comparative Analysis.  in  IrT-.RPRETING  STATUTI.S.
supra, at  461,  468-69,  485-86.

74.  See, e.g., Aulis  Aamio, Statutory Interpretation in Finland. in INTERPRETING  STATUTES,  supra note
73,  at  123,  142-43;  Robert  Alexy  &  Ralf  Dreicr,  Statutory  Interpretation tn  the  Federal Republic  of
Germany, in INTERPRETING  STATUTES.  supra note  73.  at  73.  90;  La Torte et  al  ,supra  note 73.  at  213.  222-
23,  244;  Michel  Troper  et.  al.,  Statutory Interpretation iit  France, tii  INTERPRI-.ING  STATUTI-S.  supra note
73,  at  171,  189;  see  also Summers  & Taruffo,  supra note  73.  at  485  (suggesting  that  when  there  is  "a
conflict between  an argument  from  ordinary  or technical  meaning,  on  the  one  hand.  and the  argument  that
this meaning  leads  to an absurd  or manifestly  unjust  result,  on  the other."  the "latter  argument  is  recognized
in  virtually  every system  in  our  study, though  not  always  in  the  same  form"),  id  at  486 (suggesting  that
"[w]ithin  limits,  the higher  courts of all  countries  in  our  study  adjust  the  ordinary  or technical  meaning  of
a statute  to take  due  account of its datedness  or  obsolescence  Iso]  Itihe  theory  would  appear  to  be that  the
force  or weight  of any  'old'  meaning  is outweighed").

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

B.  Holy  Trinity,  Excessive  Generality, and Presumptions

Let  us approach  these  points  by  focusing  on  Church of the Holy Trinity v.
United  States,75  Justice  Scalia's  bete  noire.  The  Holy  Trinity  case  raises  a
large number  of the issues  dealt with  in Justice  Scalia's  discussion of statutory
interpretation;  by  discussing  Holy Trinity, we  can  discuss  many  of the  issues
raised  in  the  book.  In  1885,  largely  in  response  to  an  influx  of  immigrant
labor,  Congress  made  it  unlawful

for  any  person,  company, partnership,  or  corporation,  in  any  manner
whatsoever,  to  prepay  the  transportation,  or  in  any  way  assist  or
encourage  the  importation  or  migration  of  any  alien  or  aliens,  any
foreigner  or  foreigners,  into  the  United  States  ...  under  contract  or
agreement,  parol  or special,  express  or implied,  made  previous  to  the
importation  or  migration  of  such  alien  or  aliens,  foreigner  or
foreigners,  to  perform  labor  or  service  of  any  kind  in  the  United
States  ....

76

The  problem  arose  because  the  Church  of the  Holy  Trinity  made  a  contract
with  E.  Walpole  Warren,  an  alien  residing  in  England,  to  pay  for  his
transportation  to  the  United  States,  where  he  was  to  work  as  a  rector  and
pastor. The  United  States claimed  that  the  church  had  acted  unlawfully.77  The
Supreme  Court  disagreed.  It  said  that  the  text  of  the  statute  was  not
controlling.78

The  Court's  opinion  was  very  complex,  with  multiple  strands.  It  can  be

read  in  three  different  ways,  each  with  support  in  the  opinion  itself.

(1) General  language will  not be  taken to  produce  an  outcome  that  would,
in  context,  be  absurd,  at least  if there is  no  affirmative  evidence  that this  result
was  intended  by  the  enacting  legislature.

[F]requently  words  of general  meaning  are  used  in  a  statute,  words
broad  enough to include  an act  in question,  and yet a consideration  of
the  whole 
its
enactment,  or  of the  absurd  results  which  follow  from  giving  such
broad  meaning to  the words,  makes  it unreasonable  to believe  that  the
legislator  intended  to  include  the  particular  act.79

legislation,  or  of  the  circumstances  surrounding 

On this  view, Holy Trinity is  a rerun  of the famous  case of Riggs  v. Palmer,"
in  which  the  New  York  Court  of  Appeals  held  that  a  statute  governing

75.  143  U.S.  457  (1892).
76.  Id. at 458.
77.  See  id.  at  458.
78.  See  id. at 472.
79.  Id. at 459.
80.  22  N.E.  188  (N.Y. 1889).

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

inheritance  would  not  be  interpreted  to  allow  a  nephew  to  inherit  from  his
uncle's  will  when  the  uncle's  death  resulted  from  his  murder at  the  nephew's
hands.8

(2)  General  language  will  not  be  taken  to  produce  an  outcome  that  was
clearly  not intended  by the enacting  legislature,  as those  intentions  are  revealed
by  context,  including  legislative  history.

[A]nother  guide  to  the  meaning  of  a  statute  is  found  in  the  evil
which  it  is  designed  to  remedy;  and  for  this  the  court  properly  looks
at  contemporaneous  events,  the  situation  as  it  existed,  and  as  it  was
pressed  upon  the  attention  of  the  legislative  body ...

.

.

.

It  appears  . .. 

the
committees  of Congress,  that  it  was  this  cheap  unskilled  labor which
was  making  the  trouble  ....

the  testimony  presented  before 

in 

...  We  find,  therefore,  that  the  title  of the  act,  the  evil  which  was
intended to  be  remedied,  the  circumstances  surrounding  the  appeal  to
Congress,  the  reports  of  the  committee  of  each  house,  all  concur  in
affirming  that  the  intent  of Congress  was  simply  to  stay  the  influx  of
this  cheap  unskilled  labor.8 2

On  this  view,  Holy  Trinity advocates  legislative  history  and  consideration  of
legislative  intent.

(3)  General  language  will  not  be  taken  to  depart  from  longstanding  social
understandings  and  practices,  at  least  or especially  if the departure  would  raise
serious  constitutional  doubts.

[N]o  purpose  of  action  against  religion  can  be  imputed  to  any
legislation,  state  or  national,  because  this  is  a  religious  people.  This
is  historically  true.  ...

.

[ 

. [S]hall  it  be  believed  that  a  Congress  of  the  United  States
intended  to  make  it  a  misdemeanor  for  a  church  of  this  country  to
contract  for  the  services  of  a  Christian  minister  residing  in  another
nation?83

On  this  view,  the background  tradition  of religious  liberty  operates  as  a "clear
statement"  principle,  one  that  requires  Congress  to  speak  unambiguously  if  it
wishes  to  intrude  on  that  tradition.  Congress  will  not  be  taken  to  have  barred
a  church  from  paying  for  the  transportation  of  a  rector  unless  there  is
affirmative  evidence that  Congress  intended  to  do precisely  that.  Congress  will
not  be taken  to  have  interfered  with  religious  liberty  through  inadvertence  or
loose  language.

81.  See  id.  at  191.
82.  Holy  Trinity, 143  U.S.  at  463-65,
83.  Id.  at  465,471.

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

Justice Scalia appears to think that each  of these  three principles  is  wrong,
certainly  as  applied  to Holy Trinity.84 Let  us  take  up  these principles  in  turn.
Understood  according  to  principle  (I),  Holy  Trinity presents  a  familiar,
even mundane problem,  that  is, the problem introduced  by linguistic generality.
in  this  way:
In  a  famous  passage,  Wittgenstein  describes 
"Someone  says  to  me:  'Shew  [sic]  the  children  a game.'  I teach  them gaming
with  dice,  and  the  other  says,  'I didn't  mean  that  sort  of game.'  Must  the
exclusion  of the game  with  dice  have come  before  his  mind  when  he gave  me
the  order?"8 5

the  problem 

is 

that 

implication 

it  need  not. 

Wittgenstein's  clear 

In  daily
communication,  and  without  thinking  about  it,  we  carve  out  exceptions  from
general  language;86  we  do  not  consult  the  dictionary  meaning  of the  words
and  act in  accordance  with  what  we  find  there.  It  is  tempting to  respond  that
there  is  a difference  between  daily communication  and  a legislative  command;
perhaps  the  latter  should  be  presumed  not  to  be  sloppy.  But  this  response
misses  the  point,  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  sloppiness  and  everything  to
do  with  the  cognitive  limits  of  human  beings.  Because  of  the  inevitable
limitations  of human  foresight,  even  the  most  carefully  chosen  words  can
become  unclear because  and  not in  spite  of their generality.87  Textualists  who
fail  to  see  this  point  can  be  found  only  in  science  fiction  novels  populated  by
androids  and aliens,88 whose  misunderstandings  and befuddlement  are  a  direct
consequence  of their  textualism. Now,  Justice  Scalia is not  a literalist;  he  is  at

84.  There  is  some doubt  about  whether  he sees  a  limited place  for  principles  (2)  and  (3)  in  general.
See  Scalia, supra note  7,  at  20  n.22  (acknowledging  a  role  for principle  (3)  but seeing  it  as  inapplicable
to  Holy  Trinity);  see  also Green  v.  Bock  Laundry  Mach.  Co.,  490  U.S.  504,  528  (1989)  (Scalia,  J.,
concurring  in  the judgment)  (arguing  for  statutory  interpretation  based  on  context,  ordinary  usage,  and
compatibility  with surrounding  law).

85.  LUDWIG  WITGENsTEIN,  PHILosOPHIcA.  INVESTIGATIONS  33 (G.E.M.  Anscombe trans.,  MacMillan

1960)  (1953).

86.  In  ordinary  communication,  we  do  not  think  of  it  as  making  "exceptions."  It  all  happens  very
quickly  and  naturally. For example,  "Don't bother me during  the next  hour"  (but what  if the  house catches
fire?),  or "Clean  up  your  room  completely"  (but  what  if a  certain  level  of messiness  is  standard  in  the
family?).

87.  See  H.L.A.  HART,  THE  CONCEPT  OF  LAW  124-36  (2d ed.  1994).  As  Hart  writes:

[W]e are  men, not gods;  it is  a feature  of the human  predicament  (and so of the  legislative  one)
that  we  labour  under two  connected  handicaps  whenever  we  seek to  regulate,  unambiguously
and  in  advance,  some  sphere  of  conduct  by  means  of  general  standards  to be  used  without
further  official  direction  on particular  occasions. The  first handicap is  our  relative  ignorance  of
fact;  the  second  is  our  relative  indeterminacy  of  aim.  If  the  world  in  which  we  live  were
characterized  only  by  a  finite  number  of features,  and  these  together  with  all  the  modes  in
which  they  combine  were  known  to  us,  then  provision  could  be  made  in  advance  for  every
possibility  .... Plainly  this  world  is  not  our  world;  human  legislators  can  have  no  such
knowledge  of all  possible  combinations  of  circumstances  which  the  future  may  bring.  This
inability to  anticipate  things  brings  with  it a  relative  indeterminacy  of aim.

Id. at  128.

88.  Cf. POSNER,  supra note  15,  at 268  ("A normal  English  speaker does not interpret a  message merely
by consulting  the dictionary  definitions  of each word  (assume  these definitions  are  stored  in  his brain)  and
the  relevant grammatical  and syntactical principles.").  Science fiction  enthusiasts may wish  to consider Star
Trek's  android  character  Data.  See  Star Trek:  The  Next  Generation  (Paramount  syndicated  television
broadcast).

19971

Democratic  Formalism

pains  to  distinguish  textualism  from  literalism,  and  he knows  that  the  meaning
of  text  is  a  function  of  context.  But  once  we  insist  on  that  point,  just  why  is
principle  (1)  so  bad?  Why  is  it  not  an  ordinary  application  of the  idea  that  the
meaning  of words  depends  on  context?

Perhaps  Justice  Scalia would  respond  that this  principle  increases  the  costs
of decisions  for judges;  perhaps  an  approach  that  takes  Congress  "at  its  word"
produces  more  mechanical  (simpler,  more  predictable)  jurisprudence.  Perhaps
Justice  Scalia  would  add  that  absurdity  is  in  the  eye  of  the  beholder,  so  that
principle  (I)  also  introduces  risks of error  in  the  form of judicial  misjudgments
about  what  counts  as  absurd.  And  perhaps  Justice  Scalia  would  insist  that
Congress  would  respond  well  to  his  approach  to  Holy Trinity.  Knowledge  of
judicial  refusal to  make exceptions  for absurdity  might  increase  legislative  care
with  drafting and thus decrease  excessive  generality  before the  fact.  Or perhaps
Congress  would  respond  promptly  and  effectively  to  mistakes  introduced  by
excessive  generality;  Congress  would  therefore  correct  the  outcome  in  Holy
Trinity if it  really  objects. 9  If all  this  is  true,  Justice  Scalia's  approach  would
produce  few mistakes,  and  those  mistakes  that it  does  produce  would  find easy
correction.90

If  we  understand  Justice  Scalia's  argument 

to  be  defensible  in  these
terms, 9'  the  debate  over  principle  (1)  is  really  a  debate  about  the  costs  of
decision  and  the  costs  of  error.92  More  particularly,  it  is  a  special  case  of  the
debate over rules  and  standards.  The  Holy Trinity Court  treated  the  text  of the
statute as  a  kind of standard,  inviting  inquiry  into  underlying  purposes.  Justice
Scalia wants  to treat  it  as  a kind  of rule,  fully specifying  outcomes  in  advance.
It  is  better  to
The  dispute  cannot  be  resolved  on  the  basis  of  abstractions." 
ask  about  which  approach  will  (roughly  speaking)  minimize  the  costs  of
decision  and  the  costs  of error. Justice  Scalia  can  be  taken  to  suggest  that  his
approach  will  reduce  the sum  of aggregate  decision  costs  and  aggregate  error
costs,  and  under  imaginable  assumptions,  he  is  entirely  right.

89.  Relevant  evidence  of congressional  rejection  of judicial  interpretation  can  be  found  in William  N

Eskridge,  Jr.,  Overriding  Supreme  Court Statutory hiterpreration Dectwor.  101  YALE  LJ  331  (1991)

90.  Note here the  relatively formalistic  nature  of statutory  interpretation  in  England and  the distinctive
context in  which  that  formalism  may  make sense.  highly professional  drafting and  a  responsive  Parliament
ready  and willing  to  correct errors  after  they  have  arisen  See ATYAH  & SuhistiFRS.  supra note  70.  at  104.
315-23.

91.  For proposition  (1),  Article  I of the  Constitution  is  a red  hernng,  the question  is  what  the  relevant

statute  means.

as 

an 

counts 

92.  There are  of course  qualitative  differences  among  the  vaious  kinds  of errors,  and judgments  must
be  made  about  which  errors  are  worst,  both  qualitatively  and quantitatively  There  is  also  a  question about
his
what 
approach-textualism-produces  no  errors.  But  this  begs  the  question  by  defining  errors  as  whatever
emerges  from  other  approaches.  To  be  sure,  it  is  not  clear  that  errors  can  be  defined  as  such  apirt  from
some  antecedent  account  of appropriate  interpretation  I am  attempting  to build  on  the  common  intuition
that  an  interpreter  blunders  if he  interprets  a  word  to produce  an  outcome  that  would  generally  be  taken
as  absurd.

Justice  Scalia  would 

contend 

Perhaps 

error 

that 

all. 

at 

93.  The  same  conclusion  can  be  found  in  SCHAUVER.  3upra  note  I1.  at  222-28.  which  delends

formalism  as  a  possible  approach  to  interpretation

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

But  are  the  assumptions  correct?  This  is  far  from  obvious.  Perhaps  a
judicial  role  of  the  sort  suggested  in  Holy  Trinity  will  not  introduce  much
uncertainty;  perhaps  cases  in  which  textual  generality  produces  absurdity  are
few  in  number  and  easily  recognized  as  such.  If  so,  principle  (1) may  not
much  increase  decision  costs,  and  it may  greatly  reduce  error  (understood  as
such  if the  outcome  would  be  by  general  agreement  absurd).  And  perhaps  it
is  very  hard  for  legislatures  to  anticipate  cases  of this  kind  in  advance-and
also  costly  and complex  for  legislatures,  with  so  much business  to transact,  to
spend  all  the  resources  necessary  to  fix  the  errors  of  excessive  generality.
Formalism  may decrease  costs  at  the judicial  level  while  also  increasing  costs,
perhaps  dramatically, at  the  legislative  level.  If all  this  is  true,  Holy Trinity is
right  as  an  example  of principle  (1).

If  we  are  talking  about  the  modem  state,  it  makes  sense  to  say  that
administrative  agencies  should  be  permitted  to  act  as  the  Court  did  in  Holy
Trinity (a  point  to  which  I will  return94). And  a  reasonable  assessment  of the
practical  issues  would  suggest  that courts  should  feel  free  to  make  exceptions
for applications  that  seem  unquestionably  absurd. Then  the question  would  be
whether the application  in Holy Trinity falls  in that  category. To know  that,  we
have to  know  some  cjetails,  but  certainly  it  cannot  be said  that  the  outcome  is
implausible  or an  abuse.

in 

intent  (something  actually 

Justice  Scalia is correct  in  objecting to principle  (2) if he  understands  that
principle  to suggest  that clearly  expressed  legislative  history  (in,  for  example,
committee  reports)  should  trump clearly  expressed  text.  He is  also  right  to say
that  the  text,  and  not  the  history, is  the  law;  no  one  should  doubt  that  point.
And  it  is  sensible  for  Justice  Scalia  to  insist  on  a  distinction  between
the  minds  of  legislators)  and
subjective 
"objectified  intent,"  understood  as  "the  intent  that  a  reasonable  person  would
gather  from  the  text  of the law,  placed  alongside  the  remainder  of the  corpus
juris.' 95  But  suppose  that  we  do  not  trouble  ourselves  with  the  complexities
intentions  of  collective
of  psychological 
decisionmaking  bodies,  and  suppose  that  we  use  legislative  history  only  in
cases  of interpretive  doubt,  not  because  it  is  "the  law"  but  because  it  helps
identify  the  meaning  of the  law.  Suppose  too  that  interpretive  doubt  can  be
created  either  by  ambiguous  terms  or  by  what  appears  to  be  excessive
generality.  Here  legislative  history  would  matter  for  the  same  reason  that
Madison  and  Hamilton  matter.  Words  are  hard  to  understand  without  some
conception  of their purpose,  and  the distinction  between  purpose and  intention
(suitably  "objectified")  is  thin.

the  subjective 

inquiry 

into 

Indeed, 

textualism  itself  cannot  do  without  some  crucial  subjective
elements.  Recall  that  meaning  is,  for  Justice  Scalia,  to  be  determined  by

94.  See  infra  notes  128-129  and  accompanying  text.
95.  Scalia,  supra  note 7,  at  17.

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

exploring  what  was  commonly  understood  at  the  time  of  enactment.  But
common  understandings  are  best  uncovered  by  figunng  out  what  people
thought. Thus  the  movement  from  "intentions"  to  "ineaning,"  while  entirely
sensible,  is  not  a  movement  from  something  (entirely)  subjective  to  something
(entirely)  objective.  If the  question  is  what  relevant  people  understood  a  term
to  mean,  legislative  history  may  well  be  useful.  Of course,  legislative  history
should  not  be  used  when  it  is  uninformative,  or  when  it  is  so  extensive  and
broad  that  a  judge  is  using  it  not  to  figure  out  what  Congress  meant,  but
instead  to  support judicial  policy  preferences.  Of course  the  text  has  priority,
and  it  is  right  to  insist  that  what  appears  in  the  legislative  history  may  be  the
view  of one  side  in  a  debate,  or  of  a  private  interest  group  unable  to  get  its
way  with  Congress.97  But  these  points  do  not  support  a  bar  on  use  of
legislative  history;  they  lead  in  the  direction  of  pragmatism  and  caution."

Justice  Scalia's  suggestion  that  the  use  of  legislative  history  is  akin  to
"posting  edicts  high  up  on  the  pillars,  so that  they  could  not  easily  be  read""
is  certainly  relevant,  but standing  alone  it  cannot  carry  much  weight.  Citizens
do  not always  have  easy  access  to  statutory  text  (ask  a  nonlawyer  neighbor  to
track  down  42  U.S.C.  §  7521j)(2)(B)(ii),  by, say,  tomorrow  morning),  and
those  who  can  find  the text  can  often,  without  expending  a  lot  more  effort,  find
the  history. And  where  there  are  amnbiguities  and  doubts,  might  it  not  be  better
to  look  at  legislative  history  than  to  consult  dictionaries,  or  one's  own views
about  policy  and  principle,  at  least  if  the  ordinary  meaning  of the  term,  taken
in  its  context,  is  what  governs?  Why  might  not  legislative  history  be  useful  in
showing  that  the  term  in  question  is  not  sensibly  interpreted  to  cover  the
problem  at  hand?

These  questions  need hardly  be  taken as  decisive.  We  can  imagine  a  world
in  which  resort  to  legislative  history  would  be  more  trouble  than  it  is  worth,
because  courts  and  legislatures,  in  that  world,  would  respond  well  if  courts
relied  only  on  text  and  applicable  canons  of  construction.  In  that  imaginable
world,  legislative  history  would  not  be  very  helpful  (because  it  would  be
impossibly  ambiguous); courts  would  use  legislative  history to  reach the  results
that  they  liked  best,  which  (let  us  suppose)  would  be  independently  very  bad;
and  the  use  of  legislative  history  would  have  unfortunate  effects  on  the
legislature  by  discouraging  it  from  legislating  clearly. Perhaps  some  state court
systems  do  not  use  legislative  history  for  this  reason,'"  and  what  Justice
Scalia  says  helps  support  their  practice.  But  we  can  also  imagine  a  legal

96.  See  supra  text  accompanying  note  15
97.  See  BRUCE  A. ACKERMAN  &  WILLIAM  T  HASSL-R.  CLAN  COAtJDIRTY  AIR I0N.09  (1981).  for

a good  example.

98.  See  Breyer,  supra  note  71,  at  847-60
99.  Scalia, supra  note  7,  at  17
100.  Cf., e.g., GWENDOLYN  B. FoLsoM,.  LEGISLATIV  HISTORY  RIE-S.ARCN  Rmnt  DINT-RPRiTATiON
OF  LAWS  5 (1972)  ("Use  of legislative  history  by  the  state courts  has .one  more  sloppI and is  still much
less  extensive  than  in  the  federal  courts  ")

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

culture  in  which  legislative  history  helps  to  discipline judges,  by  giving  them
a  sense  of  context  and  purpose,  without  creating  serious  problems  at  the
legislative  stage. There  is  no  way  to  know  whether, in the  abstract,  the  use  of
legislative  history  is  good  or  bad.  So  long  as  courts  proceed  sensibly,  first
principles  involving  political legitimacy  cannot resolve  that question.  Whether
it  makes  sense  to  use  legislative  history  depends  on  such  issues  as  the simple
costs  of  using  the  history,  the  likelihood  that  it  will  increase  rather  than
decrease errors,  the availability  of other more  reliable  sources  of meaning,  and
the  consequences  for  the  legislature  itself  of using  legislative  history  or  not
using it.

Justice  Scalia  is  convincing  in  urging  that  legislative  text  and  structure
deserve  priority.  He  is  right  to  say  that  courts  have  often  misused  legislative
history  and  that  the  use  of history  can  increase  costs  of decision  while  also
creating  more  rather  than  fewer  mistakes.  Certainly  a  movement 
in  the
direction  of a  firm  judicial  principle  of textual  primacy  would  make  a  good
deal  of  sense."'  But  he  has  not  demonstrated  that  where  other  sources  of
meaning  leave  doubt,  courts  should  not  consult  legislative  history.  Perhaps  a
legal  system  starting  from  scratch  would  do  best  to  forbid  courts  from
consulting  history.  Perhaps  American  public  law would  be  better  if a  ban  on
the use of history  were  enacted;  this is far from implausible.  But in  light  of our
longstanding  traditions,  a dramatic  shift of the sort proposed  by  Justice  Scalia
bears  a  heavy  burden  of justification,  and  he has  not  met  that  burden  here.

What  about  principle  (3)?  Justice  Scalia  does  not  discuss  it  in any  detail.
But  it  is  not  hard  to  imagine  how  clear  statement  rules  might  be  defended.
Justice  Scalia willingly  acknowledges  that extraordinary  acts  are  not  expected
and  that  courts  should  not  find  such  acts  unless  there  is  clear  indication  that
they  were  intended;" 2  this  idea  is  part  of a  defense  of principle  (3).  Justice
Scalia  also insists  that  courts  should try  to  fit  ambiguous  texts  with  the  rest  of
existing  law,  and  Holy  Trinity was  written  very  much  in  this  spirit. 3  And
there  is  a  third  possible  defense  of  principle  (3);  it  has  to  do  with  the
nondelegation  doctrine, whose purpose  is to ensure that legislatures, rather than
bureaucracies  or  courts,  actually  make  the  most  important  decisions  of
policy.' 4  Perhaps  courts  should 
the  executive
branch-to  decide,  with  particularity,  if  it wants  to  force  judges  to  resolve  a
serious  constitutional  problem.  On this view, vague  or general  language  should
not  be  taken  to  require judicial  resolution  of a  hard  constitutional  judgment;
there  is  too  great  a  likelihood  that,  if it  is  so  taken,  Congress  itself  will  not
have  thought about  the constitutional  issue at  all.  Certainly  it  is  most  unlikely

require  Congress-not 

101.  See  the discussion  of textual  priority  in  ACKERMAN  & HASSLER,  supra note  97,  at  108-09.
102.  See  Scalia, supra note  7,  at  29.
103.  See  the reference  to  background  norms  in POSNER,  supra note  15,  at  268-69.
104.  See Cass  R. Sunstein, Law and Administration After Chevron,  90  CoLUM.  L. REV.  2071,2111-12

(1990).

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

that  the  Congress  that  enacted  the  statute  at  issue  in  Holy  Trinity  actually
decided  to  apply  the  ban  on  importation  of labor  to  churches."'

Of course,  the  nondelegation  doctrine  is  effectively  dead,  in  part  because
courts  cannot  easily  enforce  it."  But  many  clear  statement  principles  or
substantive canons-prominently  including the  principle  requiring  Congress to
speak  clearly  if it  wants  to raise  a serious  constitutional  problem-can  be  seen
as  narrower,  more  modest,  more  targeted  nondelegation  doctrines.  The  basic
defense of principle  (3) is  that it  has  a democracy-forcing  character.  It requires
the  national  legislature  to  make  a  highly  focused  decision,  reflecting  its  own
choices  about  constitutionally  sensitive  issues.  Many  substantive  canons  of
construction  have  this purpose.  They are  designed  to  ensure  that the  legislature
focuses  with  particularity  on  some  issue,  largely  for reasons  with  roots  in  the
Constitution,  American  history, or both.  Thus,  ambiguous  statutes  will  be  read
so  as  not to  preempt  state  law,  or favorably  to  Native  Americans,  or so as  not
to apply  extraterritorially,  or favorably  to  criminal  defendants,  or  so  as  not  to
intrude  on  the  traditional  authority  of the  President.'

We  can  agree  that  the  statutory  text  deserves  priority  over  legislative
history and that  courts  should  ordinarily  rely  on  a  reasonable  understanding  of
the  text  at  the  time  of  enactment.  But  Justice  Scalia  provides  no  convincing
argument  against  principles  (1),  (2),  or (3).  A  general  conclusion  follows.  Any
approach  to  statutory  interpretation  depends  on  judgments,  partly  pragmatic
and  empirical  in  nature,  about  the  capacities  of  both  courts  and  legislatures,
and  about  the  likely  effects  on  both  institutions  of  different  interpretive
approaches.' 
Those  who  endorse  principles  (1),  (2),  and  (3),  or  imaginable
cousins  and  variations,  have  to  defend  those  principles  against  the  objection
that  they  increase  uncertainty  (thus  jeopardizing  rule  of law  values)  and  also
the  number  and  magnitude  of  mistakes.  Justice  Scalia's  approach  must  be
defended  not  only  on  the  ground  that  it  increases  certainty  (a  reasonable
proposition,  though  a  questionable  one  if textual  ambiguity  is pervasive)  but
also  on  the ground  that  it  will  not  lead  to  errors  that  are  large  in  number and

105.  Justice  Scalia, it  will  be recalled,  see  3upra text accompan.  ing  notes  30.31.  is  not  L.Oncerned  v tth
subjective  intentions,  and  for  legitimate  reasons  I  make  this  point  here  not  to  support  psychological
investigation  but  to  say  that  the  generality  of  the  statute  should  not  be  taken  to  suggest  that  the  relevant
words,  understood  tn  accordance  wtth  "objectified  intent."  would  have been  understood  to apply  to  churches
within  the  relevant  community--that  ts,  the  ordinary  audience  ol  the  statute

106.  See  Mistretta  v.  United  States.  488  U  S  361.  415  (1989)  (Scalia.  J.  dissenting)
107.  See  the extensive  catalogue  of background  norms and  princtples in EsKRtIGE.  supra note 4.  app

3,  at  323-28.

108.  This  is  true  for  "dynamic  interpretation"  Should  statutory  meaning  change  o%er  time'  Some
statutory  terms  seem  to  invite  changes  of  a  sort,  and  thus  Congress  sometimes  seems  to  ,.ontemplate
changed  readings.  Dynamic  interpretation,  undertaken  with  regard  to statutory  purposes,  might  be  justified
as  part  of  the  interpretive  project,  on  roughly  the  same  ground  as  Riggs 
t  Paulier. 22  N  E  188  (N  Y
1889).  See supra text  accompanying  notes  80-81,  95-101  O1  course  a  great deal  tums  on  w.hat  the  statute
actually  says.  Some  statutes,  understood  in  accordance  with  their  original  meaning. 
.,all  for  dynamic
interpretation;  some  do  not;  and  sometimes  there  is  no  clear  understanding  one  way  or  the  other  For
discussions  of  this,  see  ESKRIDGE,  %upra note  4,  at  9-105.  and  CASS  R  SUNsTI-LN.  AM-'R  T'.  RIGHTS
REVOLUTION  174-78  (1990).

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

serious  in  magnitude.  A  good  deal  turns  on  the  likely  performance  of courts
and  legislatures  and  on  legislators'  responsiveness  to judicial  interpretation.

Justice Scalia has  offered  only  the beginning of a defense  in  the  necessary
terms.  He  does  not  show  that  the  actual  practices  of American  courts  reveal
systematic  abuses  of principles  (1),  (2),  and  (3).  Certainly  a  more  extended
empirical  study  would  be  helpful  here.

C.  A  Dog That  Did Not  Bark: Have  Administrative Agencies Become  Our

Common Law  Courts?

transformed 

in  practice,  greatly 

There  is  a  notable  and  surprising  gap  in  Justice  Scalia's  argument:  the
administrative  state. Justice  Scalia is,  of course,  a  specialist  on  administrative
law,  whose  rise  has, 
the  practice  of
interpretation  in  public  law.  Most  of the  key  work  of statutory  interpretation
is  done  not  by  courts  at  all,  but  by  federal  agencies.  Justice  Scalia  has  also
written  an  important  and  illuminating  essay 1° 9  on  Chevron  U.S.A.,  Inc.  v.
Natural Resources  Defense  Council,"'  which  is  unquestionably  the  most
important  case  about  legal  interpretation  in  the  last  thirty  years.  Note  in  this
regard  that  in  its  relatively  short  period  on  the  scene,  Chevron,  a  kind  of
counter-Marbury"ll  for 
the  administrative  state,  has  been  cited  more
frequently  (3977  times)"l2  than  Marbury v. Madison (948  times),  Brown  v.
Board of  Education"13  (1520  times),  or  Roe  v.  Wade 14  (1556  times),  and
if present  trends  continue  it will  soon  have been  cited  more  frequently  than  all
those  cases  put  together.  Indeed,  Chevron may qualify  as  the most  cited  case
in  federal  courts.

Chevron holds  that where statutes  are ambiguous,  courts should accept  any
reasonable  interpretation  by  the  agency  charged  with  their  implementation." 5
Chevron also  appears  to  accept  the  legal  realist  suggestion,  central  to Justice
Scalia's  essay  here,  that  the  decision  of  how  to  read  ambiguities  in  law
in  the  sky""' 6  but  an  emphatically
involves  no  "brooding  omnipresence 
human judgment  about  policy  or principle.  And  Chevron concludes,  in  a  way

109.  Antonin  Scalia, Judicial Deference to Agency  Interpretations of Law,  1989  DUKE  L.J, 51 I.
110.  467  U.S.  837  (1984).
111.  Marbury  v.  Madison,  5  U.S.  (I  Cranch)  137  (1803).
112.  Quick  Cite search  of WESTLAW,  Allfeds  Database  (Oct.  I,  1997).
113.  347  U.S.  483  (1954).
114.  410  U.S.  113  (1973).
115.  See  Chevron,  467  U.S.  at  842-45.  This  simplifies  some  complex  issues.  For  discussion,  see I
RICHARD  J. PIERCE,  JR.  &  KENNETH  CULP  DAVIs,  ADMINISTRATivE  LAWV TREATISE  109-31  (3d ed. 1994);
id. at  147-51,  258-59  (3d  ed. Supp.  1996);  and  Sunstein,  Supra note  104.
116.  Southern  Pac. Co.  v. Jensen.  244  U.S.  205.  222  (1917)  (Holmes, 

., dissenting).  Hence,  Chevron
has  much  in  common  with  Erie Railroad Co  v.  Tompkins,  304  U.S.  64  (1938).  Both  cases  involve  a
rejection  of the view  that  federal  courts  could  neutrally  declare  "the  law,"  and  both  cases,  following  that
rejection,  reallocate  legal  authority  from  federal  courts  to  other institutions.  For a  provocative  discussion
of the "Erie  effect,"  see Lawrence  Lessig, Erie  Effects  of Volume  110: An  Essay on Context in Interpretive
Theory,  110  HARV.  L.  REV.  1785,  1797-800  (1997).

19971

Democratic  Formalism

in 

endorsed  by  Justice  Scalia  and  very  much  bearing  on  the  democracy  prong  of
his  argument,  that  where  underlying  statutes  are  ambiguous,  Congress  should
be  taken  to  have  decided  that  agencies  are  in  a  better  position  to  make  that
than  courts." 7  Agencies  are 
judgment 
that  better  position  because,
Chevron  emphasizes,  the  President  is  generally 
in  charge  of  their  policy
judgments,  and  hence  agencies  have  a  kind  of democratic  pedigree,  certainly
a  better  one  than  the  courts."'S  Administrative  agencies  are,  of  course,
influenced  by  shifting  political  judgments,  and  their  approaches  are  likely  to
reflect  the  President's  basic  commitments."'9  I  am  speaking  here  of  the
comparative  advantages  of  agencies  over  courts 
in  the  interpretation  of
ambiguous  statutes  because  of the  agencies'  greater  accountability  and  their
greater  technical  specialization.  For this  reason,  agencies  are  better  equipped
to  decide on  the appropriate  definition  of vague  or  ambiguous  statutory  terms.
An  emphasis  on  these  points  does  not  embrace  simple  majoritarianism,  nor
does  it  neglect  the  internal  morality  of democracy,  which  authorizes  courts  to
constrain  agencies  both  through  clear  statement  principles' :'  and  through
constitutional  law.' 2 '  To  say  that  agencies  have  comparative  advantages  in
the  interpretation  of  statutes 
little  about  constitutional
interpretation.  The  special  case  for  deference  to  agency  interpretations  has  a
great  deal  to  do  with  the agency's  immersion  in  technically  complex  issues,  a
consideration  that  has  far  less  importance  in  the  context  of  constitutional
law.

to  say  very 

is 

122

If  this  is  so,  debates  over  statutory  interpretation  must  include  not  only
Congress  and  courts  but  also  administrative  agencies,  which  may  be  in  an
especially  good  position  to  carry out  the  updating  and  particularizing  functions
of common  law  judges.  This  is  a  point  missed  both  by  Justice  Scalia  and  by
Judge  Calabresi  in  his  vigorous  argument  for  more  federal  common  law.'

117.  Technically  speaking,  Justice  Scalia  argues-in  m) 

is  best
taken  to  hold  that  the  question  of  delerence  will  he  resolved  bN reference  to  Congrcs's  instruttions.  that
Congress  has  not  spoken  clearly  on  that  subject.  and  that  in  light  of  the  *alue  ol  prosiding  a  Leiar
background  rule,  and a reasonable  understanding  of  Congiess's  sie\%s  about  reilevint  institutional  .paities,
statutes  will  generally  be  read  to  require  courts  to  defer  to  reasonable  agent)  interpretations  ot  la,  See
Scalia, supra  note  109,  at  516

conintingl)-hat  (heisron 

ie 

118.  The  Chevron  Court  noted  that

While  agencies  are  not  directly  accountable  to  the  people.  the  Chief  Exe.utise  i,  and  it  is
entirely  appropnate 
the  Go\emient  to  make  su.h  polKtt,
choices-resolving 
itsdlt  did  not  rIsolsc,  or
intentionally  left  to be  resolved  by  the  agency  charged  with  the  administration  ol  the  statute in
light of everyday  realities.

for  this  political  branch  of 

interests  %%hich  Congre.ss 

the  competing 

Chevron,  467  U.S.  at  865.  In  some  ways.  perhaps.  agencies  hase  a  stronger  demot.rati  ,  pedigree  thin
Congress  itself, though  the  Chevron  Court  did  not  so  argue  For  an  argument  to  this  effe.t,  see  JERRY
MASHAW,  GREED,  CHAOS.  AND  GOVERNANCE  131-57  (1997)
119.  See  generally  MASHAW,  3upra note  118.  at  106-30
120.  See  supra text  accompanying  note  107
121  See infra note  125
122.  See  infra text  accompanying  notes  130-144
123.  See CALABRESI,  supra note  I

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

Justice  Scalia  has  argued  elsewhere  that  plain  text  always  counts  against  an
agency  interpretation; 24  in  his  view-consistent  with  his  argument  in  this
book-Chevron  deference  is  never  due  to  an  agency  that  counteracts  text
(defined  by  reference  to  ordinary  understandings).  But  perhaps  this  view  is
itself anachronistic.  Indeed,  we  ultimately  might  conclude  that  we  can  obtain
the  right mix  of democratic  and  common law  virtues  if and  only  if we  decide
that  the  adaptation  of statutory  text  to  particular  applications  (including  the
exemption  of  absurd  outcomes),  and 
the  use  of  applicable  canons  of
construction,  is  an  entirely  appropriate  administrative task.'15

On  this  view, Holy  Trinity might  be  seen  very  differently  in  the  context
of the twenty-first century, whose  public  law would pose  as  a central  question:
What  are  the  views  of  any  agency  charged  with  implementation  of  this
law?"2  To  the  suggestion  that  this  position  means  that  some  statutes  (more
accurately  their terms  in  some  applications)  might  be  lost  or misdirected  as  a
result of new  agency  rulings, a response might  be given  in Justice Scalia's  own
words:  "[L]ots  of once-heralded  programs  ought  to get lost  or misdirected,  in
vast  hallways  or  elsewhere.  Yesterday's  herald  is  today's  bore-although  we
judges,  in  the  seclusion  of our  chambers,  may  not  be  at  courant enough  to
realize  it.' ' 27

As  against  Judge  Calabresi's  plea  for  judicial  updating,  we  might  claim
that  the  argument  itself needs  to  be  updated:  For  the  most  part,  appropriate
to  the  problem  of  statutory  obsolescence  should  come  from
solutions 
administrative  agencies,  immersed  in  the  problems  at  hand  and  having  both
technocratic  and  democratic  virtues  as  compared  to  courts.  And  as  against
Justice Scalia,  we might urge  that administrative  agencies should be  authorized
to  reject  the  "text"  in a way  that would  go  well  beyond  the  common  law  role
envisaged  by  Holy Trinity, at  least  when  there  is  no  evidence  of a  considered

124.  See  Scalia,  supra note  109,  at 520.
125.  Of course, administrative judgments may  be inconsistent  with  the internal  morality  of democracy.
If this  is  so, those  judgments  may  be  unconstitutional  or interpreted  as exceeding  statutory  authority. See,
e.g.,  Kent  v.  Dulles,  357  U.S.  116  (1958)  (interpreting  a  statute  narrowly  so  as  to allow  a  communist  to
travel  abroad).  My  point  here  is  that  whatever  one's  account  of  democracy,  agency  adaptation  ol  text  to
circumstance  is generally  legitimate, at  least where  there  is no clear congressional  instruction  the other way.
The  dictionary  definition  of  the  term  ought not  to  be  taken  to be  decisive.

126.  Holy  Trinity involved  the  government  as  prosecutor,  see Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity  v.  United
States,  143  U.S.  457,  457-58  (1892);  hence there  would  be  no  deference  under ordinary  understandings  of
the reach  of Chevron. But see Dan  M.  Kahan,  Is Chevron  Relevant to Federal Criminal Law?,  110  HARV.
L.  REv.  469, 493-506  (1996)  (arguing  for Chevron deference  to  the  Department  of Justice).  Even  if  Holy
Trinity is not itself a case  for  Chevron deference,  other cases involving  the  molding of text  to  unanticipated
applications  might  well  be  such  cases.  See,  e.g.,  Babbit  v, Sweet  Home  Chapter  of  Communities  for  a
Greater  Or.,  115  S. Ct.  2407,  2410  (1995)  (deferring  to agency  interpretation  of the  Endangered  Species
Act);  Les v.  Reilly, 968  F.2d  985,  987,  989 (9th  Cir.  1992)  (literally  interpreting  the Delaney  Clause,  which
banned  carcinogens  in  food  additives);  Public  Citizen  v.  Young,  831  F.2d  1108,  1113  (D.C.  Cir.  1987)
(same).

127.  Antonin  Scalia,  The  Doctrine of Standing as an E&sential Element of the Separation of Powers,

17  SUFFOLK  U.  L.  REv.  881,  897  (1983).

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

legislative  judgment  against  the  agency's  interpretation.'2 '  In  modern  Holy
Trinity  cases,  courts  would  not  do  the  work  on  their  own,  but  would  permit
agencies  to engage  in  a degree  of statutory  adaptation,  not  at all  on  the  theory
that  agencies  can  violate  the  text,  but  on  a  finding  that  agencies  reasonably
concluded  that  despite  the  generality  of  the  text,  there  was  no  considered
legislative  judgment  that  the  text  should  be  applied  in  a  way  contrary  to  the
agency's  view.

29

Consider,  for  example,  a  fairly  conventional  case,  American  Mining
Congress  v. EPA. 3'  Congress  had  not  clearly  dealt  with  the  problem  of  how
to handle  materials  held  for recycling,  and  the  relevant  EPA  regulation  defined
certain  materials  involved  in  recycling  as  "solid  waste."  In  particular,  the
regulation  said  that  spent  materials,  sludges,  scrap  metal,  and  the  like  would
be treated  as solid  waste  if they  were not  directly  reused  but  were  instead  held
as  part  of  an  industry's  ongoing  production  process."'  The  EPA  reasoned
that  materials  that  were  stored,  transported,  and  held  for  recycling  were
associated  with  the same  kinds  of environmental  harms  as  materials  that  were
abandoned  or  disposed  of  in  some  final  way. "2  The  court  of  appeals  struck
down the EPA regulation on the  ground  that the governing  statute  defined solid
and  other  discarded  material"';'" for
waste  as  "'garbage,  refuse,  sludge  .
the  court,  material  held  for  recycling  was  not 
'discarded.""  Citing  the
dictionary,  the  court  thought  that  the  "'ordinary plain-English  meaning"  was
decisive.1 35  If the question  was  an  internal  dispute  in  a  court  of appeals  about
the best interpretation  of a  statutory  term,  perhaps the  majority  would  be  right.
But  the  question  involved  the  validity  of an  EPA  regulation,  produced  after  a
complex process  involving a  number of political  interests, an  extended  process
of intergovernmental  deliberation,  and  an  elaborate  inquiry  into  the  underlying
issues  of substancc.  Even  if a  court  would  be  reluctant  to  adapt  the  meaning
of a  term  like  "discarded"  to  fit  with  context-even  if  this  is a  weaker  case
than  Holy  Trinity  for  contextual  adaptation-is  it  not  hubristic  for  judges,
unelected  and  relatively  unknowledgeable  about  the  enormously  complex
subject at hand,  to invoke  dictionaries  (compiled  after  all  by human  beings)  to
invalidate  executive  branch  decisions  that  cannot  reasonably  be  said  to  run

128.  Thus,  Sweet Home  Chapter  can  be  seen  as  a  case  in  which  an  agen',.  airmed 

ith  a  particular
understanding  of the  problem  at  hand  and  subject  to  democratic  controls,  is  pemitted  to adapt  a statutory
term  as  it  sees  fit,  regardless  of  what  dictionanes  say  See  Sit ert Home  Chapter.  115  S  Ct  at  24 1 N
(referring to agency  competence).  This is only  a possible  example because  the statutor)  term.  "ham."  might
well  be  taken  as  ambiguous.  See  id. at  2411-18

129.  On  this  view, the cases  interpreting  the  Delaney  Clause  literally  %rec wrongly  decided  See Le,

968  F.2d  at  990;  Public Citizen, 831  F.2d  at  1123

130.  824  F.2d  1177  (D.C.  Cir.  1987)
131.  See  id.  at  1179.
132.  See  id.
133.  Id. (quoting  42  U.S.C.  § 6903(27)  (1986))
134.  Id.  at  1185-86
135.  Id. at  1184  n.7.

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

afoul  of  any  judgment  from  Congress?  The  EPA's  decision  followed  a
sustained  period  of public  comment,  and  undoubtedly  the  government  would
be  held  accountable  for  any  decision  about  the  reach  of  the  Resource
Conservation  and  Recovery  Act  of  1976.136  If the  EPA's  decision  runs  afoul
of dictionary  decisions  but  of no  actual  decision by  Congress,  should  it  really
be  struck  down?

Or  consider  an  especially  important  recent  case,  upholding  the  power  of
the  FDA  to  regulate  tobacco  products  as  "drugs"  or  "devices. ' 37  The  FDA
contended  that the  current  meaning  of the Federal  Food,  Drug,  and  Cosmetic
Act, 3 "  as  enacted  in  1938,  allows  it  to  regulate  tobacco  products.' 
At
first  glance,  it  seems  clear  that  in  1938,  the  terms  "drug"  and  "device"  were
not  understood  to  include  tobacco  products. 4  But  might  not  an  executive
agency,  subject  as  it  is  to  political  checks  and  immersed  as  it  is  in  the
technical  details,  be  entitled  to  interpret  those  terms  to  include  tobacco
products  in  1997?  The  statute  defines  "drug"  to  include  articles  "intended  to
affect  the  structure  or  any  function  of the  body  of man  or  other  animals,"''
and  it  defines  "device"  to  include  any  "article"  that  is  similarly  intended  and
that "does  not achieve  its  primary  intended  purposes"  through  chemical  action
or  through  being  metabolized.' 42  The  court  held  that  the  FDA  could  rely  on
foreseeability,  consumer use, and internal  manufacturer memoranda to establish
intended  use  "to  affect  the  structure  or  any function  of the  body.' 1 3 And  the
court added that the FDA could  conclude that tobacco products  contain  "device
components"  designed to ensure an  (admittedly  indirect)  effect on the  structure
or  function  of the  body.'"  What  is  striking  about  the  court's  conclusions  is
that  they  were  based  not  on the  ordinary  understanding  of  the  statutory  terms
at  the time  of enactment,  but  on the agency's  authority  to interpret  those  terms
in  a  way  consistent  with  (what  accountable  and  informed  officials  could
conclude  is)  their  current  meaning.

Without  attempting  to  resolve  the  underlying  issues  here,  I think  that  the
court's  decision  is  reasonable  and  probably  correct.  To  be  sure,  the  original
meaning  of "drug"  and  "device"  may  not,  to  the  relevant  community,  have

136.  42  U.S.C.  §§  6901-6992k  (1994).
137.  See  Coyne  Beahm,  Inc.  v.  FDA,  966  F.  Supp.  1374  (M.D.N.C.  1997).
138.  21  U.S.C.  §§  301-395  (1994).
139.  See  Coyne  Bealun,  966  F. Supp.  at  1379  (citing 21  U.S.C.  § 321(g)-(h)).
140.  The qualification  "at  first glance"  is necessary  because  it  is unclear whether the community  would
take  Congress  to  have referred  to  existing  understandings  of  what count  as  drugs  and  devices  or to  have
set out a general concept whose particular content would or should vary over time, with new  understandings
of fact  and  value.  If the  second  view  is  correct,  then  Coyne Beahmn  is rightly  decided  even  under Justice
Scalia's  view of interpretation.  What  I am suggesting  here  is that  the case  is  probably  right even  if the  first
view  is  correct.  In  reality  it  is  unlikely  that  there  was  a  general  understanding  one  way  or  the  other.

141.  21  U.S.C.  § 321(g)(l)(c).
142.  21  U.S.C.  § 321(h)(3).
143.  Coyne  Bealun,  966  F.  Supp.  at  1389-91.
144.  Id. at  1394.

19971

Democratic  Formalism

included  tobacco  products.4 5  But  Congress  enacted  general  terms,  not  its
particular  understandings  of  what  those  terms  meant.  And  in  view  of  new
judgments  about  relevant  facts  and  belief-influenced  changes  in  values,  it
seems  appropriate  to  allow  a  specialized  agency,  accountable  as  it  is  to
political  forces,  to  interpret  these  (general  and  ambiguous)  terms  as  it  did  in
1997.  There  can be  little doubt  that  the  FDA's  decision  was  a  product  of a  set
of legitimate  political  influences  and  that  it emerged  after  a  sustained  period
of highly  visible deliberation  on  the  issues  at hand,  with  involvement  from  the
President  himself.  And,  of course,  Congress  can  override  the  interpretation  if
it chooses.

A broader  conclusion  follows.  It is  one  thing  to  say  that  courts  should  be
permitted  to  reject  original  meaning  in  favor  of  current  meaning'  it  is quite
another thing  to  say  that  agencies,  with  their  comparative  advantages,  should
be permitted  to do  precisely  that.  These  are separate  debates,  and  it  is  possible
to  resolve the first question  against  the  courts  while  at  the same  time  resolving
the  second  question  in  favor of the  agencies."'  What  is  disappointing  is  that
Justice Scalia  does  not discuss  these  issues,  which  link  his  interests  in statutory
interpretation  and  administrative  law,  and  which  cast  a  new  light  on the  court-
legislature  interactions  that  concern  him  here.

D.  An  Analogy

Allowing  appropriate  adjustments  for  administrative  law,  we  can  better
understand  statutory  interpretation  if we  borrow  from  the  law  of contract.  It is
largely  of  default  rules,
now  familiar  to  see  contract 

law  as  consisting 

specifying  how  to  understand  gaps  or  silences  from  the  parties  and  also  how
that  seem  vague  or  ambiguous. '   The  law  of
to  understand  provisions 
contract  contains  three  kinds  of  default  rules.  First,  some  default  rules  are
designed  to  find  out  the  instructions  of  the  parties.  What  would  they  have
done,  if they  had  made  provision  on  the  point?  Such  default  rules  are  market-
mimicking."4 8  Second,  some  default  rules  are  designed  not  to  implement  the
parties'  will,  but  to  impose  on  the  party  who  can  do  so  most  cheaply  the
incentive  to  make  a  clear  provision  on  the  point.'  Default  rules  of  this  kind

145.  An  underlying  issue  is  that  sometimes  Congress  enacts  a  geneial tcm.  ha'.inC  a  paxii.ular
understanding  of the term's  meaning,  but with  a complementary  understanding that  the meaning  ,l the term
may  and should  shift over  time;  consider the  terms  "public  polic%"  "reasonable.'  and  * p,.Lhopatht.  " See
ESKRIDGE,  supra note  4,  at  61-64;  SUNSTEIN,  3upra note  i0s, at  174.7h

146.  It  follows that  the  enterprise  of translation  might  %ell be  permissible  lot  agenties  shether  or  not
insiati0 Of LUitsttutinal

it  is  permissible  for the courts.  See generally  Lessig. 3upra note  53  targuing  101 
meaning).

147.  See Ian  Ayres  &  Robert  Gertner,  Filling Gaps  in  Incomplete Contrat t3 An  Et ononut  Thr ot  of

Default Rules,  99  YALE  L.J 87  (1989)

148.  See  id. at  97-100.
149.  See  id.;  see  also U.C.C  §  2-201  (1989)  (setting  iorh the  statute  of  Iraudsi,  Jesien  % Ashland.

281  N.W.2d  210  (Neb.  1979)  (applying  the  statute  oi  Irauds)

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

are information-eliciting,  intended not to  mimic the parties'  wishes  but to make
sure  that those  wishes  are  made  clear  by  the  parties  themselves.  It also seems
clear  how  to  choose  between  market-mimicking  and  information-eliciting
default  rules.  If the  court  is  clear  on  what  the  market-mimicking  rule  is,  it
should  choose  that  rule.  But  if the  court  is  unsure  on  that  question-if  the
costs  of decision and  costs  of error for the judge  seeking to discern  the  market
mimicking  rule  are  very  high-the  court  might  do  better  to  impose  an
information-eliciting  default,  designed to penalize  the party  in the  best position
to  make  explicit  provision  for  the  matter  at  hand.

Courts  also  have  a  third  kind  of default  rule.  Some  such  rules  are  based
on  considerations  of  public  policy  that  have  little  or  nothing  to  do  with
implementing  or  eliciting  the  parties' 
Such  considerations
might  involve,  for  example,  the protection  of third  parties,  or they  might  be
intended  to  shift  the  parties'  preferences  and  values  in  a  certain  direction.

instructions.' 

Much  of legal  interpretation  is,  or  is  about,  default  rules.'5  Now,  it  may
be  tempting  to  suppose  that  federal  courts,  lacking  common  law  authority,
ought  not  to  use  such  rules,  and  that  statutory  construction  should  proceed
without  them.  But  a  moment's  reflection  should  show  that  statutory  default
rules,  in  some  form,  are  not  so  much  desirable  as  inevitable.  As  the  law  of
contract  helps  reveal,  words  cannot  have  meaning  without  background
understandings  of various  sorts.  Usually  those  understandings  are so  taken  for
granted,  so  highly  internalized,  that  they  seem  invisible,  and  part  of  the
necessary  meaning  of  words.  But  they  are  nonetheless  in  place;  they  make
communication possible. And often legal interpretation  is possible only because
of background  principles  or rules,  some of them so  taken  for granted  that  they
are  invisible,  some  of  them  contested  enough  to  be  visible  but  not  highly
controversial,  some  of them  at  the heart  of spirited  debates  in  public  law.  If,
for  example,  a  federal  statute  does  not  say  whether  state  law  is  preempted,
what  happens?  If a  statute  is  silent  on the existence  of private  rights  of action,
do such  rights exist?  A default  rule,  principle, or presumption  is  necessary  one
way or the other. The  legal system  cannot proceed  without them.  The  question
is  not whether to  have statutory  default  rules but  which  statutory  default  rules
to  have.

Some  default  rules152  may  be  designed  to  find  out  the  legislature's  actual

150.  See, e.g.,  Petermann  v.  Teamsters,  344  P.2d  25,  27  (Cal.  Ct.  App.  1959)  (holding  that  "in  order
to  more  fully  effectuate  the  state's  declared  policy  against  perjury,  the  civil  law,  too,  must  deny  the
employer  his  generally  unlimited  right to  discharge  an employee  whose employment  is  for  a unspecilied
duration,  when the  reason  for the  dismissal  is  the employee's  refusal  to  commit perjury").

151.  See generally  Cass  R. Sunstein, Interpreting Statutes in the  Regulatory State,  103 HARV.  L. R V.

405,  453-54  (1989).

152.  As  the  previous  paragraph  suggests,  the  term  "rules" 

is  not  entirely  accurate.  Sometimes  the
background  understandings  operate  as  presumptions  or  principles, not  as  rules.  I use  the  term  "rules"  as
a placeholder for a wide range  of background understandings, many of them, technically speaking,  not  rules
at all.

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

instructions.  Such  rules  are  the analogue,  in  statutory  interpretation,  of market-
mimicking  default rules.  But  statutory  default  rules  might  also  operate  to  elicit
information,  with  the purpose  of encouraging  Congress  to  act  in  a  certain  way,
by creating  appropriate  incentives.  Courts  might,  for example,  ask  which  party
is  in the  best  position  to  correct  any  errors  in  Congress  or  ask  which  approach
is  likely  to  ensure  that  Congress  will  legislate  clearly.  Some of Justice  Scalia's
jurisprudence  is  best  understood  as  a  series  of  information-eliciting  default
rules.  Textualism  itself  has,  as  part  of  its  defense,  the  idea  that  it  will
encourage  Congress  to  state  its  will  clearly.  Similarly,  the  ban  on  use  of
legislative  history  imposes  on  Congress  an  incentive  to  say  what  it  means  in
the  constitutionally  favored  form.  We  can  also  understand  some  statutory
default rules  as  having purposes  not  involving  congressional  instructions;  these
are  the  analogue  to  "public  policy"  defaults  in  the  law  of contract.  Consider
the  ideas  that  statutes  will  be  construed  favorably  to  Native  Americans, t '
that  statutes  will  be  construed  so  as  not  to  raise  constitutional  doubts,"'  and
that  statutes  will  be  construed  so  as  not  to  preempt  state  law.'"

Justice  Scalia 

is,  as  noted,  skeptical  of  these  kinds  of  interpretive
principles,  on the ground that  they  have unclear  foundations  in sources external
t
to judicial  will  and  are  too  likely  to  represent  some  judicial  "power-grab."  "
But  some  such  principles  are  inevitable,  and  in  any  case  Justice  Scalia  is  not
at  all  skeptical  of  the  crucially  important  idea  that  statutory  ambiguities  will
be  resolved  by  the  agency  charged  with  implementing  the  relevant  statute,"'
nor  is  he  unwilling  to  qualify  that  very  principle  by  reference  to  some  clear
statement  principles  that  operate  as  information-eliciting  defaults.'5  The
contract  law  analogy  shows  that  terms  have  no  meaning  without  default  rules
and  that  there  is  a  place  for  default  rules  that  serve  purposes  external  to  the
will  of  the  parties;  it  also  helps  us  disentangle  the  diverse  functions  of  the
interpretive  principles  favored  or,  for that  matter, disfavored  by Justice  Scalia.
In any case  much work  remains  to  be  done  on the  relationship  between  default
'
rules  in contract  law  and  default  rules  in  the  law  of statutory  interpretation.

153.  See,  e.g.,  Montana  v.  Blackfeet  Tribe  of  Indians,  471  U  S  759.  766  (1985)
154.  See,  e.g.,  Edward  J.  DeBartolo  Corp.  v. Flonda  Gulf Coast  Bldg  & Consir  Tra des Council.  485

155.  See,  e.g.,  Puerto  Rico  Dep't  of  Consumer  Affairs  v  Isla  Petroleum  Corp.  485  U S  495.  503

U.S.  568,  574  (1988).

(1988).

156.  See supra text  accompanying  notes  40-41.
157.  See, e.g.,  INS  v.  Cardoza-Fonseca,  480  U.S  421.  453-55  (1987)  (Scalia.  J  . concumng)
158.  See  EEOC  v.  Arabian  Am.  Oil  Co.,  499  US.  244.  259-60  (1991) 

(Sc -ia, 

the  extratemtonal  application  of  American 

J.  concurring)
law.

(invoking  a  clear  statement  pnnciple  against 
notwithstanding  the  view  of the  relevant  agency),

159.  I  am  grateful  to  Richard  Craswell  and  Einer  Elhague  for  valuable  discussion  of  the  analogy

between  contractual  and  statutory  default  rules

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

III.  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  THE  COMMON  LAW

Justice  Scalia's  attack  on  a  version  of common  law  constitutionalism,  in
favor  of  a  species  of  originalism,  raises  a  number  of questions,  and  I will
attend  to  only  a  few  of them  here. 6

A.  Originalisms

Are  we  all  originalists  now?  In  the  commentaries  in  this  book,  Ronald
Dworkin 6'  and  Laurence  Tribe 62  write  as  originalists,  and  with  suitable
qualifications,  most  of their  work  can  fly  comfortably  under  the  originalist
banner.  For  most  participants  in  the  continuing  debates,  the  question  is
emphatically  not  whether  the  original  understanding  is  controlling;  it  is  how
the  original  understanding  is  best  understood.  Some  people  think  that  the
original  understanding  is  best taken  as  setting out  abstract  moral  principles.'6 3
Others 
abstract
principles' 6  -in  the context  of the ban  on  cruel  and  unusual  punishment,  for
example, 
fact  cruel  and
unusual."" 65  Still  others  think  that  however  the  original  understanding  is
described,  its  provisions  must  be  "translated"  in  order  to  be  applied  to  new
problems.  66

it  "'forbid[s]  whatever  punishments  are 

understanding 

the  original 

points 

think 

that 

in 

to 

Justice  Scalia  claims  that  he  does  take  the  Constitution  to  embody
"abstract  principles."  What  it  sets  forth  "is  not  a  moral  principle  of  'cruelty'
that  philosophers  can  play  with  in  the future,  but  rather the  existing  society's
assessment  of  what  is  cruel."'' 67  Thus,  the  Eighth  Amendment  is  to  be
understood  not  by  "'what  we consider  cruel  today"'  but  instead  by  "the  moral
perceptions  of  the 
this  formulation  raises  many

8  Of  course, 

time." '

160.  Thus  I do  not  discuss,  except  in  passing,  the  following  questions:  (1) Is  Justice  Scalia  a  good
originalist?  (2)  Did  the Framers  understand  constitutional  interpretation  in  originalist  terms,  or did  they
favor  some other  method?  (3) Is  it  appropriate  for an  originalist  to focus  on  the  particular expectations  the
original  community  had  of a  provision's  reach,  or should  originalists  look  elsewhere?

161.  See  Ronald  Dworkin,  Cormnent, in  A  MATrER  OF  INTERPRETATION,  supra note  6, at  115.
162.  See Tribe,  supra note  37.
163.  See,  e.g.,  Dworkin,  supra note  161,  at  115,  126.
164.  Dworkin,  who  says  that  he  is  a  "semantic  originalist,"  is  interested  in  what  the  Constitution
"says,"  and  claims  that what  it "says"  is  a matter  of abstract principles.  See  id. at  119,  122,  126.  But what
it  "says"  is a  function of our account  of interpretation,  and it  does not contain abstract  principles  unless  we
have  decided,  according  to  our  (pre-  or  extra-semantic)  account,  that  it  should  do  so.  Thus,  Dworkin's
approach,  insofar  as  it  is about judicial  review,  must  be rooted  in  arguments  about  institutional  capacities.
Dworkin  expressly  recognizes  this  point and  makes  some  such  arguments.  See DwORKIN,  supra note  57,
at  373-79.

165.  Scalia,  supra note  37,  at  145  (discussing  Dworkin's  method  of analysis  and  quoting  Dworkin,

166.  See, e.g., Lawrence  Lessig,  Translating Federalism: United  States v.  Lopez,  1995  SUP.  CT. REV.

supra note  161,  at  115,  120).

125,  131-35.

167.  Scalia, supra note  37, at  145.
168.  Id.

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

questions.  How  do  we  characterize  the  moral  perception  of the  time9  At  what
level  of  abstraction?  Apparently  Justice  Scalia  believes  that  it  must  be
characterized  at  a  relatively  low  level  of abstraction;  his  claim  that  the  death
penalty  cannot  possibly  violate  the  Eighth  Amendment's  *'abstract  moral
principle"' 69  appears  to  be  rooted  in  the  fact  that  the  moral  prnciple  held  by
the  founding  generation  did  not  appear,  to  the  Founding  generation,  to  forbid
the  death  penalty.  But  this  raises  many  further  questions.  Does  it follow  that
the  Equal  Protection  Clause  permits  school  segregation*?  That  the  national
government,  not  bound  by  the  Equal  Protection  Clause,  can  discriminate
however  it  wishes?  That  the  First  Amendment  does  not  disturb  the  common
law  of libel?

Justice  Scalia  does  not answer  these  questions.  I emphasize  this  point  not
to  say  that  the  originalist  will  necessarily  arrive  at  unacceptable  results," '  but
to  suggest  that  there  is  not  one  kind  of  (canonical)  originalism  but  a  wide
range  of (plausible)  originalisms.  Justice  Scalia  has  not  adequately  defended
the  particular  kind  that  he  favors.

B.  Originalism and Stare Decisis

There  is  a  pervasive  problem  for  originalists:  how  to  handle  precedents
that  depart  from  originalism.  In  many  areas  of constitutional  law,  onginalism
as Justice  Scalia  understands  it has  been  repudiated  for a  fairly  long  time,  and
key  provisions  now  mean  something  other  than  what,  on  Justice  Scalia's
version  of originalism,  they  were  originally  understood  to  mean.  The question
goes  to the  heart  of the  relationship  between  the  Constitution  and  the  common
law  method.  Common  law  lawyers rely  heavily  on the doctrine  of stare  decisis;
it  is  a foundation  of their  method.  How  should  those  skeptical  of common  law
constitutionalism  deal  with  the  resulting  doctnne?

flag 

burning. 

(involving 

Commenting  in  this  volume,  Professor  Tribe  argues  that  Justice  Scalia  is
not  really  an  originalist  at  all.  Tribe  objects  that  in  several  First  Amendment
animal
cases 
sacrifice173 ),  Justice  Scalia  has  voted  to  strike  down  statutes  not  inconsistent
with  the  original  understanding,  narrowly  understood.'"  But  Justice  Scalia
acknowledges  the  problem.  He  answers  that  his  votes  are  attributable  not  to  a
belief that  the  First  Amendment  sets  out  aspirations  whose  content  changes
over time, but  to the  unblinkable  fact  that  for the  First Amendment  "the  Court
has  developed  long-standing  and  well-accepted  principles  (not  out  of  accord

burning,": 

cross 

and 

169.  Id.
170.  See infra notes  194-196  and accompanying  text
171.  See Texas  v  Johnson.  491  U S  397  (1989)
172.  See R.A.V  v. Cin  of St  Paul.  505 U S 377  (19921
173.  See  Church  of the  Lukumi  Babalu  Ave.  Inc  v  City  ol  Hialeah.  508  .S 520  14,93)
174.  See Tribe,  3upra note  37.  at  80-81

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

the  general  practices  of  our  people,  whether  or  not 
required  as  an  original  matter) 
The  point  of  originalism  is  thus  not 

they  were
with 
that  are  effectively
constitutionally 
to  "roll[]  back...
irreversible.' 
accepted  old  principles  of  constitutional  law"  but  to  reject  "usurpatious  new
ones."'' 7   Justice  Scalia  explains  in  this  fashion  his  recent  votes  against
"novel  constitutional  rights"-the  right  against  excessive  damage  awards,'7

the  right  against  being  excluded  from  government  contracts  because  of party
affiliation,'78   and 
single-sex
schooling.

the  novel  constitutional  ban  on  some 

79

Now,  this  is  a  large  problem,  faced  in  some  form  by  every  Justice,  and
Justice  Scalia cannot  be  faulted  for failing  to  resolve  it  in a  brief essay  and  an
even  briefer  reply  to  critics.  But  the  difficulty with  his  claim  here  is  that  it  is
very  hard  to  know  when  an  originalist judge,  concerned  to respect  precedent,
is  applying  "accepted  old  principles"  or  instead  creating  "new  constitutional
rights."  Would  it  not  be  equally  plausible  to  say  that  in  the  nonoriginalist
judgments  that Justice Scalia joined  the Court created  new  rights,  for example
the  right  to  bum  the  flag  and  the  cross,  and  the  right  to  sacrifice  animals?
Would  it  not  be  plausible  to  say  that  in  the  judgments  from  which  Justice
Scalia  dissented, 8 °  the  Court  largely  applied  principles  developed  in  older
cases  forbidding  government  from  using  outmoded  sex  stereotypes  as  a  basis
for  segregating  schools"'  or  from  conditioning  employment  on  party
affiliation?'

2

To  answer  these  questions,  everything  depends  on  the  level  of generality
at  which  old  principles  or  new  rights  are  described.  The  precedents  in  such
areas  as  sex equality  are  well-entrenched,  and  Justice  Scalia offers  no  basis on
which to  distinguish between  a  refusal to create  "new rights" and a  willingness
to  follow  "old  principles."  There  is  also  a  risk  that  the  originalist  judge,
refusing to extend  the principles  reflected  in old cases,  will ensure  incoherence
in  the  law,  and  thus  a  form  of unfairness,  since  similarly  situated  people  will
to  as  the  Bowers  v.
not  be  treated  similarly.  This  might  be  referred 
Hardwick'83  problem:  "Thus  far  and  no  more!"  does  not  produce  much

175.  Scalia,  supra note  37,  at  138.  It  is  worthwhile  to  note  that  there  are  two  points  here:  judicial
understandings  and consistency  with  "general  practices  of our people,"  a notion  that  raises  questions  of its
own.

176.  Id. at  139.
177.  See BMW  of N.  Am.,  Inc.  v.  Gore,  116  S.  Ct.  1589,  1610-14  (1996)  (Scalia,  J.,  dissenting).
178.  See  O'Hare Truck  Serv.,  Inc.  v.  City  of Northlake,  116  S. Ct.  2353,  2361-74  (1996)  (Scalia,  J.,

dissenting).

179.  See  United  States  v.  Virginia,  116  S.  Ct.  2264,  2291-309  (1996)  (Scalia,  J.,  dissenting).
180.  See,  e.g.,  O'Hare Truck  Sent., Inc.,  116  S. Ct.  at  2361-74  (1996)  (Scalia  J.,  dissenting);  United

States v.  Virginia, 116  S. Ct.  at 2291-309  (1996)  (Scalia  J.,  dissenting).

181.  See  Mississippi  Univ.  for Women  v.  Hogan,  458  U.S.  718  (1982).
182.  See  Branti  v.  Finkel,  445  U.S.  507  (1980);  Elrod  v.  Burns,  427  U.S.  347  (1976).
183.  478  U.S.  186,  194-95  (1986)  (arguing  that  the  Court  should  not  expand  the  category  of

fundamental  rights).

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

in 

the 

this 

law.' 4   Perhaps 

sacrifice 

is 
and
inevitable 
coherence 
worthwhile-if  it  is  the  only  way  to  restore  judicial 
legitimacy  without
renovating existing law-but it  creates  problems  of its own. To decide  whether
the resulting incoherence,  and dissimilar  treatment of the similarly situated,  are
worthwhile,  it  is  necessary  to  balance  the  extent  of the  unfairness  against  the
value  of preventing  further  mistakes.  This  is  a  large  problem,  faced  by anyone
with  confidence  in  a  particular  method  of interpretation,  and  I cannot  resolve
it here.

C.  Why  (and Which)  Originalism ?

As  Justice  Scalia  knows  and  acknowledges,  the  original  understanding
cannot be  decisive simply  because  it  was the  original  understanding.  A defense
of using  the  original  understanding  must  itself be  independent  of the  original
understanding  and  thus  must be  made out in  terms of political  theory and  good
empirical  assessments  of institutional  competence.t8 5  Lawyers  cannot  defend
use  of  the  original  understanding, 
let  alone  any  particular  species  of
originalism,  by  reference  to  history.  (Nor  can  they  defend  an  approach  other
than Justice  Scalia's  by  reference  to originalism.)  The question  of whether  the
original  understanding  of an  old  text  should  bind  current  generations  is  not  at
all  simple-why  on  earth  should  current  Americans  be  bound  by  some
understandings  of  some  votes  by  some  segment  of  the  citizenry  over  two
centuries  ago?' 8 -- and  a  reference  to  "democracy," 
though  a  good  start,
cannot  provide  the necessary  legitimation.

Justice  Scalia  suggests  that  his  version  of  originalism  will  limit  the
policymaking  authority  of federal  judges,  and  this  is  very  plausibly  true.  But
he also  5uggests-and  this is  mostly  how  he  makes  his  argument-that  judges
have  only  two  real  alternatives:  Follow  the  original  understanding  as  he
understands  it  or  basically  do  whatever  they  want.  This  is  implausible.  Both
originalist  and  nonoriginalist  judges  come  in  many  different  stripes,  and  the

184.  I am  pointing  here  to  violations  of  integrity,  as  Dworkin  understands  that  ideal  See  DwORK,

supra  note  57,  at  176-224.

185.  Justice  Scalia  sees  this  point  and  refers  to  separation  of powers.  see  Scalia. supra  note  7.  at  9.
and to  democracy,  see id. at  9-12.  These  are  certainly  good  places  to  start,  but as  we  will  see  they  are no
more than that.  It is  necessary  to specify  these  concepts  in  order to get  them  to do the  necessary  work.  and
the  ideal of democracy  by  itself does  not  support originalism  or  a constrained judicial  role  See  MASHAW.
supra  note  118,  at 201-02  (discussing  flaws  in  the  usual  presentation  of the countermajontanan  difficulty)
This  ideal  is  too  abstract  and  contested  to  support  a  particular  view  of interpretation,  and.  for  reasons
suggested  below, see  infra text  accompanying  notes  189-193,  once  specified,  the  ideal  is best  understood
to  allow  courts  a  modest  but  hardly  trivial  role.

186.  Of course,  the  ratiflers  excluded  all  women  and  most  African  Americans  In  fact.  the  question
why  the Constitution  itself is  binding  is  not  entirely  simple.  To  say  that  it  is not  simple  is not  to suggest
that we should  not take  it to  be binding;  undoubtedly  we  should,  partly  for simple,  pragmatic  reasons  See
CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN,  THE  PARTIAL  CONSTITtTION  93-102  (1993).  But  the  mix  of argumer.ts  that  make  the
Constitution  binding  do not  make  the  original  understanding,  as  Justice  Scalia  would describe  it. binding
See  id.

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

the  alternative 

distinctions  among them  require  a  good  deal  of attention.  Since  Justice Scalia
to  his  brand  of  originalism  as  free  floating
describes 
constitutional  creativity,  the  discussion  is  unduly  loaded  from  the  beginning.
The  debate  over  methods  of constitutional  interpretation  cannot  sensibly  be
resolved  by  suggesting that  anyone  who disagrees  is  inviting judges  to rule  as
they  wish.

Let  us  imagine  some  more  reasonable  alternative  positions.  We  can
imagine  judges  who  care  a  great  deal  about  history,  but  who  explore  history
to  identify  not  particular  understandings  of particular  problems,  but  overall
goals  and  purposes.  We  can  imagine judges  who  think,  for  example,  that  the
First Amendment,  understood  in  light of its  historical  roots,  is  centered  above
all  on  the  preconditions  for  democratic  self-government,'87  and  that  this  idea
calls  for some particular  results  contrary  to the  originalist  understanding-for
example  limits  on  use  of the  law  of libel  by  public  officials.  We  can  imagine
judges  who  think  that  interpretation  calls  for  something  like  an  act  of
including  unforeseen
translation 
developments  not  only  of  fact  but  also  of  value. 8 8  Attentive  to  issues  of
democratic  theory  and  the  rule  of law,  such  judges  may  well  try  to  devise
strategies  to  reduce  their  own  discretion  and  policymaking  authority.  They
might, for  example,  care a great deal  about precedent,  using previous  holdings
and  rationales  to  discipline  their own  discretion.  They  might  also  think  that
courts should  be reluctant to  invalidate  outcomes  of electoral  processes  unless
it is  very  clear  that  something  has  gone  wrong.

to  accommodate  new  circumstances, 

Such judges  might emphasize-and  this is particularly  important-that  the
case  for  judicial  intrusion  is  strongest,  under  an  ambiguous  constitutional
provision, when  there  is  some defect  in the  process  of democratic  deliberation
that  gave  rise  to  the  relevant  law.'89  Despite  Justice  Scalia's  presentation
here,  democracy  should  not  be  identified  with  the  outcomes  of majoritarian
politics;  it  is  no  mere  statistical  affair.  Whatever  emerges  from  a  particular
political  process  should  not  be  identified  with  the  ideal  itself. 9'  Democracy
comes  equipped  with  its  own  internal  morality,'9'  which  constrains  what  a

187.  See  Justice  Breyer's  suggestion  to  this  effect  in  Turner Broadcasting System,  Inc.  v.  FCC, 117

S.  Ct.  1174,  1204 (1997)  (Breyer,  J., concurring).
188.  See generally Lessig, supra note  53.
189.  Of course,  JOHN  HART ELY,  DEMOCRACY  AND  DISTRUST  (1980),  is  the classic  statement  of this

position.

190.  See JORGEN  HABERMAS,  BETWEEN  FACTS  AND  NoRms  274-86  (William  Rehg trans.,  1996). For
relevant  work  from  quite  different  angles,  see  AVISHAI  MARGALIT,  THE  DECENT  SOCIETY  (Naomi
Goldblum  trans.,  1996),  which  suggests  that  a  decent  society  ensures  that  its  own  citizens  will  not  be
"humiliated"  by  official  institutions;  and  MASHAW,  supra  note  118,  at  202,  which  suggests  that  "a
moment's reflection  on the  teaching  of voting theory  makes  clear that  whatever  the  difficulty  with judicial
review,  countermajoritanism  is  an  odd  way  to  put  the  problem."  Margalit's  suggested  ban  on  official
humiliation  might  well  be  taken  to  be  part  of democracy's  internal  morality.  Cf. Romer  v.  Evans,  116  S.
Ct. 1620 (1996)  (holding  that  an  amendment to the  Colorado  Constitution  denying legislative,  judicial, and
executive  antidiscrimination  protection  to  homosexuals  violated  the  Equal  Protection  Clause).

191.  See  HABERMAS,  supra note  190,  at  274-86;  SUNSTEIN,  supra note  186,  at  162-94.

1997]

Democratic  Formalism

majority  may  do,  consistent  with  the  commitment  to  democracy.  A  majority
may  not,  for  example,  disenfranchise  people,  impose  a  regime  of  political
inequality,  or act  solely  on  the  basis  of contempt  for  fellow  citizens.'

Judges  of this  kind  come  in  many  shapes  and  sizes; they  might  well  think
of  themselves  as  originalists.  What  matters  is  that  such  judges  are  much
influenced  by  the  common  law  tradition,  and  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that
judges  of that  kind  have  less  legitimacy  or are  worse  than  oiginalist judges  of
the  kind  that  Justice  Scalia  favors.  A  federal  judiciary  that  proceeds  in
common  law  fashion  and  that  treats  constitutional  rights  as  aspirations  (given
content  by  concrete  cases  and  invoked  sparingly  to  invalidate  the  outcomes  of
ordinary  politics)  might  well,  because  of its  very  insulation,  produce  a  better
system  of  constitutional  democracy.  It  might  do  so  because  it  has  certain
advantages  in  deliberating  on  questions  of  basic  justice,'  or-in  my  view
far more  likely-it  might  do  so  because  and  to  the  extent  that  it  focuses  on
ensuring  the  preconditions  for  a  well-functioning  democratic  regime.  Justice
Scalia  thinks  that,  even  if  this  is  true,  a  judicial  role  of  this  kind  is
fundamentally  illegitimate  and  without  authority,  because  it is  not  authorized
by  the  Constitution.  But  the  Constitution  does  not  set  out  the  principles
governing  its  own  interpretation;  certainly  the  Constitution  itself  does  not
contain  an  interpretive  principle  of  originalism.  Any  judgment  about  the
appropriate  content  of governing  interpretive  principles  must  invoke  not  the
Constitution but  political theory  of some  kind.  The  claim that  the  text  must  be
interpreted  in light  of the  original  understanding  as  Justice  Scalia  conceives  it
is  not  an implausible  argument.  But  it  depends both  on contested  ideals  and on
highly  contingent  and 
largely  empirical  claims  about  what  system  of
interpretation  is  likely  to  be  or  to do  best,  all  things  considered.

For  America,  what  system  of interpretation  would  in  fact  be  or do  best?
The  past  offers  no  clear  answer,  but  it  is  a  good  place  to  start.  It  is  highly
relevant  that an originalist  approach  of the sort  favored  by Justice  Scalia would
have  very  dramatic  consequences  (not  acknowledged  or  discussed  in  his
essay). 94  Such  an  approach  may  well,  for  example,  mean  that  Brown  v.
Board of Education,'95 the  cornerstone  of  modem  equal  protection  doctrine,
is  wrong;  that  New  York  Timres  Co.  v. Sullivan,'" 
the  cornerstone  of modern
free  speech  doctrine,  is  also  wrong;  that  the  Establishment  Clause  does  not

192.  This  latter point  underlies  Romer  v. Evans, 116  S Ct  at  1627.  see  also Cass  R  Sunsteim.  The
Supreme Court,  1995  Term-Foreword: Leaving  Things  Undecided. 110  HARv  L  Riv  4.  59-64  t1996)

193.  See  BICKEL,  supra note  57, at  23-28.  A  more  recent  version  of  the argument  can  be  found  in

DWORKIN,  supra  note  57, at  373-79.

194.  I am not arguing that  originalism of the form  that Justice  Scalia  defends would  inevitably  produce
these  outcomes.  I am  only  suggesting  that  it  is  a  serious  possibility  There  are  continuing  disputes  about
whether  originalism  would  support  outcomes  of  the  kind discussed  in the  text,  and  a  possible  reaction to
those debates  is  that  often  the  historical  materials  leave  ambiguities  or  gaps  and  nonhitstoncal  judgments
must  be used,  and  are  being  used, to  resolve  the  ambiguities

195.  347  U.S.  483  (1954).
196.  376  U.S.  254  (1964).

The  Yale  Law  Journal

(Vol.  107:  529

apply  to  the  states;  that  affirmative  action  raises  no  serious  issue;  that  the
federal  government  can  discriminate  on  the basis  of race  and  sex  however  it
wishes;  that nearly  all  sex  discrimination  by  the states  is  unobjectionable;  that
compulsory school  prayer  is  constitutionally  acceptable;  that,  in short,  most  of
modern  constitutional 
law,  now  taken  as  constitutive  of  the  American
constitutional  tradition  by  Americans  and  non-Americans  alike,  now  taken  as
symbolic  of our  nation's  commitment  to  liberty  under  law,  and,  for  the  last
decade  in  particular  an  inspiration  for  constitution-making  and  constitution-
building  all  over  the  globe,  is  illegitimate  and  fatally  undemocratic.  An
approach  that leads  to conclusions  of this  kind  may not be disqualified  for that
reason,  but these possibilities  show  that slippery  slope  arguments  can  work  in
both  directions.

Justice  Scalia  may  believe  that  consequences  are  irrelevant. 97  It  is
tempting  to  think  that  the  choice  among  interpretive  approaches  should  not
depend  on outcomes;  an  important guarantee  of neutrality  might even be  found
in  indifference  to  outcomes.  But  I think  that  this  is  a  confusion.  There  is  this
much  to  be said  for indifference  to  outcomes:  Once  an  interpretive  approach
has  been  properly  selected,  it  should  not  be  abandoned  simply  because  it
produces  a bad outcome.  But any  approach  to interpretation  must be  defended
partly  by  reference  to  its  consequences,  broadly  conceived,  and  the  set  of
relevant  consequences  includes  emphatically  its  effects  on  human  liberty  and
equality.  No approach  to  interpretation  can  be  defended  without  reference  to
the  human  interests  that  it affects.  If consequences,  broadly  conceived,198  do
not matter,  what  does?

My  central  point is  that  other approaches  to  interpretation,  whether  or in
whatever  sense  originalist,  can  accommodate  our  constitutional  tradition  as  it
has  come  to be understood  without, at the same  time, authorizing judges  to do
whatever  they want.  Justice Scalia is  correct  to say  that common  law  thinking
lies  at  the  heart  of American  constitutional  law.' 99 But  this  way  of thinking
should  be  seen  as  part  of judicial  modesty,  not  judicial  hubris.  Certainly  it
allows  for a degree  of flexibility. But  it also comes  with  its  own constraints  on
judicial  power,  brought  about  through  the  doctrine  of  stare  decisis,  close

197.  He may also  believe  that the results, to the  extent they are  objectionable, would  find a legislative
remedy.  If this  is  so, his  argument  would  be  much  strengthened,  but  there  is  little  reason  to believe  that
this  is  the case.

198.  Of course,  I do not  suggest that consequences  must  be  understood  in  utilitarian  terms.  A  claim
about  consequences  might  be  made  out  in  terms  of  democracy,  protection  of  basic  rights,  promotion  of
human  capabilities  and  functionings,  and  much  more.

199.  It  is  important  to  emphasize  that judicial  discretion  cannot  be  eliminated  by  the  interpretive
methods  of civil  law  courts,  or  even  by formalism,  which  will  inevitably  leave  gaps.  Indeed,  there  is  a
substantial  overlap  between  the  interpretive  practices  of  common  law  and  civil  law  courts,  which  use
similar  presumptions and  canons,  linguistical  and substantive.  See  Summers & Taruffo,  supra note  73.  For
a  discussion  comparing  European  civil  lawyers  to American  lawyers,  see Mary  Ann  Glendon,  Comment,
in  A MATTER  OF  INTERPRETATION,  supra note 6,  at 95  passim.

19971

Democratic  Formalism

attention  to  the details  of  cases,2 °'  and  a  general  reluctance  to  issue  rules  that
depart  much  from  the  facts  of  particular  disputes.  It  is  part  and  parcel  of the
judiciary's  distrust  of  large  theories  and  its  ordinary  search  for  concrete
outcomes  and  cautious  principles  on  which  theoretically  diverse judges  may
agree. 2°  Common  law  thinking  is  even  connected  with  the  Supreme  Court's
general  and  entirely  appropriate  reluctance  to  disturb  the  outcomes  of political
processes.  To  the  extent  that  it  partakes  of ambitious  theories  at  all,  common
law  thinking,  in  its  current  incarnation 
in  American  public  law,  largely
attempts  to  protect  the  workings  of a  well-functioning  system  of  democratic
deliberation.  Of course,  courts with  the  abilities  of "broken-field  runners"  may
be  able  to  circumvent  these  constraints  on  judicial  discretion.  There  are  no
guarantees  here.  All  I  mean  to  suggest 
to  respect
precedent  and  to  proceed  cautiously  tend,  in  practice,  to  make  constitutional
law in its common  law  incarnation  more open-ended  than  it  might  appear, even
if less  open-ended  than  those  fearful  of judicial  discretion  would  wish.

is  that  the  obligation 

ideal.  If  democracy 

From the standpoint  of promoting  democratic  ideals,  it  is  hardly  clear  that
Justice  Scalia's  form  of originalism  is  preferable.  I  have  said  that  the  choice
of an approach  to interpretation  requires  a judgment  about  political  theory, and
that means  that the choice  requires  the  specification  of the  right  content  of the
democratic 
identified  with  the  outcomes  of
is  not 
majoritarian  politics,  and if its internal  morality  constrains  what  majorities  may
do,  the  American  constitutional  tradition  has  converged  on  an  alternative  far
superior to  Justice  Scalia's  approach. 2 2  From  the  standpoint  of  constraining
judicial  discretion,  the  common  law  method  of  constitutional  law,  properly
understood,  is  at  least  a  plausible  competitor  to  Justice  Scalia's  form  of
originalism,  in  light  of  the  many  difficult  questions  that  historical  inquiry
leaves unresolved  and  the  difficulty  of matching  that  form  of originalism  with
a theory  of stare  decisis.  If we  are  concerned  about  limiting  judicial  intrusions
into  politics,  Justice  Scalia's  form  of originalism  may  well  be  inferior  to  our
tradition  in  its  modemn  incarnation. 23  That  form  of  originalism  is  probably

better  at  promoting  predictability  and  stability.  But  these  are  hardly  decisive
virtues,  and it is  not clear that  there  is any  other  dimension along  which Justice
Scalia's  approach  is  preferable  to  the  serious  alternatives.

200.  Cf. Itzhak Gilboa & David  Schmeidler, Case-Based  Deciion  Theonr. 

(arguing  that  people  commonly  select  particular  acts  based  on  buch  acts" perlormance 
circumstances).

110 Q J EcoN  605 (1995)
in  simtlar

201.  See CASS  R. SuNsTEN, LEGAL REAsoNLNG  ANt)  POLTICAL  CONi-LICT 35-61  (996).  c-f Strauss.

supra  note  5, at  926-28  (discussing how  common  law  constituttonalhsm  influences  judicial restruint)

202.  Of course,  there  are questions  about how  to identify democracy's  internal  moralty. and it Judges

were  incompetent  at  that task,  it  might  make  sense  to  adopt  Justice  Scahia', form  ol  onginrlism

203.  Recall that Justice Scalia  thinks that his form  of onginalism would doom  ar  more  legtshition thin
the  current  approach,  in  areas  involving  property  rights,  Second  Amendment  rights,  and Confrontation
Clause  rights.  See supra text accompanying  notes  49-51

The  Yale  Law  Journal

[Vol.  107:  529

IV.  CONCLUSION

The  distinctive  virtues  of  the  common  law  stem  from  the  relative
independence  of common law judges, their caution  about  high theory, and their
intense  focus  on  particulars.  These  virtues  allow  a high  degree  of flexibility
over diverse  circumstances, prominently  including  those produced  by new  facts
and  values.  These  virtues  are  inseparable  from  the  distinctive  vices  of  the
common  law:  its  imperfectly  democratic  character,  its  lack  of  theoretical
ambition,  and  its  particularity,  which  may  impede  planning  and  lead  to
unfairness  because  the similarly  situated  are  not  treated  similarly  and  because
the judges'  own judgments  of value  or  fact  play  an  excessive  role.  An  effort
to evaluate  the place  of common  law  thinking  would do  well to  come  to terms
with  the realities  of the  modem  state,  prominently  including  the  large  role  of
regulatory  agencies,  which  engage 
far  more
interpretation 
than  do  federal  courts.
frequently,  and  with  far  larger  consequences, 
Administrative  agencies  are  law-interpreters,  both  in  fact  and  in  law,  and  it  is
striking  that  modern  theories  of statutory  interpretation  rarely  come  to  terms
with  that  phenomenon."

in  statutory 

Justice  Scalia's  approach  to  interpretation-democratic  formalism-has
two  foundations:  a  strong  commitment  to  rule-bound  justice  and  a  desire  to
ensure  that  discretion  is  exercised  by  democratically  elected  officials  rather
than  by judges.  Hence  his  overriding goal is  to exorcise  the  common  law from
public  law.  He  is  correct  to  emphasize  the  common  law  heritage  of  the
American  legal tradition  and  much of modern  public  law: judicial  treatment  of
many  statutes  as  standards  rather  than  rules;  doctrines  of interpretation  that
operate  as  standards  or factors; and,  perhaps  above all,  a  system  of case-based
constitutional  law  that  owes  a  great  deal  to  the  common  law  heritage. 5
Many  observers,  above  all  Judge  Calabresi,  have  celebrated  common  law
methods  and  sought  to  reintroduce  the  virtues  of common  law  judgment  into
a regulatory  state founded mostly  on statutory  enactments.  Justice  Scalia's goal
is  the  opposite: 
in  the  hope  that  it  will  increase
predictability,  constrain  the  abusive  exercise  of  discretion  by  judges,  and
increase democratic self-government  by imposing good  incentives  on Congress.
Others  might  urge  courts  to make  regulatory  agencies  a  central  ingredient
in  their theory  of interpretation,  on  the  theory  that  the  traditional  common  law
role  of courts  would  be  best carried  out  by  administrative  agencies  authorized
to  make  sense  of statutory  text2"  when  new  applications  arise,  or when  facts

to  reduce  particularity 

204.  This  is  a  gap  not  only  in  Justice  Scalia's  essay,  but  also  in  DWORKIN,  supra  note  57.  The
administrative  state  has  yet  to  be  introduced  into general  accounts  of  legal  interpretation.  Here  there  is  a
great  deal  of room  for  positive  and  normative  work.

205.  See Strauss,  supra note  5,  for  the  best  discussion  of the  way  in  which  the  common  law  explains

and justifies  current  American  constitutional  law.

206.  Of course,  this  claim  does  not mean  that  agencies  may violate  statutes. The  claim  is  intended  to
allow  agencies  to handle  ambiguities and excessive  generality,  subject, of course,  to judicially administered

19971

Democratic  Formalism

and  values  change.  This  is  an  approach  toward  which  I have  gestured  in  this
Book  Review,  on  the  ground  that  it  has  the  virtue  of  fitting  nicely  with  the
needs,  values,  and  actual  practices  of  modem  government.  Thus,  I  have
attempted  to  sketch  an  alternative  approach  to  interpretation,  one  that  also
places  a  premium  on  democratic  values  and  that  uses  clear  statement
principles,  agency  interpretations,  and  democratic  ideals  to  supplement  and
occasionally  countermand  the  text  as  understood  at  the  time  of enactment.  In
statutory  interpretation,  this  approach  would  allow  regulatory  agencies  some
room  to  adapt  text  to  particular  circumstances  and  would  authorize  courts,
supplementing  that agency  role,  to use canons  and  presumptions  to  make sense
rather  than  nonsense  out  of the  statutory  law.  In  constitutional  interpretation,
this  approach  would  combine  a  large  dose  of  judicial  modesty,  favoring
incompletely  theorized  agreements,  with  an  occasional  willingness  to  invoke
the internal  morality  of democracy  to  look skeptically  at  laws  that  compromise
the political  process or attempt to impose  second-class  citizenship  on  members
of disadvantaged  social  groups.  My  suggestion  is that  an  approach  of this  sort
would  do  far  better  than  democratic  formalism  from  the  democratic  point  of
view, that it would  impose sufficient  constraints  on judicial  power and  judicial
discretion,  and  that  its  only  comparative  defect,  a  modest  one,  is  that  it  may
suffer  along  the dimension  of  promoting  predictability.

There  is  nothing wrong  with  Justice  Scalia's  arguments  in  the  abstract.  In
an  imaginable  world,  not  unrecognizably  far  from  our  own,  some  or  all  of
those  arguments  might  become  convincing.  But  there  is  also  nothing  right
about  Justice  Scalia's  arguments  in  the  abstract.  Whether  those  arguments  are
convincing  depends  on a range  of practical  and  predictive judgments  about  the
capacities  of different governmental  institutions.  Justice  Scalia does not defend
the necessary  practical  or predictive judgments  or  even  identify  them  as  such.
He  writes  instead  as  if his  particular,  sometimes  radical,  conclusions  can  be
grounded  in  apocalyptic  arguments  about  the  slippery  slope 7  and  in  high-
sounding  abstractions  about  democracy.
It  is  to  Justice  Scalia's  credit 

that  he  has  laid  out  an  approach  to
interpretation  with  a high  degree  of clarity  and  coherence.  It is  to  his credit  too
that  he  has  sketched  an  approach  to  interpretation  that  might  make  sense  in
some imaginable  world.  What  he  has  not  shown  is  that  it makes  sense  in  ours.

clear  statement  principles.  For  an  example  of  restrictions  on  igenc) 
Arabian American Oil Co.,  499  U.S.  244,  257-59  (1991).  which uss  1a preumption  igatnst extraterritorial
application  of national  law  to trump  an  agency's \i'e\

interprct,%e  pocrl..  see  EEOC

207.  For  example,  Justice  Scalia  writes.

. .

. This,  of  course,  is the  end  of  the  Bill  of  Rights.  % hosc  mea±ning  ',ill bi

If  the  courts  are  free  to  write  the  Constitution  ane'%.  they  %,ill. by  God.  %%rite it  the  %% ,a the
majority  wants 
committed  to the  very  body  it was  meant  to  protect aginst  the majority  By  ti) ing  to make  the
Constitution  do  everything  that  needs  doing  from  age it ige.  we shAll  hi ie 
,.auscd  it  to  do
nothing  at all.
Scalia,  supra note  7, at  47.

