 Theories and Tropes: A Reply to Posner and Kelman Theories and Tropes: A Reply to Posner and Kelman University of Chicago Law School University of Chicago Law School Chicago Unbound Chicago Unbound Journal Articles Cass R. Sunstein Christine Jolls Richard H. Thaler Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, Christine Jolls & Richard H. Thaler, "Theories and Tropes: A Reply to Posner and Kelman," 50 Stanford Law Review 1593 (1998). Christine Jolls,* Cass R. Sunstein,** and Richard Thaler*** We are grateful to Richard Posner and Mark Kelman for their detailed comments on our article. Their objections come from opposite directions. Judge Posner complains that behavioral economics is not a "theory" and is indeed "antitheoretical"'; he invokes "evolutionary considerations" 2 in the interest of providing a unitary account of both rational and "quasi rational" behavior, as well as bounded self-interest.3 Posner also thinks that rational choice theory can handle many of the problems we describe. By contrast, Professor Kelman wishes that we were less theoretical. Favoring "opentextured interpretivism,"4 he thinks that behavioral economics is in a kind of "dance ' 5 with rational choice theory, and that both dancers suffer from "hubris."16 He suggests that both approaches are mere "interpretive tropes," providing two of many possible understandings of the "inexorably ambiguous" data.7 In these brief remarks, we reply to these different challenges. Our disagreements with Posner are far narrower than they might appear; he accepts our central claims and chooses mostly to argue that the behavior we describe, while real, deserves to be termed "rational." Insofar as Kelman is arguing in favor of more in the way of behavioral research, we fully agree with him. Insofar as he is arguing that any approach is hubristic unless it acknowledges * Assistant Professor of Law, Harvard Law School. Business, University of Chicago. ity and bounded willpower. that it is merely one of several equally valid ways of viewing the world, we disagree; we believe that behavioral law and economics should be regarded as more than an "interpretive trope" and that it will help to shed light on legal problems and produce improvements in the legal system. A reader of Judge Posner's commentary might be left with the impression that there are large disagreements between us. This impression would be false. Posner accepts the most important points of our article; he acknowledges the existence of the three bounds, and he agrees that the phenomena we discuss are real and potentially important to economics and law. Much of his discussion consists of quibbling about what is really a minor matter: whether we should call a given behavior rational or not. Posner is also concerned to show the sources of the three bounds, an important subject to be sure, but one on which we are agnostic. Our goal here is to reduce the perceived distance between our views and straighten out the most important misunderstandings. Seeming to have learned more from the study of cognitive psychology than he lets on, Judge Posner begins with a clever framing manipulation. He says that we (implicitly) define behavioral economics negatively as "economics minus the assumption that people are rational maximizers of their satisfactions."8 He contrasts this negative approach to what he prefers, the positive "enriching" approach he claims for standard economic theorizing.9 As readers of our article realize, we offer no such negative definition; in fact we often use precisely the same concept, "enriching" the standard economic model, that is offered by Judge Posner.10 Indeed, as we will make clear below, our goals and tools are remarkably similar. The primary problem Posner seems to have with our approach is our reluctance to call all behavior rational. To Posner, a model that is rational is good, disciplined, scientific, and enriching, whereas a model that is quasi ra 1. Bounded rationality. Whether this is true of course depends on what the evidence shows. Posner suggests, for example, that the standard economic analysis of transportation is unaffected by people's ("irrational"--his term) fear of flying, and that the economic analysis of voting is unaffected by ("irrational"--again his term) voting behavior. 14 In some contexts a standard analysis of transportation and of voting may work (although for the same reasons we gave in our article, we continue to question assertions such as that standard analysis is helpful in predicting "why the old vote more than the young"; 5 if in fact the young voted more, could it not be said that voting for them was more novel and thus generated greater utility?). A standard analysis cannot, however, tell us all of what we need to know. Behavioral economists would predict that We disagree, though, with Posner's view that information provides an obvious explanation for hyperbolic discounting.2' Posner suggests that people may discount sharply in the relatively near future because they know they have a particular need for cash now, whereas for times in the distant future it is hard to envision "what might make [one] pay in effect a huge interest rate to reallocate consumption. '22 It is true that people may sometimes have less information about their future needs than about their present ones, but it is not clear why lack of information alone would cause them to err systematically on the side of underestimating future needs. Given the lack of information about the future, it is quite possible that the need for immediate cash will be much more intense in the future. As noted, Posner claims that behavioral economics is "undertheorized. '2 3 Our article should have been entitled, he says, "A Psychological Critique of Economic Analysis of Law" rather than "A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics. '24 In his view, behavioral economics is "purely empirical," defined "by its subject rather than by its method," and unable to make predictions?5 We intended to create-and to show to be warranted-precisely the opposite impression. There have been many important theoretical advances in behavioral economics; a number of them are cited in our article.26 Consider, for example, prospect theory, the specification of biases and heuristics, and models of fairness-related behavior-all discussed in some detail in our article. Though much remains to be done, each of these contains a set of theoretical claims. Behavioral economists interested in law would predict, for example, that injunctions will stick in nuisance cases, that participants in lawsuits will display self-serving bias, that the allocation of a legal entitlement will matter to the ultimate outcome, that laws will reflect widespread judgments about fairness organized around reference points, that the pattern of environmental regulation will reflect the use of familiar heuristics, that people will be overoptimistic about risk-all topics developed in our article. Of course it is true that there is much more to be learned and that in many contexts good predictions are difficult. To the extent that he is saying more than this, we are left with the impression that Posner's claim of undertheorization is based on Pos 23. Id. at 1559. 24. Id. at 1558. 25. Id. at 1559. 26. On bounded rationality, see Daniel Kahneman & Amos Tversky, Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk, 47 ECONOMETRICA 263 (1979). On bounded willpower, see Laibson, supra note 20; Ted O'Donahue & Matthew Rabin, Doing It Now or Later (Berkeley Department of Economics Working Paper No. 97-253, Jan. 1997); Richard H. Thaler & H.M. Shefrin, An Economic Theory of Self-Control, 89 J. POL. ECON. 392 (1981). (The last two are not cited in our original article.) On bounded self-interest, see Matthew Rabin, Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics, 83 AM. ECON. REV. 1281 (1993). New theoretical work is even emerging that uses psychology to explain the anomalous behavior of stock prices. See Nicholas Barberis, Andrei Shleifer & Robert Vishny, A Model of Investor Sentiment, 49 J. FIN. ECON. (forthcoming Sept. 1998); Kent Daniel, David Hirshleifer & Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, Investor Psychology and Securit' Market Under- and Over-reactions, J. FIN. (forthcoming 1998) (manuscript available at <http://www.cob.ohio-state.edu/dept/fm/joumallabstract.htm#futurearticles>). Of course, predictions are sometimes robust to departures from unbounded rationality; an example discussed in our article is downward-sloping demand.28 If economics only consisted of this sort of prediction, many of the bounds we discuss would not matter. But in these cases there would also be no need for (or benefit from) rational choice models. Recall that Posner defines rational as "choosing the best" in terms of benefits and costs, implying an optimal tradeoff analysis (including decisionmaking and information acquisition costs). 29 This optimizing model is much richer than merely buying less of a good when the price goes up; as we pointed out, even laboratory rats do this.30 The richness adds precision to the theory and also renders it falsifiable (and in many cases, false; Posner's own discussion acknowledges many examples). In defense of rational choice theory, and in urging that we give up on it too quickly, Posner cites our claim that the fact that random choice (by rats or human beings) in a situation of scarcity will generate a downwardsloping demand curve shows that downward-sloping demand "is not evidence in support of optimizing models."' 31 He declares our analysis "wrong": "Buyers do not choose randomly. Rationality is the only reasonable explanation for their reactions to changes in relative prices. '32  Wrong. Gary Becker's demonstration that random choice yields downward-sloping demand extends easily to almost any choice behavior.33 A mix of budget-constrained consumers, some of whom just buy the brand their mother did, some of whom buy anything with Michael Jordan's picture on it, some of whom always buy the brand on the right, and so forth, will also buy less of goods whose prices We stress this relatively minor point because much of the evidence Posner marshals in support of rational choice models falls into just this category. We are willing to stipulate that demand curves slope down. But we agree with Becker's analysis that this result depends not at all on unbounded rationality. We also think that for analyzing behavior related to law, it is necessary to say much more, by way of theory, than that demand curves slope down and that people choose the best means to their ends. Following Karl Popper, Posner is enthusiastic about falsifiability as the essential feature of a successful scientific theory.36 For present purposes we intend no quarrel with this idea. Posner is even more enthusiastic about evolutionary biology, and he thinks that it is important to show that behavior which departs from traditional economic assumptions is a result of evolutionary forces. 37 For present purposes we do not intend to quarrel with evolutionary biology either. (As we stated in our article, the notion that the bounds on human behavior are adaptive is wholly consistent with our approach.38) But it is not easy to stand, as Posner does, with both Popper and evolutionary biology. The problem is that Popper's views have been subject to criticism in the We do not intend here to respond to all of Posner's particular claims. In many places he has raised good questions for further research, behavioral and otherwise. Posner also has various explanations for why we might observe the endowment effect within a rational choice model. 44 Though he claims that these explanations are falsifiable, he offers neither evidence in support of them nor tests he would accept as valid. For example, he points out that an endowment effect might be rational for a good with no substitutes, and that this observation might explain the large discrepancies that are observed between willingness to pay and willingness to accept for environmental goods.45 However, this observation cannot explain the difference in buying and selling prices for the coffee mugs in the mugs experiments (since the mugs were for sale in the campus book store). This suggests that the absence of substitutes cannot be the only explanation for the observed behavior. Posner is also incorrect in asserting that the empirical findings on whether parties bargain around court orders "vindicate rather than challenge rationality. '" 56 Posner reasons that "[i]f a case that has become final through exhaustion of appellate remedies could have been settled, because the remedy sought by the plaintiff would cost the defendant more than it would benefit the plaintiff, the case would have been settled earlier-at the latest after the judgment in the trial court and before the appeal. '57 We fail to see this reasoning. For if the defendant thinks there is a good chance a verdict for the plaintiff will be overturned on appeal, it will have no reason to settle the case prior to appeal, 51. Id. 52. See Schlomo Benartzi & Richard H. Thaler, Risk Aversion or Myopia? Choices in Repeated Gambles and Retirement Investments (Nov. 8, 1997) (unpublished manuscript, on file with the Stanford Law Review); Colin Camerer, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein & Richard Thaler, Labor Supply of New York City Cabdrivers: One Day at a Time, 112 Q.J. ECON. 407 (1997); Jeremy J. Siegel & Richard H. Thaler, Anomalies: The Equity Premium Puzzle, 11 J. ECON. PERSP., Winter 1997, at 191. Posner also faults us for not advocating education and psychiatry to cure "cognitive quirks and weakness of will. '60 In some circumstances, debiasing techniques may work for instances of bounded rationality, and this is an important area for further investigation. We mention several specific applications in our article. 6 1  Perhaps education and psychiatry can help with bounded willpower as well, but the problem has been with us at least since the time of Adam and Eve, and we are not optimistic about a cure any time soon. In any case, while educators and psychiatrists are doing their best to reduce the impact of bounded rationality and bounded willpower, we will continue our efforts to model these phenomena and learn more about how they affect the economics of the law, and also about how their harmful effects might be reduced. We hope that no one will attempt to cure bounded self-interest. Professor Kelman has considerable sympathy for behavioral economics. His basic complaint is that far from providing a "fuller, more accurate" account of human behavior, behavioral economics should recognize that it is merely one of "a variety of interpretive traditions" engaged in making up "stories" about social practices. 65 Kelman thinks that behavioral economics and rational choice theory are "bound together in a form of rhetorical duet or ritualized dance. '66 In his view, the two therefore stand together in "irreconcilable mutual dependence. '67 Kelman also contends that behavioral economics mostly offers "anecdot[es]. '' 68 In Kelman's view, this is not so much a criticism as a suggestion about the need to avoid "hubris. '69 In light of "the rich, inexorably overwhelming data with which we have to deal, .... opentextured interpretivism" is all that we have.70 His complaint is that behavioral economists, and the behavioral approach to law and economics, claim to provide more than that. It is not clear to us why Professor Kelman prefers "interpretive tropes" to what behavioral economists are trying to do. Kelman does not show that analysts are unable to develop and to test hypotheses about the relationship between incentives, including law, and human behavior. We hope to have suggested a number of promising examples in our article. To be sure, in many areas we know much less than we should; as we emphasized throughout the article, one of our most important goals in this project is to outline an extended research agenda. The solution to this problem is to do more investigating in order to figure out which hypotheses are true. There is nothing hubristic about that. because of the exceptionally high returns on stocks. See id. Or consider Kelman's claim that hindsight bias is not what it appears to be and the results may well reflect a form of rational Bayesian updating or normative judgments about liability schemes. 74 This is an intriguing claim that is difficult to evaluate without seeing the relevant experiments, but Kelman does not say anything to undermine the central empirical work on hindsight bias. Consider, for example, Baruch Fischhoff s early study, where people were asked to say how likely certain events were to happen during Kelman is right to emphasize the importance of sorting out possible alternative explanations and of understanding what kinds of effects are at work in different settings. Our basic point is that we have important empirical issues here, and no reason to think that we are left only with "interpretive tropes" or "dances." Dancing has its place, but in this context, people should stop dancing and get to work. Sounding a bit like Posner, Kelman also complains that behavioral economics is an incomplete theory.80 He objects, for example, that behavioral economics cannot predict the domain in which quasi rationality will be important; that we do not know when and how much people will sacrifice their material interest for the sake of fairness; that the relationship between legisla