 University of Chicago Law School Chicago Unbound Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics Second-Order Decisions Cass R. Sunstein Edna Ullmann-Margalit Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein & Edna Ullmann-Margalit, "Second-Order Decisions" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 57, 1998). Second-Order Decisions Cass R. Sunstein  and  Edna Ullmann-Margalit Second-Order Decisions Cass R. Sunstein* and Edna Ullmann-Margalit** I. Introduction In making decisions, people sometimes calculate the costs and benefits of alternative courses of action, and choose the option that maximizes net benefits, however these may be described and understood. Certainly this is a conventional picture of practical reason in both private and public life.1 When deciding what to buy, where to travel, whether to support legislation, or how to vote in a dispute over constitutional rights, people might seem to proceed in this way. A common idea about decision-making is that agents are typically in the business of maximizing or optimizing. At the time of choice, this is their basic method and their basic goal. *Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago. **Center for Rationality and Interactive Decision Theory, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. We are grateful to Saul Levmore and Richard Posner for valuable comments on a previous draft. 1 See, e.g,, Gary Becker, Accounting for Tastes (1996). decisions can consequences. individual and social This is true for decisions both large and small, and for decisions both by individuals and by institutions, political and otherwise. When people are deciding what cereal to buy at the grocery store, whether to buckle their seatbelts or lock their car doors, what route to take to the movie theatre, or what to say in response to the question, “how are you,” they may want, almost more than anything else, a simple way of proceed. Reduction of the burdens of decision and choice is valued in less routine settings as well. Consider the decision whether to purchase a house, to get married, to move to another city, to have a child, or, in the political realm, to create a new right, to reduce spending on welfare programs, or to make war or peace; here people often find themselves in a poor position to calculate ultimate consequences, and they seek to produce simpler strategies for choice. some like Our particular interest here is in second-order decisions. The term requires some clarification. In the case of second-order desires, one deals with desires-about-desires; in the case of second-order beliefs, Second-Order Decisions one deals with beliefs-about-beliefs. In the case of second-order decisions, however, one does not exactly deal with decisions-aboutdecisions. Rather, one deals with the decision about appropriate strategies for avoiding decisions or for reducing their costs. More particularly, our concern is with strategies that people use in order to avoid getting into an ordinary decision-making situation in the first instance. Thus people (and institutions) might be said to make a second-order decision when they choose one from among several possible second-order strategies for minimizing the burdens of, and risk of error in, first-order decisions. Second-order decisions about second-order strategies are thus our basic topic. groups tend to know this, at least where the stakes are especially high. they Second-order strategies differ in the extent to which they impose produce mistakes and in the extent to which informational and other burdens on the agent and on others either before the process of ultimate decision or during the process of ultimate decision. Thus a second-order decision might well be based on a judgment about how best to (1) reduce the overall costs of decision and (2) regulate the number, magnitude, and quality of mistakes. There are three interesting kinds of cases. First, some second-order strategies impose little in the way of decisional burdens either before or during the ultimate decision. This is a great advantage, and a major question is whether the strategy in question (consider a decision to flip a coin) produces too much unfairness or too many mistakes. Second, some second-order strategies greatly reduce decisional burdens at the time of ultimate choice, but they require considerable thinking in advance (consider, for example, the creation of rules to govern emissions from coal-fired power plants, or to govern misconduct by one’s children). Decisions of this kind may be burdensome to make in advance; but the burdens may be worth incurring if they remain far less than the aggregate burdens of onthe-spot decisions. Here too there is a question of how to regulate the number, magnitude, and quality of mistakes. Third, some second-order strategies impose little in the way of decisional burden in advance, but may impose high burdens on others who must make the first-order decision; a delegation of power to some trusted associate, or to an authority, is the most obvious case. Second-Order Decisions to provide some guidelines for seeing when one or another strategy will be chosen, and also when one or another makes best sense. In the process we introduce some ethical, political, and legal issues that are raised by various second-order decisions. People determined to ease the burdens of decision have a number of available strategies. The following catalogue captures the major alternatives. The taxonomy is intended to be exhaustive of the possibilities, but the various items should not be seen as exclusive of one another; there is some overlap between them, a point to which we shall return. will produce some extremely bad outcomes (imagine an unusually safe driver rushing his friend to the hospital); so too for mandatory imprisonment for three-time felons; so too with a ban on any dogs in restaurants (suppose a police officer needs help from his bombsniffing German Shepherd). Good friends and good doctors tend to have a flexible attitude toward rules.3 It is because of their generality that rules are often criticized as a pathology of unnecessarily rigid people and (still worse) of modern bureaucratic government4; but they might be defended as a way of minimizing the burdens of decision while producing good results overall. The rigidity of rules can also produce serious interpretive difficulties, as when a rule confronts an unanticipated case and produces, in that case, a transparently absurd outcome; here the question is whether the rule should operate as something like a presumption. A good deal of interpretive dispute in law is focussed on such problems, which is why rules often are nearly full, rather than full, ex ante specifications of outcomes.5 2. Presumptions Often ordinary people and public institutions rely not on a rule but instead on a presumption, which can be rebutted. A presumption is typically rebuttable only on the basis of a showing of a certain kind and weight.6 People might say, for example, that they will presume against disclosing a confidence; or they might say that they will violate the speed-limit only in compelling, unusual circumstances (like saving a life); or that the government may discriminate on the basis of race only if there is an especially strong reason for doing so. In order to obtain greater accuracy, rules may be “softened” in the direction of presumptions. The result, it is hoped, is to make fewer mistakes while at the same time limiting decisional burdens. Second-Order Decisions exceptions tends to have the following structure: “Do X—except in circumstances A, in which case do non-X (or, in which case you may be exempt from doing X).” Thus, for example, “observe the speed limit—except when you're driving a police car or an ambulance in an emergency, in which cases you may exceed it.” By contrast, a typical presumption says something like: “Act on the assumption that P—unless and until circumstances A (are shown to) obtain, in which case, stop (or reconsider or do something else).” The two amount to the same thing when the agent knows whether or not circumstances A obtain. The two are quite different when the agent lacks that information. With a presumption, you can proceed without the information; with a rule-with-exceptions, you cannot proceed, that is, you are justified neither in doing X nor in not doing X. Thus presumptions function as default rules; they free up the agent, who has a set course of action without knowing whether there are rebutting circumstances. specification and ex post In law, the distinction between rules-with-exceptions and presumptions is sometimes conceived as a distinction between ex ante rebutting circumstances. Thus a speed limit law may have specified exceptions (police officers and ambulance drivers may violate it); a prohibition on killing does not apply in cases of self-defense. With a presumption, the rebutting circumstances are not identified in advance; it is understood that life may turn up problems that could not have been anticipated. Here the idea of a presumption overlaps with the idea of a “standard,” to be taken up presently. influential claim that rights are “trumps” can be understood as a description of rights as strong presumptions, rebutted only by a demonstration of a particular kind.7 Presumptions play an important role in the law of contract and statutory interpretation.8 Described as “default rules,” much of contract law is founded on an understanding of what most parties would do most of the time; the parties can rebut the presumption by speaking clearly. These “market-mimicking” default rules produce continuing debates about the extent to which courts should attempt to ask, not what most parties would do, but what these particular parties would have done if they had made provision on the point; the more specific inquiry increases the burdens of decision but promises to increase accuracy. Sometimes contract rule presumptions are “information-eliciting,” that is, they attempt to impose on the party in the better position to clarify contractual terms the obligation to do precisely that, on pain of losing the case. In the law of statutory interpretation, there is a similar set of presumptions, designed to discern what Congress would have done or instead to impose the duty to obtain a clear statement from Congress on the party in the best position to do so. It is possible to see disputes over liberty and equality as rooted in presumptions, more or less crude, about appropriate social states, presumptions that can be rebutted by special circumstances. Second-Order Decisions might adopt a standard in favor of driving slowly on a snowy day, or of being especially generous to friends in distress. The degree of vagueness is of course highly variable among standards. thus a commuter might adopt a particular route and follow it every day, even though on some days another route would be better. The advantage of a routine is that it reduces the burdens of decision even if it produces occasional error. The adoption of routines is of course a common phenomenon life, as people act “without thinking.” These are the “standard operating procedures” by which people negotiate their daily affairs. We have said that routines are related to habits; they are also related to rules. Often they are the concrete specifications of how precisely a rule is to be followed. If, say, the rule is that in a snowstorm, when driving conditions are hazardous, schools are to be called off, then the routines, taken as standard operating procedures, will specify exactly how the responsibilities for carrying this out are to be allocated: what key features in the weather report should trigger the cancellation, who should notify whom (local radio stations, local TV stations, possibly some particular parents), in what order the school buses are to go out, and so forth. Something similar happens when visiting dignitaries come to a nation; the rules of protocol say who will receive special treatment (the “red carpet”) and the routines specify what steps will be taken, who does what and when. In this way routines work like manuals; their point is to minimize the discretion allowed to the accidental people who happen to be there when the event occurs—all the thinking is done in advance. Second-Order Decisions on the power of choice that helps to simplify and to facilitate choice.10 5. Small steps A possible way of simplifying a difficult situation at the time of choice is to attempt to make a small, incremental decision, and to leave other, larger questions for another day. When a personal decision involves imponderable and apparently incommensurable elements, people often take small, reversible steps first.11 For example, Jane may decide to live with Robert before she decides whether she wants to marry him; Marilyn may go to night school to see if she is really interested in law; the government might experiment with certain subsidies to independent movie producers before committing itself to a full-scale program. A similar “small steps” approach is the hallmark of Anglo-American common law.12 (If it appears at this point that the common law can run afoul of the rule of law ideal, the appearance captures reality, or at least so many people now urge.13) Judges typically make narrow decisions, resolving little beyond the individual case; at least this is their preferred method of operation when they are not quite confident about the larger issues. It is sometimes suggested that because of the likelihood of unintended bad consequences, government do best, in certain domains, if their steps are small and incremental.14 The notion of “pilot programs” is based on this idea. In the psychological literature, the “small steps” approach has been identified with both steady, reliable success (“small wins”15) and recurrent error.16 10 See Stephen Holmes, Passions and Constraint (1996). 11 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Opting: The Case of “Big” Decisions, in The 1985 Yearbook of the Wissenschaftkeleg Zu Berlin. 12 See Edward Levi, An Introduction to Legal Reasoning (1948). 13 The tension between the rule of law and the common law method is the basic theme of Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation (1997). 14 See James Scott, Seeing Like A State (1998). 15 See Karl Weick, Small Wins, 39 Am. Psych. 40 (1984). Keick urges, “[I]t seems useful to consider the possibility that social problems seldom get solved, because people define these problems in ways that overwhelm their ability to do anything about them. . . . Calling a situation a mere problem that necessities a small win . . . improves diagnosis, preserves gains, and encourages innovation. Calling a situation a serious problem that necessities a larger win may be when the problem starts.” Id. at 48. 6. Picking Sometimes the difficulty of decision pushes people to decide on a random basis. They might, for example, flip a coin, or make some apparently irrelevant factor decisive (“it’s a sunny day, so I’ll take that job in Florida”). Or they might “pick” rather than “choose” (taking the latter term to mean basing a decision on reasons).17 Sometimes this happens when the stakes are very low. In the supermarket, busy shoppers often pick; if they were to choose (among, say, toothpastes or pain relievers or cereals) they might find themselves shopping for an intolerably long time. There are many public analogues. A legal system might, for example, use a lottery, and indeed lotteries are used in many domains where the burdens of individualized choice are high, and when there is some particular problem with deliberation about the grounds of choice, usually because of underlying asymmetries among the alternatives. Second-Order Decisions Sometimes the principal grants full authority to the agent to whom power has been delegated; “trustees” often have authority of this sort. Sometimes the principal retains ultimate power of decision. Thus, for example, in a system of separated and divided powers, warmaking decisions are typically delegated to specified officials, subject to various safeguards. In the private sphere, people may rely on the wisdom of those in whom they have great confidence, and here there is a continuum from mere consultation to a delegation of full authority over the outcome. A. Costs of Decisions and Costs of Errors Under what circumstances will, or should, an agent or institution choose one or another second-order strategy? Begin with a somewhat crude generalization: Rational people attempt to minimize the sum of the costs of making decisions and the costs of error, where the costs of making decisions are the costs of coming to closure on some action or set of actions, and where the costs of error are assessed by examining the number, the magnitude, and the kinds of errors. We understand “errors” as suboptimal outcomes, whatever the criteria for deciding optimality; thus both rules and delegations can produce errors. If the costs of producing optimal decisions were zero, it would be best to make individual calculations in each case, for this approach would produce judgments without compromising accuracy or any other important value. This would be true for individual agents and also for institutions. Two qualifications are necessary. The first is that people may want to relieve themselves of responsibility for certain decisions, even if those people would make those decisions correctly. This is an important reason for delegation (and hence institutional arrangements of various kinds, including the separation of powers). A second qualification comes from the fact that special problems are created by multi-party situations: public institutions seek to promote planning by setting down rules and presumptions in advance, and the need for planning can argue strongly against on-the-spot decisions even if they would be both correct and costless to achieve. We will take up these qualifications below. The chief motivation for second-order decisions is that most people know two important facts: their own (first-order) decisions may be wrong, and arriving at the right decision can be very difficult, or have high costs. For any agent these costs are of qualitatively diverse kinds: time, money, unpopularity, anxiety, boredom, agitation, anticipated ex post regret or remorse, feelings of responsibility for harm done to self or others, injury to selfconception, guilt, or shame. Things become differently complicated for multimember institutions, where interest-group pressures may be important, and where there is the special problem of reaching a degree of consensus. A legislature, for example, might find it especially difficult to specify the appropriate approach to affirmative action, given the problems posed by disagreement, varying intensity of preference, and aggregation problems; for similar reasons a multimember court may have a hard time agreeing on how to handle an asserted right to physician-assisted suicide. The result may Second-Order Decisions be strategies for delegation or for deferring decision, often via small steps. 19 Cf. Joseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom 23-31 (discussing authority). 20 See Stephen Holmes, supra note. this will prevent the President from being criticized for necessary but unpopular decisions (such as refusing to increase the supply of money when unemployment seems too high); the fact that the Federal Reserve Board is unelected is an advantage here. There are analogues in business, in workplaces, and even in families, where a mother or father may be given the responsibility for making certain choices, partly in order to relieve the other of responsibility. Of course this approach can cause predictable problems. These various points are closely related to two important phenomena: wanting not to have options and wanting not to have knowledge. Through restricting options and reducing knowledge, people can simplify decisions, and hence they often adopt a secondorder strategy to accomplish these goals. 21 A good discussion, highly relevant to second-order decisions, is Gerald Dworkin, Is More Choice Better Than Less, in Gerald Dworkin, Autonomy (1991). Second-Order Decisions (knowing that some of those to which I have not applied may be better than the best of the five to which I am admitted). There are other examples of enabling constraints; consider legislative procedures, or rules of order and relevance, designed to reduce the number of issues that can be considered at any one time. When something is considered “out of order,” by informal or formal rule, it is because this limitation, embodying a second-order decision, simplifies judgment by reducing options. feelings of responsibility 22 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Not Wanting in Reasoning Practically (Edna Ullmann-Margalit ed., forthcoming, Oxford University Press 1998). obtain information that may compromise the person who has become informed. Presidents and Supreme Court justices prevent themselves from knowing many relevant facts. Thus many secondorder decisions consist of a failure to secure more information, especially but not only if it is costless to do so. People fail to seek options or information, or take affirmative steps not to get either of these, in order to minimize the burdens of decision and the number and magnitude of errors, or to reduce actual or perceived responsibility. Thus far we have offered a taxonomy of second-order strategies and suggested some general grounds on which someone might pursue one or another approach. It will be useful to organize the discussion by observing that several of them require substantial thought before the fact of choice, but little thought during the process of ultimate choice, whereas others require little thought both before and during the process of choice. Thus there is a temporal difference in the imposition of decision costs, which we describe with the terms “High-Low” and “Low-Low.” To fill out the possibilities, we add “Low-High” and “High-High” as well. Note that by the terms decision costs we refer to the overall costs, which may be borne by different people or agencies: the work done before the fact of choice may not be carried out by the same actors who will have to do the thinking during the process of ultimate choice. Consider Table 1: Table 1: Burdens Ex Ante and Burdens Ex Post little ex post thinking little ex ante thinking substantial ex ante thinking Low-Low: picking; small steps; various heuristics; some standards (1) High-Low: rules; presumptions; some standards; routines (2) substantial ex post thinking Low-High: delegation (3) High-High: Hamlet; characters in Henry James novels; dysfunctional governments (4) Second-Order Decisions Cell 1 captures strategies that seem to minimize the overall burdens of decision (whether or not they promote good overall decisions). These are cases in which agents do not invest a great deal of thought either before or at the time of decision. Picking is the most obvious case; consider the analogous possibility of flipping a coin. Small steps are somewhat more demanding, since the agent does have to make some decisions, but because the steps are small, there need be comparatively little thought before or during the decision. As we have noted, cell 1 is the typical procedure of AngloAmerican common law; we shall soon investigate this method in more detail. The most sharply contrasting set of cases is High-High, Cell (4). As this cell captures strategies that maximize overall decision costs, it ought for our purposes to remain empty. Fortunately it seems to be represented only by a small minority of people in actual life (consider Hamlet or certain characters in Henry James novels and their real-world analogues, and also incompetent bureaucracies). Cell (2) captures a common aspiration for national legislatures and for ordinary agents who prefer their lives to be rule-bound. Some institutions and agents spend a great deal of time deciding on the appropriate rules; but once the rules are in place, decisions become extremely simple, rigid, even mechanical. Everyone knows people of this sort; they can seem both noble and frustrating precisely because letter. Legal formalism—the commitment to setting out clear rules in advance and mechanical decision afterwards—is associated with cell (2); indeed, the ideal of the rule of law itself seems to entail an aspiration to cell (2).23 follow rules they the to When a large number of decisions must be made, cell (2) is often the best approach, as the twentieth-century movement toward bureaucracy and simple rules helps to confirm. Individual cases of unfairness may be tolerable if the overall result is to prevent the system from being overwhelmed by decisional demands. Cell (2) is also likely to be the best approach when a large number of people is involved and it is known in advance that the people who will have to carry out on-the-spot decisions constantly change. Consider institutions with many employees and a large turnover of employees (the army, entry levels of large corporations, and so forth). The head of an organization may not want newly recruited, less-than-welltrained people to make decisions for the firm: rules should be in place so as to insure continuity and uniform level of performance. On the other hand, the fact that life will confound the rules often produces arguments for institutional reform in the form of granting power to administrators or employees to exercise “common sense” in the face of rules.24 An intermediate case can be found with most standards. The creation of the standard may itself require substantial thinking, but even when the standard is in place, agents may have to do some deliberating in order to reach closure. Decisions are not mechanical. Of course there are many different kinds of standards, and it is possible to imagine standards that require a great deal of thought ex ante and standards that require very little, just as it is possible to imagine standards that greatly simplify or standards that give relatively little guidance. Second-Order Decisions paternalism, which can be seen as arising whenever there is delegation without consent. follow one or another of the basic second-order strategies. A. Informal and Formal Delegations As a first approximation, a delegation is a second-order strategy that reduces the delegator’s costs both before and at the time of making the ultimate decision, through exporting those costs to the delegate. Informal delegations occur all the time. Thus, for example, one spouse may delegate to another the decision about what the family will eat for dinner, what investments to choose, or what car to buy; a dieting teenager may delegate to his older sibling or best friend the decision whether and when desert may be eaten; an author may delegate to his coauthor the decision how to handle issues within the latter’s expertise. These delegations often occur because the burdens of decision are high for the delegator but low for the delegate, who may have specialized information, who may lack relevant biases or motivational problems, or who may not mind (and who may even enjoy) taking responsibility for the decision in question. (These cases may then be more accurately captured as special cases of Low-Low.) The intrinsic costs of having to make the decision are often counterbalanced by the benefits of having been asked to assume responsibility for it (though these may be costs rather than benefits in some cases). Thus some delegates are glad to assume their role; this is important to, though it is not decisive for, the ethical issue whether to delegate (consider the question of justice within the family). And there is an uneasy line, raising knotty conceptual and empirical questions, between a delegation (with a delegator and a delegate) and division of labor (consider the allocation of household duties). or changes environmental Public institutions, most prominently legislatures, often delegate authority to some other entity. There are many possible factors here. A legislature may believe that it lacks information about, for example, the problems is an Environmental telecommunications market; the result Protection Agency or a Federal Communications Commission. Alternatively, the legislature may have the information but find itself unable to forge a consensus on underlying values about, for example, the right approach to affirmative action or to age discrimination. The legislature may be aware that its vulnerability to interest-group pressures will lead it in bad directions, and it may hope and believe that the object of the delegation will be relatively immune. Interestgroup pressures may themselves produce a delegation, as where powerful groups are unable to achieve a clear victory in a legislature but are able to obtain a grant of authority to an administrative agency over which they will have power. Or the legislature may not want to assume responsibility for some hard choice, fearing that decisions will Self-interested electoral representatives may well find it in their electoral self-interest to enact a vague or vacant standard (“the public interest,” “reasonable accommodation” of regulation” of pesticides), and to delegate the task of specification to someone else, secure in the knowledge that the delegate will be blamed for problems in implementation. produce reprisal. Obviously a delegation is sometimes a mistake—an abdication of responsibility, an act of unfairness, a recipe for more rather than fewer errors. But when is delegation the right option? Delegation deserves to be considered whenever an appropriate delegate is available and there is a sense in which it is inappropriate for the agent to be making the decision by himself. Before delegating, comparison with other possible approaches may well be in order. As compared with making all first-order decisions on an all-things Second-Order Decisions considered basis, a delegation promises to lower decision costs, certainly for the delegator and on certain assumptions on balance; this depends on the capacities of the delegate (can he or she make decent decisions quickly?). If the delegate is trustworthy, the delegation may well produce fewer mistakes. transferring the burdens of decision to someone else who should not be forced to bear them alone. agency) (usually an legitimacy of delegations In institutional settings, there is an analogous problem if the delegate lacks political administrative accountability even if it has relevant expertise. The result is the to continuing debate over administrative agencies.25 Such delegations can be troublesome if they shift the burden of judgment from a democratically elected body to one that is insulated from political control. So too, there is a possibly illegitimate abdication of authority when a judge delegates certain powers to law clerks (as is occasionally alleged about Supreme Court justices) or to special masters who are expert in complex questions of fact and law (as is alleged in connection with a proposed delegation in the Microsoft litigation). Avoidance of responsibility may be a serious problem here. Three important complications deserve comment. First, any delegate may itself resort to making second-order decisions, and it is familiar to find delegates undertaking each of the strategies that we have described. Sometimes delegates prefer High-Low and hence generate rules; almost everyone knows that this is the typical strategy of the Internal Revenue Service, a delegate of Congress that likes to proceed via rule. Many spouses, delegated the power of decision by their husbands or wives, operate in similar fashion. Presumptions may be favored over rules for the now-familiar reason that they can reduce ex ante costs and promote greater “flow.” Alternatively, delegates may use standards or proceed by small steps. This is the general approach of the National Labor Relations Board, which (strikingly) avoids rules whenever it can, and much prefers to proceed case-by-case. Or a delegate may undertake a subdelegation. Confronted with a delegation from her husband, a wife may consult a sibling or a parent. Asked by Congress to make hard choices, the President may and frequently does subdelegate to some kind of commission, for some of the same reasons that spurred Congress to delegate in the first instance. Of course a delegate may just pick. She 25 Compare David Schoenbrod, Power Without Responsibility (1995) with Jerry Mashaw, Chaos, Greed, and Governance (1997). Second-Order Decisions may, for example, choose to flip a coin, or she may decide without doing much thinking about what decision is best. Thus far we have been discussing cases in which the delegator exports costs to some other party. What about the intrapersonal case? On the one hand, there is no precise analogy between that problem and the cases under discussion. On the other hand, people confronted with hard choices can often be understood to have chosen to delegate the power of choice to their future selves. Consider, for example, such decisions as whether to buy a house, to have another child, to get married or divorced, to move to a new city; in such cases agents who procrastinate may understand themselves to have delegated the decision to their future selves. Second-Order Decisions A. Diverse Rules, Diverse Presumptions We have suggested that rules and presumptions belong in this category, and frequently this is true. But the point must be qualified; some rules and presumptions do not involve high burdens of decision before the fact. For example, a rule might be picked rather than chosen—drive on the right-hand side of the road, or spoons to the right, forks to the left. Especially when what it is important is to allow all actors to coordinate on a single course of conduct, there need be little investment in decisions about the content of the relevant rule. A rule might even be framed narrowly, so as to work as a kind of small step. A court might decide, for example, that a law excluding homosexuals from the armed services is unconstitutional, and this decision might be framed as a rule; but the court’s opinion could be issued in such a way as to leave undecided most other issues involving the constitutional status of homosexuals. Rules often embody small steps. Of course the same points can be made about presumptions, which are sometimes picked rather than chosen and which might be quite narrow. In most well-functioning legal systems, for example, it is clear what is and what is not a crime. People need to know when they may be subject to criminal punishment for what they do. The American Constitution is taken to require a degree of clarity in the criminal law, and every would-be tyrant knows that rules may be irritating constraints on his authority. So too, the law of contract and property is mostly defined by clear rules, simply because people could not otherwise plan, and in order for economic development to be possible they need to be in a position to do so. B. Of Planning and Trust Often institutions are faced with the decision whether to adopt a High-Low strategy or whether instead to delegate. We have seen contexts in which a delegation is better. But in three kinds of circumstances the High-Low approach is to be preferred. First, when planning is important, it is important to set out rules (or presumptions) in advance. The law of property is an example. Second, there is little reason to delegate when the agent or institution has a high degree of confidence that a rule (or presumption) can be generated at reasonable cost, that the rule (or Second-Order Decisions presumption) will be accurate, and that it will actually be followed. is better when no Third, and most obviously, High-Low trustworthy delegate is available, or when it seems unfair to ask another person or institution to make the relevant decision. Hence legislatures tend in the direction of rule-like judgment when they have little confidence in the executive; in America, parts of the Clean Air Act are a prime example of a self-conscious choice of High-Low over delegation. Liberal democracies these considerations as special reasons to justify rules in the context of criminal law: The law defining crimes is reasonably rule-like, partly because of the importance of citizen knowledge about what counts as a crime, partly because of a judgment that police officers and courts cannot be trusted to define the content of the law. When would High-Low be favored over Low-Low (picking, small steps)? The interest in planning is highly relevant here and often pushes in the direction of substantial thinking in advance. If the agent or institution has faith in its ability to generate a good rule or presumption, it does not make much sense to proceed by random choice or incrementally. Hence legislatures have often displaced the common law approach of case-by-case judgment with clear rules set out in advance; in England and America, this has been a great movement of the twentieth century, largely because of the interest in planning and decreased faith in the courts’ ability to generate good outcomes through small steps. Problems, and Recovering Addicts Thus far we have been stressing public decisions. In their individual capacity, people frequently adopt rules, presumptions, or self-conscious routines in order to guide decisions that they know might, in individual cases, be too costly to make or be made incorrectly because of their own motivational problems. Sarah might decide, for example, that she will turn down all invitations for outof-town travel in the month of September, or John might adopt a presumption against going to any weddings or funerals unless they involve close family members, or Fred might make up his mind that at dinner parties, he will drink whatever the host is drinking. Rules, presumptions, and routines of this kind are an omnipresent feature of practical reason; sometimes they are chosen self-consciously and as an exercise of will, but often they are, or become, so familiar and simple that they appear to the agent not to be choices at all. Problems may arise when a person finds that he cannot stick to his resolution, and thus High-Low may turn into High-High, and things may be as if the second-order decision had not been made at all. Second-Order Decisions delegate instead. Whether a delegation (Low-High) is preferable to a rule or presumption (High-Low) will depend in turn on the various considerations discussed above. A. Equipoise, Responsibility, and Commitment Why might an institution or agent pick rather than choose? When would small steps be best? At the individual level, it can be obvious that when you are in equipoise, you might as well pick; it simply is not worthwhile to go through the process of choosing with its high cognitive or emotional costs. As we have seen, the result can be picking in both low-stakes (cereal choices) and highstakes (employment opportunities) settings. Picking can even be said to operate as a kind of delegation, where the object of the delegation is “fate,” and the agent loses the sense of responsibility that might accompany an all-things-considered judgment. Thus some people sort out hard questions by resorting to a chance device (like flipping a coin). apportioning what many people regard as a social burden). In light of the purposes of the jury system, alternative allocation methods would be worse; consider stated willingness serve, an individualized inquiry into grounds for excuse, or financial payments (either to serve or not to serve). For military service, related judgments are involved, in the form of a belief that any stated criteria for service might be morally suspect, and hence a belief that random outcomes produce less in the way of error.28 to B. Change, Unintended Consequences, and Reversibility Lotteries involve random processes; small steps do not. We have said that Anglo-American judges often proceed case-by-case, as a way of minimizing the burdens of decision and the consequences of error. In fact many legal cultures embed a kind of norm in favor of incremental movement. They do this partly because of the distinctive structure of adjudication and the limited information available to the judge: in any particular case, a judge will hear from the parties immediately affected, but little from others whose interests might be at stake. Hence there is a second-order decision in favor of small steps. 28 On ethical and political issues associated with lotteries in general, see Jon Elster, Solomonic Judgments 36-122 (1993). Second-Order Decisions of too much information. A particular case may have a surplus of apparently relevant details, and perhaps future cases will lack one or more of the relevant features, and this will be the source of the concern with creating wide precedents. The existence of (inter alia) features X or Y in case A, missing in case B, makes it hazardous to generate a rule in case A that would govern case B. The narrow writing and reception of the Supreme Court’s decision in the celebrated Amish case, allowing an exemption of Amish children from mandatory public schooling, is an example. rare participant is able to see a number of steps down the road—to understand the multiple effects of one-shot interventions on the system. The successful participants are alert to this risk and take small, reversible steps, allowing planning to occur over time. Hence Dorner, along with others focussing on the problems created by interventions into systems,31 argues in favor of small steps. Judges face similar problems, and incremental decisions are a good way of responding to the particular problem of bounded rationality created by ignorance of possible adverse effects. A. Second-Order Strategies The discussion is summarized in Table 2. Recall that the terms “low” and “high” refer to the overall costs of the decision, which are not necessarily borne by the same agent: with Low-High the costs are split between delegator and delegate; with High-Low they may split between an institution (which makes the rules, say) and an agent (who follows the rules). Strategies Examples Potential Advantages Potential Disadvantages Appropriate Context 1. low-high: delegation spouses, friends; administrative agencies relief from direct responsibility for ultimate decisions; increased chance for good outcomes Anglo-American common law; lotteries; big personal decisions low overall costs; reversibility; coping with change and with unintended consequences problems relating to trust, fairness, and responsibility; possible high costs in deciding whether and to whom to delegate difficulty of planning; high aggregate decision costs; multiple mistakes 2. low-low: picking, small steps, various heuristics 3. high-low: rules, presumptions, routines speed limit laws; legal formalism; criminal law; recovering addicts; rigid people Hamlet; Henry James characters; dysfunctional governments low costs of numerous decisions once in place; uniformity; facilitates planning difficulty of generating good rules or presumptions; mistakes once in place none (unless decision costs are actually pleasant to incur and decisions end up being good) paralysis; unpopularity; individual or institutional collapse availability of appropriate and trustworthy delegate; high burdens of, or perceived likelihood of error in, decision by delegator equipoise/symmetry of preferences or values; aversion of drastic changes; fear of unanticipated consequences sheer number of anticipated decisions/decisionmakers; repetitive nature of future decisions; need for planning, confidence in ability to generate ex ante decisions agency or institution cannot do otherwise B. Do People Make Second-Order Decisions? favor, given We have not yet discussed an important underlying issue: do people, or institutions, actually make a self-conscious decision about which second-order strategy the menu of to possibilities? Sometimes this is indeed the case. A legislature may, for example, deliberate and decide to delegate rather than to attempt to generate rules; a court may choose, self-consciously, to proceed incrementally; having rejected the alternatives, a President may recommend a lottery system rather than other alternatives for admitting certain aliens to the country. Thus it is possible to think of cases in which an institution or a person expressly makes an allthings-considered decision in favor of one or another second-order strategy. Second-Order Decisions showing that this strategy is preferable to the realistic alternatives.32 Often a court or even a state would do best to proceed via small steps, in such a way as to ensure reversibility; this is an important means of avoiding the problems associated with social planning, even for those who do not believe that a general antipathy to state planning is warranted. But it is possible to find circumstances in which small steps lead to disaster, by preventing those who must deal with the law from predicting its content. People do not generally make selfconscious second-order decisions, and often this is fortunate; but the discussion here has been intended as an initial step toward making it possible to be more systematic and conscious about the relevant options. In the course of making decisions, people are often reluctant to calculate the costs and benefits of the alternatives. Instead they resort to second-order strategies designed to reduce the burdens of firstlow number of order decisions while producing a tolerably suboptimal outcomes. This is a pervasive aspect of the exercise of practical reason, and second-order decisions have large consequences for individuals, for institutions, and for societies. Delegations can take many different forms, with more or less control retained by the person or institution making the delegation. Strategies of delegation make sense when a delegate is available who has relevant expertise (perhaps because he is a specialist) or is otherwise trustworthy (perhaps because he does not suffer from bias or some other motivational problem), or when there are special political, strategic, or other advantages to placing the responsibility for decision on some other person or institution. Delegations can create problems of unfairness, as when delegates are burdened with tasks that they do not voluntarily assume, or would not assume under just conditions, and when the delegation is inconsistent with the social role of the delegator, such as a legislature or a court. Hence delegations can be troubling from the point of view of democracy or the separation of powers. Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence The Law School The University of Chicago 1111 E. 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics (Second Series) 1. William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 4. Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of 8. William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 21. Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle 22. Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the 23. William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis 24. J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). American Business Enterprise (April 1995). and Biotechnology (November 1995). Autobiographical Essay (March 1997).