Faculty Scholarship 

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness: Evidence 
Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness: Evidence 

University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1998 

from Law Students 
from Law Students 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Christopher E. Houston 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein & Christopher E. Houston, "Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness: 
Evidence from Law Students," 48 Journal of Legal Education 496 (1998). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Risk Assessment, Resource
Allocation,  and Fairness:
Evidence  from  Law Students

Christopher E.  Houston  and Cass R. Sunstein

Articles,  discussions,  and  research  about  risk  assessment  and  resource
allocation  often  refer  to  observed  differences  between  laypersons  and  "ex-
perts."'  Experts are said to assess risk and to allocate  resources with  the goal of
maximizing  the expected  number of lives saved;  laypersons  are said to  depart
from  this goal,  partly  because  they  make  frequent  errors,  and  also  because
they  give  weight  to  qualitative  variables  that  make  for  distinctions  among
quantitatively  identical  risks.  Ordinary people,  it is said,  care about whether
risks  are equitably  distributed, voluntarily incurred, controllable,  or faced  by
future generations;  they depart from the  expert's focus  on lives saved.2

No one knows whether  lawyers demonstrate "expert" patterns of risk assess-
ment and  resource  allocation;  it might  seem  intuitive  to  think  that they  do,
especially,  perhaps,  if they  have  been  trained  with  an  emphasis  on  the  eco-
nomic analysis  of law. Whether expert or not, the patterns of assessment  and
allocation that lawyers  exhibit likely have great influence  in the modern state,
for lawyers  tend  to dominate arenas of governmental  decision-making.  There
is an ample literature on risk assessment, well worth consulting in  connection
with  an  Administrative  Law  course;3  but  that literature  says  little  about how
lawyers  and public officials  respond  to risk.

We attempted to study these patterns  partly to learn something about how
law students and hence  lawyers  are likely to think. But there  is a pedagogical
issue  as well.  In Administrative  Law,  students must learn  a good  deal  about
regulatory policy, and in order to do that, they should have some sense of the
need to allocate  resources among different risks. Why do some risks receive  so

Christopher E. Houston is  an associate with Ropes & Gray in  Boston. Cass R. Sunstein  is  Karl N.
Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Law at the University of Chicago.

1.  For general discussion of experts, ordinary people, and risk assessment,  see Richard  H. Pildes

& Cass  R. Sunstein, Reinventing the  Regulatory State, 62  U.  Ci.  L. Rev. 1 (1995).

2.  A helpful discussion is  Howard Margolis, Dealing with Risk: Why the  Public and  the Experts

Disagree  on Environmental  Issues  (Chicago,  1996).

3.  See  Baruch  Fischhoff  et  al.,  Acceptable  Risk  (New  York,  1981),  and  the  summaries  in
Stephen  G.  Breyer et al.,  Administrative  Law  and  Regulatory  Policy, 4th  ed.,  310-14  (New
York, 1998);  Robert V. Percival et al., Environmental Regulation: Law, Science, and Policy, 2d
ed.,  513-19  (Boston,  1996).

Journal of Legal  Education,  Volume  48, Number 4  (December  1998)

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 496 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness

much attention, and why are other risks so often neglected?4 This is a pressing
question in  both administrative  and environmental  law.  It is therefore  useful
to  think  of ways  to  direct  students  to  consider  regulatory  priority-setting,
preferably in such a way as to encourage  their active discussion of these issues
from early on  in the  course.

To  understand  the  risk  assessment  and  resource  allocation  patterns  of
lawyers  (and also  to  evaluate  whether  those  patterns  are  "expert"  or  other-
wise),  we  administered  two surveys  at the University of Chicago  Law SchoolY
The  University  of Chicago  is a particularly  apt school at which  to determine
whether lawyers--or,  more  accurately,  future  lawyers-are  more  like  layper-
sons or like  experts  in  their risk assessment  and resource  allocation,  because
the  school  has  a  well-known  and  long-standing  reputation  in  the  eco-
nomic analysis  of law. This paper discusses  these surveys and  results obtained
from them.

We administered  the first survey in January  1997  to 118  second- and  third-
year law students taking Administrative Law.  The  second survey was  given in
January  1998  to 94 second- and third-year law students taking Administrative
Law. We administered  both surveys on  the first day of class,  so that the results
would  not  be  tainted  by information  conveyed  and  discussed in  class,  espe-
cially  about risk assessment  and resource  allocation.  We  analyze  the surveys,
and we  present the results  below, in three  sections:  the  first section  discusses
resource  allocation,  the  second  discusses  risk assessment,  and  the  third  dis-
cusses fairness.  Our principal findings are as follows.

"  Law  students  act like  ordinary  people  rather  than  experts  in  the
particular sense  that they care  about variables  other thf.n number
of lives saved.  When  they are  given information  beyond  the num-
ber of lives saved,  equity becomes more important to them; and  to
achieve  equitable  resource  allocation,  they are willing to  sacrifice
the total number of lives saved. But the total number of lives saved
is  the  predominant  factor  in  resource  allocation,  and  there  is  a
ceiling  on  the  extent  to  which  other  considerations  will  prompt
them  to  allocate  resources  more equitably,  like  ordinary  people,
and less like  experts.

"  Law students seem  to behave  more like experts when assessing risk
levels  themselves;  that  is,  their  assessments  are  not substantially
incongruentwith  expert assessments, or at least not as incongruent
as the assessments  of laypersons. When  asked to establish  funding
priorities,  however,  law students  do  go  far  beyond  expert  assess-
ments  of risk alone.  Specifically,  they  incorporate  considerations
such  as  voluntariness,  alternative  possibilities  for  addressing  the
risk apart from government funding, breadth  of effect, and effects
on children and other innocent parties;  they are responsive  to  the

4.  This  is  the principal  question in  Stephen  Breyer, Breaking the Vicious  Circle  (Cambridge,

Mass.,  1993).

5.  The survey instruments are available from the authors.

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 497 1998

Journal of Legal Education

concerns  of ordinary  people,  even  when  those  concerns  are  not
matched orjustified  by expert assessments.
Law students, at least  at the University  of Chicago,  are very differ-
ent from  ordinary  people  in  their judgments  about  the  relation
between  markets  and fairness.  Ordinary people  think that certain
market-driven behavior is unfair, but law students disagree sharply.
Law  students  also  offer  interesting  and  highly  distinctive  judg-
ments  about price increases  with  risk  to important  products,  and
with  respect  to  both subsidies  and  price regulation.  (It would  be
extremely interesting to find  out whether  this is a consequence  of
being the sort of person  who chooses law  school,  or of law school
itself, or of the University of Chicago  Law School.)

Resource Allocation Among Risks  and Programs

The 1997Preliminary Survey

We  designed  the  1997  preliminary  survey  to  test  the  extent  to  which
number  of lives saved, or perhaps some  other goals, would  play a role in  law
students' resource allocation decisions. The most straightforward finding was
that the  number of lives saved is far from the sole consideration  for purposes
of allocating  money.  On  the  contrary, law  students are willing  to save  fewer
lives  in return for  the achievement  of other  social goals.  The  most relevant
question posited that the respondent was "entrusted with the task of allocating
$100  million  among  a  number  of possible  regulatory  activities."  Then  the
survey listed  the following six programs.

A.  Spend  all $100  million  on AIDS  education,  prevention,  and treatment,

with estimated annual  savings of 120 lives.

B.  Spend $50 million on enforcement activity relating to toxic air pollutants,

with estimated annual savings  of 10 lives.

C.  Spend $50  million  on  safety inspections of nuclear power plants, which
would  carry  an  estimated  annual  savings  of no  lives  but would  satisfy
many members  of the public  who  are  concerned  about nuclear  power
plant safety and are demanding greater attention  to these safety risks.
D.  Spend $25  million on  heightened  security  measures  at airports, which
would  carry  an  estimated  annual  savings  of only  0.5  lives  but  would
respond  to greater public  demand  for airport security  following  recent
highly  publicized  accidents.

E.  Spend  $100  million  on  a  vigorous  antismoking  campaign  involving
education, restrictions on sales to minors, and higher tobacco taxes, with
estimated annual savings of 200 lives.

F.  Spend $50  million on preventing lead ingestion by children in the inner

city, with estimated annual savings  of 50 lives.

The survey item then  posited that the respondent's advisers  had narrowed

the  policy options for allocating the $100  million  to the following.

1.  Adopt program A (AIDS)  in its entirety, saving  120  lives annually.
2.  Adopt program  E  (smoking) in its entirety, saving  200  lives annually.
3.  Spend  $50 million  on program A (AIDS) and $50  million on program  E

(smoking),  for a total  savings of 160  lives annually.

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 498 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness

4.  Spend  $20  million  on  program  A  (AIDS),  $25  million  on  program  E
(smoking),  $25 million on program  B (toxic  air pollutants),  $20 million
on program D  (airport security),  and $10  million on program C  (nuclear
power  plants),  for a total savings of 79.5 lives  annually.

5.  Spend  $50  million. on  program  F  (lead ingestion)  and $50  million  on

program  E (smoking),  for a total savings of 150 lives annually.

6.  Spend $50  inillion  on.program  F  (lead ingestion)  and $50  million  on

program  A  (AIDS), for a total savings of 110  lives annually.

For all but the first two allocations  (for which  calculation  of lives saved was
obvious  from  the  program  description),  the  number  of lives  saved  annually
was  provided.  The  dependent  measure  for  this  survey  item  was  threefold:
respondents  were  asked  to indicate,  of those six  allocations,  which  was their
most-preferred  allocation,  which  their second-most-preferred  allocation,  and
which  their least-preferred.  Table  1  displays  the frequencies  with which  each
allocation  was  chosen  in these dependent  measures.

Table  1: Resource  Allocation Distributions  (1997 Preliminary  Survey)

Allocation Policy

Number of lives saved 
Number of programs 
First choice 
Second choice 
(First or second  choice) 
Least-preferred  choice 

1 
120 
1 
1 
7 
8 
23 

2 
200 
1 
25 
7 
32 
15 

3 
160 
2 
24 
42 
66 
7 

4 
79.5 
5 
22 
17 
39 
51 

5 
150 
2 
32 
20 
52 
16 

6
110
2
14
24
38
6

Had  the  respondents  attended  only  to  the  number  of  lives  saved  by  a
particular  allocation,  they would  have  overwhelmingly  favored  allocation  2,
spending  all  of the  money  on  antismoking  measures  and  saving  200  lives
annually. While this allocation did receive 25  first-place votes, there were  even
more first-place  votes  for allocation  5,  splitting the  money  between  smoking
and  lead ingestion but saving 50 fewer  lives annually. In addition, allocation 2
was second-to-last  in number  of combined first-place  and second-place  votes;
the allocation  receiving  most combined first-place and second-place  votes was
allocation  3,  splitting  the  money between  two  programs  and saving  160  lives
annually.  Allocation  4, which  split the  money among five  different  programs
was  near  average  in  receiving  first-place  and  second-place  votes,  but  more
interesting  was  its  receiving  far  and  away  the  most  last-place  votes.  Finally,
while  spending  money  on  AIDS  was  chosen  often  when  it  was joined with
other programs, spending money on AIDS alone received the least number of
first-place  and  second-place  votes  and  the  second-highest  number  of last-
place votes.

These  initial results, as well as other rough exploratory analyses of the data,

led  to the  following hypotheses.

*  The  number  of lives  saved  might  be  a substantial  factor  in  the
respondent's  choice  of  allocation,  but  it  was  not  the  exclusive
factor  and  might  not  have  been  even  a  dominant  factor.  (For

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 499 1998

Journal of Legal Education

example,  one  very  rough  exploratory  analysis  indicated  that  as
little as 2.5  percent of the variance  in  response  to  these measures
might  have  been  explicable  by the  number  of lives  saved  under
each allocation.)

"  Addressing  only one problem might be less preferable in itself than
addressing two problems; but addressing five problems and possibly
spreading the money too diffusely might be least  preferable.

"  AIDS  seemed  somewhat  important  but  only  in  conjunction  with
some  other  program;  spending  money  on  AIDS  alone  was  least
popular as a first or second choice.

These  hypotheses,  if  true,  are  quite  interesting.  They  suggest  that  law
students  (and perhaps  lawyers)  differ greatly from  experts  insofar as they  do
not focus  on  the numbers  alone.  They also  suggest  that law  students  like  to
spread  money among a variety of programs-but  that there  are  limits on the
extent  to  which  they  like  to  spread.  (One  reason  for  this  limit  might  be
cognitive  difficulty  in  assessing  more  complex  allocations;  another  reason
might be  a sense  that, if resources  are spread too  diffusely among programs,
no  program  will  achieve  any material  benefit.)  Finally,  they suggest a  reluc-
tance to devote resources  to AIDS alone. This possible reluctance  might stem
from  distributional  concerns;  it might also  stem from a belief that AIDS  is in
some  sense  a product of voluntary  activity  that could  be  negligent or worse.
(One  might  think  that  smoking  would  similarly  be  considered  a  voluntary
activity. But many people might perceive smoking as less voluntary and at least
partially  caused  by  manipulative  efforts  of the  tobacco  industry.  Recent  re-
search on the effectiveness  ofantismoking campaigns points to the strength  of
such  perceptions:  the most effective  campaigns seem to be those urging their
targets  not to  be manipulated by the  tobacco industry.6 )

The 1998 Survey
The 1998 survey sought to test and refine  the hypotheses generated by the
preliminary  1997  survey,  as  well  as  several  additional  hypotheses  about  re-
source  allocation  among risks  and  regulatory  programs.  In the  relevant  por-
tion of the 1998 survey, respondents were again asked to allocate  $100  million
among nine programs or regions, as described  below. In this survey, however,
they were  free to allocate  the $100  million among the  programs  or regions  in
any proportions  they wished,  rather  than  being limited  to  fixed  allocations
provided for them. Moreover, there was no minimum or maximum allocation
for any  one program  nor any requirement  to fund  a minimum or  maximum
number  of  programs.  The  resource  allocation  portion  of  the  1998  survey
required  the most complex  analysis and  interpretation, in  part because  there
were  five  variant  conditions  for  this  portion  of the  survey.  The  underlying
rationale  for  these  varying  conditions  (and for  this  portion  of  the  survey

6.  See  Lisa  K. Goldman  & Stanton  A.  Glantz,  Evaluation  of Antkmoking  Advertising  Cam-

paigns, 279JAMA  772  (1998).

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 500 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness

generally)  was  that we  wanted  to  assess  the  extent  to which  various  types  of
information would affect the respondents'  allocations.

Our basic findings  were  that  the law students behaved  like  experts  to  this
extent: the  number  of lives  saved was  the predominant  factor  in  their alloca-
tions.  But  even  with  no  information  other  than  the  number  of lives  saved,
respondents  sacrificed  some lives  saved  in  the  interest  of breadth  or  equity.
And  when  information  of any  sort was  added  to  the  number  of lives  saved,
breadth  and  equity  became  even  more  prominent,  although  the  effect  of
additional  information  was  limited  and  the  number  of lives  saved  seemed
always to remain the predominant factor. Finally, the 1998 survey also yielded
insight about the  effects  of special  interest  groups,  regarding  allocation  for
AIDS,  and regarding  the intriguing possibility that people  make their alloca-
tions by establishing the highest and lowest priorities  and then leaving what is
left to the middle  (rather than, for instance, making allocations in serial  order
of priority).

In one  condition  (the program-basic  condition),  we  briefly  described  the
nine  programs  and,  for  each  program,  projected  the  number  of lives  to  be
saved annually, as follows.

1.  AIDS research,  education, prevention,  and treatment  (projected to save

12.0 lives  annually per $10  million  spent).

2.  Cancer  research,  education,  prevention,  and  treatment  (projected  to

save  12.0 lives annually per $10  million  spent).

3.  Enforcement activity  directed at toxic  air  pollutants  (projected  to save

5.0 lives annually  per $10  million spent).

4.  Prevention  of lead ingestion by  children in schools and other buildings

(projected  to save  6.0 lives annually per $10  million spent).

5.  Removal  of asbestos  from school  buildings  (projected  to save  2.0  lives

6. 

7. 

annually per $10  million spent).
Increased  safety  inspections  of nuclear power  plants  (projected  to save
0.0 lives annually per $10  million  spent).
Increased safety inspections ofairlines (projected to save 0.5 lives annually
per $10  million spent).

8.  Aggressive  antismoking campaign  involving  advertisements,  education,
restrictions  on  sales  to  minors,  and  higher  taxes  on tobacco  products
(projected to save  16.0 lives annually per $10  million  spent).

9.  Wide-reaching  fitness and nutrition campaign involving advertisements,
education,  and  various  wellness  programs  and  incentive  programs
(projected to save  16.0 lives annually per $10  million  spent).

A  second  condition  (the  program-enhanced  condition)  sought  to  deter-
mine  the  extent  to  which  certain specific  factors  other  than  the number  of
lives saved and  the  nature  of the  risk would  affect allocation  patterns. These
additional factors  included political accountability,  distributional effects,  and
public opinion. In this condition, respondents  received the same information
described above, but for some of the programs,  there was additional  informa-
tion, as follows.

*  The  description  of program  1  (AIDS)  added  that  "AIDS-related
spending was a visible part of your party's most recent  campaign."

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 501 1998

Journal of Legal Education

*  Program 4 was  described  as  preventing lead  ingestion by  children

in  inner-city schools and buildings.

"  Program 5 was  described as the removal  of asbestos from allschool

buildings.

*  The  description  of program  6  (nuclear  power  plant inspections)
added  that  "some  members  of  the  public  are  increasingly  con-
cerned with nuclear power plant safety and are assertively demand-
ing greater  attention to these potentially  catastrophic  risks."

*  The  description  of  program  7  (airline  inspections)  added  that
.recent  highly  publicized  incidents  have  focused  public  attention
on airline safety."

*  The descrilItion  of program 8 added that the program was strongly

opposed by the  tobacco  industry and farmers.

"  The  descriptions  of programs  2,  3,  and 9  (cancer/toxic air pollut-

ants/fitness and nutrition)  were left unchanged.

A  third  condition  (the  program-minimal  condition)  identified  the  pro-
grams simply as Program 1, Program  2, etc., and offered  no information other
than the number of lives saved annually per $10  million spent. The purpose  of
this was twofold: first, to establish a baseline allocation absent any information
but lives  saved,  to which we  could  compare  the  allocations  generated where
additional  information  was  given;  and  second,  to verify that the respondents
were willing and able to allocate  like experts,  at least when lives saved was  the
only  information provided.

Although these  three conditions were presumed to  elucidate the effects of
various  types  of information,  we  wanted  to  isolate  further  the effects  of the
supplemental information in the program-enhanced  condition, independently
of the  particular  program  to  which  such  information  was  attached.  For  ex-
ample, perhaps being a visible part of one's party's campaign might have some
effect on allocations for AIDS but not for other programs. But there were  too
many permutations  to test each piece  of supplemental  information with each
program, and besides,  it could be that our programs were not broad  enough.
Accordingly, we sought to assess whether the supplemental information would
have any effects  completely  apart  from the  nature of a program,  and we  did
this by creating  two additional  conditions,  in which  the  fund  recipients were
not "programs" but "regions."  In these fourth  and fifth conditions,  the survey
posited:

A new government program  is to be implemented. For purposes of analyzing
the program's effects and distributing funds for the program, the country has
been  divided  into  nine  regions  of approximately  equal  populition.  With
regard  to  the  number  of lives  saved,  the  program  has  different  effects  in
different regions. The other effects of the program do not differ substantially
among regions.  Assume  that you are responsible for allocating  $100  million
among the different  regions.

One  of  these  two  "region"  conditions  (the  region-minimal  condition)
merely  provided  the number  of lives that  the  program  was  projected  to save

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 502 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness

annually  (per $10  million spent) in that particular region.  This condition was
analogous  (and nearly  identical)  to  the  program-minimal  condition,  which
offered only such information  for "programs," and  the numbers of lives saved
for the regions  matched those for the programs.

In  addition  to  this  same  information  about  numbers  of lives  saved,  the
other  "region"  condition  (the  region-enhanced)  added supplemental  infor-
mation  as  similar  as  possible  to  that  which  was  added  in  the  program-
enhanced  condition, as follows.

"  For  region  1, the description  of the number  of lives  saved  added
that "this  region  was  a key  supporter  of your  party's  most recent
campaign."

*  For region 4, the lives saved were noted to be "mostly lives of inner-

city children."

schoolchildren."

"  For  region  5,  the  lives  saved  were  noted  to  be  "mostly  lives  of

"  For  region  6,  the description  of the  number  of lives  saved  added
that "some members  of the  public are increasingly  concerned  that
this region  might suffer  catastrophic loss  of lives without  the  pro-
gram.

"  For region  7,  the  description  of the  number  of lives  saved added
that "recent highly publicized incidents  have focused  public atten-
tion  on this region's problems."

"  For region  8,  the  description  of the  number  of lives  saved added
that "implementing the program in this region is strongly opposed
by two powerful  special-interest groups."

"  For  regions  2,  3,  and  9,  the  descriptions  of the  number  of lives
saved  were  left unchanged  and  not  enhanced  by  supplemental
information.

The 1998 Survey Results

General  Patterns:  Efficiency Versus Equity in Resource  Allocation

Respondents  adhering  to expert judgments  would generally  allocate  their
.$100 million  so as  to maximize  the  number  of lives  saved  annually;  in  that
sense,  they  should strive  for  maximum  efficiency.'  Efficiency  in  this  sense
would entail allocating all of the money to program  8, to program 9, or to both
in any proportion,  yielding a total of 160  lives saved  annually. But far from a
majority  of the respondents  allocated  their  funds  in the  maximally  efficient
manner;  on  the contrary,  only  23  respondents  (24.5%)  did so.  Clearly, then,
factors other than maximizing number of lives saved affected the  vast majority of the

7.  We  do not mean  efficiency in a technical sense, which  would be based on willingness  to pay,
a  criterion that would  generate  something other  than maximizing  lives saved.  See  Valuing
Health for Policy- An Economic Approach,  eds. George Tolley et al.  (Chicago,  1994).

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 503 1998

Journal of Legal Education

allocations chosen-and the  purpose  of this survey was  indeed  to  discern  what
some of those factors might be.8

One  potential  factor  was  apparent  in  the  preliminary  1997  survey  (and
discussed briefly  above):  namely, people  might prefer  not to  put all  of their
allocation  in  one  basket,  as  it were,  but  instead  to spread  the wealth  among
recipients.  A  possible  explanation  for  this  preference  is  that  people  are
hedging against  the risk  that any one  program  might  fail  to  meet its projec-
tions for lives  saved;  as  one  allocates  funds  to other  programs,  one is  better
assured  that  at  least  one  of  those  programs  will  meet  expectations.  This
explanation is analogous  to  the explanation for asset allocation  and  diversifi-
cation in investment portfolios. But this explanation  seems  less  than compel-
ling- the survey simply asserted  projections of lives saved, without delving into
probabilities of saving more or fewer lives than projected. We are not inclined
to  believe  that  so  many  respondents  considered  such  matters  and  hedged
accordingly.

Instead, fairness or  equity is probably a better  explanation  for the  tendency
to  spread  the  wealth  among  more  programs  than just the  one  or  two  that
would  maximize  efficiency.  If  only  one  or  two  programs  receive  the  $100
million,  then all  who would  benefit  from  the  other programs  are  effectively
shut out;  those whose  lives might be saved  by the less-than-maximally-efficient
programs  enjoy no  heightened  prospect  at  all.  By  contrast,  if the  money  is
allocated  among  more  programs,  the  total  benefit  may  not  be  as  high,  but
perhaps respondents believe  that more people--or more diverse people-will
enjoy some incremental  benefit of an increased probability that their lives will
be saved.'

We  operationalized  these  two  factors,  efficiency  and  equity,  via  summary
statistics  derived  from  each  respondent's  allocation  among  programs.  The
simple proxy for efficiency was the total number of lives saved annually under
the  respondent's  allocation  of the  whole  $100  million;  we  will  refer  to  this
variable as  total lives. For each program,  we calculated the  actual lives saved as
follows:

(millions allocated)  x  (lives saved per $10  million)  /  $10  million.

We  then  summed  the actual  lives saved  for  each  program  to  get  the  total
lives. Under maximum  efficiency, where the entire  $100  million was allocated.

8.  One  adjustment  to  the  results  was  necessary  to  conduct  the  analyses  described  below.
Specifically, for eight of the respondents, allocatiorLs to the various programs did not add to
$100  million. For at least five and possibly more of these respondents,  this was  likely due  to
mere miscalculation.  It is possible,  though, that some respondents  allocated  less  than $100
million deliberately,  as a sort of statement about  the propriety of government spending and
supporting  limits  thereon. Although  we  would  be  interested  in  whether attitudes  toward
government spending  might affect allocations  to  some programs or regions vis-A-vis others,
the  propriety  of government  spending  in  general  did  not  concern  us here.  We  were con-
cerned  with what people  would "buy" with  every $100  million  spent,  not with  whether they
thought $100  million was  too much to spend or whether they preferred  to save some of that
$100  million. Accordingly,  where a respondent's allocations  did  not sum to $100  million, we
either increased or decreased all of the  allocations  proportionately to make  them do so.
9.  For  the  sake  of  grammatical  simplicity,  the  word  "program" will  generally  refer  to  both
programs  and  regions,  although  where  a  distinction  between  programs  and  regions  is
required, it will be made clear, and the word "program" in the name of a survey condition will
remain significantly distinct.

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 504 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness

to  program  8,  program 9,  or both,  total lives would equal  160.  Lower  figures
would indicate  decreased  efficiency.

We  operationalized  equity via  two  statistics.  The  first  equity  statistic,  de-
signed  to  test  breadth  (a  very  possible  proxy  for  equity),  was  simply  the
number  of programs  to which  a respondent  allocated  any money  at all;  this
variable  we  call  total programs. Respondents  concerned  solely with  efficiency
(at least as  we  consider  it here, as  lives saved)  would  allocate  money  to  only
one or two programs  (namely, program  8 and/or program 9). As  the respon-
dent allocated  money  to  more  programs,  breadth  (or, here,  equity)  would
increase, and efficiency would  decrease.

The second statistical  proxy for equity, equity variance, is subtler and more
precise  but  also  more  complex  than  the  total programs variable  described
above. Under what might seem to be a perfectly equitable  allocation of equal
amounts  to  all  nine  programs,  each'program  would  receive  $11.1  million,
which is exactly  equal  to the mean  allocation  (i.e., $100  million  divided by 9,
insofar as  all respondents  allocated $100  million among nine  programs).  As
allocation  patterns  deviate  from  this  perfectly  equitable  pattern,  the  actual
allocations  for specific programs  will, on average, also  deviate from the  mean
allocation  of $11.1  million.  On  this  basis,  equity  variance equaled  the  total
summed variances  of each program's  allocation  from  the  mean allocation of
$11.1  million  per  program.  That  is,  for  each  program,  we  subtracted  the
actual  allocation from  the mean allocation  of $11.1  million and squared that
difference. Then, for each respondent, we added all nine squared differences
and, finally, computed the  square root of that sum total;  equity variance refers
to the resulting figure.

That  equity  variance offers  some  measure  of  a  respondent's  breadth  in
allocation  can  again  be  seen  as  follows.  If a  respondent  allocated  the  $100
million  among  all  nine programs  equally,  the  allocation  for  each  program
would  equal  the mean allocation,  and  equity variance would  equal  zero;  from
this  baseline,  as  the  respondent increases  allocations  to some  programs  and
decreases  allocations  to  other programs  (perhaps  even  to  zero),  allocations
for programs will deviate  more and more from the mean  allocation  (of $11.1
million per program),  and  equity variance will increase accordingly.

Table  2 presents by condition  the means for  total lives, equity variance, and
total programs. Efficiency  (as  measured  by  total  lives)  was  highest  in  the
program-minimal  and  region-minimal  conditions  (with  140.42  and  145.89
total lives saved, respectively),  and there was no significant  difference between
these  two conditions  (which we will refer tojointly as the minimal conditions).
This result is not surprising, because in these  conditions respondents  had no
information  except  the  number  of lives  saved,  and  that  factor  should  have
been predominant in  their allocations.

The more interesting finding is that the means for total lives in the program-
basic  (116.54),  program-enhanced  (115.28),  and  region-enhanced  (118.73)
conditions  were  significantly  lower  than  the  means  for  the  two  minimal
conditions  (using a Student-Newman-Keuls  test, or SNK,  at p < .05)-but they
were  not  significantly  different  from  one  another.  In  other  words,  when

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 505 1998

Journal of Legal Education

information about the number of lives  saved by a program was accompanied
by any additional  information,  total lives (representing  efficiency)  decreased
significantly,  but  it  did  not  matter  whether  that  additional  information
was  basic  program  description  alone  (as  in  the  program-basic  condition),
supplemental  information  alone  (as  in  the  region-enhanced  condition),  or
both  (as  in  the  program-enhanced  condition):  total lives was  essentially  the
same  regardless.

Table  2: Efficiency Versus  Equity in Resource Allocation  (1998  Survey)

All 

anditaons  minimal 
140.4 
126.0 
15.7 
125 
4.0 
5.8 

Program-  Pogram- 
basc 
116.5 
11.2 
6A 

Program-  Ron- 
minimal 
enhanced 
145.9 
115.1 
16.2 
9.1 
4.0 
7.2 

Region- 
enhanced 
118.7 
11.7 
7.0 

Minimal  ,onminimal
conditions  conditions

142.2 
15.8 
4.0 

116.7
10.6
7.0

Totallives 
Equity variance 
Total programs 

We  obtained  complementary  results  for  total programs and  equity variance,
the  two  measures  of equity,  or  breadth,  of allocation.  The  total programs to
which  respondents  allocated  any  funds  at all  was  lowest  (which  meant  that
breadth was  lowest)  in the  two  minimal  conditions  (averaging  3.96 programs
in the program-minimal  condition  and 4.00  programs in  the region-minimal
condition);  and  total programs was  highest  (which  meant  that  breadth  was
highest) in the three nonminimal conditions  (averaging 6.37 programs in the
program-basic  condition,  7.18  in  the  program-enhanced,  and  7.00  in  the
region-enhanced).  The  two  minimal  conditions  were  significantly  lower in
total programs than  the three  nonminimal  conditions  (using SNK at p <  .05).
But  the  two  minimal  conditions  were  not  significantly  different  from  each
other,  nor  were  the  nonminimal  conditions  significantly  different  from
one another.

Similarly, equity variance was highest  (which meant that the allocations were
furthest from perfect breadth or equality among all nine programs) in the two
minimal  conditions;  and  equity  variance was  lowest  (which  meant  that  the
allocations were closest to perfect breadth or equality)  in the three nonminimal
conditions. Of the three nonminimal  conditions, however,  only the program-
enhanced condition  was significantly lower than the  two  minimal  conditions
(using SNKatp< .05).  As with  totalprograms, the two minimal  conditions were
not significantly  different  from  each  other  in  equity  variance, nor  were  the
three  nonminimal  conditions  significantly  different  from  one  another  on
this variable.

Because  the  program-basic  and program-enhanced  conditions  showed  no
significant differences  in total lives, equity variance, or total programs (as assessed
via planned contrasts),  we  combined these two  conditions in  order to conduct
additional  analyses using a two-factor model in which one factor was program
versus  region  (i.e.,  whether allocations were  to  programs  or to regions)  and
the other factor was minimal versus  nonminimal  (i.e., whether or not respon-
dents received  any information beyond  number  of lives saved).  For total lives,
equity  variance, and  total programs alike,  whether  respondents  received

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 506 1998

Risk Assessment,  Resource Allocation, and Fairness

minimal-versus-nonminimal  information  was a significant  factor  (p <  .001 for
each variable).  But whether  respondents  allocated  funds  to  programs  versus
regions  was  not  a significant  factor,  nor was  there  a significant  interaction
between  the two  factors.

Finally,  one  additional  finding  about  these  three  variables  was  that  they
correlated  rather consistently  with  our  construction  of the  efficiency-versus-
equity  tradeoff. Total lives (or efficiency)  was  positively  correlated  (r =  .822)
with  equity variance (for which zero  indicated  perfect equity and  higher num-
bers  indicated  less  equity)  and  negatively  correlated  (r  =  -.804)  with  total
programs (for which lower numbers  indicated less equity and higher numbers
indicated  more  equity);  both correlations  were  significant  at p <  .001.  There
was  also  a  significant  negative  correlation  between  equity  variance and  total
programs (r  =  -.897,  p <  .001);  this  we  also  expected  because  higher  equity
variance and  lower  total programs both  indicate  less equity, while  lower  equity
variance and higher  total programs both indicate more equity.

In  sum,  the  resource  allocation  portion of the  1998  survey  indicated  the

following.

"  Respondents  were  capable  of appreciating lives  saved and  gener-
ally  acted  more  like  experts  when  no  other  information  was  of-
fered.

"  But even when  they had no information beyond lives saved and  so
should  have  acted  most  like  experts,  they  allocated  money  on
average  to four  of the  nine  programs, sacrificing  some  fifteen  to
twenty  lives  vis-i-vis  the  most  efficient  allocation.  This  indicated
that there  is at least a baseline reluctance  to concentrate  resources
too  much  and/or  a  baseline  interest  in  equity  (i.e.,  in  breadth,
fairness,  or sharing the wealth).

"  Moreover,  when  any  information,  regardless  of  its  nature,  was
offered in  addition to lives saved,  respondents  acted even less like
experts  and  shifted  more  towards  breadth  and  equity  in  their
allocations, sacrificing on average about twenty-five  more  lives.

Specific Programs

Table 3 presents the mean allocations  (overall and broken  down by condi-
tion) for each program. It lists the programs in order of their mean allocations
for all conditions  combined. With  each mean allocation we include  in paren-
theses the  program's  ranking for that particular  column. Each  listing briefly
references  the program description and supplemental  information, although
each  piece  of such  information  would  be  applicable  to  only  some  of  the
various  conditions.

For  all  programs  except  program  5  (lead-inner-city  children),  specific
allocations were significantly different among conditions. As with  the broader
measures  discussed  above,  no specific  program  showed  a  significant  differ-
ence  (in  a  planned  contrast)  between  the  program-basic  and  program-
enhanced  conditions.  Accordingly,  as  with  those broader  measures,  we  col-

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 507 1998

Journal of Legal Education

lapsed  these  conditions  to  conduct a two-factor  analysis with  minimal-versus-
nonminimal  as  one  factor  and  program-versus-region  as  the other.  Because
the  minimal-versus-nonminimal  factor was significant for all but one program
(where  the factor was  still marginally significant),  Table 3 also  presents sepa-
rate  mean  allocations  for  the  combined  minimal  conditions  (i.e.,  program-
minimal  and  region-minimal)  versus  the  combined  nonminimal  conditions
(i.e., program-basic,  program-enhanced,  and region-enhanced).

Table  3: Resource Allocations  to Specific Programs (1998  Survey)

Thvmrs 

9:  Fitness 
(no supplemental information) 
8:  Antismoking- 
interest-group oppcsition 
1:  AIDS- 
campaign issue/support 
2: Cancer 
(no supplemental information) 
4:  Lead ingestion- 
inner-city children 
3:  Air pollutants 
(no supplemental  information) 
5:  Asbestos remoal- 
all schoolchildren 
7: Airline inspections- 
publicized incidents 
6:  Nuclear power plants-- 
catastrophe concerns 

All 

conditons  minimal 
36.0 
(2) 
36.4 
(1) 
7.7 
(4) 
8.2 
(3) 
5.6 
(5) 
3.7 
(6) 
1.3 
(7) 
1.0 
(8) 
0.2 
(9) 

Priogram.  Program-  Prgram-  &&g-n Begion.  Minimal Nnminima!
enhanced  minimal  enhanced  conditions  conditions
39.6 
30.3 
(1-tie)  (1) 
39.6 
17.7 
(1- tie)  (3) 
6.7 
18.3 
(3) 
(2) 
6.7 
10.0 
(3) 
(4) 
2.7 
7.3 
(5) 
(5) 
1.9 
4.8 
(7) 
(7) 
2.1 
5.3 
(6) 
(6) 
0.5 
3.9 
(8) 
(8) 
0.1 
2.5 
(9) 
(9) 

basic 
30.3 
(1) 
13.6 
(4) 
14.0 
(3) 
16.5 
(2) 
8.1 
(5) 
7.7 
(6) 
3.9 
(7) 
3.1 
(8) 
2.7 
(9) 

31A 
(1) 
24.4 
(2) 
12.3 
(3) 
12.2 
(4) 
6.7 
(5) 
5.2 
(6) 
3.5 
(7) 
2.6 
(8) 
1.7 
(9) 

37.2 
(2) 
37.5 
(1) 
7.4 
(4) 
7.7 
(3) 
4.7 
(5) 
3.1 
(6) 
1.5 
(7) 
0.8 
(8) 
0.2 
(9) 

28.0
(1)
16.8
(2)
15.2
(3)
14.8
(4)
7.9
(5)
6.4
(6)
4.6
(7)
3.7
(8)
2.6
(9)

24.2 
(1) 
18.7 
(2) 
13.4 
(4) 
17.5 
(3) 
8.2 
(5) 
6.7 
(6) 
4.6 
(7) 
4.1 
(8) 
2.6 
(9) 

Ceiling effects  and the dominance of lives saved.  As we have  noted, for no
program  was  there  any  significant  difference  between  the  program-basic,
program-enhanced,  and  region-enhanced  conditions.  This finding  suggests
that  the  potential  effects  of information  beyond  the  number  of lives  saved
have limits and  that, accordingly,  the effects  of different types of information
are not additive  once those limits  are  reached.  If we were  not surprised  that
some  limit  precludes  additive  effects  of information  other  than  number  of
lives saved,  we  were  surprised  that this  ceiling  was  so  low.  For  example,  we
would  have expected  the supplemental  information  presented  alone  (i.e.,  in
the  region-enhanced  condition)  to  produce  a  significant  difference  from
program  description  presented  alone  (i.e.,  in  the  program-basic  condition)
for at least one of the nine programs, but we never got this result. (To be sure,
there were  some potential  trends in  this direction,  but none  that was  signifi-
cant or even marginally so.)

This  ceiling  on  the  effects  of information  beyond  number of lives saved
points to the relative  dominance of lives saved in respondents'  allocation. The
relative  rankings,  both  overall  and  across  specific  conditions  and  combina-
tions,  make it  even clearer  that the  number  of lives saved  was the  dominant

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 508 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness

factor in the allocations. That dominance  is most pronounced  in the minimal
conditions,  of  course,  where  (as  predicted)  efficiency  was  highest  in  the
absence  of  mitigating  alternative  information.  But even  though  additional
information  (whether  program  description,  supplemental  information,  or
both)  caused  a  decrease  in  efficiency  and  broader  allocation,  the  relative
rankings  of  the  various  programs  remained  relatively  consistent  with  the
number of lives saved  under the programs.

Fitness,  smoking, and special-interest  groups.  The  program  receiving  the
highest allocation  overall was program 9  (fitness-no supplemental  informa-
tion),  projected to save  16.0 lives per $10  million spent;  program 8 (antismok-
ing-interest-group  opposition),  also  projected  to  save  16.0  lives  per  $10
million, received  the second-highest allocation  overall. In the  minimal  condi-
tions, these  programs  received virtually  identical allocations,  but when  infor-
mation  was  added  to  the  number  of lives  saved,  program  8  allocations  de-
creased more than twice as much as the program 9 allocations  (as we discuss in
more detail  below).  Indeed,  a within-subjects  analysis  of  the  relative  alloca-
tions between programs  8 and 9 showed a significant difference between those
allocations  in  general,  and  the  magnitude  of  the  difference  varied  signifi-
cantly both by condition  and on the minimal-versus-nonminimal  factor.

The  relative allocation  between  programs  8  and 9 was  not affected by  any
interaction  between  the minimal-versus-nonminimal  factor and the program-
versus-region  factor. As we  have  said, this  points  to a ceiling  on the effects  of
any information  added  to the  number of lives saved.  But  one set of trends  is
worth  mentioning:  namely,  from  the  baseline  established  in  the  program-
minimal  condition, allocations  for program 8 in the program-basic  condition
(i.e.,  for an antismoking program)  decreased  an average  of $5  million more
than  did  the  allocations  for  program  8  in the  program-enhanced  condition
(i.e.,  where  the antismoking  program  description  was supplemented  by the
note  that  the  program  was  strongly  opposed  by  the  tobacco  industry  and
farmers).  At  the  same  time,  comparing  the  region-minimal  and  region-
enhanced  conditions,  both program  8 and  program  9 were  exactly  equal  in
the  region-minimal  condition,  but  program  8  dropped  much  more  than
program  9  in  the  region-enhanced  condition,  where  the  only  difference
between  the two  programs was  program 8's being strongly opposed  by power-
ful special-interest groups.

Although  the  difference  for  program  8  between  the  program-basic  and
program-enhanced  conditions  was  not significant, it was  not far from signifi-
cance and might become so if we used more powerful  measures  (and/or more
respondents).  If valid, what  the  trend indicates  is  that  the tobacco  industry
might  hurt  itself  with  its  public  opposition  to  antismoking  programs:  the
antismoking program received  higher allocations when the industry's  opposi-
tion  was  mentioned.  In  other  words,  it  might  sometimes  be  strategic  and
prudent for the  tobacco  industry to stifle  its public  opposition  to  (or support
for) programs with which it is concerned. Conversely, as we have said, support-
ers  of antismoking  programs  likely  help  their  cause  by  highlighting  the  to-
bacco industry's  opposition  to them.

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 509 1998

Journal of Legal Education

Notwithstanding  this  specific  observation,  special-interest  groups  in  gen-
eral  do  not  seem  to  hurt  their  own  causes,  even  when  their  support  or
opposition  is  salient;  in  the  region-enhanced  condition,  the  mere  fact  of
special-interest  opposition  to  program  8  reduced  allocations  to  levels  far
below  those  in  otherwise-identical  program  9  Oust  as  the  special-interest
opposition  would  like).  Even  when  the  special-interest  group  is  the tobacco
industry  (i.e., in the program-enhanced  condition),  allocations  were substan-
tially lower for program  8 than for program  9; theyjust were not as low as they
were when the interest group was not identified  as being the tobacco  industry.
AIDS,  cancer,  and  political  campaigns.  Program  1  (AIDS-campaign  is-
sue/support),  projected to save  12.0  lives per $10  million  spent, received  the
third-highest  mean  allocation  overall,  while  program  2  (cancer-no supple-
mental  information),  with an  identical  projection  of lives saved,  received  an
almost identical  fourth-highest allocation.  Indeed, within-subjects  analyses of
the relative allocations between  program  1 and  program 2 showed  no signifi-
cant differences between  those allocations in general. The relative allocations
between  the two programs did vary significantly  both by  condition and on the
minimal-versus-nonminimal  factor;  generally, allocations  for  both programs
increased about equally  when information  was  added to  the  number  of lives
saved.  But there  was  also  a marginally  significant  interaction  effect between
the  minimal-versus-nonminimal  factor and  the program-versus-region  factor.
From the baseline in region-minimal,  allocations for program  1 in the region-
enhanced  condition  increased  more  than  allocations  for  program  2.  This
makes sense because only program  1 added supplemental  information in  the
region-enhanced  condition;  any  increase  in  program  2's  allocation  in  that
condition  would  have  been  due to  its  interdependence  with  the  other  pro-
grams, since  its  description was  no  different.  By  contrast,  from  the baseline
in  program-minimal,  allocations  for  program  1  in  the  program-basic  and
program-enhanced  conditions increased less  than the allocations for program
2. And program  l's allocation in  the program-enhanced  condition was  lower
(albeit not significantly)  than  in the region-enhanced  condition.

These  findings yield  a few  possible  explanations.  The slight  difference  in
program  1  allocations  between  the  program-enhanced  and  the  region-
enhanced  conditions  might  simply suggest  that  the  slight  difference  in  the
supplemental information was relevant.  In the program-enhanced  condition,
AIDS was described as "a visible part of your party's campaign," whereas in the
region-enhanced  condition,  the  region was  described  as  "a key supporter  of
your party's most recent campaign";  and perhaps the latter, denoting  explicit
support rather than mere visibility  (which was unclear as to effect or valence),
commanded greater attention and  influence  on the allocation.  But from  the
baseline in  the program-minimal  condition,  AIDS-program  allocations  went
up less  than  cancer-program  allocations  in  the program-basic  condition, and
AIDS allocations went  down a little when  the  campaign-visibility  information
was  added,  while  cancer  allocations  went  even  higher  in  the  program-
enhanced  condition  (albeit likely due to interdependence,  as no supplemen-
tal information was added for program  2).  Since the number of lives saved was

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 510 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness

equal  between  the  two  programs,  it  might  be  that  respondents  preferred
cancer in the nonminimal  program conditions because it affects more people;
this interpretation would  cohere with  the preference  for breadth and  equity.
Another  explanation  might  be  that these  patterns  reflect some  sort of back-
lash against AIDS programs.  But if the alleged  backlash  is purportedly due  to
AIDS'  not  affecting  so  many  people,  then  the  explanation  is  simply  the
complement  of the  breadth-  or  equity-based  explanation  for  the  relatively
higher  allocations  for  cancer  programs.  And  while  the  decrease  in  AIDS
allocation  in  the  program-enhanced  condition  (where its  campaign  visibility
is  salient)  might  further  support  a  backlash  theory,  that  decrease  was
rather  small  and  not  significant,  and  it  might  simply  have  reflected  the
interdependence  of the AIDS program  and other programs with supplemen-
tal  information.

Nuclear power plants and airline safety. Program 6 (nuclear power plants-
catastrophe  concerns),  projected  to  save  zero  lives  per  $10  million  spent,
received  the lowest mean allocation  overall;  program  7  (airline inspections-
publicized  incidents),  projected  to  save  only 0.5  lives  per $10  million  spent,
received  the second-lowest  allocation. As  with  other programs,  the minimal-
versus-nonminimal  factor  was  significant:  allocations  for  both  programs  in-
creased  when  program  descriptions  and/or  supplemental  information  was
added  to  the  number  of  lives  saved.  Notwithstanding  that  significance,
however,  even  when  additional  information  was  given,  programs  6  and  7
still  received  the  lowest  and  second-lowest  allocations,  respectively;  this
consistency  further  highlights  the  dominance  of lives  saved  in  determining
allocations.

Lead,  air  pollution,  and  asbestos.  Program  4  (lead  ingestion-inner-city
children),  projected  to save  6.0 lives per $10  million spent, received  the fifth-
highest mean  allocation  overall; program  3  (air pollution-no supplemental
information),  projected  to save  5.0  lives  per $10  million  spent, received  the
sixth-highest  overall allocation;  and program  5  (asbestos removal-all  school-
children),  projected  to  save  3.0  lives  per  $10  million  spent,  received  the
seventh-highest  overall  allocation.  Within-subjects  analyses  yielded  a signifi-
cant pattern of differences  in the allocations among programs  3, 4, and 5.  In
addition,  allocations  for  these  programs  as  a  group  varied  significantly  by
condition  and  on  the  minimal-versus-nonminimal  factor.  (By  themselves,
program  3  and  program  5  varied  significantly  by  condition  and  on  the
minimal-versus-nonminimal  factor;  program  4  did  not vary  significantly  by
condition  and  reached  only  marginal  significance  on  the  minimal-versus-
nonminimal  factor.)  But the relative  pattern  of allocations  among  the three
programs  did not  vary  significantly  by  condition  or  on  the  minimal-versus-
nonminimal  factor;  generally, allocations for both programs  increased about
equally when information was added to  the number  of lives saved.

Unlike  any  of  the  interprogram  patterns  discussed  above,  the  relative
pattern  of allocations among these three programs  varied significantly on the
program-versus-region  factor.  Essentially,  program  3  received  higher  alloca-
tions  than  program  5  in  the  program  conditions  but  not  in  the  region

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 511 1998

Journal of Legal Education

conditions  (where program  3 received  allocations  that were very  slightly  but
not significantly lower).  The  superiority of program  3 in  the program  condi-
tions is  consistent with  the  dominance  of lives  saved  and  might  also  reflect
persisting concern  about air pollution, while  concern about asbestos seems to
have  waned  in  the  past  few  years  (especially  as  we  have  recognized  the
exorbitant expense  but limited benefit  of asbestos  removal).  By  contrast, the
relative  equality  of these  two  programs  in  the  region  condition  might derive
from  the  salience  of program  5's  benefiting  all  schoolchildren  (and  thus
appealing  to breadth  or equity concerns),  especially  since program  3 has no
supplemental  information  added.

Notwithstanding  the  results above,  the most interesting observation  about
programs  3,  4,  and  5  might  be  that  their  results  are  rather  uninteresting.
Program  4 is  one salient  example;  it was  the only program  for which  alloca-
tions  did not vary significantly  across  the five  conditions, and  it was the  only
program for which the minimal-versus-nonminimal  factor was  only marginally
significant.  Program  3  (which  added  no  supplemental  information  in  the
enhanced  conditions)  offers  another  example.  The  allocation  for  this  pro-
gram  in  the  program-basic  condition  approximates  the  midpoint of  alloca-
tions for that program  in the two  region conditions.  This might indicate  that
there  are  perceived  variations  in  the program's  allocations;  with  no  supple-
mental information, the two region conditions should have approximated  the
program-basic  condition for allocations to this program, so the variance  in the
region conditions  is  more likely  due  to the program's  interdependence  with
other programs  than anything else.

These  "uninteresting" results  suggest that the allocation process  might  be
one  of deciding  on  the  extremes  and  thinking  much  less  about the middle.
Here,  that would  mean the  respondents  might typically  have  decided  which
programs should  clearly get the  highest and  lowest allocations  and  then  how
much those  programs should receive;  the  remaining programs  in the  middle
then split up the pot, in rough proportion to the number of lives saved.  If this
observation is valid generally, it suggests that the most fertile opportunities  for
influencing  allocations lie where the program  is very high or very low  on  the
priority list. By contrast, allocation for programs of moderate  priority might be
destined to take  the  relatively constant amount left over after the  higher and
lower  priorities  have  been  addressed.  But  this  hypothesis  is  tentative  and
requires further inquiry.

Summary  and concluding remarks.  In sum,  the  most basic  trend  observed
in this portion  of the survey was  that, given minimal information,  respondents
come  closest  to  maximal  efficiency  in  the  sense  that  lives  saved  dominates
everything  else. But when  given any sort of additional  information  (whether
program descriptions,  supplemental information,  or both),  respondents  sac-
rifice efficiency  in favor  of greater breadth  or equity. In making this  tradeoff,
though,  respondents  generally  achieve  the  breadth  without  disturbing  the
relative  priority  of  the  various  programs;  there  may  be  less  difference  in
allocation from first to second and so on to last, but first and second and so on
to last retain  their relative levels of priority. And  there seems  to be a ceiling on

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 512 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness

the  effects  of additional  information,  so  that additional  information  affects
allocations  only  to  a  certain  point;  beyond  this  point,  further  information
seems  to have  no effect on allocations.

The  question is, where  efficiency suffers, which  programs bear those losses
in  efficiency?  Because  the  programs  with  highest  allocations  under  more
efficiency-oriented  conditions  have  more  to  give,  it should be  expected  that
they would  bear such  losses  and that portions of their allocations  would  be
redirected  to  programs  lower in efficiency.  Indeed,  this  is  exactly  what hap-
pened here. When  information  of any sort was added to  the number of lives
saved,  the  two  programs with  highest  allocations  in the  minimal  conditions
suffered losses, while all other programs received  higher allocations. Even the
programs  ranked  third  and fourth  in the minimal  conditions  approximately
doubled their allocations  in the nonminimal  conditions. This result seems  to
mitigate  the predominance  of lives saved in  determining  allocation, suggest-
ing that  such  efficiency  is something  of a spartan  luxury that must be  aban-
doned  when  additional  information  and  complexity  detract  from  spartan
simplicity.

Also  relevant to  this issue  of what programs  bear  the losses in efficiency  is
the  marked disparity between how much program 8's allocations decreased in
the  nonminimal  conditions and  how  relatively  little program  9's allocations
decreased.  That finding points  to  two  conclusions,  either  or both  of which
may be valid  (even if subject  to the ceiling on effects  of information added to
lives saved)  and worthy of further research.  One is that government's  launch-
ing  an  antismoking  campaign  raises  issues  of autonomy,  paternalism,  and
propriety  that the government's  launching of a pro-fitness campaign does not.
The second,  consistent with  public choice theory, is  that, for all the criticism
of special-interest  groups that one often  encounters  (even  from  those whom
they  seek  to  influence),  their  support or  opposition  can  substantially  affect
resource  allocation and  hinder efficiency.

Risk Assessment

The 1997 Preliminary Survey

There is  considerable  debate  not  only about differences  between  experts
and  ordinary  people  on  the importance  of maximizing  lives  saved,  but also
about  the  particular  kinds  of risks  that  experts  and  ordinary  people  deem
important. Consider, for example, the following table:"0

10.  See  Breyer, supra note 4, at 21  (derived from Environmental  Protection Agency,  Unfinished
Business: A Comparative  Asse.sment  of Environmental  Problerns,  (Washington,  1987)  and
national  public  opinion polls  by the  Roper  Organization  in  December  1987  and January
1988).

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 513 1998

Journal of Legal Education

Table 4: Rating Hea

tlh Risks

nicals
erways

Hazardous waste sites
Exposure to worksite chen
Industrial pollution  of wat
Nuclear accident radiatior
Radioactive  waste
Chemical leaks  from underground storage tanks
Pesticides
Pollution  from industrial  accidents
Water pollution from farm  runoff
Tap water contamination
Industrial air pollution
Ozone layer destruction
Coastal water contamination
Sewage-plant water pollution
Vehicle  exhaust
Oil spills
Acid rain
Water  pollution from  urban  runoff
Damaged wetlands
Genetic alteration
Nonhazardous  waste sites
Greenhouse  effect
Indoor air pollution
X-ray radiation
Indoor radon
Microwave  oven  radiation

Public
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

EPA experts
Medium  to low
High
Low
Not ranked
Not ranked
Medium  to low
High
Medium to low
Medium
High
High
High
Low
Medium to low
High
Medium to low
High
Medium
Low

Low
Medium  to low
Low
High
Not ranked
High
Not ranked

In the risk assessment portion  of the  1997 preliminary survey, respondents

were given the following  instruction:

The federal, state, and local governments of the United States expend resources
on a wide range  of issues  that present environmental  health and safety risks.
As  a guide  to setting government priorities, how  important  do you consider
each of the following risks? Listed below are 24 risks. Please assign each risk to
one  of three categories  (high,  medium, or low  importance),  indicating  its
seriousness  compared  with  the  other  risks  listed  there.  Please  be  sure  to
assign  exactly  eight  (8)  risks  (one-third  of the  total)  to  each  of the  three
categories.

Surveys  were  scored  by  assigning  to  each  risk  3  points  if in  the  "high"
category,  2 if in  the "medium," and  1 if in the "low." The  last two  columns  of
Table  5 display  the mean scores  and ordinal  rankings  of our twenty-four risk
factors  (which were somewhat  different from  the twenty-six  risks  of Table  4).
More  than  they  answered  the  question  whether  law  students  are  more  like
experts  or  like  laypersons,  these  results pointed out  certain  ambiguities  and

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 514 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness

other  issues in risk assessment  that would  need  to  be addressed  and  refined
with the followup  survey.

For example,  on the basis of certain variance  patterns and comments from
some respondents, we believed that answers to the question "How important is
each  risk,  as a  guide  to  setting government  priorities?"  were  somewhat  am-
biguous.  Specifically,  we  could  not  be'sure  how  much  the  answers  were
determined  by  the  respondent's  assessment  of  the  risk  itself, independent
from  government  expenditure,  versus  how  much  the  answers  were  deter-
mined  by  the  respondent's  opinion  as  to  the  propriety  and/or  utility  of
government  expenditure  on  the  risk,  independent  of  the  risk  itself.  For
example,  the risk  of cigarette  smoking  (to smokers  themselves)  showed  the
highest  variance,  and  its  distribution  was  U-shaped.  Presuming that  the  re-
spondents did not include adherents to the then-current Bob Dole  claim that
smoking was notso harmful  or addictive, we assumed that the risk itself should
have  been  ranked  uniformly  high,  but  instead  we  found  that  it was  often
ranked medium or even  low, because some  respondents believed it improper
or ineffective  for government to spend resources against  cigarette  smoking.

Another source  of potential ambiguity in these results was that respondents
might have interpreted  or defined the term "risk" in various ways. Some  might
have interpreted it in technical terms, as the magnitude of harm multiplied by
the probability of harm, but others might have given greater weight to one or
the other of those factors. Moreover, some respondents  might have factored in
other characteristics  of the risk, such as its being particularly grisly, unforesee-
able,  inequitable,  and so  forth  (as  described,  for  example,  by Slovic  and  his
colleagues1 1). Again, these variations in definition of "risk" might have affected
the results,  and certain comments by respondents indicated  that this was a real
possibility. Accordingly,  the  1998  survey  was  designed  with  an  eye  toward
reducing these ambiguities and focusing the results and  their interpretation.

The 1998 Survey

The  1998 survey improved upon the preliminary survey by dividing respon-
dents into  two  conditions  for  the  risk assessment  portion,  using a  different
response  format, and  offering  a guideline definition  of risk. For both  condi-
tions, the question began with the  guideline definition:

The level of risk associated with an event or condition is a product of both the
magnitude of harm resulting from the event or condition  and the probability
that the event or condition will occur. The federal, state, and local governments
of the United States expend resources against a wide range of environmental,
health, and safety  risks.

Then, in one  condition  (the risk level condition),  respondents were given

the following instruction:

Listed below are 24 risks. You have been asked to evaluate  the level of risk that
each presents. Accordingly, please rank all of the risks from 1 to 24, indicating
the level of each risk  compared  to all the others  (1 =  highest level of risk on
the list, 2 = second-highest  level of risk on the list, and so on,  to 24 = lowest

11.  See  the general outline and  treatment in Paul Slovic  et al.,  Regulation  of Risk  A Psychologi-
cal  Perspective,  in Regulatory  Policy and  the Social  Sciences, ed.  Roger G. Noll, 241  (Berke-
ley,  1985).

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 515 1998

Journal of Legal Education

level of risk  on the  list).  IMPORTANT:  You  must use each  rank from 1 to 24,
and  there  can be  no ties between  risks.

In  the  second  condition  (the  funding  priority  condition),  respondents

were  instead given  this instruction:

Listed  below  are  24 risks. Assume  that the government  has  allotted  limited
funds thatwill  be used to combat eight of the risks listed below.  Because these
funds are  limited, you have  been asked  to evaluate  where they would be  best
spent.  Accordingly, please  rank  all  of the risks  from  1  to 24,  indicating  the
spending  priority  that  each  risk  should  receive  compared  to  all  the  others
(1 = highest spending priority on the list, 2 = second-highest spending priority
on  the  list,  and  so  on,  to  24  =  lowest  spending  priority  on  the  list).
IMPORTANT:  You must use each rank from I  to 24, and there can  be no ties
between risks.

The 1998 Survey Results

Table  5  presents  the  ordinal  ranking and  mean  score  for  each  risk both
overall and by condition.  (In addition, as noted above, this table includes  the
ordinal ranking and mean  score for each  risk as assessed  by the  1997 prelimi-
nary survey, which  used  a different  response  format and scale.)

Risk 

Table  5: Risk Assessment (1998  Survey and  1997 Preliminary Survey)
1997
preliminay
survey
Rank  Mean

Funding priort 
condition 

Overall 
(1998survey) 

Risk level 
condition 

Rank  Mean 

Rank  Mean 

Rank  Mean 

Poverty 
Violent crime 

(excluding terrorism)

Infectious  diseases 
(excludingAIDS)

**Automobile accidents 
4 
Particulate air pollution 
5 
Firearms 
6 
"Hazardous  waste 
7 
*Poor diet/nutrition 
8 
Pollution of surface waters 
9 
AIDS 
10 
*Occupational injury and illness  11 
12 
Loss of wildlife habitats 
*Stratospheric ozone depletion 
13 
14 
*Pesticide residue on  foods 
Secondhand cigarette smoke 
15 
Global warming/ 
16 

greenhouse  effect
**Cigarette smoking 
(risk to srfiokers)

**Terrorism 
**Nuclear power 
Pesticide exposure 
to farm worker

**Indoor air pollution 
Airline accidents 
Electromagnetic  fields 
Meteors or comets 

collidingwith  earth

**p<.05 

*p<.10

1 
2 

3 

17 

18 
19 
20 

21 
22 
23 
24 

4.25 
5.54 

7.72 

8.93 
9.37 
9.84 
10.04 
10.26 
10.36 
11.06 
11.75 
12.87 
12.90 
13.84 
13.57 
13.68 

13.82 

14.96 
15.37 
15.47 

15.98 
17.11 
19.40 
22.38 

1 
2 

4 

3 
6 
8 
12 
5 
11 
10 
7 
13  (tie) 
15 
17  (tie) 
13  (tie) 
16 

9 

21 
20 
19 

17 (tie) 
22 
23 
24 

4.66 
6.02 

"7.13 

6.71 
9.71 
10.51 
11.34 
8.59 
11.17 
10.78 
10.49 
13.73 
14.05 
14.49 
13.73 
14.41 

10.61 

17.15 
16.83 
15.15 

14.49 
17.49 
19.12 
21.98 

1 
2 

3 

8 
5 
6 
4 
10 
7 
9 
14 
12 
11 
13 
17 
15 

20 

16 
18 
19 

22 
21 
23 
24. 

3.92 
5.17 

8.17 

10.64 
9.11 
9.32 
9.04 
11.55 
9.74 
11.28 
12.72 
12.21 
12.02 
12.53 
13.45 
13.11 

16.30 

13.26 
14.25 
15.72 

-17.13 
16.81 
19.62 
22.70 

2 
1 

5 

8 
6 
7 
3 
20 
4 
10 
12 
9 
11 
19 
18 
14 

13 

15 
17 
16 

21 
22 
23 
24 

2.77
2.79

2.42

2.31
2.40
2.33
2.59
1.64
2A7
2.19
2.07
2.19
2.10
1.65
1.66
1.92

2.04

1.75
1.70
1.74

1.47
1.42
1.27
1.09

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 516 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness

Differences Between Conditions

We  conducted  Mann-Whitney  U-tests  on  each  risk to  determine  whether
the assessment  of that risk differed  between  the risk level  condition  and  the
funding priority condition.  (The Mann-Whitney  U-test is a test of significance
that is analogous to a t-test but more appropriate for ordinal  data such  as the
rankings  generated  by this  portion of the survey.)  Table  5  highlights signifi-
cant differences  as follows:  where the mean scores for a risk were significantly
different  between  conditions  (p <  .05),  the risk  has  two  asterisks;  where  the
difference  between conditions was marginally significant  (p< .10),  the  risk has
one asterisk.

A total of ten risks  showed significant or marginally significant  differences
between  the  two  conditions.  Of these  ten,  the  following  five  risks  received
higher mean rankings  in the funding priority condition  than in the risk level
condition:  hazardous  waste,  nuclear  power,  stratospheric  ozone  depletion,
pesticide  residue  on foods,  and terrorism.  This difference  indicates  that the
law students might have been just like experts in recognizing that the risk level
for these is actually rather low; but they might have beenjust like laypersons  in
believing  that  these  risks warrant  higher  funding priority  nonetheless.  This
difference  might be explained in two ways. First, in adopting the role of policy
makers  in  the  funding  priority  condition,  respondents  might  simply  have
recognized  the importance  that  others  place  on  these  risks  and  responded
accordingly,  notwithstanding  their  own  predilections.  Second,  the  students
might have wanted higher funding for the same reasons  that laypersons want
higher funding for these  risks, such as the reasons discussed by Slovic  and his
colleagues  (the widespread  devastation  that could  result  from the  risks,  the
particular danger to children and  other innocent parties,  etc.) .12

By  contrast,  five  risks  showed  significant  or marginally  significant  differ-
ences in which the mean ranking was higher in the risk level condition than in
the funding priority condition:  automobile  accidents,  cigarette smoking  (risk
to  smokers),  poor  diet/nutrition,  indoor  air  pollution,  and  occupational
injury and illness. What is notable about these five  risks is that, unlike  the five
risks discussed above, these risks can be  seen as matters  of voluntary behavior
and/or contractual  relations,  and  they can be addressed  fairly well via insur-
ance  arrangements  and  the  tort  system.  For  example,  while  respondents
might see  cigarette  smoking and poor diet as substantial  risks, they might see
these  risks  as  being  better  addressed  by  behavioral  change  and/or  self-
insurance  than  by  government  funding.  Similarly,  while  the  respondents
might see  indoor air pollution and occupational injury or illness as substantial
risks,  they  might see  these  risks  as  being  better addressed  by insurance  (in-
cluding  workers'  compensation)  or  even  by the  tort system  than  by govern-
ment  funding.  On  the  contrary,  the  five  risks  discussed  above,  with  their
potential widespread  devastation,  might  be seen as  less amenable  to solution
via behavioral  modification,  insurance, or  the tort system.

12.  See  id

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 517 1998

Journal of Legal Education

Variance

Variance for each risk was generally similar between  conditions, but Levene's
test for equality  of variances  indicated  that there were  significant  or margin-
ally significant  differences  in variance  for five  of the risks.  For loss  of wildlife
habitats, indoor  air pollution,  and  pollution  of surface  waters,  variance  was
higher in the  risk level condition  than in  the funding priority condition.  (For
pollution  of surface  waters,  this  difference  was just  marginally  significant.)
Apparently,  for these  risks,  respondents  were  less consistent  in  assessing the
risk level than  they were in assessing the  proper funding  priority. By contrast,
poor diet/nutrition  and  infectious  diseases  (excluding AIDS)  showed higher
variance  in  the  funding  priority  condition  than  in  the  risk level  condition
(although  both  of these  differences  were just  marginally  significant).  For
these risks,  respondents were  less consistent in  assessing  the  proper funding
priority than they were in assessing the risk level.  Finally, one other interesting
observation about variance  was that two  risks showed  overall  standard  devia-
tions  that were  significantly  different  from  the  average  standard  deviation
(which was 5.55):  those risks were cigarette  smoking  (risk to smokers),  with  a
standard deviation of 7.75, and poor diet/nutrition, with a standard deviation
of 7.43.

Correlations Between  Risk Assessment and Resource  Allocation

Finally, some  of the risks  in  this portion  of the  survey  matched  programs
included  in  the  resource  allocation  portion  of the survey.  Accordingly,  we
derived  Spearman  correlation  coefficients for certain  pairings  of risks  in this
portion  of  the  survey  and  programs  in  the  resource  allocation  portion.
(Spearman  coefficients  were  more  appropriate  than  Pearson  coefficients
because of the ordinal nature  of the risk assessment rankings.)  We limited this
computation  to  respondents  in  the  program-basic  and  program-enhanced
conditions  of the  resource  allocation  portion,  because  these  were  the  only
respondents who knew the nature  of the programs when  making their alloca-
tions.  We  expected  correlations  to  be  negative  because,  under  the  1-to-24
ranking system  of the  risk assessment  portion,  greater  risks  received  lower
rank scores.

Of the  pairings  we  tested,  three  were  significantly  correlated.  First,  rhisk
rankings  for AIDS  were  negatively  correlated  with  allocations  to  the  AIDS-
related  program  (r =  -.438).  Second,  risk  rankings  for  poor  diet/nutrition
were  negatively  correlated  with  allocations  to  the  fitness  and  nutrition  pro-
gram  (r= -.400).  Third,  risk rankings  for secondhand  smoke were negatively
correlated  with  allocations  to  the  antismoking program  (r =-.331).  By  con-
trast,  risk  rankings  for  cigarette  smoking  (risk  to  smokers)  showed  virtually
zero correlation with allocations to  the antismoking program, which  is consis-
tent with cigarette  smoking's having the  highest variance among all risks.  (In
fact,  the Spearman  correlation  between  risk rankings  for  cigarette  smoking
and  risk  rankings  for  secondhand  smoke  was  only  .182  and  definitely  not
significant, which  is also consistent with cigarette  smoking's having such high
variance.)  Other  pairings  that  did  not  show  significant  correlations  were
between  risk  rankings  for  nuclear  power  and  allocations  for  nuclear  power

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 518 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness

plant inspections,  between  risk rankings for airline accidents  and allocations
for  airline  safety  inspections,  and  between  risk  rankings  for  particulate  air
pollution and allocations  for programs  related to toxic air pollutants.

Summary

Law  students seem to  behave  more like  experts  when assessing  risk levels
themselves.  Their  assessments  are  not  particularly  discordant  with  those  of
experts;  at  the  very  least,  they are  more  congruent  with  expert assessments
than  are the  assessments  of laypersons.  But when asked  to  establish funding
priorities,  law  students  do  go  beyond assessments  of risk alone.  Specifically,
they apparently attend to factors such as voluntariness, alternative  possibilities
for addressing the risk aside from government funding, breadth of effect, and
effect on  children  and other innocent parties;  and/or  they are  responsive in
their hypothesized roles as policy makers  to the  concerns of ordinary people,
even when  those concerns  are not matched orjustified by expert assessments
of risk levels.

Fairness

The 1997 Preliminary Survey

The  1997  preliminary  survey  included  an  item  presenting  the  following
scenario:  "A department  store  in  your  town  sells  snow  shovels,  usually  at a
price  of $10  per  shovel.  The  morning  after  a  substantial  snowstorm,  the
department store  decides  to  raise  the  price to  $15  per shovel."  Respondents
were  then  asked  to  indicate  whether  they  believed  the  department  store's
decision was "completely fair,"  "acceptable," "unfair," or "very unfair." In most
surveys,  most people  (80 percent or so)  treat this decision as unfair.

Of  the  116  responses,  29  (25.0%)  indicated  that  the  decision  was  com-
pletely fair,  66 (56.9%)  said  that it was acceptable,  17  (14.7%)  said  that it was
unfair, and only 4 (3.4%)  said  that it was very unfair. Collapsing the data, then,
95  (81.9%)  of the respondents  thought  the decision  was  completely  fair  or
acceptable, while only 21  (18.1%)  of the subjects  thought it was unfair or very
unfair.  Chi-square  tests  on  these  two  distributions  indicated  that  each  was
significantly different  from a random distribution.

These  results  differ  greatly  from  results  observed  among  other  popula-
tions.13 We do not know whether this is a law student effect, a law school effect,
an  elite  law  school  effect,  or  a University  of  Chicago  Law  School  effect.  In
general,  the students in our survey were most like economists  in their willing-
ness  to  suffer  the  laws  of  supply  and  demand  without  protest.  Because  of
certain respondent comments,  we wondered  if such tolerance  was due to  the
respondents'  perceiving snow shovels not as  essentials but instead as luxuries,
for which  fairness  could  not provide  a superior  claim  to  efficiency.  And we
wondered  about  the  extent  to  which  law  students  might  be  prepared  to
address efficiency's  effects on fairness via either prohibition of price increases
or subsidies  to offset price increases.

13.  See Richard  H. Thaler, Quasi  Rational  Economics 201  (NewYork,  1991).

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 519 1998

Journal of Legal Education

The 1998 Survey

The  1998  survey presented  respondents with  three  scenarios:

*  The hardware store in your town sells snow shovels,  usually at a price of
$10  per shovel. The morning after a substantial snowstorm,  the hardware
store decides to raise the price  to $15  per shovel.

*  Due  to the same  substantial  snowstorm,  roads to  the town  are  blocked,
and  the grocery  store  is unable  to  receive  new  inventory.  The  grocery
store decides to double the price of meat and fruit.

*  The  grocery store also  decides  to double  the price  of diapers  and baby

formula.

Respondents  were asked  to indicate whether they believed  the decision in
each  scenario was  "completely  fair,"  "somewhat fair,"  "somewhat unfair,"  or
"completely unfair." For  each  scenario,  respondents  were also  asked  to indi-
cate,  using a  1-9  scale,  whether  the  government  should  prohibit  the  price
increase  (1  =  yes,  9  =  no)  and  whether  the  government  should  subsidize
consumers  to offset the  price increase  (1 = yes, 9 = no).  Because food and baby
needs seem more important or indispensable  than snow shovels, we expected
the responses for these products  to differ from  responses for shovels.

The 1998 Survey Results

Tables 6 and 7 present  results for  the fairness  portion of the 1998  survey.

Analyses  of these  results yielded several  observations.

First, a  chi-square  test comparing  the fairness  results  for the  snow  shovel
items on  the 1997 preliminary  survey and  the  1998 survey showed  no signifi-
cant difference in the two  distributions, whether we compared the data across
all four possible  responses  or collapsed  the responses  into  one  fair category
versus  one unfair category.

Table  6: Fairness Assessments  (1998  Survey)

Actua  RespoDistibuthin/Mean 

Complely 
fair 
(=1) 
44 (47.3%) 

Someohat 
fair 
(=2) 
25 (26.9%) 

Somaohat 
unfair 
(=3) 
18 (19.4%) 

Compl&e 
unfair 
(=4)
6(6.5%) 

Mean 
(midpt 2.5) 

Fr 
(=) 

Coyapsed  RpeDj&n 

tiudon/Mean
Mean
(midpl  .5)

Unfair 
(-2) 

1.85 

69 (74.2%) 

24  (25.8%) 

126

30(31.9%) 

22 (23.4%) 

30(31.9%)  12(12.8%) 

2.26 

52 (55.3%) 

42 (44.7%) 

28 (30.1%) 

19 (20.4%) 

35 (37.6%)  11  (11.8%) 

2.31 

47 (50.5%) 

46 (49.5%) 

1.45

1.49

Snow 
shovels
Fruit 
& meat
Diapers 
& formula

Second, the particular product mattered  in the 1998  survey:  people found
increases  for snow shovels  more fair than increases for fruit and meat and for
diapers and baby formula. More specifically: looking solely to the  1998 survey,
chi-square  tests  showed  that  the  distribution  of responses  was  significantly
dependent  on  the  product for  which prices  were  being increased  (p <  .01,
whether assessed across all four responses or with the responses collapsed  into
one fair category versus  one  unfair category).  Still  more specifically,  though,

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 520 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness

subsequent  chi-square  tests  showed  no  significant  difference  between  the
response pattern for meat and fruit and the response  pattern  for diapers and
baby formula (whether assessed across all four responses or with the responses
collapsed  into  fair  versus  unfair).  But  there  was  a  significant  difference
between  the  response  pattern  for  snow  shovels  and  the  response  pat-
terns,  collapsed  together,  for  meat  and  fruit and  for diapers  and  baby  for-
mula (p <  .01,  whether assessed across all four responses or with the responses
collapsed).

This significant difference indicated that respondents  found price increases
on  fruit  and  meat  and  on  diapers  and  baby formula  less  fair  than  a  price
increase  on snow  shovels.  Notwithstanding  that  difference,  though,  respon-
dents were  more likely  to  find the price increases  fair than  unfair, regardless
of the particular product.

Table 7:  Preferences for Prohibition of Price Increases
Versus Government Subsidy  (1998  Survey)
Should government prohibit 
the price increase? 
(1=yes, 9=no;  midpoint 5) 
7.59 
6.48 
6.34 
6.80 

Should government subsidize 
consumes to offset increase? 
(1=yes, 9=-no; midpoint 5) 
7.85 
6.18 
6.07 
6.70 

Collapsed mean
(prohibition + subsidy)
for each product
7.72
6.33
6.21
6.75
(grand mean)

Snow shovels 
Fruit & meat 
Diapers & formula 
Collapsed means for 
prohibition and subsidy 
across all products

Third,  we  conducted  within-subjects  analyses  on  responses  concerning
government prohibition of price increases and government subsidies to offset
price  increases.  These  analyses  revealed  no  significant  difference  overall  in
preference  for prohibition versus subsidy. But there was a significant  effect of
the  particular  product  for which  a  prohibition  or  subsidy  was  in  question.
Specifically,  as with  the  responses  above regarding fairness versus  unfairness,
subjects were  more  opposed to  either prohibition  or subsidy when  the  prod-
uct was snow  shovels than  they were  to  either prohibition  or subsidy when  it
was  fruit and meat  or diapers  and  baby  formula. But again,  notwithstanding
that difference,  mean  responses  leaned  toward  opposing  prohibition  or sub-
sidy, regardless of the particular product.

Finally, there was  a marginally significant interaction  between  the particu-
lar product and the relative  preference for subsidy versus prohibition.  Specifi-
cally, with regard  to snow shovels  (for which  respondents were  most tolerant
of the price increases),  respondents  were  a little  more  opposed  to the subsi-
dies  than  they were to  the prohibition  of price increases;  with  regard  to fruit
and meat and  to  diapers  and baby formula  (for which respondents were  less
tolerant of the price increases),  respondents were a little more opposed to the
prohibition  of price increases  than they were  to  the subsidies.  This interac-
tion, while  only marginally significant,  might indicate  that, when  a product is
more important or  indispensable,  respondents  such  as these  prefer  to  offset

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 521 1998

Journal of Legal Education

the  unfairness  of the  price  increase  with  subsidies  rather  than  prohibiting
such  price increases.

One possible  rationale for the interaction  could be  that prohibiting price
increases  removes  incentives  for  merchants  to  supply  these  important  or
indispensible  products, whereas  subsidies  motivate  the  merchants  to  supply
the products and receive the extra premium, while they prevent the individual
consumer from  bearing too  much  cost. Meanwhile  a less  important product
might notjustify a subsidy; even  if prohibition of price increases is a disincen-
tive for merchants to supply the product, consumers are not much harmed by
the merchants'  unwillingness.

In  this  essay  we  have  reported  on  several  studies  designed  to  reveal  law
students'  evaluations  of issues of regulatory policy,  especially  with respect  to
risk allocation  and  risk assessment.  Part of the purpose  was  pedagogical-to
give students a sense of the range of problems encountered  under the general
rubric of "administrative  law"  (with  similar such problems  occurring in envi-
ronmental  law as well).  An understanding  of these problems  can  illuminate
both regulatory policy andjudicial  review, and can usefully be brought to bear
on many cases in the Administrative Law course. Part of our purpose was to see
whether and how law students  deviate from  experts, who tend to focus on the
number of lives saved;  we wanted  to  explore  whether law  students  think like
ordinary  people  or  like  experts,  and  to  understand  their  deviations,  if any,
from these  two  (somewhat stylized)  groups.

Our most important findings are as follows. With  regard to resource  alloca-
tion,  law students at the University  of Chicago deviate from  experts  in giving
weight to  factors  others  than number of lives saved, when any such  informa-
tion  is  presented  to them.  That is,  they  also  care  about  equitable  issues  of
fairness  and breadth. With regard to risk assessment, the law students are able
to  act like  experts  in assessing  risk  levels  alone. When  establishing  funding
priorities,  however,  they are  responsive  to the  concerns  of laypersons,  even
when  such  concerns  are  not  supported  by  expert  assessments;  and  they
appreciate factors such as voluntariness, the availability of solutions aside from
government funding, and potential  effects  of each  risk.

But these law students also differ-and  strikingly so-from ordinary people
in  their judgments  about  the  role  of fairness  in  certain  markets.  Among
ordinary  people,  about  80  percent  find  market  outcomes  unfair  and  20
percent find them fair.  For law  students the proportions are  almost precisely
reversed:  20 percent find unfairness and 80 percent  find fairness. We  do not
know whether this remarkable  difference  is a consequence  of being the kind
of person who  chooses  law school,  of law school training, or of University  of
Chicago Law School  training.

As we have  indicated, this exercise had two purposes. One was pedagogical,
and  the  distribution  of the  survey  (and  preliminary  discussions  of  the out-
come)  did help to focus  student attention on some central  issues  in adminis-
trative  law. The other purpose was to see how law students and perhaps lawyers

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 522 1998

Risk Assessment, Resource Allocation, and Fairness 

523

approach  question  of priority-setting  and  equity  in the  administrative  state.
The  preliminary  results  are  intriguing  and  highly  suggestive;  but  there  is
much to learn, in particular because  of possible  distinctive effects arising from
the  respondents" being  enrolled  at  the  University  of Chicago  Law  School,
where the economic analysis of law is of substantial importance and emphasis.
Further  research  could  provide  a  great  deal  of  insight  into  the  particular
judgments  of lawyers,  an  important  group  of  citizens  who  take  substantial
policy-making roles, about how government might make best use of its limited
resources in reducing risks to life  and health.

HeinOnline  -- 48 J. Legal Educ. 523 1998

