 * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Jack Goldsmith, Dan Kahan, Martha Nussbaum, and Judy Shih for excellent comments, and to Shih for valuable research assistance as well. actually reduces trust in government, not because of serious misconduct on the part of high-level officials, but because of scandal mongering, and because of the transformation of political disputes into criminal allegations. 2 The Act should be allowed to expire in 1999; even better, it should be repealed. produced by the 1998 events involving Monica Lewinsky and President Clinton. It should not be controversial to say that in current politics, a general and pervasive problem is that deliberation and reason-giving are too frequently absent. 9 Many of those concerned with institutional reform have attempted to produce solutions to precisely this problem.1 ° On the part of the media, many politicians, and numerous interest groups, there is particular pressure toward sensationalism. Real or imagined scandals therefore play a significant role in coverage of political issues. Emphasis on scandals can, of course, be in the political self-interest of elected representatives, who may be able to achieve a large name for themselves by identifying and attacking corruption whether or not it actually exists-particularly if the call is for further or more independent investigation. Emphasis on scandals can also be in the economic self-interest of the media, especially when a basic concern is inevitably to attract viewers, readers, and sponsors." 12. See Sushil Bikhchandani et al., A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades, 100 J. POL. EcON. 992, 994 (1992) (cascade occurs when it is optional to follow behavior of others without regard to own information). The original goal of the Independent Counsel Act was simple, laudable, and entirely appealing: to ensure that the decision whether to prosecute high-level government officials would not be made by high-level government officials. In the aftermath of the Watergate scandal, a genuine constitutional crisis, the Act seemed indispensable as a way of promoting public trust in government, by giving an assurance that high-level officials would be investigated by people who were not controllable by their hierarchical superiors. The idea that no person should be judge in his or her own cause is deeply rooted in American constitutional traditions;13 it seems only natural to think that those investigating high-level criminality should be insulated from control of the highest executive officers. In this way, the Independent Counsel Act might be seen as continuous with the Founders' effort to design institutions so as to respond to the natural incentive effects of different governmental arrangements. It might even be seen as a Madisonian effort to ensure that "ambition [will] ... counteract ambition." 14 A possible response to this concern is that impeachment is the appropriate remedy for high-level official misconduct. But in the context of the Watergate era, it seemed sensible to reply that impeachment is extremely difficult and unnecessarily strong medicine, and that it should be used very rarely. The Act seemed far more precisely targeted. It would create an assurance, ex ante and ex post, that a disinterested person would investigate and if necessary prosecute high-level officials, in such a way as to give the public assurance that the investigation would be entirely neutral, and unaffected by politics. The question, hardly an unfamiliar one, is whether legislation driven by particular events might not have unintended consequences and create problems more serious than those that it was meant to prevent. 15 As a matter of law, what sort of structure has emerged? Every year, of course, many complaints are made by people asserting that a high-level official has violated the law and that an independent counsel should be appointed. The Independent Counsel Act specifies a rigid procedure for handling these complaints. Second, if the Attorney General decides that a preliminary investigation is warranted, the Attorney General must decide within ninety days whether "there are reasonable grounds to believe that further investigation is warranted .... ,2o During the preliminary investigation phase-and this is a crucial provision-the Attorney General is not authorized to convene grand juries, plea bargain, grant immunity, or issue subpoenas. 2' Moreover, the statute was amended at the end of the Reagan Administration so that the Attorney General cannot decline further investigation because the defendant lacked the necessary state of mind, "unless there is clear and convincing evidence" of that fact. 2 Third, if the Attorney General concludes that "there are reasonable grounds to believe that further investigation is warranted," the Attorney General must apply to the court for the appointment of an independent counsel; 23 this step is mandatory. The independent counsel, once appointed, has "full power and independent authority to exercise all investigative and prosecutorial functions A CrrzEN's GUIDE TO ENVIRONmENTAL HEALTH AND SAFETY IssuEs (1995). There is a frequent problem with legislation based on anomalous recent events; often the events are not likely to be replicated in anything like the same form, and the solution introduces a host of new problems. ,,6 The independent counsel may be removed by the Attorney General "only for good cause, physical or mental disability, or any other condition that substantially impairs the performance" of her duties.2 7 2. Observations Let us make a few observations about this simple and quite rigid structure. How can the process of appointing an independent counsel be stopped if it is undesirable? There are several methods. The first is via a preliminary determination that the charges are insufficiently credible and specific. But credibility may be hard to deny if, as is often the case, the allegation has been reported in the newspaper and Members of Congress think that there is reason for concern. If so, a preliminary inquiry must be undertaken. Since the 1978 enactment of the Independent Counsel Act, every administration has been investigated by an independent counsel. There have been sixteen " Hamilton Jordan, President Carter's chief of staff, was said to have used cocaine. " Theodore Olson, an assistant attorney general under President Reagan, was said to have committed perjury in testimony before Congress. Clinton's passport files. In each of these cases, an independent counsel was appointed, and in none of them has the independent counsel decided to indict the prospective defendant. But the investigations cost the taxpayers significant sums of money. Surely one of the most revealing, and absurd, was the investigation of Theodore Olson, who was subject to an extended criminal investigation growing out of his testimony defending the Department of Justice's position in connection with the executive branch's refusal to hand over to Congress the EPA's law enforcement files. This intensely political debate, over the environmental policies of the Reagan Administration, produced an utterly ridiculous charge-that Olson had committed the crime of perjury and should be indicted-and the result was a multimillion dollar investigation. Has the Act produced more good than harm? It would not be unreasonable to answer this question by saying very categorically that the Act has produced no What incentives are created by the Act? What are the likely effects of the Act on the behavior of politicians, the media, citizens, and independent counsels themselves? 1. Politicians Consider first the incentives of politicians as these incentives are altered by the Act. It is hard to imagine any presidential administration in which there will not be at least a colorable claim of official illegality by someone covered by the Act-a proposition supported by the fact that every administration has been subject to at least one independent counsel investigation since the Act's passage. And among political opponents of any administration, a number are likely to find it very much in their political interest to call for an independent counsel to investigate some real, possible, or even wholly imagined wrongdoing. Every political opponent of any administration knows this, and that knowledge increases each opponent's incentive to move first, or to join any bandwagon, or to speak about the value of future investigation of improprieties and illegalities. have done this, "cascade" 3 or bandwagon effects may well arise-and those who do not favor an independent counsel in the particular case, especially in the opposing party, may seem timid, or unduly allied to the interests of the current administration. It is thus likely that members of an opposition party may well find themselves in the seemingly odd position of publicly favoring-and by significant numbers-no less than a sustained criminal investigation and a possible jail sentence for their political opponents. What is especially important is that everyone knows this before any scandal begins, and this knowledge will make the unfortunate scenario all the more likely. From the media's standpoint, there are likely to be substantial and damaging incentive effects as well. If members of Congress have asked for an independent counsel, there is reason to think that high-level officials have actually committed crimes, and perhaps some of them should, or will, go to jail. That is certainly newsworthy; to say the least, it is worth considerable attention. Here are the critical points: A large part of the job of newspapers is to sell newspapers and advertisers. In many quarters, corruption sells. A large part of the job of television broadcasters is to attract viewers and sponsors, and a news program that is focused on a "growing scandal," or a call for official investigation of high-level criminality, is likely to attract viewers. politicians and media members follow their self-interest to the detriment of the public as a whole. The problem seems to be getting worse over time. Consider the following evidence, reporting references to the independent counsel in the New York Times and Washington Post in the years since the Act's passage: Front Page Stories Mentioning Independent Counsels32 To be sure, this is not the whole story. Responsible editorial writers also seek to be, or to appear, statesman-like, and it is quite easy to assume the posture of the concerned outsider favoring appointment of an independent counsel on the collect the figures since that time. What about the standpoint of the criminal justice system itself?. What incentives are placed on the independent counsel? The best way to answer such questions is by comparing the independent counsel to an ordinary prosecutor. As I have noted, any ordinary prosecutor has a limited budget and a large set of actual or potential targets of investigation. Thus, the prosecutor herself has a wide rather than narrow focus. 3 3 Every prosecutor also knows that criminality of some sort or another is extremely widespread. In any law school class, for example, a large percentage of students are likely to have committed some crime within the last decade. What are the aggregate results of all this? We do not have sufficient information to know with precision. But some speculations seem reasonable. The Act contributes to a general aura of distrust of government, distrust grounded not on an assessment of what existing or potential policies actually do, but instead on a belief that officials are basically corrupt. Hence it is possible for Americans to be doing relatively well, in part because of government policies, while also believing that their government is very bad, in part because they "know" that every recent administration contains many likely criminals. Political deliberation is likely to be crowded out if the national news is focused on whether the Vice President should be investigated for a crime. And political alienation is likely if officials on all sides are accused of criminality. Such extremely accusations can easily be exploited by conspiracy-mongers and third party candidates such as Ross Perot, themselves subject to character assassination, but able in the process to draw many officials under a skeptical cloud. reasonably well.3 5 Usually invoked as a counterexample, the Watergate scandal is actually a case in point. Archibald Cox was made independent by Justice Department regulations. After Robert Bork fired Cox, Leon Jaworski was appointed, did his job well, and President Nixon had to resign. The system worked. And there was no Independent Counsel act. The true lesson of the Watergate scandal is that political safeguards and ordinary prosecutors are perfectly sufficient. The principal problem with the Independent Counsel Act is that it imposes predictable and harmful incentives on Members of Congress, the media, and the independent counsel himself. By so doing, it makes all relevant institutions work less well. Congress intended the Act to increase trust in government; instead it has diminished trust in government. The Act aggravates some of the most serious problems in Congress by deflecting attention from substantive issues and turning disputes about policy into allegations of criminality. one of the more serious problems facing American government, either now or in the foreseeable future. The most serious problems involve the actual effects of policies on people's lives; the Act deflects attention from those problems. In any case, official wrongdoing can and should be handled through other, less destructive means. These include impeachment, political controls of the ordinary sort, threats of prosecution from executive authorities, and perhaps new institutions that avoid the risks created by the independent counsel. There have been seventeen special prosecutors or independent counsels appointed to investigate wrongdoing by senior government officials since the Ethics in Government Act was passed in 1978. Their jurisdictions, durations, and expenses have grown over the years. As of September 30, 1996, the total cost of the probes, including three still under way, was $ 128.8 million. Carter administration Subject: Hamilton Jordan, White House chief of staff Subject: Timothy Kraft, White House aide Reagan administration Subject: Raymond Donovan, Labor secretary Subject: Edwin Meese I1, White House counselor Duration: 1984 Counsel: Jacob Stein Issue: Incomplete financial disclosure Outcome: No charges filed Cost: $ 312,000 Subject: Theodore Olson, assistant attorney general Duration: 1986-1989 Counsel: Alexia Morrison Issue: Lying to Congress Outcome: No charges filed Cost: $ 2.1 million Subject: Michael Deaver, White House deputy chief of staff Duration: 1986-1989 Counsel: Whitney North Seymour Issue: Lying about lobbying activities Outcome: Convicted Cost: $ 1.6 million Subject: Iran-Contra affair Duration: 1986-1994 Counsel: Lawrence Walsh Issue: Lying to and obstructing Congress, destroying documents Outcome: 7 guilty pleas; 4 convictions (Oliver North's and John Poindexter's) Subject: Confidential Duration: 1989 Counsel: Sealed Issue: Confidential Outcome: Confidential Cost: $ 15,000 Subject: Department of Housing and Urban Development Subject: Confidential Counsel: Sealed Issue: Confidential Outcome: Confidential Cost: $ 93,000 Subject: Janet Mullins and Steven Berry, State Department aides Clinton administration Subject: President and Mrs. Clinton Duration: 1994-present Counsel: Robert Fiske (1994); Kenneth Starr (1994) Issue: Whitewater; White House travel office firings; misuse of FBI personnel files Outcome: 9 plea agreements; 3 convictions; 2 acquittals; ongoing. Cost: $ 27.3 million Subject: Mike Espy, former secretary of Agriculture Duration: 1994-present Counsel: Donald Smaltz Issue: Illegal-gifts Outcome: 1 guilty plea; 9 convictions; 3 indictments, including Espy's on 39 counts; ongoing. Cost: $ 7.9 million Subject: Henry Cisneros, former secretary of Housing and Urban Development Duration: 1995-present Counsel: David Barrett Issue: Lying to FBI about payments to a former mistress Outcome: Ongoing Cost: $ 1.9 million Subject: Ron Brown, late Commerce secretary Duration: 1995-1996 Counsel: Daniel Pearson Issue: Financial improprieties Outcome: Probe closed after Brown's death Cost: $ 2.5 million Subject Position Duration Counsel Outcome Hamilton White Jordon House Chief of Staff Timothy White House Kraft Aide Arthur Christy Charges Filed Gerald Gallinghouse Use Charges Filed Subject Position Duration Counsel Outcome Raymond Labor Donovan Secretary Leon Silverman Lying about No ties to organized crime Charges Filed Financial Disclosure Filed Charges White Edwin Meese Ell House Counselor Theodore Assistant Olson Attorney General Jacob Stein Incomplete No Morrison Lying to Congress No Charges million Filed