JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://about.jstor.org/terms 
Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 
This content downloaded from 129.59.95.115 on Sun, 28 Aug 2016 21:52:05 UTC 
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards: The P of Punitive Damages DANIEL KAHNEMAN Princeton University, Woodrow Wilson School of Public Policy, Princeton, NJ 08544 DAVID SCHKADE University of Texas, Austin CASS R. SUNSTEIN University of Chicago burden of uncertainty both on plaintiffs If the social function of punitive dam theorists argue (see Polinsky and Shavel that signal. Erratic awards are an ill wi 
The awarding of punitive damages is examined usefully from three distinctive scriptive (Bell, Raiffa and Tversky, 19 ought to be. A normative analysis of pun aspect of legal practice in a broader view Existing normative treatments of the iss phasize ethical concerns, most prominent and Luban, 1993; Polinsky and Shavell, analysis seeks an understanding of the f treatment of punitive damages will b psychological factors that affect the de considers ways to overcome the limitatio decisions. The goal of a prescriptive app jurors' task so as to make it easier for th 
The main focus of the present article is called the outrage model - which descr punitive awards. We also identify a sta much of the random variability in these mapping of a judgment about the approp punitive intent) onto the dollar scale. By sense that we defined earlier: for the per substantial social consensus about the s different cases, and different juries vie punitive intentions. The consensus brea press punitive intent in dollars, the re evidence suggests that different juries c different damages, even if they agree in 
The prescriptive task of legal reform analysis of judgments of punitive damag priate role of community sentiment in t three positions on this issue, ordered b sentiment about awards is normatively this sentiment, because of sampling erro tively acceptable, but community sentim lacks normative force; (iii) the communi tive standard, because it is an illegitima these three assessments are associated wi The normative and prescriptive analyse (Sunstein, Kahneman and Schkade, 199 PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 5 1 
We proceed as follows. Section 1 sets out the the study. Section 2 describes the procedures an 3 presents the results. Section 4 reviews the arg findings for legal reform. Section 5 concludes. 
The vast literature on punitive damages has bee the social function of punitive awards and wi Standard accounts suggest that punitive damag the problem of underdeterrence created by the pensate all injured plaintiffs (Landes and Posner, "sense of the community" about the appropria especially serious wrongdoers (Galanter and Lub these treatments for the emotions of outrage an ton, 1993). These emotions are of course cent there are some exceptions, punishment is gen expresses emotions of anger and indignation and 1993; Kahan and Nussbaum, 1996). 
We will propose a descriptive model of the psy a more general theoretical analysis (Kahnem concept of attitude beyond the domain of publi There is much evidence that a basic process of respond to the objects and events of their lives each of these objects and events evokes an attit ation and a response tendency. The evaluation dislike, and the response tendencies vary from aggression. The evaluations and intentions that d multiple ways, ranging from physiological indi surveys. 
The main implication of the present analysi correlate closely if they express the same atti excess of .80) have been observed between grou computed over a set of public issues (Kahneman 1994, 1998; Kahneman et al, 1993). The results generality of this observation. 
Figure 1 summarizes the outrage model of pu are considered an expression of an angry or indi evaluative aspect of the attitude is labeled o punitive intent. The goal of the model is to responses of populations of respondents to va figure is to be read from left to right. 
Features f Subjectivei Factors (Overfl Defendant's Malice, RecMesoiess Extent Victim of Harm 
Identity i r 
Firm Size // / Anchors Standards Figure 
The 
Outrage 
Model of 
Punitive 
Damages 
The variables listed under 'case features' i an action that determine the intensity of figure represents outrage as basic, and punit by additional factors. This representation i rage are a proper subset of the case feature affect punitive intent independently of suffered by the victim and the relationshi the judgment. 
The description of an action can evoke outrage without any information about the harm that it caused. However, the harm that an action caused is a factor in punitive intent. This retributive aspect of punishment is incorporated in many aspects of the law, such as the large discrepancy between the sentences for murder and for attempted murder. The relationship between victim and juror was manipulated in an experiment by Hastie, Schkade and Payne (1997); awards were larger when the plaintiff was located in the jurors' community than when the plaintiff was from a remote location. We speculate that the retributive urge is stronger when the victim belongs to one's group than when the victim is a stranger. Although punitive intent is affected by some factors that do not affect outrage, our general hypothesis is that most of the determinants of the two states are shared - and we therefore expect them to be highly correlated. 
In some situations the expression of an attitude is not spontaneous, but is restricted to a particular scale of responses. Stringent constraints apply, for example, when respondents in opinion surveys are asked to indicate the extent of their agreement or disagreement with a particular statement. In the situation with which we are concerned here, the responses of juries dealing with punitive awards are restricted to a scale of dollars. The PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 53 different expressions of an attitude are affected by specifi (usually slight) differences among them. Thus, the colum Figure 1 identifies some variables that affect the mapping of scale, but not onto a rating scale of punitive intent. For exa of the defendant firm is a scaling factor in translating judgment that appears severe when the defendant is a s inadequate when the defendant is a giant. Other factors th mapping of punitive intent onto the dollar scale are discuss 
In summary, the outrage model assumes internal states of which can be mapped onto different response scales. As both in their complexity and in the precision and reliability support: some scales are 'noisier' than others. The main co that the dollar scale is an extremely noisy expression of pu For more than a century, psychologists have studied the pro are mapped onto overt responses. An important distincti between category scales and magnitude scales. Category s of ordered responses, as in the familiar format of many o can be represented by numbers; in such cases descriptive la extremes of the scale, and sometimes to some or all inter assumed that category scales are invariant to a linear trans a scale that ranges from 1 to 7 is interpreted as equivalent that ranges from 0 to 60. As this example illustrates, the ze no particular significance. 
Internal states can also be mapped onto magnitude scale zero and no upper bound. The study of magnitude scaling (1975). The standard application of this technique is in the physical functions that relate the intensity of subjective expe physical stimulus that evokes them. In a typical experimen series of sounds that vary in loudness, or lights that vary i that vary in painful intensity. The observer is instructed t each stimulus according to the relative intensity of the evokes. Magnitude estimation has also been applied to s heinousness of crimes and the severity of punishments ( 
The research on magnitude scaling has yielded several robu (Stevens, 1975). (1) There is substantial agreement among magnitudes that they assign to the internal responses evo example, if one observer assigns three objects magnitudes o who assigns a value of 5 to the first stimulus would be expe 30 to the other two. (2) The distribution of judgments o positively skewed; skewed distributions are observed both i the same stimulus over repeated occasions judges. (3) The standard deviation of t mean of these judgments; this relations of the same stimulus over repeated oc different judges. (4) Unless the experi that should be assigned to it (called a values of judgments: some observers ass assign low numbers. (5) In general, mag by a power function to the relevant ph function of luminance and loudness is a exponent of approximately 1/3). (6) W a magnitude scale and on an interval sc are related by a power function to thei 
Like other internal states that vary i expressed either on category scales or could be asked to evaluate the outrage ranging from "not outrageous" to "ext could be asked to rate outrage on an un outrage, and a particular number (the specified action (the standard). The mod expect to observe characteristic differe particular, the standard deviations of strongly correlated with the means of j not on the category scale.1 
The dollar scale of punitive awards sa scale of punitive intent: the scale has a measurement (dollars) is specified in thi unit in which judgments are denominat lack relevant experience in mapping the fore expect judgments of punitive awar that are observed in magnitude scaling underlying punitive intent may differ even if they agree on the ratios of awa compare expressions of punitive inten appropriate severity of punishment and 
We use the category scales of outrage punitive damages to examine two relate to punish conform to a bedrock of socia onto category scales with verbally def achieve some uniformity in the use in t social consensus. In contrast, there are f to dollars. Our second hypothesis is th dollar scale induce extremely large v punitive intent in dollar amounts. Here features different 
of 
the dollar scale, two juries punitive awards. that sha We designed a study to test several implications of the outrage model. Respondents were given a set of vignettes of personal injury cases in which a plaintiff (always an individual) sued a firm for compensatory and punitive damages. The respondents were told to assume in all cases that compensatory damages had been awarded in the amount of $200,000, and that punitive damages were to be considered. Different groups provided different judgments of these scenarios. Respondents in the outrage condition were asked to rate the outrageousness of the defendant's behavior. Respondents in the punishment condition rated how severely they wished to punish the defendant. Finally, respondents in the dollar award condition were asked to assess the amount of punitive damages (if any) that should be awarded. 
We examined the following hypotheses: (1) The outrage evoked by scenarios of tortious behavior is governed by broadly shared social norms. The ranking of different scenarios by their outrageousness is expected to be generally similar for different demographic groups (See Section 3.1.3). (2) Punitive intent is determined by the outrageousness of the defendant's behavior and by other case factors, prominently including the harm suffered by the plaintiff. The prediction that harm affects punitive intent but not outrage was tested by presenting alternative versions of some scenarios, in which the severity of the harm suffered by the plaintiff was varied (See Section 3.1.4). (3) Damage awards are determined by punitive intent and by specific mapping factors, prominently including the size of the defendant firm. This prediction was tested by presenting each scenario in two versions, in which the size of the defendant was varied (See Section 3.1.5). (4) Large individual differences in the use of the dollar scale reduce the precision with which population norms for punitive awards can be estimated from the judgments of small samples of respondents, such as juries. This hypothesis was tested in two ways. First, we compared the amount of measurement error in ratings of punitive intent on a category scale and in dollar awards. Second, we predicted that transformations of dollar awards that remove individual differences in scale usage (e.g, transforming each individual's responses to ranks) would result in a sharp reduction in unsystematic variability. The rationale for this prediction is that such transformations eliminate the skewness and reduce the arbitrary variability associated with the dollar scale but retain the ordinal correspondence of punishments to punitive intentions (See Sections 3.2 and 3.3.1). (5) Because there is less error variance in ratings of punitive intent than in dollar awards, these ratings are a more accurate predictor of community sentiment about appropriate dollar awards than dollar awards themselves. The dollar award that a jury sentiment judgments intent could the precision ratings (See 
makes in a particular case can about the appropriate award, in the population. It is possib provide a more accurate esti 
of estimates based on jud 
Section 3.3.2). 
The sample consisted of 899 jury-eligible respondents who were recruited from the Travis County, Texas voter registration list by a professional survey firm and paid $35 for their participation. The resulting sample had good representation from various demographic and socio-economic groups. For example, respondents were 44% male; 64% Caucasian, 16% African- American, 15% Hispanic; median income = $30K-$50K; median education = Some College; median age = 30-39. Thirty-two respondents were dropped from the sample because they gave incomplete responses or failed to understand the task. 
The survey was conducted at a downtown hotel. Participants were run in large groups at pre-arranged times over a four day period. Most respondents completed their task in 30 to 45 minutes. 
Each respondent received three pages of general instructions and four numbered envelopes. The first three envelopes contained the materials for Parts 1 , 2 and 3 of the study, as described below. The fourth envelope contained demographic questions and debriefing information. The instructions (which are excerpted in Appendix I) included (1) an overview of the survey procedure, (2) an explanation of the task of jurors in civil (as opposed to criminal) trials, (3) definitions of and distinctions between compensatory and punitive damages, including the fact that compensatory damages had already been awarded in the cases they would consider, (4) a summary of standard legal conditions for punitive damages (maliciousness or reckless disregard for the welfare of others), and (5) a reminder about the standard of evidence required in this situation (preponderance of the evidence). 
Ten scenarios describing personal injury cases were constructed (summarized in Table 1 ; full versions in Appendix II). The first six were used in Parts 1 and 2 of the procedure and the other four in Part 3. Each respondent rated some version of all ten scenarios. Envelope #1 contained material about one of the first six scenarios. Envelope #2 contained the other five of these six scenarios. Envelope #3 contained the four scenarios used in Part 3 of the experiment. 
In Parts 1 and 2, between-subjects manipulations were response mode (Outrage, Punishment or $ Damages) and firm size (annual profits of $10-$20 million (Medium) or Case Part Description Mary 1 ,2 Employee suffers anemia due to benzene exposure on the job Frank 1 ,2 Motorcycle driver injured when brakes fail Thomas 1 ,2 Circus patron shot in arm by drunk security guard Susan 1,2 Auto airbag unexpectedly opens, injuring driver Carl 1 ,2 Man suffers skin damage from using baldness cure Sarah 1 ,2 Elderly woman suffers back injuries from using exercise video Jack 3 Small child playing with matches burned when pajamas catch fire Joan 3 Child ingests large quantity of allergy medicine, needs hospital stay Martin 3 Disabled man injured when wheelchair lift malfunctions Janet 3 Secretary chronically ill due to radiation from computer monitor $100-$200 million (Large)), and scenario sequence, including which scenario was evaluated first, in isolation from the others (in Part 1 of the procedure). Scenario order was counterbalanced so that each scenario appeared in each ordinal position with equal frequency. Table 2 shows the wording of the evaluation questions in the three response modes. Instructions in all scenarios stated that compensatory damages of $200,000 had already been awarded. 
Part 3 had the same structure as Parts 1 and 2, except that the isolation manipulation was replaced by a manipulation in which the degree of harm suffered by the plaintiff was varied. For each of the four scenarios used in Part 3, we formulated a high-harm and low-harm version. For example, in the case in which a child playing with matches was burned when his pajamas caught fire, the injuries were described as "He was severely $ Damages In addition to paying compensatory damages, what amount of punitive damages (if any) should the defendant be required to pay as punishment and to deter the defendant and others from similar actions in the future? (please write your answer in the blank below) $ burned over a significant portion of his bod and months of physical therapy" (high har and required regular professional medical tr We discuss the results in three parts. Section 3.1 is concerned with the validity of the outrage model shown in Figure 1. Section 3.2 deals with the predictability of dollar damage awards, and with the role of individual differences. Section 3.3 considers the question of unpredictability at the level of juries. We examine the hypothesis that variability in the individuals' use of the dollar scale is sufficient to be a major cause of unpredictability in jury awards. 
The analyses in this section examine some of the social norms that govern evaluations of the actions of firms and the intended severity of punishment for harmful negligence. They focus on the average judgments of the general public (as represented in our sample), and of sub-populations within it. 3.1.1 . Preliminary analysis: The effect of context. Unlike real jurors, who are exposed to a single case for a long time, the participants in our study responded to a total of 10 personal injury cases in quick succession, and had an opportunity to compare these scenarios to each other. To examine the effect of this unusual procedure, every participant first encountered one of the first six scenarios in Table 1, which was presented in a separate envelope and was evaluated in isolation from the others (Part 1). The experimental design provides a comparison of the distribution of judgments to each scenario when it is judged in isolation or in the context of other scenarios. The context was provided in envelope 2, where subjects were instructed to read through all five scenarios therein before responding to any one. In addition, of course, each subject had already responded to the scenario they encountered in envelope 1, which also contributed to the context. The relevant data are summarized in Table 3, which shows the mean outrage and punishment judgments and median dollar awards for each scenario in the isolation and in the context conditions. 
To test whether the availability of a context altered intuitions, we computed rankcorrelations (N = 12) over the scenarios of Table 3, between the judgments in the isolation condition and in the context condition. The correlations are high: .88, and .90, respectively, for the means of outrage and punishment ratings, .89 for the medians of dollar awards. 
We also examined whether the availability of a context of comparison affected the distribution of judgments. Except for a small but significant increase in the severity of punishment in the context condition (i = 3.19,/? < .01), the means of judgments made in 
No Context Context No Context Context No Context Context Medium Firms Mary 3.76 Frank 3.76 Thomas 4.73 Susan 3.12 Carl 2.92 Sarah Mean 3.33 3.31 3.21 3.51 341,667 491,667 Stdev (means) 1.00 1.15 1.18 1.59 229,000 425,000 Stdev Ratio 1.15 1.35 1.86 isolation and in context are also similar. The most consistent effect of a context of similar cases is to increase the range of the judgments of different scenarios. The variances of mean judgments of outrage and punishment over the 12 scenarios are larger in the context condition. In a test for a difference between correlated variances, the effect of context is significant for the punishment condition (F(l,10) = 6.87, p < .05), and marginally significant for outrage (F = 4.07, p < .10). The results for a similar comparison of the medians of dollar awards are similar (F = 4.64,/? < .10). The availability of a context apparently makes a serious case appear more serious than it would on its own, and makes a milder case appear milder. 
The small effect of a comparison context in improving discriminations among cases could be useful in the design of possible reforms of the jury's task. However, the fact that the effect of context is small allows us to generalize the conclusions of the present experiment with some confidence to situations in which no context is provided (the standard case for real juries) or to situations in which other scenarios might be used. 3.1.2. Average judgments of scenarios. Table 4 presents measures of central tendency for the three types of response (outrage, punishment and awards) for each of the scenarios presented in the experiment. Because the context effects analyzed in the preceding section are small, judgments obtained in Part 1 and in Part 2 of the questionnaire are pooled in the a Firm Hann Mean Mean Mean $ Median $ % Zero $ Size Level Scenario Outrage Punish Awards Awards Awards Large High Joan 4.24 4.93 17,853,229 2,000,000 5.7 Large High Martin 3.88 4.78 17,071,115 1,900,000 0.0 Large - Frank 4.32 4.77 9,954,507 1,000,000 0.7 Medium High Martin 4.41 4.73 4,899,710 1,000,000 2.9 Large - Thomas 4.29 4.73 8,703,479 500,000 2.8 Large Low Joan 4.19 4.65 22,131,390 1,000,000 2.8 Medium - Thomas 4.69 4.64 2,152,765 525,000 2.9 Medium - Frank 4.56 4.54 3,450,993 500,000 1.5 Medium High Joan 4.49 4.53 4,871,791 1,000,000 6.0 Large - Mary 4.05 4.50 9,162,137 1,000,000 2.8 Medium Low Martin 4.03 4.32 2,185,522 525,000 1.5 Medium Low Joan 4.67 4.32 6,204,239 550,000 7.2 Large Low Martin 4.01 4.28 9,589,643 1,000,000 2.9 Medium - Mary 4.32 4.24 1,939,926 575,000 2.2 Medium - Susan 2.95 3.12 1,701,522 200,000 18.4 Large - Susan 2.85 3.03 10,254,317 300,000 12.7 Large High Janet 2.91 2.79 5,122,207 250,000 28.0 Large - Carl 2.80 2.79 1,779,264 200,000 9.9 Medium - Carl 2.70 2.59 752,173 175,000 16.2 Large Low Janet 2.84 2.56 7,229,776 200,000 23.9 Medium High Janet 2.65 2.55 1 ,263 ,264 200,000 12.5 Medium Low Janet 2.49 2.54 1,925,031 150,000 29.7 Medium High Jack 1.83 1.58 1,289,063 32,500 43.8 Laige Low Jack 1.75 1.56 1,650,695 100 49.3 Large High Jack 1.83 1.50 917,836 0 58.2 Medium Low Jack 1.49 1.18 483,403 0 66.7 Large - Sarah 1.54 0.93 89,314 0 74.6 Medium - Sarah 1.35 0.61 230,184 0 75.7 data of Table 4. Different summary statistics a are shown for ratings of outrage and of intende presents medians and the proportion of respon be zero. The use of the median is justified becau severely skewed, as expected for judgments on descending order of the mean punishment ra medium-firm and large-firm versions of each high-harm versions of the four scenarios used i 
The main observation from Table 4 is that the mildest is quite similar for the three responses. awards generally decline, concordant with the arrange the scenarios. We computed the Pearson Table 4 (N = 28). The correlation between the is very high (.98). The correlations of these two lower (.69 and .78, respectively for outrage and PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 6 1 these correlations are attenuated by the Because the skewed distribution of dollar a of sample means than of medians, the corre the means of dollar awards are even lowe 3.1.3. Demographic analyses. Do the avera broadly shared social norms? Are there dif answer these questions we broke down the ing ethnicity, gender, education and inc separately for each subcategory (e.g., w correlations between the mean judgments o over the 28 scenarios. Table 5 presents the 
The results of Table 5 indicate that the rati there is little or no disagreement betwee Hispanics and whites, and respondents at similar orderings of the 28 scenarios used i these scenarios of personal injury cases evid are broadly shared in society. 
The results for outrage ratings are generall lower (a median correlation of .94, compa correlations reflect the slightly lower stati lations between mean judgments of dollar was .65), another indication of the poor rel course, could be mitigated by using larger aEntries are correlations between the indicated demographic categori 
The high correlations shown in Table 5 imply o mean judgments of disjoint demographic group They do not preclude systematic differences bet scales. Thus, one group could be generally more make the same discriminations among scenarios. which they discriminate between cases, yielding 
To test for differences between the mean respon multivariate ANOVA for each response mode, wit scenario as a within subject factor, and dummy as covariates. There were no significant differenc important exception of gender. Although the mea highly correlated, women were somewhat more s outrage ratings (a mean difference of .52 scale un (difference of .37,/? < .001), and set higher log a gender X scenario interaction in which women and punishment (but not higher dollar awards) t ( p < .05). 
In summary, we have evidence of a remarkable degree of consensus on the relative outrage evoked by scenarios of personal injury and on the relative severity of the punishment that is considered appropriate in this class of cases. This conclusion may not fully generalize to all domains of the law. We might expect to find much larger differences in the level of judged severity between communities and social categories in other areas, perhaps including attitudes to sexual harassment and civil rights violations, although there could still be agreement across categories on the relative severity of different instances within a domain. 3.1.4. From outrage to punishment: The harm effect. In the outrage model of Figure 1, morally objectionable actions evoke a graded response of outrage or indignation. An action can be judged more or less outrageous without reference to its consequences. Consequences, however, are important to punishment in law, and we suspected that they would also be important to lay intuitions about the proper punishment for reprehensible actions. This prediction was tested in Part 3 of the questionnaire, where different respondents encountered versions of the same scenario that differed in the harm that the plaintiff had suffered. 
The results are summarized in the three panels of Figure 2. In each panel, the mean response to each high-harm scenario is plotted against the mean response to the low-harm version of the same scenario. Because outrage is assumed to be independent of consequences, our model predicts that the points should fall near the identity line. This prediction is confirmed. An analysis of variance shows no main effect of harm on outrage ratings. A different pattern is found for the punishment measure, which is displayed in the middle panel of Figure 2. Here the points all fall above the identity line, indicating that punishment ratings reflect the severity of the harm as well as the outrageousness of the action that caused it. The effect of harm is small, but statistically reliable ( F = 7.4 , p < .01). Because the outrage model involves a cascade of judgments, the effect of harm on punitive intent is expected to transfer to dolla statistically significant effect of harm on the n .05). There is also a Harm X Firm Size interacti of Harm on log awards is enhanced for large fir 3.1.5 . From punitive intent to dollar awar community, opinion is sharply divided on awards should depend on the size of the Galanter and Luban, 1993). Lay intuition model, punitive intent is an intention t defendant matters a good deal. Concepts su or inflicting pain on it are quite meaningf economists and legal scholars may find th intuitively obvious that it takes a louder me a larger loss to inflict pain on it. The outra to punish will be translated into a larger pu if it is small. 
The four panels of Figure 3 present the same as in Figure 2: the mean judgment plotted against the mean judgment for the outrage model predicts that firm size shoul to punish, or on the likelihood of deciding all three measures fall symmetrically abo large effect of firm size is apparent in t significant effect of firm size on log a awards (F = 6.1, p = .01). 
The data reported in this section confir about the acceptable behavior of firms (s They also lend strong support to the outr a basic evaluation of a defendant's action b was caused to the plaintiff, and of the am intended level of pain on a defendant. 
The analyses presented so far were conce the general public, and of sub-populations consensus on social norms, and also concl precise account of moral judgments. Howe ness in individual judgments of dollar awa of small samples of people. Variability, es a critical problem in the world of legal pr section is concerned with an analysis of v 3.2. The unpredictability of dollar award A central goal of the present study was punitive damage awards. Our main hypot onto a dollar scale is a major cause of un distribution of responses associated with variability and little skewness in the mappi scales, because these scales are bounded, and in the task of finding a response that expres we present several analyses that compare the 3.2.1. Measuring unpredictability: Variance which the respondents in our study (and jur tions of various scenarios involving tortious respondents would agree in their evaluatio Table Metrics11 
Proportion of 
Variance in 
Individual 
Respon 
Raw responses .29 .49 .06 Convert to ranks for each subject .42 .58 .51 
Ln($) .42 Proportions w (including fir subgroups in subjects. t narios would be the only source of variance in judgments - in this ideal situation there is only signal, no noise. In a non-ideal world, however, we expect to observe variance from two other sources: (1) individual differences in the average response to scenarios, and (2) "noise," which combines idiosyncratic responses of individuals to particular scenarios with pure measurement error. The proportion of total variance that is accounted for by scenarios provides a useful index of the extent to which judgments approximate the ideal of complete consensus. Table 6 presents the values of this index for the three responses used in the present study, and for some transformations of these responses. 
To produce the values shown in Table 6, separate analyses of variance were conducted for each group of respondents who were exposed to the same combination of 10 of the 28 different scenarios. The values shown are a weighted average of the results obtained in these homogeneous groups. Ratings of outrage and punishment show much higher consensus than dollar awards. Indeed, only 6% of the variance of dollar awards is associated with scenarios. Similar results were reported by Kahneman and Ritov (1994), who compared willingness to pay for various causes (a magnitude sale) to category scale measures of related attitudes. 
Dollar awards exhibit all the characteristics that are expected of magnitude scaling without a modulus, where each respondent in effect adopts a personal modulus. Individual differences in this modulus combined with the proportionality between individual means and standard deviations are expected to produce a high correlation between the mean and the standard deviations of respondents' judgments: if two individuals agree in their underlying impressions but their moduli differ by a factor, both the means and the standard deviations of their expressed judgments will differ by the same factor. For each group of respondents who saw the same set of 10 scenarios we computed the correlation between the mean and the standard deviation of the 10 responses made by each individual. As expected, this correlation was very high for dollar awards (an average of correlation of .90), but small for outrage ratings and (an average of .16) and punishment ratings (an average of .09). 
Second, we observe that the distributions of awards are highly skewed to the right, for each of the 28 scenarios. We trace the skewness to two sources: the characteristic skewness of all magnitude judgments (Stevens, 1975), and the skewness in the distribution of personal moduli. We computed skewness statistics for non-zero awards for each scenario PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 67 for each group of respondents exposed to the s skewness measure.2 Dollar award distributions we age skewness statistic of 3.57), while outrage rati ratings (average of -.13) showed little skewness moduli, we computed the skewness index of th standard deviations of positive individual respo the same set of scenarios. The average skewness standard deviations. Finally, we generated a new s each group of respondents, by dividing all the po individual's mean response. This transformation i individual differences in moduli on the distribut of judgments within scenarios is now 1.35. This v skewness expected for magnitude judgments ob much lower than the skewness of untransformed skewness observed in the judgments of particula distribution of personal moduli. 
In a further test of the hypothesis that the poo attributable to individual differences in modul judgments to ranks. The ranking transformation use of the scale, while retaining the essential co judgments. The transformation yielded a dramati dollar awards: the proportion of systematic varia ranking transformation yielded only a modest im related variance for outrage and punishment ratin conclusion that the unpredictability of raw dolla (and possibly meaningless) individual difference 
A logarithmic transformation of dollar awards the proportion of variance accounted for by scen magnitude scale. The transformation of awards t teristic skewness of the distribution of judgment analysis of the predictability of actual punitiv showed that the logarithmic transformation yiel They also showed that the log of awards is pr objective characteristics of cases in which such cluded that the unpredictability of punitive awar consistency between their analyses of real jury a we agree with their conclusion that log awards a plaintiffs, however, live in a world of dollars, judgments of our respondents and of the real j correctly described as erratic and unpredictable skewness creates the possibility of disastrous l even in very large firms. 
jury 
analyses The unpredictability that is of interest t a group of twelve (and sometimes fewer) about a single case, and an opportunity experiment are of course quite differe possibility of mitigating high individual an attempt not to overstate the variabi analyze the judgments of synthetic jurie respondents. The 'jury judgments' that group of 12 individuals, using the med judgment that a jury composed of thes 
Our decision to use the median of ind research findings which suggest that thi the decision that is likely to emerge fr and Casper (1992) report an extensive e pensatory damages in a price-fixing case. liberation responses of individual jurors either the mean or the mode. 
There is no reason to believe that our main findings would be altered by the process of group deliberation. The conclusion of a now considerable literature using a wide variety of tasks is that deliberating groups hold no generalized advantage over individuals in the performance of judgment tasks (Kerr, MacCoun and Kramer, 1996). More specifically, Kerr, MacCoun and Kramer (1996) concluded from their review of judgmental biases in legal contexts that jury deliberations were actually slightly more likely to amplify the biases of individuals than to attenuate them. In the jury damage assessment context, Diamond and Casper's (1992) mock jury awards were significantly higher than the mean individual award (by 26%), a finding mirrored qualitatively in other studies (Davis, 1996, experiment 1; Kaplan and Miller, 1987, for punitive but not compensatory damages). If this effect applies to our study as well, the right-skewed distribution of damage awards in our data would cause our synthetic jury judgments to underestimate both the mean and the variance of the awards that that deliberating juries would have made. However, in a study with student mock-jurors Davis et al (1997) found that the median somewhat overestimated actual group judgments. While the relationship between individual judgments and that of the groups they compose is still an evolving area of research, this evidence suggests that the results we observe in our synthetic juries provide a reasonable and conservative approximation to the results that would be observed with real juries. 
We created synthetic juries by randomly selecting groups of 12 respondents, with replacement, in each condition and for each scenario, and used the median of the 12 responses to represent the jury judgment (the size of the pool from which juries were drawn varied from 144 to 151 in Part 1-2 scenarios and from 64 to 77 in Part 3 scenarios). One thousand simulated juries were created in this fashion for each scenario and condition. PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 69 
Table 7 presents, for each of the scenarios used in the and upper bounds of a 95% confidence interval for the a as well as the mean ratings of simulated punishment juries. unpredictability and characteristic skewness of jury d under laboratory conditions.4 Note that the extreme striking for the most severe cases. As noted earlier, thi similar observations with magnitude scales in the cont standard deviation of judgments is commonly found (Stevens, 1975). In the data of Table 8, the width of t correlated with both the mean ( r = .90) and the medi 3.3.1 . Measuring unpredictability: correlational analy sidered predictable, in our use of that term, if there i randomly selected from the population. We carried o 
Punishment .86 .89 $ Awards .47 .51 .42 
Overall Median $ Award .71 .77 .69 predictability of the judgments made by simulated ishment juries. The basic unit of this analysis is a s each of the 28 scenarios listed in Table 7. Except fo als appearing in more than one jury, this procedure dent juries to deal with 28 separate cases on the s created 60 sets of 28 simulated jury judgments judgment was contributed by a different jury. We t between each pair of sets. This computation was per correlation between the outrage ratings of succes the correlation between the outrage rating of on another). The data shown in Table 8 are medians of each response mode or of the 3600 correlations ob 
The results of Table 8 conform to our hypothesis. independent synthetic juries judging outrage or p and .89). In contrast, agreement between indepen awards on a magnitude scale is quite weak (r = .42) and skewness of judgments on this measure is so judgments are unstable. The problem could be r samples. For example, we found that when the siz correlation between the dollar awards of independe the problem would be exacerbated in smaller sam 
A jury can be thought of as a sample from the com an estimate of community sentiment. In the contex timent about the punitive damages for a scenario damages set by all the respondents who judged it. T correlations between sets of simulated jury judg sponding estimates of community sentiment, for dollar awards for each scenario. Remarkably, punis timent about dollar awards more accurately than do is especially notable because, as will be shown bel awards and ratings of punitive intent is highly non 3.3.2. Improving predictability. As noted above, t viewed as estimates of community sentiment about in a given case. The accuracy with which a dollar jur be assessed by computing the difference between PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 7 1 community sentiment, for which we use the The root-mean-square of these discrepancies for each scenario, provides a measure of aver standard error of the estimate in a regression 
Hypothesis 5 states, and the correlational an implies, that punishment juries can be used munity sentiment about dollar awards than amine this possibility, we proceed as follows. the functions that relate the overall median o mean judgment of all simulated punishment j we create punishment juries according to the use the median punishment rating of the 12 i We then use the relevant function from Figu ment jury into a dollar award. As before, the the overall median of dollar awards, and we these estimates. 
As can be seen in Figure 4, the relationship between punishment ratings and dollar awards is highly non-linear. On the background of previous psychophysical scaling research, this result is not surprising. Stevens (1975) pointed out that magnitude scales are generally related to category scales of the same underlying variable by a power function. Following Stevens, we therefore fitted (separately for medium and large firms) conversion functions of the following form: 
A = af* + e (1) where D¿ = median jury award for scenario i. Mean punishment ratings lower than 1 . and a prediction of $0 was made for these on those scenarios that exceeded this thres for medium and large firms, respectively) estimated a and b using a nonlinear nume and the estimated functions for this analy 
To assess the relative quality of the esti verted punishment ratings, we created 100 and each scenario, in the same fashion a estimate of the population median of dol simply the median of the twelve individu of individual responses was converted to a function for the appropriate firm size. T and the observed median dollar award for each scenario were summed across the 100 juries. Finally, we computed for each scenario the ratio of the RMSE for dollar awards to the RMSE for converted punishment ratings. The last column of Table 7 presents these ratios, which we use as a summary statistic of the relative accuracy of the two estimation procedures. 
As is apparent from the large ratios (the median ratio is 2.18), the estimates derived from punishment ratings are far more accurate than estimates from dollar awards. For example, for the case of Joan with a medium firm size and high harm, the ratio is 2.27 (Table 7), the median individual award is $1,000,000 (Table 4), and the estimates of dollar juries have an average error from this value of $913,481 compared to $402,414 for estimates based on punishment juries. A difference in this direction was found for 25 of the 28 scenarios. These results support the rather counter-intuitive conclusion that the goal of estimating community sentiment about dollar awards can be achieved more efficiently by asking juries to rate their intent to punish than by asking them to set dollar awards provided of course that the requisite conversion function is available. The research we have reported was designed with three objectives in mind: (i) to learn about the psychology of punitive damages; (ii) to understand why punitive damages are sometimes arbitrary and unpredictable; (iii) to consider possible reforms in the task assigned to the jury, which might reduce this uncertainty. We discuss the three objectives in turn. 
PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 73 made no attempt to analyze in this researc elementary internal state is a central determi that could be asked about the same incident: a rating of appropriate punishment or in set tions of the image of a defendant firm and 
Although many questions about the case wo also raises a particular set of consideration attitude structure in which several internal increasing complexity; a more complex respo its predecessor in the chain, and also on som of outrage is basic, punitive intent is interm are most complex. The determinants that affe determinants of earlier links. 
We have identified some of the determinants the list we offered is not complete. For exam not the only factor that influences punitive ignation of an action as a repeated offense c even if it does not increase the outrageousnes the only factor that affects dollar awards be another likely candidate. Because there is no to punish a company "severely" or "very se dollars is likely to be highly susceptible to su anchors (Chapman and Bornstein, 1996; Ha cannot reject the interpretation that the fir study was produced by anchoring on the num of different sizes. More generally, we view t as a framework for future investigation of t 
The normative status of the outrage model this model appears to capture moral norms t hand, there are reasons to question whether to be honored by the legal system in awardi retributive focus of outrage is not well-suite theorists view as the main justification for Polinsky and Shavell, 1997). Those who emph damages should be awarded to make up fo detected and punished. This idea is not rep suspect that the brazen actions of an agent tha of day may occasion more outrage than the Thus, efforts to make punitive awards ser intuitions that jurors bring to their role. Leg intuitions that treat corporations as persons, persons. In some areas, legislatures commit social norms of lay persons. We return to the of a radical change in the role of juries in se 4.2. A cause of unpredictable awards The task of setting punitive damages most method, which we have labeled magnit earlier, subjects in most applications of particular number (the modulus) to a spe stimuli in terms of ratios of subjective int both arbitrary and inconsequential: the s whether the standard stimulus is to be jud also be conducted without a modulus, by ments of different stimuli should reflect th In the context of psychophysical scaling that are quite similar to those that are obt noisier and more skewed. It appears that adopts a modulus - and different subjects a greatly increases the variability and ske stimulus. The effects of individual diffe eliminated in the statistical analysis of ps many stimuli. Under current legal practic considers only one case in isolation, and i it to others. 
The close similarity of our results to the two questions: (i) what is the significance tude of responses? (ii) what is the status given scenario (or stimulus)? In the contex tions are (i) individual differences in the si of an arbitrary modulus; and (ii) the ave largely arbitrary, although the ratios of re 
Do these conclusions also apply to the se the mapping from punitive intent to dollar would be in a psychophysical experiment? the overall magnitude of awards need no genuine differences of opinion about the p the amount required to engage the attentio The data of the present study do not perm dollar awards is due to such systematic e believe that arbitrary differences in indiv first is the evidence indicating the grea dubious informative value. In addition, we onto dollars raises normative and concep expert. It is likely that lay persons faced choices. The normative relevance of doll which the moduli used by jurors are arbitr 
We have considerable confidence in the con of the dollar scale were an important cause study. A more difficult question concerns the circumstances of the present experiment propose, is that actual juries and the parti mapping punitive intent onto an unbound them. Under these circumstances we expect susceptible to any anchors that may be p deliberations. 
A final note of caution is in order here. The fact that punitive damages share the known deficiencies of magnitude scaling is likely to be a significant cause of unpredictable punitive awards - but it is not the only one. Other relevant factors include regional differences, plaintiffs demand, the quality of the lawyers on both sides, and doubtless others. 
In spite of the acknowledged limitations of our experiment, we believe that our findings have substantial implications for reforms of the role of juries in setting punitive awards. Of course the decision of whether and how the current system should be reformed must be guided by a normative analysis of the social and legal function of punitive damages. In the subsequent discussion we distinguish among three canonical positions, which differ in the diagnosis of the principal weakness of the current system, and imply different recommendations for how it might be improved. The issues raised in the following sections are discussed in greater detail in Sunstein, Kahneman and Schkade (1998). In that paper, we also discuss other reform proposals, such as damage caps, compensatory damage multipliers, and an increased supervisory role for judges. 4.3.1. High variability of dollar awards. The first and least radical of the three positions we shall discuss assumes that the only problem with the punitive awards made by juries is that they are erratic and unpredictable, because of the large individual differences between jurors in the mapping of punitive intent into dollars. In this view the "community sentiment" about the appropriate dollar punishment in a case is the normative standard. The task of the jury is simply to reflect this sentiment, which we have operationalized here as the median of the judgments that would be made if the entire eligible popúfation participated in setting dollar awards. The problem of unpredictability arises from an identifiable source: a sample of twelve is too small to provide an accurate estimate of community sentiment, because of the large individual differences in the mapping of punitive intent. The goal of reform is merely to obtain a more accurate understanding of that sentiment. 
How might this problem be solved? The analysis that we described in Section 3.3.2 showed that asking juries to assess severity of punishment, and converting this assessment to dollars by a conversion function leads to much greater accuracy (by a factor of more than 2 in these data) than asking juries to set dollar awards. The procedure of this experiment provides a blueprint for a m could yield a substantial improvement in 
In the first phase of such reform, a s generated - perhaps several sets correspo injury or financial misconduct. These individuals (or experimental juries) to ob respondents would set dollar awards. Oth perhaps rank the scenarios by this vari conversion function that could subsequen of punishment (or their ranking of the into dollar awards. The analysis that we r new procedure. As we have seen, the resu can be reduced by changing the jury's ta rating or by ranking), and avoiding th Specifically, we found that it is possibl (where the error variability and the mea accurate estimate of community sentime dollar awards can provide. 
The proposed procedure raises many qu point of view, however, it is straightfor damages should reflect the central ten modest critique of the existing system, change, providing improved estimates without questioning the normative force 
If we pursue this perspective, then other of community sentiment can be consi gested to us by Dan McFadden involves relevant category (e.g., personal injury c of the community median. This approach on the stability of the category mean. A punitive intent and it is possible that fu stable and reliable scale, which would sentiment about dollar awards. Many ne "How can we obtain the best estimate of % 
the legal system should deny the normative status of community sentiment about dollar awards, but accept community sentiment about punitive intent. If the translation of punitive intent onto the dollar scale is arbitrary and poorly informed, the goal of the jury system should not be to predict community sentiment about dollars - even if this prediction could be made accurate. 
On this view, the conversion functions that take punitive intent to dollars (see Figure 4) reflect intuitions about appropriate dollar awards that are neither informed nor particularly reasonable. Even if it is granted that the jury is sovereign is deciding how much an PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 77 individual or a corporation should be made to that would enable them to convert their punit Even experts would find that question diffic plausible that individuals and juries answer i clinging to numerical anchors provided in th sentiment on awards is seen as representing t moduli, another procedure will be required to t 
The proposal that naturally emerges from determination of punitive awards. As before, j a ranking of the case at hand on a scale of pun However, the conversion function from puni legislative or regulatory process, not by the community sentiment to another. The convers the factors that affect community judgment, su informed analysis of the harm that different ity of a formal scheme to convert punitive in unpredictability of awards; it is also likely to 4.3.3. Rejecting the outrage model A still mo could draw on our findings about the moral in model. Our results suggest that these intuiti focus; that they appear to neglect issues of d persons; and that they require punitive damag the defendant. From the normative standpoint aspects of the outrage model. Many observers damages should be deterrence, not retributi Shavell, 1997). The view of the corporation a than perfectly robust: would potential jurors b who ultimately pay the punitive damages are most of them individually powerless to change have also been raised about the justification fo ages should be adjusted to the size of the def 
It appears that jurors bring to their task som moral intuitions, which may not correspond t Accepting this position not only denies the leg legitimacy of the punitive intent of the comm in the right direction? Perhaps; but a large litera suggests that the intuitions of the outrage mod in the face of explicit instructions to the cont coming). 
If accepted, the logic of this analysis would lead to a proposal that appears radical in the special context of American legal tradition and practice: Juries should not be assigned the task of setting punitive damages, because they are unlikely to carry out their task appropriately in light of the best understanding of the goal of punitive awards. It follows that the task of determining the size of awards administrative process. If a jury is used at about the outrageousness of the defenda several inputs in a punitive decision that (see Sunstein, Kahneman and Schkade, 
We have shown that the difficulty of map potentially important source of unpredicta dollar response contrasts with another im ment in the population with respect to judg consensus operates across differences of substantial consensus on outrage and punit awards are much less so. 
This finding leads naturally to some specific reform proposals. In particular, it suggests that any effort to improve predictability in the award of punitive damages will be most successful if it assists with the task of mapping outrage and punitive intent onto a dollar scale. A conversion formula might well be adopted to provide this assistance. The content of the conversion formula depends on the normative status that is accorded to community sentiments. As we have seen, different recommendations for reform emerge from three different diagnoses of the problem: (i) dollar awards are susceptible to excessive sampling error; (ii) the mapping of punitive intent to dollars is poorly informed; (iii) the judgments of jurors are likely to be affected by outrage and by retributive urges that are not in line with appropriately designed legal principles. 
Our findings have implications well beyond the area of punitive damages, because the legal system is pervasively in the business of requiring people to map normative judgments onto dollar amounts. Our analysis suggests that the mapping of attitudes onto unbounded scales creates problems that are both predictable and severe. We suspect, for instance, that similar difficulties exist in the setting of awards for pain and suffering, libel, and civil rights violations, and in attempts to use measures of willingness to pay to estimate the value of public goods.6 There is a need to develop mechanisms for eliciting social preferences and values that do not suffer from the problems and defects identified here. We do not expect to find an uncontroversial way of eliciting, or constructing, social preferences and values, but some approaches to this important task are demonstrably worse than others, because they make people perform tasks for which they are illequipped. The problems we have identified and the solutions we have sketched here are likely to be relevant to many questions currently facing law and policy. PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 79 In this study we would like you to imagine t court. Civil law suits can involve disputes individuals and companies, in which the plain or their property in some way. A civil suit i gaining compensation from the defendant f 
Civil suits involve two different types o defendant that is found liable for damages. compensate a plaintiff for the harm suffered damages are intended to achieve two purpo misconduct, and (2) to deter the defendant a in the future. 
In the cases you will consider, the defendan satory damages to the plaintiff. This does must also be awarded. Whether or not puniti large they should be, is completely separate 
Punitive damages should be awarded if a pr defendants either acted maliciously or with Defendants are considered to have acted ma someone. Defendants are considered to have of others if they were aware of the probable actions were a gross deviation from the stan 
Civil suits differ from criminal cases, in wh or a company for alleged violations of the la claim by "a preponderance of the evidence," that the plaintiffs claim is justified. This dif tion must prove the defendant's guilt "bey 
In each of the cases you will consider, the ju decided to accept the plaintiff's claim. As a c dant to pay $200,000 in compensatory damag defendants are large [medium-sized] compa lion per year. 
hospital stay she is now better, the condition has not been fully cured. She believes that exposure to benzene in her work place caused the condition and sued her employer, TGI International. The jury (of which you are $200,000 in compensation. 
TGI International is a large company (wi manufactures high-tech machine parts. So discovered that manufacturing workers benzene, a substance that can cause ane show that the top management at TGI Int problem, because benzene levels in the p allowed by OSHA regulations. They though any luck no one will get sick." They also "warnings would just create panic." Frank Williams Frank Williams suffered serious internal injuries when the braking system on his motorcycle failed to work at a traffic light. He felt that that the brakes were defective, and sued National Motors, the company that manufactures and sells his motorcycle. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered National Motors to pay him $200,000 in compensation. 
National Motors is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that makes motorcycles, scooters, and other motorized single person vehicles. The evidence showed that the braking system used by National Motors has a basic design defect. National Motors was aware that "there might be a problem with our brakes," because in pre-market tests, the defect appeared on several occasions. But the pre-market tests were not extensive, despite the fact that auto industry regulations require elaborate testing. Internal company documents show National Motors' belief that "it would be quite expensive for us to do much more now, we can't be certain we have a serious problem here, and anyway we can fix the problem afterwards if it really does turn out to be serious." Thomas Smith While he was visiting the circus, Thomas Smith was shot in the arm by a security guard who mistakenly thought that Smith had threatened another customer with bodily harm. The security guard was drunk at the time. Smith sued Public Entertainment, the company that operates the circus. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Public Entertainment to pay him $200,000 in compensation. 
Public Entertainment is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) which operates circuses and public fairs. Fred Williams, the security guard who was involved in the incident, is an alcoholic with a history of incidents of drunkenness on the job. During one of these incidents Williams took out his gun and started waving it around wildly, but he did not shoot anyone. Public Entertainment had repeatedly warned Williams to "clean described risk to fire up his act" as "basically him." but a 
took good no guy other with action. In a bit of 
opened unexpectedly while she was driving the vehicle. She believes that the airbag was defective and sued the manufacturer, Coastal Industries. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Coastal Industries to pay her $200,000 in compensation. 
Coastal Industries is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that specializes in parts and accessories that can be added to existing vehicles, such as adding the latest safety equipment to older cars. While its airbag conforms to the requirements stated in government regulations, it does not include certain additional "fail-safe" systems that are used in other airbags to ensure against accidental opening. Internal documents show that most but not all of the Coastal Industries designers believed that their system "is certainly safe enough, even if it does not include all possible safeguards" and that their marketing department said that "there will be no market for our airbag if we raise its price by adding more safety bells and whistles." Carl Sanders Carl Sanders used Nalene, an over-the-counter baldness treatment available at drugstores. While a small amount of hair did grow back, he also developed severe side-effects, including open sores on the scalp and permanent brown spots over his forehead. He sued the manufacturer, A&G Cosmetics. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered A&G Cosmetics to pay him $200,000 in compensation. 
A&G Cosmetics is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that sells many different cosmetic products, including wigs, "weaves" and chemical solutions designed to combat baldness. Nalene has proven effective in promoting hair growth in 30% of people in clinical trials. However, Nalene caused unpleasant side effects in some cases, although none were as severe as those Carl Sanders experienced. When marketing Nalene, A&G Cosmetics did not fully disclose these findings. It only said "minor side effects have been observed in a very small number of people tested." While this amount of disclosure was within legal limits, other companies that make hair products voluntarily disclosed more about their products. 
community health center. When Stanle herself unable to do so, but she presse that she was not adequately warned of Gersten Productions. The jury (of whic to pay her $200,000 in compensation. 
Gersten Productions is a large company produces informational materials in heal concerning healthy lifestyles. The " exercises suitable mostly for people in and models in the video are all relativ exercise videos to come with any special case testified that Gersten Production when the exercises were beyond their good results for almost all people who h injuries of any type from doing so. Jack Newton Jack Newton, a five year old child, was playing with matches when his cotton flannel pajamas caught fire. He was severely burned over a significant portion of his body and required several weeks in the hospital and months of physical therapy. His parents sued the manufacturer of the pajamas, Novel Clothing. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Novel Clothing to pay the Newtons $200,000 in compensation. 
Novel Clothing is a large company (profits of $100-200 million per year) that specializes in making clothes for children. Before marketing the pajamas, Novel conducted the tests normally used in the industry for problems like flammability, and observed no incidents like the Newtons experienced. Companies in the industry as well as federal regulators have known for a while that it is possible to add extra fire-retardant chemicals to their fabrics (in addition to those specified in current regulations), but these extra measures are not required. The process is very expensive, and no other manufacturers currently use it. Internal documents show that the management of Novel Clothing had decided that "when it comes to costly safety innovations we will follow our competitors. We don't want to be less safe than anyone else but we don't have to lead the way either." Low harm version: Jack Newton, a five year old child, was playing with matches when his cotton flannel pajamas caught fire. His hands and arms were badly burned, and required regular professional medical treatment for several weeks. 
Joan Glover Joan Glover, a six year old child, ingested a large number of pills of Allerfree, a nonprescription allergy medicine, and required an extensive hospital stay. The overdose weakened her respiratory system, which will ma diseases such as asthma and emphysema for an inadequately designed child-proof safet Allerfree, the General Assistance company. General Assistance to pay the Glovers $20 
General Assistance is a large company (wit manufactures a variety of non-prescripti "child-proof" safety caps on all medicine ignored the intent of this regulation by sel with a child-proof safety cap that was gen higher than any others in the industry. A stupid, unnecessary federal regulation is a that Allerfree may be punished for violatin ment has many other things to worry abou any case "the punishments for violating the be asked to improve the safety caps in th Administration had previously warned a v were "on shaky ground" but the company d Low harm version: Joan Glover, a six year Allerfree, a non-prescription allergy medici and is now deeply traumatized by pills of any even beneficial medications such as vitamin trollably and says that she is afraid. Martin West Martin West, a right-handed disabled veteran who lived in a two story house, was seriously injured in a fall when the chain broke on his electric lift-chair (a device that allows someone to be carried up stairs in a chair that moves up and down an angled track). He fell from near the top of the stairs and tumbled awkwardly all the way to the bottom landing, damaging his spinal cord in the process. As a result he now has only partial control of his right arm, a condition which doctors believe is permanent. He sued the manufacturer of the lift-chair, MedTech Products. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered MedTech to pay him $200,000 in compensation. 
MedTech Products is a large company (profits of $100-200 million per year) that manufactures many types of medical equipment, including wheelchairs, car-lifts, and other devices used by the disabled. The lift-chair is a new product for MedTech, and instead of producing a new design, company engineers decided to adapt the design of the hydraulic lifts for cars already on the market. Unfortunately, there are several unique problems in designing a safe and effective lift-chair that are beyond the experience of the company's engineers. Product managers said that hiring new engineers with the proper expertise was "too expensive, and would take too long" and ordered current engineers to "just do the best you can, but be sure you meet The inexperience of the engineers and the rush to testing procedures that were less rigorous product regulations. 
Low harm version: Martin West, a left-handed house, was injured in a fall when the chain bro allows someone to be carried up stairs in a chair He fell from near the bottom of the stairs and t spinal cord in the process. His right arm was doctors were able to repair most of the injur previous range of motion in the arm. 
Janet Windsor, a secretary who works on com skin cancer. After a long course of painful che cancer, although they cannot be sure that it wi caused by the computer monitors that she wor national Computers. The jury (of which you a puters to pay her $200,000 in compensation. 
International Computers is a large company (p manufactures components of computer syste monitor that Ms. Windsor used emits an unu other similar monitors, a level that pushes t Internal company documents cite experts who c of radiation could create any serious risk to company was not legally required to disclose t do so. 
Low harm version: Janet Windsor, a secretary who works on computer equipment, suffered from frequent and severe migraine headaches. As a result, for several years she often experienced nausea, insomnia and depression, and missed many workdays and family events. 
This research was supported by Exxon Company, U.S.A. The data reported and the opinions expressed in this article belong to the authors. John Payne, Lawrence Mark, Lawrence Ward, Dan McFadden and Rob MacCoun provided helpful comments on an earlier draft. We also thank Ron Carrell for his able assistance with the administration of the study. Notes 1 . Except for cases at the extremes of the scale, where all respondents agree. a z-score (i.e., substract the sample mean and divide by the sample standard deviation) for each observation, cubing it, and then computing the average of these cubed z-scores. A positive value means the distribution is skewed to the right, a negative statistic means it is skewed to the left, and zero means it is symmetric. promise for improving on the median, but there is as yet no clear evidence for this claim. For example, in Davis (1996) the SJS was slightly better than the median at predicting the responses of individual juries but slightly worse at predicing the overall distribution of awards. 
Polinsky (1997). that ranking could be more useful than rating; see section 3.1.1. to pay for public goods (Kahneman and Ritov, 1994). 
Davis, James H., Wing Tung Au, Lome Hulbert, Xiao-ping Chen, and Paul Zarnoth. (1997). "Effects of Group Size and Procedural Influence on Consensual Judgments of Quantity: The Example of Damage Awards and Mock Juries," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 73, 703-718. 
Diamond, Shari, and Jonathan Casper. (1992). "Blindfolding the Jury to Verdict Consequences: Damages, 
Experts, and the Civil Jury," Law and Society Review 26, 513-563. 
Eisenberg, Theodore, John Goerdt, Brian Ostrom, David Rottman, and Martin Wells. (1997). "The Predictability of Punitive Damages," Journal of Legal Studies 26, 623-662. 
Galanter, Marc, and David Luban. (1993). "Poetic Justice," American University Law Review 42, 1393-1453. Hampton, Jean. (1993). "The Retributive Idea." In J. Hampton and J. Murphy (Eds.), Forgiveness and Mercy. 
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge. 
Hastie, Reid, David Schkade, and John Payne, (forthcoming). "A Study of Juror and Jury Judgments in Civil 
Cases: Deciding Liability for Punitive Damages," Law and Human Behavior. 
Hastie, Reid, David Schkade, and John Payne. (1997). "Effects of Plaintiff Identity and Plaintiffs Damage 
Request on Juror Assessments of Punitive Damages," Working paper. 
Huber, Peter. (1989). "No-fault Punishment," Alabama Law Review 40, 1037-1049. 
Jeffries, John. (1986). "A Comment on the Constitutionality of Punitive Damages," Virginia Law Review 72, 139-151. 
Kahan, Daniel, and Martha Nussbaum. (1996). "T'vo Conceptions of Emotions in Criminal Law," Columbia Law Review 96, 269-374. Kahneman, Daniel, and liana Ritov. (1994). "Deter 
Study in the Headline Method," Journal of Risk Kahneman, Daniel, and liana Ritov. (1998). "Prefe tainty , in press. 
Kahneman, Daniel, liana Ritov, Karen Jacowitz, 
Goods: A Psychological Analysis," Psychological Kahneman, Daniel, and Jack Knetsch. (1992). "Va 
Journal of Environmental Economics and Manag Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch, and Richard T 
Entitlements in the market," The American Eco Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch, and Richard Th 
Journal of Political Economy 98, 1325-48. Kaplan, Martin, and Charles Miller. (1987). "Grou Influence: Effects of Type of Issue and Assigned ogy 53, 306-313. 
Kerr, Norbert, Robert MacCoun, and Geoffrey K 
Groups," Psychological Review 103, 687-719. Landes, William, and Richard Posner. (1993). Econ 
Press. 
Lodge, Milton. (1981). "Magnitude Scaling: Qua 
Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steve Shavell. (1997). 
Review. 
Stevens, Stanley S. (1975). Psychophysics. Introduction to Its Perceptual , Neural , and Social Prospects. Wiley: 
NY. 
Sunstein, Cass, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade. (1998). "Assessing Punitive Damages," Yale Law Journal, May. 
